bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Genome-scale metabolic modeling reveals SARS-CoV-2-induced host
metabolic reprogramming and identifies metabolic antiviral targets
Kuoyuan Cheng1,2, Laura Riva3,*, Sanju Sinha1,2, Lipika Ray Pal1, Nishanth Ulhas Nair1, Laura
Martin-Sancho3, Sumit K. Chanda3, Eytan Ruppin1,4,#
1. Cancer Data Science Laboratory (CDSL), National Cancer Institute (NCI), National Institutes
of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD, USA.
2. Biological Sciences Graduate Program (BISI), University of Maryland, College Park, MD,
USA.
3. Immunity and Pathogenesis Program, Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Center, Sanford
Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute, La Jolla, CA, USA.
4. Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA.
* Current address: Calibr, a division of The Scripps Research Institute, 11119 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
# corresponding author, email: eytan.ruppin@nih.gov

Abstract
Tremendous progress has been made to control the COVID-19 pandemic, including the
development and approval of vaccines as well as the drug remdesivir, which inhibits the SARSCoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19. However, remdesivir confers only mild benefits to a subset
of patients, and additional effective therapeutic options are needed. Drug repurposing and drug
combinations may represent practical strategies to address these urgent unmet medical needs.
Viruses, including coronaviruses, are known to hijack the host metabolism to facilitate their own
proliferation, making targeting host metabolism a promising antiviral approach. Here, we
describe an integrated analysis of 12 published in vitro and human patient gene expression
datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection using genome-scale metabolic modeling (GEM). We find
that SARS-CoV-2 infection can induce recurrent and complicated metabolic reprogramming
spanning a wide range of metabolic pathways. We next applied the GEM-based metabolic
transformation algorithm (MTA) to predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets that counteract the virusinduced metabolic changes. These predictions are enriched for validated targets from various
published experimental drug and genetic screens. Further analyzing the RNA-sequencing data
of remdesivir-treated Vero E6 cell samples that we generated, we predicted metabolic targets
that act in combination with remdesivir. These predictions are enriched for previously reported
synergistic drugs with remdesivir. Since our predictions are based in part on human patient
data, they are likely to be clinically relevant. We provide our top high-confidence candidate
targets for their evaluation in further studies, demonstrating host metabolism-targeting as a
promising antiviral strategy.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), a serious respiratory disease caused by the
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 has evolved into a major pandemic incurring millions of deaths
worldwide (all dates as of December 2020; WHO Coronavirus Disease Dashboard, 2020).
Despite unprecedented global efforts in response to this serious health threat including
abundant studies on the disease biology (e.g. Zhou et al. 2020, Hoffmann et al. 2020, etc.,
reviewed in Tay et al. 2020, etc.), preclinical antiviral drug/target screens or predictions (e.g.
Riva et al. 2020, Wei et al. 2020, Danoliski et al. 2020, etc., with compiled resources like
Kuleshov et al. 2020, etc.), and thousands of registered clinical trials on COVID-19
(International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, 2020), therapeutic options remain scarce.
Remdesivir, a viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerase inhibitor represents the only drug
approved by the drug regulatory authorities of several countries, including the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) (Beigel et al. 2020), and confers only mild clinical benefits to a
subset of COVID-19 patients (WHO Solidarity Trial Consortium et al. 2020). The Janus kinase
(JAK) inhibitor baricitinib (in combination with remdesivir), and virus-neutralizing antibodies
bamlanivimab, and casirivimab plus imdevimab have obtained Emergency Use Authorization
(EUA) from the FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2020). Dexamethasone and other
corticosteroids have been recommended by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (NIH) for
hospitalized patients requiring supplemental oxygen (RECOVERY Collaborative Group et al.
2020; National Institutes of Health, 2020). Besides, several SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been
approved or authorized for emergency use in different countries (Dong et al. 2020; U.S. Food
and Drug Administration, 2020). Nevertheless, there is still an urgent unmet medical need for
the fast identification and development of highly effective anti-COVID-19 therapies.
Viruses are known to “hijack” host cell metabolism to complete their own intracellular life
cycle (Mayer et al. 2019), modulating diverse pathways including carbohydrate, lipid, amino acid
and nucleotide metabolism (Mayer et al. 2019; Sanchez et al. 2015). Coronaviruses including
MERS-CoV rearrange cellular lipid profiles upon infection (Yan et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2019).
Recent studies have reported that SARS-CoV-2 also induces changes in numerous metabolic
pathways including TCA cycle, oxidative phosphorylation and lipid metabolism among others in
human patient samples (Gardinassi et al. 2020; Ehrlich et al. 2020). Notably, counteracting the
metabolic demands of viruses including MERS-CoV have been shown to abolish their ability to
infect the host cells (Mayer et al. 2019; Yuan et al. 2019), and the PPARα-agonist fenofibrate
can reverse some of the SARS-CoV-2-induced metabolic changes and reduce the viral load
(Ehrlich et al. 2020). Therefore, targeting the virus-induced metabolic changes can be a
promising novel antiviral strategy (Mayer et al. 2019), and can be especially valuable in antiSARS-CoV-2 drug repurposing to address the current urgent COVID-19 crisis considering that
many existing drugs are metabolism-targeting.
Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) are in silico constraint-based models that
comprehensively encompass the cellular network of metabolic reactions, metabolic proteins,
and metabolites (Baart et al. 2012). GEM analysis has been repeatedly shown to generate
accurate predictions and informative hypotheses for metabolism research (Gu et al. 2019).
Notably, we have previously developed numerous GEM-based algorithms including iMAT

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Shlomi et al. 2008), which computes genome-wide metabolic fluxes from gene expression
profiles, and the metabolic transformation algorithm (MTA; Yizhak et al. 2013), which predicts
metabolic targets whose inhibition facilitates transformation between specified cellular metabolic
states (e.g. from diseased to healthy states). More recently, Valcárcel et al. has described a
variant of MTA named rMTA with improved performance (Valcárcel et al. 2019). Incorporating
such high-performance GEM methods in the analysis of data on SARS-CoV-2 infection provides
us with a unique opportunity to understand the metabolic demands of SARS-CoV-2 and to
systematically predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets that counteract the virus-induced metabolic
alterations.
Here we apply GEM algorithms in a comprehensive analysis of 12 published bulk/singlecell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq/scRNA-seq) and mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics
datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection, involving both in vitro and human patient samples. We find
that metabolic reprogramming represents one of the most consistent molecular changes in
SARS-CoV-2 infection besides immune responses, and characterize the complex patterns of
metabolic flux alterations. Using MTA, we predicted anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets that reverse the
virus-induced metabolic changes, either as single targets or in combination with remdesivir (the
latter using our new RNA-seq data on remdesivir treatment). The predictions are highly enriched
for reported anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets identified from various experimental screens, and we
provide our top high-confidence candidate targets for the evaluation in further studies.

Results
Integrated analysis of multiple gene expression datasets identifies coherent immune and
metabolic changes in SARS-CoV-2 infection
Multiple studies have characterized the gene expression changes during SARS-CoV-2 infection
in different in vitro and in vivo settings. We collected a total of 12 published relevant datasets
spanning a wide range of sample types (various cell lines, primary bronchial epithelial cells,
nasopharyngeal swab and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid, i.e. BALF samples from patients) and
assay platforms (bulk RNA-seq, scRNA-seq, and MS-based proteomics). These datasets are
summarized in Table 1. With each of the datasets, we performed differential expression (DE)
analysis comparing the SARS-CoV-2-infected or positive samples to the non-infected control or
negative samples (Methods; Table S1). For the single-cell datasets, we focused on the airway
epithelial cell which is known as the major virus-infected cell type. Comparing the datasets with
a principle component analysis (PCA) plot based on the inverse normal-transformed DE log
fold-change values (Fig. 1A; Methods) suggests that the cell lines tend to have distinct DE
profiles from the patient samples, although different patient datasets exhibit considerable
variation depending on sample type and sequencing platform. This pattern is confirmed by the
comparison of the top significant DE genes from each pair of datasets (using Fisher’s exact
tests, top n=400 DE genes from each dataset were used, all with at least FDR<0.1; Methods;
Fig. 1B). Moreover, examining only the top DE genes appears to mitigate the technical variation
across datasets, with reasonable coherence demonstrated by odds ratio median value 2.18 and
maximum 13.60 (adjusted P median 5.09e-5, minimum<2.22e-16; Fig. 1B).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1. Summary of the published gene expression datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection
analyzed in this study.
Dataset
Name*

Sample Type

Vero

Vero E6 cell line

6

bulk RNAseq

Riva et al. 2020

NHBE

Primary normal human bronchial epithelial cell

6

bulk RNAseq

Blanco-Melo et
al. 2020

A549

A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line with
exogenous ACE2 expression

6

bulk RNAseq

Blanco-Melo et
al. 2020

6

bulk RNAseq

Blanco-Melo et
al. 2020
WeingartenGabby et al.
2020

Calu-3

Calu-3 human lung adenocarcinoma cell line

Sample
Size† Platform

Reference

293T

HEK293T human embryonic kidney cell line

12

bulk RNAseq

Caco-2

Caco-2 human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell line

6

MS-based
proteomics

Bojkova et al.
2020

Swab.Butl
er
NP swab samples from human individuals

580

bulk RNAseq

Butler et al. 2020

Swab.Lieb
erman
NP swab samples from human individuals

484

bulk RNAseq

Lieberman et al.
2020

BALF

BALF from human individuals

6

bulk RNAseq

Xiong et al. 2020

SC.Liao

BALF from human individuals (epithelial cells were
used in analysis)

13

scRNA-seq

Liao et al. 2020

SC.Chua. NP and bronchial samples from human individuals
Basal
(basal cells were used in analysis)

24

scRNA-seq

Chua et al. 2020

SC.Chua. NP and bronchial samples from human individuals
Ciliated
(ciliated cells were used in analysis)

24

scRNA-seq

Chua et al. 2020

* These are the names used in figure labels throughout the text.
† The total number of replicates (virus-infected and control combined) used for analysis in in
vitro datasets, or the total number of human individuals (patients and controls combined) used
for analysis in in vivo datasets. In some datasets, only a subset of all the available samples
were analyzed.
Abbreviations: NP, nasopharyngeal; BALF, bronchial alveolar lavage fluid; RNA-seq, RNAsequencing; MS, mass spectrometry; scRNA-seq, single-cell RNA-sequencing.
We then performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Subramanian et al. 2005) on
the DE results from each dataset (Table S2), and further compared the datasets on the pathway
level by the significantly enriched pathways (FDR<0.1; Methods). Reassuringly, the level of
coherence across datasets on the pathway level is even stronger, with a median odds ratio of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4.25 (maximum is infinity followed by 35.49) across pairs of datasets (adjusted P median 2.01e5, minimum<2.22e-16; Fig. 1C). Examining the most consistently enriched pathways across the
datasets while giving higher importance to the various in vivo patient datasets (Fig. 1D; Table
S3; Methods), we see many up-regulated pathways involved in innate immune response to viral
infection, e.g. interferon signaling and cytosolic DNA sensing. Among the pathways involving
coherently down-regulated genes upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, we find antigen presentation, as
well as numerous pathways spanning many major categories of cellular metabolism, e.g.
oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS; energy metabolism), sphingolipid metabolism (lipid
metabolism), valine, leucine and isoleucine degradation (amino acid metabolism), and N-glycan
biosynthesis. These may reflect the specific metabolic requirements of SARS-CoV-2 or underlie
its pathogenic effects (see Discussion). Visualizing a more complete landscape of metabolic
pathway alterations across the datasets reveals further consistent, although weaker changes
(based on GSEA normalized enrichment score, i.e. NES; Fig. 1E; Table S2; Methods). These
results suggest that besides immune response, metabolic reprogramming represents one of the
most robust changes induced by SARS-CoV-2 infection across various systems, consistent with
the key roles of metabolism in viral infection. We next focused on characterizing the SARS-CoV2-induced metabolic changes in the infected host cells on the metabolic flux level.
Genome-scale metabolic modeling (GEM) identifies SARS-CoV-2-induced patterns of metabolic
flux changes
Since gene expression does not necessarily correlate with protein level or enzyme
activity and thus may not truthfully reflect metabolic activity (Maier et al. 2009), we applied GEM
to infer the metabolic fluxes (i.e. rates of all metabolic reactions) across the datasets.
Specifically, for each dataset, the iMAT algorithm (Shlomi et al. 2008) was applied to the median
expression profiles of the control and virus-infected samples to compute the refined metabolic
models representative of the two respective groups, and the flux distribution of each metabolic
reaction was obtained by sampling (Methods). The flux distributions of the control and infected
groups were compared and reactions with differential fluxes (DF) were identified (Methods;
Table S4). We again examined the consistency across the datasets, here on the flux level, by
checking the overlap of the top DF reactions between each pair of datasets. Like on the gene
expression level, we are assured by the overall high level of coherence of the DF reactions
(odds ratio median 2.40, maximum 28.13; adjusted P value median and minimum both <2.22e16; Fig. 2A shows the result for the positive DF reactions, the result is similar for negative DF
reactions; We note that the sign of DF represents the direction of flux change with regard to the
positive direction of a reaction, which can be reversible, and not the increase or decrease of the
absolute flux). Although no reaction shows fully consistent changes across all 12 datasets, we
identified a set of most consistently changed reactions across datasets while giving higher
importance to the in vivo patient datasets (Table S5A; Methods), and examined the metabolic
pathways they are enriched in with Fisher’s exact tests (significant pathways with FDR<0.1
shown in Fig. 2B; Table S5B). We see that consistent flux changes are found in various
noteworthy pathways including metabolite transport (mitochondrial and extracellular), pentose
phosphate pathway, hyaluronan metabolism, pyrimidine biosynthesis, glycine, serine, and
threonine metabolism, TCA cycle, inositol phosphate metabolism, fatty acid elongation, among

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

others. Many of these pathways have been implicated in the infection and life cycle of different
viruses including SARS-CoV-2 (Mayer et al. 2020, Ou et al. 2020, Gardinassi et al. 2020, Li et
al. 2020, Thomas et al. 2020, Ehrlich et al. 2020, Bojkova et al. 2020; see Discussion). Below
we closely inspect the flux alteration patterns within these pathways with specialized methods.
First, we focused on the cellular transport pathway, seeking to identify the specific
transport pattern summarized for each metabolite species (Methods; Table S5C). Some of the
metabolites showing the most consistent patterns across datasets are summarized in Fig. 2C.
In addition to biological variation, technical noise from the modeling can also contribute to the
lack of full consistency in these results. Nevertheless, several glucogenic amino acids, including
alanine, asparagine, and glutamate are seen to have increased cellular import from the
extracellular space to the cytoplasm (or decreased export) in the virus-infected vs control group
across more than half of the datasets. On the other hand, nicotinamide and tetrahydrofolate
show relatively consistent patterns of decreased cellular import (or increased export; Fig. 2C).
Next, we inspected the other pathways not related to metabolite transport by visualizing their
alteration patterns overlaid on the metabolic network, for virus-infected vs the control group. For
example, the pyrimidine (de novo) biosynthesis pathway contains consistently increased fluxes
towards the synthesis of UMP (the precursor of pyrimidines; Fig. 2D), consistent with the
nucleic acid synthesis needs of the virus. In the TCA cycle, we mostly see increased flux driving
the normal cycle, together with the interconversion and mitochondrial transport of the
cytoplasmic counterparts of TCA cycle intermediates (Fig. 2E). This seems contradictory to the
consistent gene expression-level decrease of the “TCA cycle and respiratory electron transport"
pathway (Fig. 1D). However, upon closer inspection, we find that the gene-level enrichment of
this pathway is mostly driven by the decrease in electron transport chain genes (Table S2), and
consistently OXPHOS reactions show decreased fluxes (Table S5A). As examples of pathways
with more complex flux change patterns, in the inositol phosphate metabolism pathway, we see
increased fluxes converging to phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate (pail45p_hs[c]) and
inositol (inost[c]), but decreased fluxes to inositol 1-phosphate (mi1p_DASH_D[c]; Fig. 2F); in
the glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism pathway, we see decreased conversion of serine
to glycine but increased serine degradation to pyruvate (Fig. 2G); in the fatty acid elongation
pathway, we see that the synthesis and interconversion of different fatty acids show distinct flux
changes (Fig. 2H). These highly intricate metabolic programs revealed by the GEM analysis are
consistent with many previous reports and possibly reflect the specific metabolic demands of
SARS-CoV-2 during its life cycle (see Discussion), which also demonstrates the value of the
modeling approach over gene expression-level analyses.
Prediction of anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets that act via counteracting the virus-induced metabolic
changes
We have demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 can induce recurrent and complex alterations
in host cell metabolism. As was proposed previously, targeting the virus-induced metabolic
changes can be an effective antiviral strategy (Mayer et al. 2019), which we adopted here to
predict anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets. Specifically, we applied the GEM-based rMTA algorithm
(Valcárcel et al. 2019) to each of our collected datasets to predict metabolic reactions whose

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

knockout (KO) can transform the cellular metabolism from the SARS-CoV-2-infected state to the
non-infected normal state (Methods; Table S6). MTA computes a score for each of the
metabolic reactions in the cell, and usually the 10-20% reactions with the highest MTA score
contain promising candidate targets (Yizhak et al. 2013). We first compared the top 10% MTApredicted reactions across datasets and found that they have reasonable overlap (odds ratio
median 3.42, maximum 16.47, Fisher’s exact test adjusted P median and minimum both<2.2e16 across all pairs of datasets; Fig. 3A). Interestingly, some strong overlaps are seen between
certain cell line and patient datasets, consistent with the recurrent metabolic changes across
these datasets as seen above.
To validate these predictions, we collected multiple validation sets of reported antiSARS-CoV-2 gene targets or drugs identified from large-scale chemical or genetic screens.
These include CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screens in Vero E6 cells (Wei et al. 2020) and in cells with
exogenous ACE2 expression (A549ACE2, Daniloski et al. 2020), and additional lists of
experimentally validated drugs reported in different in vitro studies compiled by Kuleshov et al.
2020 (Methods). We first tested for significant overlap between our top 10% MTA-predicted
targets from each of the datasets and the validation sets described above with Fisher’s exact
tests (after mapping all validated target genes or drugs to the metabolic reactions; Methods).
Strongly significant overlaps were found between our predictions from 8 out of the 12 datasets
with the antiviral hits (i.e. those whose KO inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infection) identified in the
CRISPR-Cas9 screens (FDR<3.95e-4; Fig. 3B; Table S6B), these significant datasets include
the Vero (Riva et al. 2020) and A549ACE2 data (Blanco-Melo et al. 2020) from the same cell
types as those used in the CRISPR-Cas9 screens, but encouragingly also include three in vivo
patient datasets (Lieberman et al. 2020, Liao et al. 2020, Chua et al. 2020). Further examining
the experimentally validated anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug sets from previous studies (compiled by
Kuleshov et al. 2020), we also found a few cases of significant overlap (FDR<0.1; Fig. 3C;
Table S6C), although these drug sets are relatively small, and when we pooled all validated
drugs compiled by Kuleshov et al., their targets are only enriched in the predictions from the
SC.Chua.Basal dataset (Fig. 3C). Some of our top predicted reactions are also mapped to host
proteins identified to interact with SARS-CoV-2 proteins from Gordon et al. 2020 and Stukalov
et al. 2020, although we only see weak statistically significant overlaps with the Stukalov et al.
data but not the Gordon et al. data (FDR<0.1; Fig. 3D; Table S6D), suggesting that most of our
predicted targets are not directly involved in the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle. Overall, our MTA-based
top predictions obtained strong validation from the published CRISPR-Cas9 screens, with
further but weaker support from the drug screens and host-virus protein-protein interaction (PPI)
data.
We further take advantage of the genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screens to more closely
evaluate the performance of our MTA predictions. Unlike in many of the drug-screen datasets
where the screens are low-throughput or complete screen results were not available, we were
able to confidently define positive and negative sets (i.e. genes whose KO inhibits or promotes
the viral infection, respectively) from the CRISPR-Cas9 screen data. The positive and negative
sets were defined in a balanced way (Methods), with which we performed ROC curve analysis
of our MTA predictions from each of the dataset (Methods). Although the MTA prediction is only
based on the transformation of cellular metabolic states and does not consider the possible

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effect of other anti-/pro-viral mechanisms, we see that the predictions based on 6 of the
datasets achieved area under ROC curve (AUROC) values above 0.6 and as high as 0.81,
although two of the other datasets apparently yielded AUROC significantly lesser than 0.5 (Fig.
3E; see Discussion). As examples, ROC curves from the two best-performing datasets are
shown in Fig. 3F, we note that the steep proportions of the curves showing close to 1 specificity
and decent sensitivity indeed correspond to about top 10-20% of the MTA predictions,
consistent with our previous experience with MTA. These results testify that our metabolismtargeting strategy using the MTA algorithm is able to achieve reasonable prediction
performances.
Next, we seek to integrate our predictions from the 12 datasets into a final consensus list
of high-confidence candidate targets for further extensive experimental validation and
investigation. We applied a procedure to pick highly recurrent top predictions across both the in
vitro and in vivo datasets (Methods), resulting in a final list of 66 candidate target metabolic
reactions of which 59 are mapped to genes and 15 are targeted by known drugs (Table S7A).
This final list of candidates are also strongly enriched for the positive targets identified in the two
anti-SARS-CoV-2 CRISPR-Cas9 screens described above (Wei et al. 2020 and Daniloski et al.
2020; odds ratio=26.56, P<2.2e-16). These candidates are enriched for metabolic pathways
including cellular transport, inositol phosphate and aminosugar metabolism, and within the
cellular transport pathway, transporters for various amino acids, succinate, citrate and
adenosine are enriched (FDR<0.1; Fig. 3G; Table S7B; Methods). These are consistent with
the known biology of SARS-CoV-2, e.g. phosphoinositides are known to be critical for SARSCoV-2 cell-entry by endocytosis, and inhibiting phosphatidylinositol-3,5-bisphosphate with the
drug apilimod has been shown to suppress SARS-CoV-2 entry (Ou et al. 2020).
Prediction of metabolic targets for anti-SARS-CoV-2 in combination with remdesivir
Given that our MTA-based prediction of single anti-SARS-CoV-2 metabolic targets has
yielded promising results, we proceed to extend the same strategy for the prediction of targets
that can be combined with remdesivir to achieve higher antiviral efficacy. To this aim, we
cultured Vero E6 cells infected by SARS-CoV-2, with or without remdesivir treatment. A control
group (no viral infection or remdesivir treatment) a remdesivir-only group (no viral infection)
were also included (Methods). Bulk RNA-seq was performed to obtain the gene expression
profiles of these samples (Methods). Visualizing the gene expression data with a PCA plot, we
see that remdesivir can indeed effectively reverse the virus-associated expression changes
(mostly along the first PC axis), but also results in additional orthogonal changes along the
second PC axis (Fig. 4A). Performing a GSEA analysis comparing the virus+remdesivir group
to the normal control group, we see that many pathways show significant differences in their
expression, including some metabolic pathways, e.g. cholesterol and steroid biosynthesis (Fig.
4B; Table S8; Methods). Some of these differences can be attributed to the incomplete
reversion of virus-induced expression changes by remdesivir, while others may arise from
remdesivir-specific effects (Fig. 4B). Further computing the metabolic flux profiles
representative of each group of samples with iMAT (Shlomi et al. 2008) then inspecting the fluxlevel PCA plot (Fig. 4C; Methods), we observe a similar pattern from that seen on the gene

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expression level. The differential fluxes between the virus+remdesivir and the control group are
enriched for various metabolic pathways (FDR<0.1; Fig. 4D; Table S9; Methods), many also
have differential fluxes comparing virus-infected samples to control (see Fig. 2B), suggesting
that these metabolic changes are not fully reversed to normal by remdesivir. We hypothesize
that further reversing the cellular state in the virus+remdesivir group towards the healthy control
state may be an effective combinatory targeting strategy to improve the antiviral efficacy of
remdesivir.
As before, we focused on the domain of cell metabolism and applied MTA on our data
from Vero E6 cells to predict targets for reversing the metabolic flux profile in the
virus+remdesivir group towards normal (Methods; Table S10A). Trying to validate these
predictions, we obtained a list of 20 experimentally tested drugs showing synergistic anti-SARSCoV-2 effects with remdesivir in the Calu-3 cell line (Nguyenla et al. 2020). Despite the cell type
difference, we observed that the targets of these drugs are significantly enriched by our top 20%
MTA predictions (Fisher’s exact test P=0.011, odds ratio 4.83; there is also a trend of
enrichment by the top 10% MTA predictions with odds ratio 2.01, but it failed to achieve
statistical significance at P=0.30). The top 20% predictions recovered 6 of the 11 metabolic
reaction targets from Nguyenla et al., corresponding to drugs including cilostazol, ezetimibe,
ivosidenib and valdecoxib. Some of the top predicted targets overlap with our predicted single
anti-SARS-CoV-2 targets as described above, e.g. various inositol phosphate metabolism
reactions. This is consistent with the observation that the virus-induced metabolic changes in
these pathways are not effectively reversed to normal by remdesivir (as seen from Fig. 2B and
4D). Performing a pathway enrichment analysis, we see that these top predictions are enriched
in bile acid, IMP, and heme biosynthesis pathways, among others (Fig. 4E; Table S10B);
cholesterol and steroid metabolism pathways, which were seen to be different on the gene
expression level between the virus+remdesivir and control samples (see Fig. 4B), are also
enriched for the top predicted targets (Fig. 4E). We provide the top 20% predictions ranked by
the MTA score and known drugs for these targets in Table S10A. These predictions represent
candidate targets that can potentially improve the antiviral efficacy of remdesivir in combination
and warrant further testing in future studies.

Discussion
In this study, we provide a comprehensive GEM analysis integrating 12 published gene
expression datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection, spanning multiple in vitro and in vivo sample
types and expression profiling platforms. We revealed the complexity of host metabolic
reprogramming by SARS-CoV2, and further predicted anti-SARS-CoV-2 single or combinatory
(with remdesivir) targets that act via counteracting the virus-induced metabolic changes. Our
GEM-based prediction algorithm showed good performance based on validation with published
targets from in vitro screens, and the predicted targets represent highly promising candidates for
further experimental testing.
To date, a large number of studies have been published that contributed to our fast
understanding of the host molecular changes associated with SARS-CoV-2 infection. These
studies involve a variety of different experimental models and/or sample types, making it

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

necessary to perform a systematic analysis across datasets and evaluate the robustness and
clinical relevance of the findings in human patients. Although we do not aim to (and cannot)
include all relevant published data, we tried to cover datasets on both popular in vitro models of
SARS-CoV-2 infection as well as human patients (nasopharyngeal swab and BALF samples).
While many other studies have shed light on the systemic and immune cell-specific response
characteristic of SARS-CoV-2 infection (e.g. Zheng et al. 2020 and many of the patient studies
we collected in Table 1), our focus is specifically on the virus-infected host cells, i.e. primarily
the airway epithelial cells in vivo. Therefore, for human samples, in addition to bulk RNA-seq,
we analyzed scRNA-seq data to separate the distinctive changes within the epithelial cells from,
e.g. various types of immune cells. In terms of methodology, we have avoided a more formal
effect size-based meta-analysis due to the challenge arising from the wide range of expression
profiling platforms (bulk RNA-seq, scRNA-seq, MS-based proteomics) and the technical
variation involved. Rather, we relied more on P values, and made subjective decisions that give
higher importance to the various patient datasets when defining consistent findings, aiming to
obtain results of higher clinical relevance. By integrated analysis of all these data, we found that
metabolism is one of the cellular domains that exhibit the most coherent changes across
datasets in SARS-CoV-2 infection (besides immune responses; Fig. 1D). This finding is
consistent with our prior knowledge on the need of a wide spectrum of viruses to manipulate
host metabolism for viral proliferation (Mayer et al. 2019), and sets a solid basis for our GEMbased metabolic flux analysis and antiviral target prediction.
The application of GEM in complement to gene expression-level analysis is a central
part of our study. It is known that gene expression does not always perfectly correlate with
protein level or enzyme activity (Maier et al. 2009). Besides, many metabolic reactions are
reversible, while the directions of reactions are important biologically, such information is
missing on the gene level. By taking advantage of the additional information in the topological
constraints of the metabolic network, GEM allows us to infer the actual metabolic fluxes, thus
revealing extra complexity in SARS-CoV-2-induced metabolic reprogramming, as is evident
from Fig. 2D-H. Many of these inferred metabolic changes are consistent with what’s known
about SARS-CoV-2 and other related viruses. For example, the highly coherent increase in
pyrimidine biosynthesis (Fig. 2D) corresponds to the increased need of viral genome replication
and gene expression (Bojkova et al. 2020), and pyrimidine de novo synthesis inhibitors have
been shown to have anti-SARS-CoV-2 effects (Xiong et al. 2020). Inositol phosphate
metabolism (Fig. 2F) is important for the life cycle of many viruses due to the structural or
signaling roles of different phosphoinositides (Beziau et al. 2020), with the inhibition of certain
phosphoinositides disrupting endocytosis and blocking SARS-CoV-2 cell-entry (Ou et al. 2020).
Fatty acid synthesis was reported to increase in SARS-CoV-2 infection (Ehrlich et al. 2020),
whereas our results suggest a more complex pattern for different fatty acid species (Fig. 2H),
which echoes the results of several metabolomics studies (Shen et al. 2020, Barberis et al.
2020, Thomas et al. 2020). Both TCA cycle and OXPHOS have been shown to decrease based
on gene expression during the virus infection (Ehrlich et al. 2020, Gardinassi et al. 2020), and
have been implicated in the systemic syndromes of the virus (Li et al. 2020). While we did
recapitulate such gene expression changes, our GEM analysis only confirmed the decrease of
OXPHOS (Table S5A) but revealed a mostly normal-functioning TCA cycle on the flux level,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

which appears to be driven by 2-oxoglutarate transported from the cytosol (Fig. 2E). Despite
that GEM can help to suggest such intricate flux-level patterns, these computed fluxes should
be verified with isotope labeling experiments, and their biological significance in the virus
infection needs to be further investigated.
Given the importance of metabolism during virus infection, targeting host metabolism
has already been proposed as a promising novel antiviral strategy (Mayer et al. 2019). For this,
the MTA algorithm we previously developed (Yizhak et al. 2013), again a method under the
GEM framework, can be particularly valuable for the metabolic target discovery. MTA has been
successfully applied to predict lifespan extending interventions in yeast (Yizhak et al. 2013), a
metabolic cancer driver gene (Auslander et al. 2017), and a novel therapeutic target for
intractable epilepsy (Styr et al. 2019). A recent variant of MTA named rMTA was shown to
deliver better performance (Valcárcel et al. 2019), and here we used an optimized
implementation of rMTA in our study. MTA/rMTA are not based on supervised machine learning
technique, and do not use any of the validation datasets for target prediction. Yet, we were able
to achieve decent performance during the validation (Fig. 3B-F). It is particularly encouraging to
see that in several cases, the validation data (which mostly originated from in vitro experiments)
correlated well with the predictions based on in vivo human data. In some datasets, however,
our predictions were not successfully validated by the genetic screen data (Fig. 2B,E). One
reason could be that MTA can only consider the metabolism-related effects and ignores other
potential mechanisms that determine the antiviral efficacy of a target. Nevertheless, it could also
be due to biological differences between the datasets used for prediction and those used for
validation. To avoid overdependence on the limited validation sets available in defining the final
consensus candidate target list, we did not explicitly exclude any dataset used for prediction but
enforced the inclusion of the human patient data to achieve higher clinical relevance. The
prediction for combinatory targets with remdesivir also showed promising preliminary results,
although our validation is more limited in this case due to lack of data. Follow-up studies are
warranted to solidly test and validate these predicted targets for potential further antiviral
therapy development.
In summary, we identified prevalent and intricate metabolic reprogramming in the host
cell as a feature of SARS-CoV-2 infection, and further predicted single and combinatory antiviral
targets with promising performance seen in preliminary validations. These targets should be
rigorously validated experimentally. Since our predictions are in part based on human patient
data, they are likely to have high clinical relevance and may ultimately help to achieve better
efficacy in COVID-19 treatment. Our study demonstrates the targeting of host metabolism as a
promising antiviral strategy and highlights the power of GEM analysis to advance the
understanding of cell metabolism during viral infection and antiviral target prediction.

Materials and Methods
Differential gene expression analysis
We obtained each of the gene expression datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection from the sources
listed in Table 1. For the bulk RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) datasets whose read count data is

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

available at the time of analysis, we performed differential expression (DE) analysis comparing
the SARS-CoV-2-infected or positive samples to the non-infected control or negative samples
with DESeq2 (Love et al. 2014). For Weingarten-Gabby et al. 2020, a nested design for DE was
needed and DESeq2 failed to run properly, and limma-voom (Law et al. 2014) was used. For
Butler et al. 2020 and Xiong et al. 2020, we obtained the DE results provided from the
supplementary materials of the respective publication, as we were not able to obtain their genelevel expression data at the time of analysis. For Butler et al. 2020, among their multiple
versions of DE results we used the one from limma-voom with sva correction
“Voom:Positive_vs_Negative:10M_samples:sva_correction_2sv”. We also took the DE results of
the proteomic data from Bojkova et al. 2020 as provided by the authors, and used the 24 hours
post-infection data which is the latest time point available with the largest number of DE
proteins). For the single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) datasets, The “FindMarkers”
function in the R package Seurat (Stuart et al. 2019) was used to call the MAST method (Finak
et al. 2015) for DE analysis in each annotated cell type, with “logfc.threshold” set to 0 to obtain
full results across genes. We focused on the airway epithelial cells since our major aim in this
study is to investigate the changes in the cell types infected by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, these
include the “Epithelial” cell type from Liao et al. 2020 and the “Ciliated” and “Basal” cell types
from Chua et al. 2020 (other epithelial subtypes from these datasets yielded no significant DE
genes). All DE results are given in Table S1.
Gene set enrichment analysis of the differential expression results
Using the DE log fold-change values from each dataset, gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) (Subramanian et al. 2005) was performed using the implementation in the R package
fgsea (Korotkevich et al. 2019). The gene set/pathway annotations used were the Reactome
(Jassal et al. 2020) and KEGG (Kanehisa et al. 2021) subsets from the “Canonical Pathway”
category in version 7.0 MSigDB database (Liberzon et al. 2011). For metabolic pathways (in
Figure 1E), those under the category “Metabolism” from KEGG (Kanehisa et al. 2021) were
used. All GSEA results are given in Table S2.
Comparison of the differentially expressed genes and pathways across datasets
The DE results across datasets were compared in a descriptive manner. As a first
approach, the DE log fold-change values were inverse normal-transformed across all genes
within each dataset, which preserves only the order (i.e. rank) of DE effect sizes, and then PCA
was applied to the transformed data. As a second approach, top significantly DE genes or
enriched pathways from each pair of datasets were tested for significant overlap using Fisher’s
exact tests. For DE genes, the number of significant genes vary greatly across datasets based
on a single FDR cutoff, so we uniformly took the top n=400 DE genes ranked by FDR from each
dataset (all cases have at least FDR<0.1). For enriched pathways we simply took those with
FDR<0.1 from each dataset. To identify the consistent DE changes across datasets, a formal
meta-analysis of all 12 datasets is challenging given the wide range of assay platforms and DE
algorithms used. So instead, we adopted a subjective criteria that give high importance to the
various in vivo patient datasets, such that the results may be more clinically relevant: we
identified pathways that are significantly (FDR<0.1) enriched in the consistent direction

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(up/down-regulation) in at least one of the bulk RNA-seq patient datasets and also at least one
of the scRNA-seq datasets, while never showing significant enrichment (FDR<0.1) in the
opposite direction in any of the datasets (for the results in Figure 1D; Table S3).
Computation of metabolic fluxes from gene expression data with genome-scale metabolic
modeling
For each dataset, we used the genome-scale metabolic modeling (GEM) algorithm iMAT
(Shlomi et al. 2008) to compute the metabolic flux profile from gene expression data. iMAT
requires gene-length normalized expression values in the bulk RNA-seq datasets, for this we
computed TPM values with Salmon (Patro et al. 2017) from the raw fastq files for datasets
where TPM data is not provided. Then for each dataset, we took the median expression values
of the control and virus-infected samples respectively as the representative expression profile
for each group, and used it as input to iMAT. The human genome-scale metabolic model (GEM)
Recon 1 (Duarte et al. 2007) was used as the base model to iMAT. The main reason we used
the older human GEM version was due to the significantly longer computation time and
resources needed if later larger models were used instead. The output of iMAT is a refined GEM
for the each of the virus-infected and control groups in each dataset, with metabolic reaction
bounds adjusted to achieve maximal concordance with the gene expression data while
satisfying the stoichiometric constraints of the cellular metabolic network (Shlomi et al. 2008).
Each output model defines a space rather than a single unique solution of the global metabolic
flux profile, and artificial centering hit-and-run (ACHR) was used to sample the metabolic space
and obtain the flux distribution of each metabolic reaction in each condition (control or virusinfected) and dataset. All GEM analyses were performed using our in-house R package named
gembox, with the academic version of IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimization Studio 12.10 as the
optimization solver.
Differential flux analysis of virus-infected vs control group in each dataset
The flux distributions of the control and infected groups were compared to identify
reactions with differential fluxes (DF). Since an arbitrarily large number of sample points can be
sampled from the metabolic space of each group, resulting in statistical tests with arbitrarily
small P values, we adopted the following effect size-based criterion for DF reactions: absolute
rank biserial correlation (an effect size measure of the difference between the two flux
distributions in the control and virus-infected groups) >0.1, and absolute relative flux change
(i.e. the absolute difference of the mean fluxes between the two groups over the absolute mean
flux in the control group) >5%. Positive DF reactions have flux value difference in infected vs
control group >0, and vice versa for negative DF reactions. Note that for non-reversible
reactions, flux values are non-negative and the sign of DF can be interpreted similarly to
differential gene expression; for reversible reactions, flux values can be negative, representing
reactions happening in the reverse direction, thus the sign of DF needs to be interpreted
differently, e.g. negative DF represents flux shift towards the reverse direction and not
necessarily decrease in absolute flux. The DF results are given in Table S4.
Analysis of reactions with consistent differential fluxes across datasets and their pathway
enrichment analysis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To compare the DF results across datasets, the DF reactions from each pair of datasets
were tested for significant overlap using Fisher’s exact tests (separately for positive and
negative DF). Since no reaction shows fully consistent DF across all 12 datasets analyzed,
similarly as with the DE analysis, we identified the DF reactions with high level of consistency
especially in the in vivo patient datasets, such that the results may be more clinically relevant:
we identified DF reactions in the consistent direction (positive/negative) in at least one of the
bulk RNA-seq patient datasets and also at least one of the scRNA-seq datasets, while showing
DF in the opposite direction in no more than 3 datasets, resulting in 293 positive and 349
negative DF reactions (Table S5A). The metabolic pathway enrichment of these DF reactions
was analyzed with Fisher’s exact tests (results in Table S5B), with the “subSystems” slot in the
metabolic model used as pathway annotation. Note that due to the special interpretation of the
sign of DF values as explained above, the GSEA used for gene expression-level analysis is not
appropriate for pathway enrichment analysis on the flux level.
Differential transport flux analysis by each metabolite species
Differential transport flux analysis on the metabolite level was first performed for each
dataset. Specifically, in each group (control or virus-infected), the sampled flux values on the
reaction level for all transport reactions across the cell membrane were summarized by each
metabolite, taking the direction of transport (i.e. import or export) into consideration to produce
the net cellular transport flux of the metabolite (positive means net import, vice versa). The
metabolites with differential net transport fluxes between the control and virus-infected groups
were identified as in the reaction-level DF analysis described above. The consistent DF
metabolites were then identified in the same way as with the DF reactions described above. The
results are given in Table S5C.
Analysis of the consistent flux alteration patterns in different metabolic pathways
For each of the significantly enriched metabolic pathways identified in the consistent DF
reaction analysis described above, we defined the “consensus” direction of each reaction as
represented by those shown in the virus-infected group from the majority (>6 out of 12) of the
datasets, and also similarly for the “consensus” direction of DF for each reaction. The
consensus directions of reactions and their DF were overlaid onto network diagrams of the
pathways and visualized, where metabolites are represented by nodes, reactions are
represented by directed (hyper) edges with edge direction corresponding to the consensus
reaction direction and edge color corresponding to the consensus DF direction. Parts of the
metabolic pathways where reactions are not consistently altered across datasets are greyed out
or removed to increase the clarity. Upon visual inspection, potential futile loops in the network
are also removed from the visualizations.
Prediction of anti-SARS-CoV-2 target metabolic reactions with metabolic transformation
algorithm
For each of the collected datasets, the DE result of virus-infected vs control samples as
well as the representative flux distribution of the virus-infected group computed with iMAT
(Shlomi et al. 2008) followed by ACHR sampling were used as inputs for the GEM-based

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

metabolic transformation algorithm (MTA; Yizhak et al. 2013; a variant called rMTA was used;
Valcárcel et al. 2019) to predict metabolic reactions whose knock-out can transform cellular
metabolic state from that of the virus-infected to that of the control samples (full prediction
results from all datasets in Table S6A). The output of rMTA is a score (rMTA score) for each
metabolic reaction, with higher scores corresponding to better candidates for achieving the
metabolic transformation as specified above. From our previous experience (Yizhak et al. 2013),
the top 10-20% MTA predictions contain promising targets. The human Recon 1 GEM (Duarte
et al. 2007) was used for the MTA analysis. The rMTA algorithm implemented in our in-house R
package named gembox was used, with the academic version of IBM ILOG CPLEX
Optimization Studio 12.10 as the optimization solver. To compare the MTA predictions across
datasets, the top 10% predictions from each pair of datasets were tested for significant overlap
using Fisher’s exact tests.
Validation of the MTA-predicted anti-SARS-CoV-2 metabolic targets
Multiple datasets of reported anti-SARS-CoV-2 gene targets or drugs identified from
large-scale chemical or genetic screens were collected to validate our predictions. Gene-level
results of two published CRISPR-Cas9 genetic screens (Wei et al. 2020 and Daniloski et al.
2020) were obtained from the supplementary materials of the respective publication. For Wei et
al., gene hits with FDR<0.1 and mean z score>0 (i.e. KO inhibits the viral infection) were taken;
Daniloski et al. reported two screens with different multiplicities of infections (MOIs) and
provided only single-sided FDR, so gene hits with FDR<0.1 from either screen were taken. The
union set of hits from both studies were used. Lists of experimentally validated drugs reported in
different studies compiled by Kuleshov et al. 2020 were downloaded from
https://maayanlab.cloud/covid19/, which are then mapped to the genes they inhibit using data
from DrugBank v5.1.7 (Wishart et al. 2018). Additionally, host proteins identified to interact with
SARS-CoV-2 proteins were obtained from the supplementary materials of Gordon et al. 2020
and Stukalov et al. 2020. The genes from these validation datasets are mapped to metabolic
reactions wherever applicable based on the human GEM Recon 1 (Duarte et al. 2007) data.
Then, the significant overlap between the top 10% MTA-predicted targets from each dataset
and each of the validation sets described above was tested with Fisher’s exact tests on the
reaction level (full results in Table S6B-D). Reaction-level test is performed because multiple
reactions can be mapped to the same gene, and performing Fisher’s exact test on the genelevel fails to consider such multiple mapping and is thus inappropriate.
For ROC analysis, negative sets (i.e. genes whose KO promotes SARS-CoV-2 infection)
were defined based on the two CRISPR-Cas9 screens described above. For Wei et al., gene
with FDR<0.1 and mean z score<0 were taken; since Daniloski et al. provided only single-sided
FDR, the log fold-change threshold corresponding to the FDR<0.1 cutoff was identified, and
genes with more extreme log fold-changes in the opposite direction were taken. The union of
the negative sets from both studies was used. Both the positive (described in the previous
paragraph) and negative sets of genes are then mapped to metabolic reactions as described
above. The negative set defined as such contains a relatively balanced number of reactions
compared to the positive set (131 vs 81). The rMTA score for the reactions produced by MTA
was used as the predicted value for ROC analysis. The R package pROC (Robin et al. 2011)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was used to compute the AUROC values and their 95% confidence intervals (the latter
computed with bootstrapping).
Defining and analyzing the consensus set of candidate anti-SARS-CoV-2 metabolic targets
across datasets
Based on top 10% MTA predictions from the 12 datasets (6 in vitro and 6 in vivo), the
metabolic reaction targets that are recurrent in at least 3 of the in vitro datasets, and also in 3 of
the in vivo datasets (i.e. the intersection of the two) were taken to be the final consensus
candidate targets with high-confidence support across datasets. These target reactions are also
mapped to genes using the human GEM Recon 1 data (Duarte et al. 2007), and further mapped
to known drugs inhibiting the gene targets using data from DrugBank v5.1.7 (Wishart et al.
2018; target list given in Table S7A). The metabolic pathway enrichment of these targets was
analyzed with Fisher’s exact tests, with the “subSystems” slot in the metabolic model used as
pathway annotation. For enrichment analysis of cellular transport reactions by each metabolite
species, the reactions responsible for transporting each metabolite across the cell membrane
were identified from Recon 1 and used as reaction sets for the Fisher’s exact tests.
Preparation of Vero E6 cell samples with SARS-CoV-2 infection and remdesivir treatment, RNAsequencing, and gene expression data analysis
Vero E6 cells (ATCC® CRL-1586™) were maintained in Dulbecco’s modified eagle
medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS,
Gibco), 50 U ml−1 penicillin, 50 μg ml−1 streptomycin, 1 mM sodium pyruvate (Gibco), 10 mM
4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES, Gibco), and 1× MEM non-essential
amino acids solution (Gibco). The SARS-CoV-2 USA-WA1/2020 strain was obtained from BEI
Resources (NR-52281). The virus was inoculated on Vero E6 cells and the cell supernatant was
collected at 72 h post-inoculation (hpi), when extensive cytopathic effects were observed. The
supernatant, after clarification by centrifugation 15 min at 4 °C at 5,000 xg, was aliquoted and
stored at −80°C until use. 500,000 Vero E6 cells were seeded in 6-well plates. The following
day, the cell medium was replaced with fresh medium supplemented with either DMSO or 1 µM
remdesivir (Adooq Bioscience), and cells were either mock-infected or infected with SARS-CoV2 USA-WA1/2020 (MOI=0.3). Twenty-four hours after infection, cells were collected, and total
intracellular RNA was extracted using the Qiagen® RNeasy® Plus Mini Kit. Three replicates
were performed for each group, resulting in a total of six samples. The quality of the extracted
RNA was assessed with Agilent® 2100 Bioanalyzer. Libraries were prepared on total RNA
following ribosome RNA depletion with standard protocol according to Illumina®. Total RNA
sequencing was then performed on the Illumina® NextSeq system, 150bp paired-end runs were
performed and 100 million raw reads per sample were generated. STAR (Dobin et al. 2013) was
used to align the reads to reference genome of the African green monkey (Chlorocebus
sabaeus, https://useast.ensembl.org/Chlorocebus_sabaeus/Info/Annotation), with the SARSCoV-2 genome (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore/NC_045512) added to the reference
genome. DESeq2 (Love et al. 2014) was used for DE analysis between pairs of experimental
groups (including virus+remdesivir vs control and virus vs control; DE results in Table S8A).
GSEA (Subramanian et al. 2005) was performed using the implementation in the R package

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

fgsea (Korotkevich et al. 2019), results are provided in Table S8B. The gene set/pathway
annotations used were the Reactome (Jassal et al. 2020) and KEGG (Kanehisa et al. 2021)
subsets from the “Canonical Pathway” category in version 7.0 MSigDB database (Liberzon et al.
2011).
Genome-scale metabolic modeling of the remdesivir-treated Vero E6 cell samples and
prediction of anti-SARS-CoV-2 metabolic targets in combination with remdesivir
As with the metabolic modeling of the other datasets on SARS-CoV-2 infection, iMAT
(Shlomi et al. 2008) together with ACHR was used to compute the metabolic flux distribution for
each of the experimental groups, using the median expression TPM values of each group as the
input to iMAT. Reactions with differential fluxes (DF) between groups (including virus+remdesivir
vs control and virus vs control) were identified as described above, and their significant
metabolic pathway enrichment was tested with Fisher’s exact tests, with pathways defined by
the “subSystems” from the Recon 1 model (Duarte et al. 2007; results in Table S9). The DE
result of virus+remdesivir vs control group and the mean flux distribution of the virus+remdesivir
group computed with iMAT were used as inputs for MTA to predict metabolic reactions whose
knock-out can further transform the virus+remdesivir metabolic state to the normal control state
(results in Table S10A). The top 10% and 20% MTA-predicted targets were tested for significant
enrichment for the targets of a list of experimentally validated synergistic drugs with remdesivir
(Nguyenla et al. 2020) using Fisher’s exact test (performed on the metabolic reaction level as
described above). Metabolic pathway enrichment analysis of the top MTA-predicted targets was
performed as described above (results in Table S10B).
Notes on statistical analysis and visualization
R version 3.6.3 was used for all statistical tests. P values lesser than 2.22e-16 may not
be computed accurately and are reported as “P<2.22e-16” throughout the text. The BenjaminiHochberg (BH) method was used for P value adjustment throughout the text. The R packages
ggplot2 (Wickham 2016), ComplexHeatmap (Gu et al. 2016) and visNetwork (https://cran.rproject.org/web/packages/visNetwork/index.html) were used to create the visualizations.
Data and code availability
The gene expression data analyzed in this study are from published studies, with
detailed information given in Table 1. The bulk RNA-seq data for SARS-CoV-2 infection in Vero
E6 cells with remdesivir treatment will be deposited to the GEO database (dataset ID pending).
The code used for the analyses can be found in the GitHub repository:
https://github.com/ruppinlab/covid_metabolism.

Acknowledgement
This research was supported in part by the Intramural Research Program of the National
Institutes of Health, NCI, and used the computational resources of the NIH HPC Biowulf cluster
(http://hpc.nih.gov). We acknowledge and thank the National Cancer Institute for providing
financial and infrastructural support. K.C. and S.S is supported by the NCI-UMD Partnership for
Integrative Cancer Research Program.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Analysis of SARS-CoV-2-induced gene expression changes with 12 published
datasets. (A) PCA plot using the rank-based inverse normal-transformed differential expression
(DE) log fold-change values (virus-infected compared to control samples) across all the
datasets analyzed. (B) Visualization of the overlap of the top significant DE genes (n=400, all at
least have FDR<0.1) between each pair of datasets analyzed using Fisher’s exact tests
(Methods). The dot size corresponds to the effect size of the overlap as measured by odds ratio,
and the color corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted one-sided P value (grey means below
0.05). (C) Visualization of the overlap of the top significantly enriched pathways (FDR<0.1) from
the gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) between each pair of datasets analyzed using
Fisher’s exact tests (Methods). The meanings of dot size and color are the same as (B), dots
with black border correspond to infinity odds ratio. (D) A summary visualization of the GSEA
result for the top consistently altered pathways during SARS-CoV-2 infection across the
datasets, with more importance given to the various in vivo patient datasets (Methods). The dot
color corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted P values from GSEA, with two sets of colors
(red-orange and blue-purple) distinguishing up-regulation from down-regulation (positive or
negative normalized enrichment scores, i.e. NES); dot size corresponds to the absolute value of
NES measuring the strength of enrichment. The left and right-hand side blocks represent the
pathways that tend to be consistently up-regulated and down-regulated in infected vs control
samples, respectively; within each block, the pathways are ordered by negative sum of log P
values across datasets (i.e. Fisher’s method). (E) Heatmap summarizing the landscape of
metabolic pathway alterations (based on gene expression) during SARS-CoV-2 across
datasets. The heatmap color corresponds to the GSEA NES values (explained above) for
KEGG metabolic pathways grouped into major categories. Only the metabolic pathways with
FDR<0.2 enrichment in at least one dataset are included in the heatmap. The dataset labels
used in this figure correspond to those given in Table 1.
Figure 2. Genome-scale metabolic modeling (GEM)-based analysis of SARS-CoV-2induced metabolic alterations across datasets. GEM was used to compute the metabolic
fluxes from the gene expression profiles, and reactions with differential fluxes (DF) between the
SARS-CoV-2-infected and control groups were identified for each dataset (Methods). (A)
Visualization of the overlap of the top DF reactions between each pair of datasets analyzed
using Fisher’s exact tests (Methods). The dot size corresponds to the effect size of the overlap

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

as measured by odds ratio, and the color corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted one-sided
P value (grey means below 0.05). (B) A summary visualization of the metabolic pathway
enrichment result for the top consistent DF reactions across the datasets, with more importance
given to the various in vivo patient datasets (Methods). Y-axis represents the odds ratio of
enrichment, the dot color corresponds to the adjusted P value from Fisher’s exact tests, and dot
size corresponds to the number of enriched reactions within each pathway. Half-dots plotted on
the top border line correspond to infinity odds ratio values. The pathways on the X-axis are
ordered by P value and only those with FDR<0.1 are shown. (C) A summary visualization of the
top metabolites with consistently altered cellular transport patterns during SARS-CoV-2 infection
across the datasets, with more importance given to the various in vivo patient datasets
(Methods). The dot color corresponds to the rank biserial correlation (rrb) as one measure of the
DF effect size, with positive value (red color) corresponding to higher net cellular import from the
extracellular space or lower net export in infected vs control samples, vice versa for negative
value (blue color); dot size corresponds to another measure of DF effect size, which is the
absolute percentage of flux value change relative to the flux in the control group (%dflux;
Methods). The left-hand side block contains metabolites that tend to show overall higher net
cellular import (or lower export) in infected vs control samples across many datasets (despite
the lack of full coherence), vice versa for the right-hand side block. (D-H) Visualization of the
relatively consistent DF patterns in selected enriched pathways. The metabolic network is based
on the human GEM Recon 1 (Duarte et al. 2007), and pathways are taken from the
“subSystems” annotation in the GEM. Metabolites are represented by nodes, reactions are
represented by directed (hyper) edges, with edge direction corresponding to the consensus
reaction direction and edge color corresponding to the consensus DF direction across datasets
(Methods). Red and blue colors correspond to increased and decreased fluxes, respectively;
grey color corresponds to reactions not showing consistent DF changes across datasets, some
of such reactions are not shown to increase clarity. (D) Pyrimidine biosynthesis. (E) TCA cycle
(left-hand side); the right-hand side contains the cytoplasmic counterparts of the TCA cycle
intermediate metabolites, their interconversion and cytosol-mitochondrial transport. (F) Inositol
phosphate metabolism. (G) Glycine, serine, and threonine metabolism. (H) Fatty acid
elongation. Metabolites are labeled by their names in (D,E,G) or IDs from Recon 1 in (F,H), with
suffixes denoting their cellular compartments: [c] cytosol; [m] mitochondria. The mapping
between the IDs and metabolite names in (F,H) is given in Table S5D.
Figure 3. Genome-scale metabolic modeling (GEM)-based prediction of anti-SARS-CoV-2
targets that act via reversing the virus-induced metabolic alterations. The robust metabolic
transformation algorithm (rMTA, Valcárcel et al. 2019) was used to predict metabolic reactions
whose knock-out can reverse the SARS-CoV-2-induced metabolic changes using each of the
collected datasets (Methods). (A) Visualization of the overlap of the top 10% MTA-predicted
target reactions between each pair of datasets analyzed using Fisher’s exact tests (Methods).
The dot size corresponds to the effect size of the overlap as measured by odds ratio, and the
color corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted one-sided P value (grey means below 0.05).
(B) A summary visualization of the enrichment of the top 10% MTA-predicted targets from each
dataset for the antiviral hits (i.e. those whose KO inhibits SARS-CoV-2 infection) identified in the
two published CRISPR-Cas9 screens (Wei et al. 2020 and Daniloski et al. 2020; Methods). Y-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

axis represents the odds ratio of enrichment, the dot color corresponds to the negative log10
adjusted one-sided P value from Fisher’s exact tests, and dot size corresponds to the number of
enriched target reactions. The datasets are ordered by P values, the first 8 datasets have
FDR<0.1. (C) cases of significant enrichment (FDR<0.1) of top 10% MTA-predicted targets from
each dataset for the experimentally validated anti-SARS-CoV-2 drug sets from previous studies
(compiled by Kuleshov et al. 2020). Axes and the meanings of dot color and size are similar to
(B) but the axes are flipped and the adjusted P values are not log-transformed. Half-dots plotted
on the top border line correspond to infinity odds ratio values. (D) significant cases of significant
enrichment (FDR<0.1) of top 10% MTA-predicted targets from each dataset for the host
proteins involved in host-SARS-CoV-2 protein-protein interactions (from Stukalov et al. 2020;
data from Gordon et al. 2020 was also analyzed but no significant enrichment was found). Axes
and the meanings of dot color and size are similar to (C) but raw P values instead of adjusted P
values are plotted (all the displayed cases have adjusted P=0.08). (E) A summary of the area
under ROC curve (AUROC) value of the MTA prediction using each dataset, based on positive
and negative sets (i.e. genes whose KO inhibits or promotes the viral infection, respectively)
from the two published CRISPR-Cas9 screen data (Wei et al. 2020 and Daniloski et al. 2020;
Methods). The error bars (vertical lines through the dots) represent 95% confidence intervals.
(F) Example ROC curves from two of the best-performing datasets. The curves are colored by
color gradients corresponding to the threshold of top MTA predictions. (G) Summary of the
metabolic pathways significantly enriched (FDR<0.1) by the final list of consensus candidate
targets identified across datasets (Methods). Three significant pathways including cellular
transport were identified (the first three items on the X axis). The rest of the items on the X axis
are for significant enrichment results (FDR<0.1) by each metabolite species within the cellular
transport pathway. Y axis and the meanings of dot color and size are similar to (B).
Figure 4. Analysis of the gene expression and metabolic flux profile of remdesivir
treatment and prediction of metabolic targets for anti-SARS-CoV-2 in combination with
remdesivir. (A) PCA plot of the gene expression profiles for the Vero E6 samples from all
experimental groups: control (no virus or remdesivir treatment), virus (SARS-CoV-2-infected),
virus+remdesivir (SARS-CoV-2-infected treated by remdesivir), remdesivir (remdesivir treatment
alone without virus). There are 3 replicates in each group. (B) A visualization of selected
differentially expressed pathways comparing the virus+remdesivir group to the control group
using gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA). Y-axis represents normalized enrichment score
(NES), positive value means higher expression in the virus+remdesivir group compared to
control, vice versa. Pathways on the X-axis are ordered by their NES values, all pathways
displayed have adjusted P<0.05; pathways with names in red are those that are not significantly
different (adjusted P>0.2) when comparing the virus group to the control group using GSEA, i.e.
changes in these pathways may arise from remdesivir-specific effects. The dot color
corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted GSEA P value, and dot size corresponds to the
number of enriched genes (i.e. “leading edge” genes in GSEA). (C) PCA plot of the average
metabolic flux profile computed using the iMAT algorithm (Shlomi et al. 2008; Methods)
representative of each of the experimental groups, the labels are the same as (A). (D) A
visualization of metabolic pathway enrichment result of the differential metabolic fluxes in the
virus+remdesivir group vs the control group, using Fisher’s exact tests (Methods). Y-axis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

represents the odds ratio of enrichment, the horizontal dashed line corresponds to odds ratio of
1. The dot color corresponds to the negative log10 adjusted one-sided P value from Fisher’s
exact tests, and dot size corresponds to the number of enriched target reactions. The datasets
are ordered by P values, all pathways displayed have FDR<0.1. (E) The robust metabolic
transformation algorithm (rMTA, Valcárcel et al. 2019) was used to predict metabolic reactions
whose knock-out can further transform the metabolic state of the remdesivir-treated SARS-CoV2-infected cells back to the normal control state, using the Vero E6 cell samples (Methods). The
significant metabolic pathways (FDR<0.1) enriched by the top 20% MTA-predicted targets are
shown. Axes and the meanings of dot color and size are similar to (D). The pathways with
names in bold text are also significantly enriched (FDR<0.1) by the top 10% MTA-predicted
targets.

References
Auslander N, Cunningham CE, Toosi BM, et al. An integrated computational and experimental
study uncovers FUT9 as a metabolic driver of colorectal cancer. Mol Syst Biol. 2017;13(12):956.
Published 2017 Dec 1. doi:10.15252/msb.20177739
Baart GJ, Martens DE. Genome-scale metabolic models: reconstruction and analysis. Methods
Mol Biol. 2012;799:107-126. doi:10.1007/978-1-61779-346-2_7
Barberis E, Timo S, Amede E, et al. Large-Scale Plasma Analysis Revealed New Mechanisms
and Molecules Associated with the Host Response to SARS-CoV-2. Int J Mol Sci.
2020;21(22):8623. Published 2020 Nov 16. doi:10.3390/ijms21228623
Beigel JH, Tomashek KM, Dodd LE, et al. ACTT-1 Study Group Members. Remdesivir for the
treatment of Covid-19—Final report. N Engl J Med. 2020 Nov 5;383(19):1813-1826. doi:
10.1056/NEJMoa2007764.
Beziau A, Brand D, Piver E. The Role of Phosphatidylinositol Phosphate Kinases during Viral
Infection. Viruses. 2020;12(10):1124. Published 2020 Oct 3. doi:10.3390/v12101124
Blanco-Melo D, Nilsson-Payant BE, Liu WC, et al. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2
Drives
Development
of
COVID-19.
Cell.
2020;181(5):1036-1045.e9.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026
Bojkova D, Klann K, Koch B, et al. Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals
therapy targets. Nature. 2020;583(7816):469-472. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2332-7
Bojkova D, Costa R, Bechtel M, Ciesek S, Michaelis M, Cinatl J Jr. Targeting pentose
phosphate pathway for SARS-CoV-2 therapy. Preprint. bioRxiv. 2020;2020.08.19.257022.
Published 2020 August 21. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.19.257022
Butler DJ, Mozsary C, Meydan C, et al. Shotgun Transcriptome and Isothermal Profiling of
SARS-CoV-2 Infection Reveals Unique Host Responses, Viral Diversification, and Drug
Interactions. Preprint. bioRxiv. 2020;2020.04.20.048066. Published 2020 May 1.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.20.048066

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Chua RL, Lukassen S, Trump S, Hennig BP, Wendisch D, et al. COVID-19 severity correlates
with airway epithelium–immune cell interactions identified by single-cell analysis. Nat
Biotechnol. 2020 Aug;38(8):970-979. doi: 10.1038/s41587-020-0602-4.
Daniloski Z, Jordan TX, Wessels HH, et al. Identification of Required Host Factors for SARSCoV-2 Infection in Human Cells [published online ahead of print, 2020 Oct 24]. Cell.
2020;S0092-8674(20)31394-5. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.030
Dobin A, Davis CA, Schlesinger F, et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner.
Bioinformatics. 2013;29(1):15-21. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635
Dong Y, Dai T, Wei Y, Zhang L, Zheng M, Zhou F. A systematic review of SARS-CoV-2 vaccine
candidates. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2020;5(1):237. Published 2020 Oct 13.
doi:10.1038/s41392-020-00352-y
Duarte NC, Becker SA, Jamshidi N, et al. Global reconstruction of the human metabolic network
based on genomic and bibliomic data. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007;104(6):1777-1782.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0610772104
Ehrlich A, Uhl S, Ioannidis K, Hofree M, tenOever BR and Nahmias Y. The SARS-CoV-2
Transcriptional Metabolic Signature in Lung Epithelium. 2020. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3650499 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3650499
Finak G, McDavid A, Yajima M, et al. MAST: a flexible statistical framework for assessing
transcriptional changes and characterizing heterogeneity in single-cell RNA sequencing data.
Genome Biol. 2015;16:278. Published 2015 Dec 10. doi:10.1186/s13059-015-0844-5
Gardinassi LG, Souza COS, Sales-Campos H, Fonseca SG. Immune and Metabolic Signatures
of COVID-19 Revealed by Transcriptomics Data Reuse. Front Immunol. 2020;11:1636.
Published 2020 Jun 26. doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.01636
Gordon DE, Jang GM, Bouhaddou M, et al. A SARS-CoV-2 protein interaction map reveals
targets for drug repurposing. Nature. 2020;583(7816):459-468. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2286-9
Gu C, Kim GB, Kim WJ, Kim HU, Lee SY. Current status and applications of genome-scale
metabolic models. Genome Biol. 2019;20(1):121. Published 2019 Jun 13. doi:10.1186/s13059019-1730-3
Gu Z, Eils R, Schlesner M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and correlations in
multidimensional
genomic
data.
Bioinformatics.
2016;32(18):2847-2849.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btw313
Hoffmann M, Kleine-Weber H, Schroeder S, et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2
and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell. 2020;181(2):271280.e8. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.02.052

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

International Clinical Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP). COVID-19 trials [updated on 4 December
2020]. Available online: https://www.who.int/clinical-trials-registry-platform (accessed on
December 10, 2020); data from: https://www.who.int/ictrp/COVID19-web.csv
Jassal B, Matthews L, Viteri G, et al. The reactome pathway knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2020;48(D1):D498-D503. doi:10.1093/nar/gkz1031
Kanehisa M, Furumichi M, Sato Y, Ishiguro-Watanabe M, Tanabe M. KEGG: integrating viruses
and cellular organisms. Nucleic Acids Res. 2021;49(D1):D545-D551. doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa970
Korotkevich G, Sukhov V, Sergushichev A. Fast gene set enrichment analysis. 2019. Preprint.
bioRxiv. doi:10. 1101/060012.
Kuleshov MV, Stein DJ, Clarke DJB, et al. The COVID-19 Drug and Gene Set Library. Patterns
(N Y). 2020;1(6):100090. doi:10.1016/j.patter.2020.100090
Law CW, Chen Y, Shi W, Smyth GK. voom: Precision weights unlock linear model analysis tools
for RNA-seq read counts. Genome Biol. 2014;15(2):R29. Published 2014 Feb 3.
doi:10.1186/gb-2014-15-2-r29
Li S, Ma F, Yokota T, et al. Metabolic reprogramming and epigenetic changes of vital organs in
SARS-CoV-2 induced systemic toxicity [published online ahead of print, 2020 Dec 7]. JCI
Insight. 2020;145027. doi:10.1172/jci.insight.145027
Liao M, Liu Y, Yuan J, Wen Y, Xu G, Zhao J, Cheng L, Li J, Wang X, Wang F, Liu L, Amit I,
Zhang S, Zhang Z. Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with
COVID-19. Nat Med. 2020 Jun;26(6):842-844. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0901-9.
Liberzon A, Subramanian A, Pinchback R, Thorvaldsdóttir H, Tamayo P, Mesirov JP, Molecular
signatures
database
(MSigDB)
3.0,
Bioinformatics,
2011;27(12):1739–1740,
https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btr260
Lieberman NAP, Peddu V, Xie H, et al. In vivo antiviral host transcriptional response to SARSCoV-2 by viral load, sex, and age. PLoS Biol. 2020;18(9):e3000849. Published 2020 Sep 8.
doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.3000849
Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for RNA-seq
data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014;15(12):550. doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8
Maier T, Güell M, Serrano L. Correlation of mRNA and protein in complex biological samples.
FEBS Lett. 2009;583(24):3966-3973. doi:10.1016/j.febslet.2009.10.036
Mayer KA, Stöckl J, Zlabinger GJ, Gualdoni GA. Hijacking the Supplies: Metabolism as a Novel
Facet of Virus-Host Interaction. Front Immunol. 2019;10:1533. Published 2019 Jul 3.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.01533
National Institutes of Health. COVID-19 Treatment Guidelines. 2020. Available online:
https://www.covid19treatmentguidelines.nih.gov/immune-based-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

therapy/immunomodulators/corticosteroids (updated on November 3, 2020; accessed on
December 10, 2020)
Nguyenla X, Wehri E, Dis EV, Biering SB, Yamashiro LH, Stroumza J, Dugast-Darzacq C,
Graham T, Stanley S, Schaletzky J. Discovery of SARS-CoV-2 antiviral synergy between
remdesivir and approved drugs in human lung cells. Preprint. bioRxiv. 2020;2020.09.18.302398;
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.18.302398
Ou X, Liu Y, Lei X, et al. Characterization of spike glycoprotein of SARS-CoV-2 on virus entry
and its immune cross-reactivity with SARS-CoV. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):1620. Published
2020 Mar 27. doi:10.1038/s41467-020-15562-9
Patro R, Duggal G, Love MI, Irizarry RA, Kingsford C. Salmon provides fast and bias-aware
quantification
of
transcript
expression.
Nat
Methods.
2017;14(4):417-419.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197
RECOVERY Collaborative Group, Horby P, Lim WS, et al. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized
Patients with Covid-19 - Preliminary Report [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jul 17]. N
Engl J Med. 2020;NEJMoa2021436. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2021436
Riva L, Yuan S, Yin X, et al. Discovery of SARS-CoV-2 antiviral drugs through large-scale
compound repurposing. Nature. 2020;586(7827):113-119. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2577-1
Robin X, Turck N, Hainard A, et al. pROC: an open-source package for R and S+ to analyze
and compare ROC curves. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011;12:77. Published 2011 Mar 17.
doi:10.1186/1471-2105-12-77
Sanchez EL, Lagunoff M. Viral activation of cellular metabolism. Virology. 2015;479-480:609618. doi:10.1016/j.virol.2015.02.038
Shen B, Yi X, Sun Y, et al. Proteomic and Metabolomic Characterization of COVID-19 Patient
Sera. Cell. 2020;182(1):59-72.e15. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.032
Shlomi T, Cabili MN, Herrgård MJ, Palsson BØ, Ruppin E. Network-based prediction of human
tissue-specific metabolism. Nat Biotechnol. 2008;26(9):1003-1010. doi:10.1038/nbt.1487
Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, et al. Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell.
2019;177(7):1888-1902.e21. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031
Stukalov A, Girault V, Grass V, et al. Multi-level proteomics reveals host-perturbation strategies
of SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV. Preprint. bioRxiv. 2020;2020.06.17.156455. Published 2020
Jun 17. doi:10.1101/2020.06.17.156455
Styr B, Gonen N, Zarhin D, et al. Mitochondrial Regulation of the Hippocampal Firing Rate Set
Point
and
Seizure
Susceptibility.
Neuron.
2019;102(5):1009-1024.e8.
doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2019.03.045

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Subramanian B, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledgebased approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. PNAS. Oct
2005;102(43):15545-15550. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0506580102
Tay MZ, Poh CM, Rénia L, MacAry PA, Ng LFP. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity,
inflammation and intervention. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(6):363-374. doi:10.1038/s41577-0200311-8
Thomas T, Stefanoni D, Reisz JA, et al. COVID-19 infection alters kynurenine and fatty acid
metabolism, correlating with IL-6 levels and renal status. JCI Insight. 2020;5(14):e140327.
Published 2020 Jul 23. doi:10.1172/jci.insight.140327
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Update: FDA Authorizes
Monoclonal Antibodies for Treatment of COVID-19. 2020. Available online:
https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fdaauthorizes-monoclonal-antibodies-treatment-covid-19 (released on November 21, 2020;
accessed on December 10, 2020)
U.S. Food and Drug Administration. COVID-19 Vaccines. 2020. Available online:
https://www.fda.gov/emergency-preparedness-and-response/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid19/covid-19-vaccines (accessed on December 28, 2020)
Valcárcel LV, Torrano V, Tobalina L, Carracedo A, Planes FJ. rMTA: robust metabolic
transformation
analysis.
Bioinformatics.
2019;35(21):4350-4355.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz231
Wei J, Alfajaro MM, DeWeirdt PC, et al. Genome-wide CRISPR Screens Reveal Host Factors
Critical for SARS-CoV-2 Infection [published online ahead of print, 2020 Oct 20]. Cell.
2020;S0092-8674(20)31392-1. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.028
Weingarten-Gabbay S, Klaeger S, Sarkizova S, et al. SARS-CoV-2 infected cells present HLA-I
peptides from canonical and out-of-frame ORFs. Preprint. bioRxiv. 2020;2020.10.02.324145.
Published 2020 Oct 2. doi:10.1101/2020.10.02.324145
WHO Solidarity Trial Consortium, Pan H, Peto R, et al. Repurposed Antiviral Drugs for Covid-19
- Interim WHO Solidarity Trial Results [published online ahead of print, 2020 Dec 2]. N Engl J
Med. 2020;NEJMoa2023184. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2023184
Wickham H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. 2016. Springer-Verlag New York.
ISBN 978-3-319-24277-4.
Wishart DS, Feunang YD, Guo AC, et al. DrugBank 5.0: a major update to the DrugBank
database for 2018. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018;46(D1):D1074-D1082. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1037
Xiong Y, Liu Y, Cao L, et al. Transcriptomic characteristics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in COVID-19 patients. Emerg Microbes Infect.
2020;9(1):761-770. doi:10.1080/22221751.2020.1747363

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Xiong R, Zhang L, Li S, et al. Novel and potent inhibitors targeting DHODH are broad-spectrum
antivirals against RNA viruses including newly-emerged coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 [published
correction appears in Protein Cell. 2020 Oct 8;:] [published correction appears in Protein Cell.
2020 Nov 9;:]. Protein Cell. 2020;11(10):723-739. doi:10.1007/s13238-020-00768-w
Yan B, Chu H, Yang D, et al. Characterization of the Lipidomic Profile of Human CoronavirusInfected Cells: Implications for Lipid Metabolism Remodeling upon Coronavirus Replication.
Viruses. 2019;11(1):73. Published 2019 Jan 16. doi:10.3390/v11010073
Yizhak K, Gabay O, Cohen H, Ruppin E. Model-based identification of drug targets that revert
disrupted metabolism and its application to ageing. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2632.
doi:10.1038/ncomms3632
Yuan S, Chu H, Chan JF, et al. SREBP-dependent lipidomic reprogramming as a broadspectrum antiviral target. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):120. Published 2019 Jan 10.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-08015-x
Zheng HY, Xu M, Yang CX, et al. Longitudinal transcriptome analyses show robust T cell
immunity during recovery from COVID-19. Signal Transduct Target Ther. 2020;5(1):294.
Published 2020 Dec 24. doi:10.1038/s41392-020-00457-4
Zhou P, Yang XL, Wang XG, et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of
probable bat origin. Nature. 2020;579(7798):270-273. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2012-7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.27.428543; this version posted January 28, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

