bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mRNA vaccine-induced SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells recognize B.1.1.7 and B.1.351
variants but differ in longevity and homing properties depending on prior infection status

Jason Neidleman1, 2, †, Xiaoyu Luo1, †, Matthew McGregor1, 2, Guorui Xie1, 2, Victoria Murray3,
Warner C. Greene1, 4, Sulggi A. Lee5, *, and Nadia R. Roan1, 2, *, #

1

Gladstone Institute of Virology, San Francisco, CA, USA

2

Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA

3

Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and the University of California, San Francisco, CA,

USA
4

Departments of Medicine, and Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San

Francisco, CA, USA

†

*

Equal contribution

Co-correspondence:

nadia.roan@gladstone.ucsf.edu, sulggi.lee@ucsf.edu
#

Lead contact

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT

While mRNA vaccines are proving highly efficacious against SARS-CoV-2, it is important
to determine how booster doses and prior infection influence the immune defense they elicit,
and whether they protect against variants. Focusing on the T cell response, we conducted a
longitudinal study of infection-naïve and COVID-19 convalescent donors before vaccination and
after their first and second vaccine doses, using a high-parameter CyTOF analysis to phenotype
their SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells. Vaccine-elicited spike-specific T cells responded similarly to
stimulation by spike epitopes from the ancestral, B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 variant strains, both in
terms of cell numbers and phenotypes. In infection-naïve individuals, the second dose boosted
the quantity but not quality of the T cell response, while in convalescents the second dose
helped neither. Spike-specific T cells from convalescent vaccinees differed strikingly from those
of infection-naïve vaccinees, with phenotypic features suggesting superior long-term
persistence and ability to home to the respiratory tract including the nasopharynx. These results
provide reassurance that vaccine-elicited T cells respond robustly to the B.1.1.7 and B.1.351
variants, confirm that convalescents may not need a second vaccine dose, and suggest that
vaccinated convalescents may have more persistent nasopharynx-homing SARS-CoV-2specific T cells compared to their infection-naïve counterparts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SUMMARY BULLET POINTS

•

mRNA vaccine-elicited T cells respond identically to B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 spike

•

Second mRNA dose affects quantity but not quality of vaccine-elicited T cells

•

Convalescents’ spike CD4 T cells express more CD127 and lung-homing receptors

•

Spike CD4 T cell levels in blood inversely correlate with tissue migration markers

BRIEF SUMMARY

Neidleman et al. conducted CyTOF on antigen-specific T cells in longitudinal samples from
infection-naïve and COVID-19 convalescent mRNA vaccinees. Vaccine-elicited T cells respond
identically to variants, and change in quantity but not quality after first dose. Convalescents’ T
cells preferentially express the longevity-associated marker CD127 and respiratory tract homing
receptors.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION

Within 18 months of the December 2019 emergence of SARS-CoV-2, the novel
betacoronavirus had already infected ~150 million people and taken the lives of over 3 million,
nearly collapsed worldwide health systems, disrupted the global economy, and perturbed society
and public health on a scale not experienced within the past 100 years. Fortunately, multiple
highly-efficacious vaccines, including the two-dose mRNA-based ones developed by
Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, which confer ~90% protection against disease, were approved for
emergency use before the end of 2020. Although the vaccines provide the most promising route
for a rapid exit from the COVID-19 pandemic, concerns remain regarding the durability of the
immunity elicited by these vaccines and the extent to which they will protect against the variants
of SARS-CoV-2 now spreading rapidly around the world.
The first variant observed to display a survival advantage was the D614G, which was more
transmissible than the original strain and quickly became the dominant variant throughout the
world (Korber et al., 2020). This variant, fortunately, did not evade immunity and in fact appeared
to be more sensitive than the original strain to antibody neutralization by convalescent sera
(Weissman et al., 2021). More worrisome, however, was the emergence at the end of 2020 of
rapidly-spreading variants in multiple parts of the world, including B.1.1.7, B.1.351, P.1, and
B.1.427/B.1.429 (originally identified in United Kingdom, South Africa, Brazil, and California,
respectively) (Plante et al., 2021). Some variants, including B.1.1.7, may be more virulent (Davies
et al., 2021). While antibodies against the original strain elicited by either vaccination or infection
generally remain potent against B.1.1.7, their activity against B.1.351 and P.1 is compromised
(Cele et al., 2021; Collier et al., 2021; Edara et al., 2021; Garcia-Beltran et al., 2021; Hoffmann et
al., 2021; Kuzmina et al., 2021; Muik et al., 2021; Planas et al., 2021; Stamatatos et al., 2021;
Wang et al., 2021). Antibodies from vaccinees were 14-fold less effective against B.1.351 than

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

against the ancestral strain, and a subset of individuals completely lacked neutralizing antibody
activity against B.1.351 9 months or more after convalescence (Planas et al., 2021).
Reassuringly, early data suggest that relative to antibody responses, T cell-mediated
immunity appears to be less prone to evasion by the variants (Redd et al., 2021; Skelly et al.,
2021; Tarke et al., 2021). Among 280 CD4+ and 523 CD8+ T cell epitopes from the original SARSCoV-2, an average of 91.5% (for CD4) and 98.1% (for CD8) mapped to regions not mutated in
the B.1.1.7, B1.351, P.1, and B.1.427/B.1.429 variants. Focusing on just the spike response, the
sole SARS-CoV-2 antigen in the mRNA-based vaccines, then 89.7% of the CD4+ epitopes and
96.4% of the CD8+ epitopes are conserved (Tarke et al., 2021). In line with this, the magnitude
of the response of T cells from convalescent or vaccinated individuals was not markedly reduced
when assessed against any of the variants (Tarke et al., 2021). The relative resistance of T cells
against SARS-CoV-2 immune evasion is important in light of the critical role these immune
effectors play during COVID-19. T cell numbers display a strong, inverse association with disease
severity (Chen et al., 2020; Woodruff et al., 2020), and the frequency of SARS-CoV-2-specific T
cells predicts recovery from severe disease (Neidleman et al., 2021; Rydyznski Moderbacher et
al., 2020). SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells can also provide long-term, self-renewing immunological
memory: these cells are detected more than half a year into convalescence, and can proliferate
in response to homeostatic signals (Dan et al., 2021; Neidleman et al., 2020a). Furthermore, the
ability of individuals with inborn deficiencies in B cell responses to recover from COVID-19 without
intensive care suggests that the combination of T cells and innate immune mechanisms is
sufficient for recovery when antibodies are lacking (Soresina et al., 2020).
Although T cells against the ancestral strain display a response of similar magnitude and
breadth to the variants (Tarke et al., 2021), to what extent the variants change these T cells’
phenotypes and effector functions is a different question. Small changes in the sequences of T
cell epitopes, in the form of altered peptide ligands (APLs), can theoretically alter how the T cells
respond to stimulation. Indeed, change of a single residue can convert a proliferative, IL4-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

secreting effector response into one that continues to produce IL4 in the absence of proliferation
(Evavold and Allen, 1991). Furthermore, APLs can activate Th1 cells without inducing either
proliferation or cytokine production, shift Th1 responses into Th2-focused ones, and in some
instances even render T cells anergic or immunoregulatory by eliciting TGFb production (SloanLancaster and Allen, 1996).
Another important aspect that hasn’t been explored is to what extent vaccine- vs. infectioninduced T cell responses differ phenotypically and funcitonally, and to what extent convalescent
individuals benefit from vaccination as they already harbor some form of immunity against the
virus. Studies based on the antibody and B cell response suggest that for COVID-19
convalescents, a single dose of the mRNA vaccines is helpful while the additional booster is not
necessary (Ebinger et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2021; Stamatatos et al., 2021); how this translates in
the context of vaccine-elicited T cell immunity is not clear.
To address these knowledge gaps, we conducted 39-parameter phenotyping by CyTOF
on 24 longitudinal specimens from 8 mRNA-vaccinated individuals, 4 of whom had previously
contracted and recovered from COVID-19. Blood specimens were obtained prior to vaccination,
two weeks following the first dose, and two weeks following the second. For each individual, we
assessed in depth the phenotypes and effector functions of total CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, and of
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells responding to the original SARS-CoV-2 spike, to spike from variants
B.1.1.7 and B.1.351, and to nucleocapsid. By conducting high-dimensional analyses on the
resulting 120 datasets generated, we find a reassuringly unaltered T cell response against the
variants, and a striking impact of prior infection on qualitative features of T cells elicited by
vaccination.

RESULTS
Study Design

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To characterize the phenotypic features of mRNA vaccination-elicited SARS-CoV-2specific T cells, we procured 24 longitudinal blood samples from the COVID-19 Host Immune
Response and Pathogenesis (CHIRP) cohort. Three of the participants had received the
Moderna (mRNA-1273) vaccine, while the remaining five had received the Pfizer/BioNTech
(BNT162b2) one. For all participants, longitudinal specimens were obtained at three timepoints:
prior to vaccination, ~2 weeks (range 13-18 days) after the first vaccine dose, and ~2 weeks
(range 6-28 days) after the second dose. Half of the participants were never infected with
SARS-CoV-2, while the other half had completely recovered from mild (non-hospitalized)
COVID-19 disease (Table S1). These prior infections had all occurred in the San Francisco Bay
Area between March – July of 2020, when the dominant local strain was the original ancestral
strain. Each specimen was phenotyped using a 39-parameter T cell-centric CyTOF panel (see
Methods and Table S2) at baseline (to establish the overall phenotypes of total CD4+ and CD8+
T cells), and following 6 hours of stimulation with overlapping 15-mer peptides spanning the
entire original (ancestral) SARS-CoV-2-spike, B.1.1.7 spike, B.1.351 spike, or the original
SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (the latter as a control for a SARS-CoV-2-specific response not
boosted by vaccination). Including all the baseline and stimulation conditions, a total of 120
specimens from the 8 participants were analyzed by CyTOF.

SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells elicited by vaccination recognize B.1.1.7 and B.1.351
variants
We first confirmed our ability to identify SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells by stimulating
PBMCs from vaccinated individuals with spike peptides. In line with our prior studies
implementing a 6-hour peptide stimulation (Neidleman et al., 2020a; Neidleman et al., 2021),
spike-specific CD4+ T cells could be specifically identified through intracellular cytokine staining
for IFNg, and a more robust response was observed among CD4+ than CD8+ T cells (Fig. 1A).
Activation induced markers (AIM) such as Ox40, 4-1BB, and CD69 could also be identified in T

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cells after spike peptide stimulation, but with a higher background in the baseline (no peptide
stimulation) specimens relative to the intracellular cytokine staining approach (Fig. S1). For this
reason, in this study we exclusively used IFNg positivity in the peptide-stimulated samples as a
marker of antigen-specific T cells.
In the infection-naïve participants, the first vaccination dose primed a spike-specific
CD4+ T cell response, which was further boosted with the second dose (Fig. 1B, top left). For
each participant and time point, the same number of cells were stimulated by exposure to the
ancestral or variant spikes. This finding suggests that vaccine-elicited spike-specific CD4+ T
cells recognize ancestral and variant spike equally well, and is consistent with their recently
reported ability to recognize variant strains (Tarke et al., 2021). The response of vaccine-elicited
CD8+ T cells to spike peptides was weaker, and mostly apparent only after the second dose
(Fig. 1B, top right). As expected, vaccination did not elicit T cells able to respond to
nucleocapsid peptides (Fig. 1C, top panels).
In contrast to the infection-naïve individuals where spike-specific CD4+ T cells were
clearly elicited and then boosted upon the second dose, spike-specific CD4+ T cell responses in
convalescent individuals did not show a consistent upward trend. Convalescent donor PID4112
had a large frequency of pre-vaccination SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells that increased to
>1% of the total CD4+ T cell frequency after the first dose and then dampened after dose 2 (Fig.
1B, bottom left). PID4112 also exhibited an elevated nucleocapsid-specific CD4+ T cell
response after the first vaccination dose (Fig. 1C, bottom left), which may have been due to
bystander effects resulting from the concomitant large spike-specific response. In comparison,
PID4112’s spike-specific CD8+ T cell response was low after dose 1, and boosted after dose 2
(Fig. 1B, bottom right). In contrast to PID4112, the remaining three convalescent donors
exhibited an overall weak spike-specific T cell response. In fact, when comparing these three
donors to the four infection-naïve donors, there was a highly significant decrease in the
magnitude of the spike-specific CD4+ T cell response, while the spike-specific CD8+ T cell

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

response was equivalent between the two groups (Fig. 1D). These results were unexpected and
suggest that, when excluding outlier PID4112, the magnitude of the vaccine-elicited spikespecific CD4+ T cell response was lower in convalescent individuals than in infection-naïve
individuals.
These assessments of the magnitude of the spike-specific T cell response together
suggest that 1) in infection-naïve individuals the CD4+ T cell response is boosted by the second
vaccination dose, 2) convalescent individuals exhibit a more disparate response, with most
donors mounting a weaker response than infection-naïve individuals, and 3) the response is
more robust among CD4+ than CD8+ T cells. As a higher number of SARS-CoV-2-specific
CD4+ T cells were available for analysis, we focused on this subset for our subsequent
analyses.

Vaccine-elicited spike-specific CD4+ T cells responding to B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 spike are
indistinguishable from those responding to ancestral spike
Leveraging our ability to not only assess the magnitude but also the detailed (39parameter) phenotypic features of SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells, we first determined
whether the ancestral and variant spike epitopes stimulated different subsets of vaccine-elicited
spike-specific CD4+ T cells. Such differences could theoretically result from the fact that ~510% of the spike epitopes differ between variants and ancestral strains (Tarke et al., 2021), and
may therefore act as APLs steering responding cells towards different fates. We isolated the
datasets corresponding to both post-vaccination timepoints for all eight donors, and then
exported the data corresponding to spike-specific CD4+ T cells (as defined by IFNg production,
Fig. 1). After reducing the multidimensional single-cell data for each individual specimen to a
two-dimensional datapoint through multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Ritchie et al., 2015), we
observed the ancestral spike-stimulated samples to be interspersed among the B.1.1.7- and
B.1.351-responding ones (Fig. 2A). We then visualized the spike-specific CD4+ T cells at the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

single-cell level. When visualized alongside total (baseline) CD4+ T cells, spike-specific cells
occupied a distinct “island” defined by high expression of IFNg (Fig. 2B), suggesting unique
phenotypic features of these cells. To better analyze these spike-responding CD4+ T cells, we
visualized them in isolation within a new t-SNE which clearly demonstrated complete mixing of
the cells stimulated by the ancestral, B.1.1.7, and B.1.351 spike proteins (Fig. 2C). Almost all of
the responding cells expressed high levels of CD45RO and low levels of CD45RA (Fig. 2D),
suggesting them to be memory cells. These memory CD4+ T cells included central memory T
cells (Tcm), T follicular helper cells (Tfh), and those expressing multiple activation markers
(CD38, HLADR, CD69, CD25) and receptors known to direct cells to tissues including the
respiratory tract (CXCR4, CCR5, CCR6, CD49d) (Fig. 2E). The expression levels of these and
all other antigens quantitated by CyTOF were not statistically different between CD4+ T cells
responding to the three spike proteins (Fig. S2). To confirm the identical phenotypes of the three
groups of spike-responding cells, we implemented unbiased clustering by flowSOM. Spikestimulated cells were clustered into 8 subsets, and no subset was preferentially enriched in any
one of the three groups (Fig. 2F). Together, these data suggest that vaccine-elicited spikespecific CD4+ T cells respond in the same manner to spike epitopes from the ancestral or
variant strains, and would probably mount similar responses in vivo to infection by all three virus
types.

The phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells do not change after the second vaccine
dose
We next took advantage of our longitudinal study design to assess for any changes in
the differentiation of spike-specific T cell responses over the course of the 2-dose vaccination.
As the data presented above suggested no phenotypic differences between CD4+ T cells
responding to the ancestral, B.1.1.7, and B.1.351 spike proteins, our subsequent analyses
combined these datasets. We first assessed whether, among infection-naïve individuals, the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells were different after the first and second doses. Both
MDS and tSNE visualizations of the data revealed that the cells from the two timepoints were
interspersed, suggesting lack of phenotypic differences (Fig. S3A, B). This was confirmed by
flowSOM clustering, which showed that although the first timepoint harbored fewer cells (Fig.
S3C), it included the same flowSOM clusters as the second timepoint (Fig. S3D). Furthermore,
no significant differences were observed in the frequencies of any of the clusters between the
two timepoints (Fig. S3D). Manual gating revealed that the main canonical subsets of CD4+ T
cells – the naïve (Tn), stem cell memory (Tscm), effector memory RA (Temra), central memory
(Tcm), effector memory (Tem), T follicular helper (Tfh), and regulatory T cells (Treg) – did not
differ significantly between the two timepoints. Interestingly, however, transitional memory T cell
(Ttm) were higher at the later timepoint (Fig. S3F, G). Overall, Tcm and Tfh were the most
abundant subsets among the spike-specific CD4+ T cells (Fig. S3F, G). These data together
suggest that although the magnitude of the CD4+ T cell response is amplified by the second
vaccine dose (Fig. 1B), its qualitative features are mostly unchanged by this booster.
We then conducted a similar analysis in the convalescent individuals. As the prevaccination timepoint included spike-specific CD4+ T cells primed by prior SARS-CoV-2
infection, we included all three timepoints in this analysis. When the data were visualized by
MDS, it was apparent that most of the pre-vaccination specimens localized away from the postvaccination specimens, which were interspersed with each other (Fig. 3A). Similar distinctions
between pre-and post-vaccination specimens were visualized at the single-cell level by tSNE
(Fig. 3B, C). Clustering of the cells by flowSOM revealed that although cells from each timepoint
included all the clusters, the cluster distribution was markedly skewed among the prevaccination cells (Fig. 3D, E). Indeed, two clusters (C1, C3) were significantly over-represented
and one (C5) under-represented among the pre-vaccination specimens (Fig. 3F). Interestingly,
this altered distribution was not due to any changes in the main canonical subsets, which
remained unaltered between the three timepoints (Fig. S4). To assess what may drive the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

differences between the phenotypes of the pre- vs. post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T
cells, we assessed for markers that were differentially expressed in clusters C1, C3, and C5.
Interestingly, although clusters C1 and C3 were both over-represented among the prevaccination specimens, cluster C3 alone had diminished expression of multiple activation, costimulatory, and checkpoint inhibition markers (Fig. S5). These results suggest that the postvaccination specimens may be enriched for spike-specific CD4+ T cells with higher levels of
activation, co-stimulation, and checkpoint inhibition. Indeed, manual gating suggested that
spike-specific CD4+ T cells that are activated (CD38+HLADR+), and express multiple costimulatory activating receptors (ICOS+Ox40+) or checkpoint molecules (PD1+CTLA4+) were
significantly enriched among the post-vaccination specimens (Fig. 3G).
Together, these results suggest that, similar to the infection-naïve specimens,
convalescent specimens exhibited no phenotypic differences between spike-specific CD4+ T
cells after the first vs. second vaccination; however, there was a clear increase in the activation
state of the infection-primed spike-specific CD4+ T cells even with the first vaccine dose that
persisted after the second dose.

Vaccination-induced spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent individuals exhibit
unique phenotypic features of increased longevity and tissue homing
We next determined whether there were any phenotypic differences between the
vaccine-induced spike-specific CD4+ T cells from the infection-naïve vs. convalescent
individuals. Removal of convalescent outlier PID4112 revealed the magnitude of the spikespecific CD4+ T cell response to be lower in the convalescents than in infection-naïve
participants after full vaccination (Fig. 1D). But when all donors were included there was no
statistically significant difference in response magnitude (Fig. 4A). However, the spike-specific
CD4+ T cells from the convalescent and infection-naïve individuals exhibited clear phenotypic
differences when assessed by both MDS (Fig. 4B) and tSNE (Fig. 4C); this was most apparent

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

after the second vaccine dose, but could already be observed after the first. Since the cells after
the second dose are more clinically relevant (as they are the ones persisting in vaccinated
individuals moving forward), we focused our subsequent analysis on just this timepoint. When
visualized as a dot plot, it was apparent that the spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve
individuals segregated away from those from the convalescents (Fig. 4D). Clustering of the data
also demonstrated clear differences between the two patient groups (Fig. 4E, F), which was
confirmed by demonstration of significant differences in cluster abundance (Fig. 4G).
To identify these phenotypic differences, we first assessed the relative distributions of
the main canonical CD4+ T cell subsets. Interestingly, the vaccinated convalescents harbored
significantly more spike-specific Tcm and less Ttm. There was also a trend (p = 0.05) for less
Tem in these donors (Fig. 5A). In contrast, Tfh and Treg frequencies were not different between
infection-naïve and convalescent vaccinees (Fig. 5B). To broaden our analysis, we assessed for
unique features of cluster A1, which was over-represented in the infection-naïve donors, and
cluster A3, which was over-represented in the convalescent donors (Fig. 4G). Interestingly,
cluster A3 expressed high levels of CD127, CCR7, and CXCR4, while cluster A1 tended to
express lower levels of these antigens (Fig. S6A). Confirming this finding, we also found that the
expression levels of all three antigens were higher among the cells from the convalescent
donors, although for CXCR4 the difference did not reach statistical significance (Fig. S6B).
We then followed up on each of these three differentially expressed markers. CD127,
the alpha chain of the IL7 receptor, can drive IL7-mediated homeostatic proliferation of SARSCoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells (Neidleman et al., 2020a), and serves as a marker of long-lived
precursor memory cells (Kaech et al., 2003). To assess the potential longevity of the spikespecific CD4+ T cells, we determined the percentage of CD127+ cells expressing low levels of
the terminal differentiation marker CD57. After the second dose of vaccination, convalescent
individuals harbored more long-lived (CD127+CD57-) spike-specific CD4+ T cells than infectionnaïve individuals (Fig. 5C). CCR7, the second preferentially-expressed marker among the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

convalescents’ spike-specific CD4+ T cells, is a chemokine receptor that directs immune cells to
lymph nodes. As CD62L, a selectin that also mediates lymph node homing, was also on our
panel, we assessed whether CCR7+CD62L+ cells were enriched among the spike-specific
CD4+ T cells from the convalescent donors, and found this to be the case (Fig. 5D). The last
differentially expressed antigen, CXCR4, was recently suggested to direct bystander T cells to
the lung during COVID-19, and to be co-expressed with the T resident memory / activation
marker CD69 (Neidleman et al., 2021). Interestingly, spike-specific CD4+ T cells from
convalescent donors harbored a significantly higher proportion of CXCR4+CD69+ cells (Fig.
5E), suggesting a potentially superior ability to migrate into pulmonary tissues.
Our finding that the convalescent donors’ spike-specific CD4+ T cells were preferentially
CCR7+CD62L+ and CXCR4+CD69+ suggested that they may preferentially migrate out of the
blood into tissues. Supporting this possibility was our observation that, after the second vaccine
dose, the percentages of CCR7+CD62L+ and CXCR4+CD69+ spike-specific cells increased as
the percentages of spike-specific CD4+ T cells decreased (Fig. 5F). This suggests that the low
spike-specific CD4+ T cell response after the second dose of vaccination in some convalescent
donors (Fig. 1D) may have resulted from these cells preferentially leaving the blood
compartment. This was further supported by our finding that the expression levels of CCR7 and
CD62L on spike-specific CD4+ T cells inversely correlated with the magnitude of the spikespecific CD4+ T cell response (Fig. 5G). To assess whether the CCR7+CD62L+ and
CXCR4+CD69+ CD4+ T cells have the potential to migrate into the nasopharynx, the most
common site of SARS-CoV-2 entry, we obtained paired blood and nasal swabs from one of the
infection-naïve participants (PID4101) and phenotyped total CD4+ T cells isolated from these
specimens. There was a marked enrichment of both CCR7+CD62L+ and CXCR4+CD69+ CD4+
T cells in the intranasal specimens (Fig. 5H), suggesting that CD4+ T cells expressing these
markers preferentially exit the blood and enter the nasopharynx. Together, these data suggest
that after vaccination, spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent individuals differ from

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

those in infection-naïve individuals in that they appear to be more long-lived, and more readily
migrate out of the blood to mucosal sites, thus explaining their overall lower frequencies
measured from the blood.

Phenotypic differences of post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells are not due to
different number of antigen exposures
The data presented above reveal striking phenotypic differences between spike-specific
CD4+ T cells from convalescent vs. infection-naïve individuals after full vaccination. To try to
understand the drivers of these differences, we assessed whether they could be accounted for
by different numbers of antigen exposures. While the fully vaccinated infection-naïve donors
were exposed twice to spike antigen, the fully vaccinated convalescent donors were exposed a
total of three times. We first assessed whether the CCR7+CD62L+, CD57-CD127+, and
CXCR4+CD69+ subsets that were more abundant in convalescent than infection-naïve donors
after the second vaccine dose, were also more abundant after the first vs. second vaccine dose.
We found they were not (Fig. 6A), arguing against the notion that three rounds of antigen
exposure are necessary to elicit the unique phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells in
convalescent vaccinees. We then compared these subsets between the infection-naïve donors
after they had received both doses, vs convalescent donors after they received the first dose,
with the rationale that both groups were exposed a total of two times to spike antigen. We found
that all three subsets were significantly increased in the convalescent donors, and that the Tcm
and Ttm subsets were also differentially present among the two groups (Fig. 6B). These results
suggest that it is not the number of times one is exposed to antigen, but rather something
intrinsic to prior infection, that drives the unique phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells in
vaccinated, convalescent individuals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Phenotypic features of spike-specific CD8+ T cells from vaccinated, convalescent
individuals are unique but differ from their CD4+ T cell counterparts
Finally, we assessed to what extent the similarities and differences observed with spikespecific CD4+ T cells were also seen for spike-specific CD8+ T cells. Similar to the CD4+ T
cells, spike-specific CD8+ T cells stimulated by the three different spike proteins (ancestral,
B.1.1.7, B.1.351) did not differ in their phenotypic features (Fig. S7A-C). Also similar to the
CD4+ T cells, spike-specific CD8+ T cells elicited by vaccination differed phenotypically in the
infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals (Fig. S7D-F). Unlike the CD4+ T cell data, however,
these phenotypic differences could not be accounted for by distribution changes among the
main canonical subsets Tn, Tscm, Temra, Tcm, Tem, and Ttm (Fig. S7G). Also unlike the CD4+
T cells, these differences were also not explained by differential abundance of the
CD127+CD57-, CCR7+CD62L+, or CXCR4+CD69+ subsets (Fig. S7H). Instead, the differences
appear to be due to other phenotypic changes, including elevated frequencies of activated cells
in the convalescent donors, in particular those co-expressing the Tcm marker CD27 and
activation marker CD38, and the checkpoint inhibitor molecule CTLA4 and activation marker 41BB (Fig. S7I). These results suggest that vaccine-elicited spike-specific CD8+ T cells, like their
CD4+ counterparts, respond equivalently to the B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 variants, and exhibit
qualitative differences in convalescent individuals but via different phenotypic alterations than
their CD4+ counterparts.

DISCUSSION
T cells are important orchestrators and effectors during antiviral immunity. They may
hold the key to long-term memory due to their ability to persist for decades, yet these cells have
been disproportionately understudied relative to their humoral immune counterparts in the
context of COVID-19. Here, we designed a longitudinal study assessing both the frequency and
phenotypic characteristics of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells in order to address the following

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

questions: 1) Do SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells elicited by vaccination respond similarly to
ancestral and variant strains?, 2) To what extent is the second dose needed for boosting T cell
responses in infection-naïve and convalescent individuals?, and 3) Do vaccine-elicited memory
T cells differ in infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals?
To answer the first question, we compared post-vaccination SARS-CoV-2 spike-specific
T cell responses against ancestral vs. the variant B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 strains. Consistent with a
recent study (Tarke et al., 2021), we find that vaccination-elicited T cells specific to the ancestral
spike protein also recognize variant spike proteins. We further demonstrate that the phenotypic
features of these cells are identical, whether they are stimulated by ancestral or variant spike
proteins. This was important to establish because of prior reports that effector T cells can
respond differently to APLs by altering their cytokine production or by mounting an
immunoregulatory response (Evavold and Allen, 1991; Sloan-Lancaster and Allen, 1996). APLs
could theoretically arise when a variant infects an individual that was previously exposed to
ancestral spike through vaccination or prior infection. That both the quantity and quality of T cell
responses is maintained against the variants may provide an explanation for the real-world
efficacy of the vaccines against variants. Although limited data are available, thus far all
vaccines deployed in areas where the B.1.1.7 or B.1.351 strains dominate have protected
vaccinees from severe and fatal COVID-19 (Gupta, 2021). Given the potentially important role
of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells in protecting against severe and fatal COVID-19 (Dan et al.,
2021; Neidleman et al., 2021), we postulate that this protection may have been in large part
mediated by vaccine-elicited T cells. In contrast, efficacy of the vaccines against mild or
moderate disease in variant-dominated regions of the world is more variable. For example, in
South Africa where B.1.351 is dominant, the AstraZeneca ChAdOx1 vaccine only prevented
~10% of mild-to-moderate disease cases (Madhi et al., 2021), while more recent data from
Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine administered in Qatar, where both B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 are dominant,
revealed that fully vaccinated individuals were 75% less likely to develop COVID-19 (Abu-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Raddad et al., 2021). The overall diminished vaccine-mediated protection against milder
disease in variant-dominated regions of the world might be explained by the likely important role
of antibodies to prevent initial infection by blocking viral entry into host cells (manifesting as
protection against asymptomatic and mildly symptomatic infection), and the observation that
vaccine-elicited antibodies are generally less effective against the variant than against ancestral
spike in lab assays (Cele et al., 2021; Collier et al., 2021; Edara et al., 2021; Garcia-Beltran et
al., 2021; Hoffmann et al., 2021; Kuzmina et al., 2021; Muik et al., 2021; Planas et al., 2021;
Stamatatos et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2021). Reassuringly, there is no evidence that vaccinated
individuals mount a weaker immune response to variants than do unvaccinated individuals,
which could theoretically result through a phenomenon termed original antigenic sin (where the
recall response is inappropriately diverted to the vaccination antigen at the expense of a
protective response against the infecting variant strain) (Klenerman and Zinkernagel, 1998).
To address the second question of whether a booster dose is needed, we compared the
T cells after the first vs. second vaccination doses, among the infection-naïve and convalescent
individuals. In infection-naïve individuals, spike-specific responses were observed after the first
vaccination dose, and were further boosted after the second. This enhancement of the T cell
response after the second dose is similar to the reported increase in anti-spike IgG levels after a
second dose in infection-naïve individuals (Ebinger et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2021). Interestingly,
however, while the phenotypes of B cells producing the anti-spike antibodies differ after the first
vs. second dose (converting from IgM-dominant to IgG-dominant B cells) (Goel et al., 2021), the
phenotypes of the spike-specific CD4+ T cells between the two doses were remarkably similar.
These cells were primarily Tcm and Tfh cells, the latter of which are important for providing
helper function for B cells. The prominence of SARS-CoV-2-specific Tfh cells after just one dose
of vaccination is consistent with prior reports that a single dose of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA in mice
is sufficient to elicit potent B and Tfh cell responses in germinal centers (Lederer et al., 2020).
These results suggest that with regards to T cells, the booster dose is necessary for enhancing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the magnitude but not quality of the response. Overall, however, our conclusions are in line with
those drawn from serological studies (Ebinger et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2021): it is important to
administer the second vaccine dose in infection-naïve individuals.
A different situation appears to be the case for convalescent individuals. Longitudinal
serological studies suggest that the spike-specific antibody response in convalescent individuals
after the first mRNA dose is already equivalent to that of infection-naïve individuals after their
second mRNA dose (Ebinger et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2021), suggesting that convalescent
individuals may only need a single dose of vaccination. We found no evidence of increased
numbers of spike-specific CD4+ T cells after the second dose, and no phenotypic changes
between the cells at the two timepoints. Spike-specific CD4+ T cells from these individuals did
however exhibit marked phenotypic changes as they transitioned from the pre- to the postvaccination timepoints. This was expected since the cells from the pre-vaccination timepoint are
resting memory CD4+ T cells that were primed months prior, while the post-vaccination
timepoints were more recently-reactivated memory cells. Interestingly, unlike for the infectionnaïve individuals where all individuals responded similarly to each dose of vaccination, the
magnitude of the CD4+ T cell response differed markedly between different convalescent
individuals. PID4112 had a large pool of spike-specific CD4+ T cells prior to vaccination, and
their numbers increased to extremely high levels after the first vaccination dose. Surprisingly,
this large peak in the spike-specific response was accompanied by an increase in the
nucleocapsid-specific CD4+ T cells, which was unexpected since the vaccine does not contain
nucleocapsid. We suspect this high response to nucleocapsid was due to inflammationmediated bystander activation of T cells in an antigen-independent manner. Consistent with this
hypothesis, the participant reported severe side effects (severe headache, chills, myalgia,
nausea, and diarrhea) after the first dose. The remaining three convalescent donors, by
contrast, never exhibited a robust T cell response, and in fact after full vaccination actually
exhibited a highly significantly lower CD4+ T cell response than the infection-naïve vaccinees.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We speculate on an explanation further below. Overall, our results suggest that a second
SARS-CoV-2 vaccine dose in individuals who have recovered from COVID-19 may provide less
benefit than in individuals who have not previously been exposed to SARS-CoV-2; these
findings are in line with recommendations from previously published serological studies (Ebinger
et al., 2021; Goel et al., 2021; Stamatatos et al., 2021).
One of the most striking observations from this study, and the third and final question we
set out to answer, was the remarkably distinct phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from
infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals who were fully vaccinated. These differences were
not due to the additional round of antigen exposure experienced by the convalescent
individuals, as they were already apparent in convalescent individuals after the first vaccine
dose. The spike-specific CD4+ T cells from the convalescent individuals harbored features
suggesting increased potential for long-term persistence: they were enriched for Tcm cells,
which are have longer in vivo half-lives than their Tem and Ttm counterparts (Bacchus-Souffan
et al., 2021), and express elevated levels of CD127, a marker of long-lived memory T cells
(Kaech et al., 2003). Interestingly, CD127 expression on SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells has been
implicated in COVID-19 disease amelioration and in these cells’ long-term persistence. CD127
expression was more frequent on spike-specific CD4+ T cells from ICU patients who eventually
survived severe COVID-19 than in those that did not (Neidleman et al., 2021). IL7, the ligand for
CD127, can drive homeostatic proliferation and expansion of spike-specific CD4+ T cells
(Neidleman et al., 2020a), and CD127 is not only expressed on SARS-CoV-2-specific memory
CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, but its levels increase further over the course of convalescence (Ma et
al., 2021; Neidleman et al., 2020a). Together, these findings suggest that after vaccination,
spike-specific CD4+ T cells in convalescent individuals may persist longer than those from
infection-naïve individuals, but additional long-term follow-up studies will be required to directly
test whether this indeed is the case.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Another interesting characteristic of post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells from
convalescent individuals relative to infection-naïve individuals was their expression of multiple
tissue-homing receptors. In particular, these cells were preferentially CCR7+CD62L+ and
CXCR4+CD69+. CCR7 and CD62L mediate homing to lymph nodes, while CXCR4 is a
chemokine receptor important in migration of hematopoietic stem cells to bone marrow, but also
able to direct immune cells to the lung during inflammation (Mamazhakypov et al., 2019).
Interestingly, we recently observed co-expression of CXCR4 with CD69 (an activation marker
that also identifies T resident memory cells) in pulmonary T cells from COVID-19 patients
(Neidleman et al., 2021). Many of these cells were bystander (non-SARS-CoV-2-specific)
CXCR4+CD69+ T cells whose numbers in blood increased prior to death from COVID-19. We
therefore proposed a model whereby recruitment of non-SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells into the
lungs of severe patients may exacerbate the cytokine storm and thereby contribute to death
(Neidleman et al., 2021). In the case of the vaccinated convalescent individuals, however,
expression of CXCR4 and CD69 on SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells is expected to be beneficial as
it would direct the T cells capable of recognizing infected cells into the lung. CCR7 and CD62L
co-expression would further enable these cells to enter draining lymph nodes and participate in
germinal center reactions. Supporting the hypothesis that the post-vaccination spike-specific
CD4+ T cells from convalescent individuals may better home to the respiratory tract is our
observation that frequencies of these cells in blood correlated negatively with the extent to
which they co-expressed CCR7 and CD62L, and to a lesser extent CXCR4 and CD69. This was
further supported by our finding that CD4+ T cells from the nasopharynx of the upper respiratory
tract were preferentially CCR7+CD62L+ and CXCR4+CD69+ relative to their blood
counterparts. All together, these results imply that compared to infection-naïve individuals,
convalescents’ spike-specific CD4+ T cells may be superior in surviving and migrating to the
respiratory tract. Directly testing this hypothesis will require obtaining large numbers of
respiratory tract cells from vaccinated, infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals (e.g., via

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bronchoalveolar lavages or endotracheal aspirates) for quantitation and characterization of
SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells. Of note, vaccination of infection-naïve individuals might not
induce a strong humoral immunity in the respiratory mucosa either, as neutralizing antibodies
against SARS-CoV-2 are rarely detected in nasal swabs from vaccinees (Planas et al., 2021). If
it turns out that current vaccination strategies do not ensure robust humoral and cell-mediated
immune responses in the respiratory tract, then strategies that better elicit mucosal-homing
SARS-CoV-2-specific B and T cells in infection-naïve individuals – for example by implementing
an intranasal route of mRNA immunization – may hold a greater chance of achieving sterilizing
immunity.

Limitations
As this study was aimed at using in-depth phenotypic characterization as a discovery tool, it
focused on deeply interrogating many different conditions (e.g., spike variants, longitudinal
sampling) rather than many donors. Therefore, although a total of 120 CyTOF specimens were
run, only 8 donors were analyzed. The findings reported here should be confirmed in larger
cohorts. A second limitation of the study was the need to stimulate the specimens in order to
identify and characterize the vaccine-elicited T cells. We limited peptide exposure to 6 hours to
minimize phenotypic changes caused by the stimulation. We note that at this time, stimulation
with peptides is the only way to identify SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells as robust MHC
class II multimer reagents for SARS-CoV-2 are not available currently. Finally, the analysis
focused on CD4+ T cells because the overall numbers of detectable spike-specific CD8+ T cells
were low. Nonetheless, the main findings we made with the CD4+ T cells – that they recognize
variants equivalently, and that the phenotypes of the responding cells differ by prior SARS-CoV2 natural infection status – were recapitulated among CD8+ T cells. Additional studies in a
larger number of participants testing more cells, and implementing the use of MHC class I

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tetramers, would increase the ability to characterize in greater depth the vaccine-elicited CD8+
T cell response.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Van Auken Private Foundation, David Henke, and Pamela and
Edward Taft (N.R.R.); philanthropic funds donated to Gladstone Institutes by The Roddenberry
Foundation and individual donors devoted to COVID-19 research (N.R.R.); the Program for
Breakthrough Biomedical Research (N.R.R., S.A.L.), which is partly funded by the Sandler
Foundation; and Awards #2164 (N.R.R.), #2208 (N.R.R.), and #2160 (to S.A.L.) from Fast
Grants, a part of Emergent Ventures at the Mercatus Center, George Mason University. We
acknowledge the NIH DRC Center Grant P30 DK063720 and the S10 1S10OD018040-01 for
use of the CyTOF instrument. We thank Stanley Tamaki and Claudia Bispo for CyTOF
assistance at the Parnassus Flow Core, Heather Hartig for help with recruitment, Françoise
Chanut for editorial assistance, and Robin Givens for administrative assistance.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
J.N. designed and performed experiments, and conducted data analyses; X.L. helped develop
an analysis plan and conducted data analyses; M.M. processed and banked specimens; G.X.
performed experiments; V.M. conducted CHIRP participant interviews, enrollment, and
specimen collection; W.C.G. participated in data analysis, performed supervision, and edited the
manuscript; S.A.L. established the CHIRP cohort, conducted CHIRP participant interviews,
enrollment, and specimen collection, and edited the manuscript; N.R.R. conceived ideas for the
study, performed supervision, conducted data analyses, and wrote the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the manuscript.

COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS: The authors declare no competing financial interests.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

METHODS

RESOURCE AVAILABILITY
Lead Contact
Requests for resources and reagents and for further information should be directed to and will
be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Nadia Roan (nadia.roan@gladstone.ucsf.edu).
Materials Availability
This study did not generate new unique reagents.
Data and Code Availability
For this study, a total of 120 specimens were analyzed by CyTOF. Each specimen included
both CD4+ and CD8+ T cells. For each specimen, we gated separately on events
corresponding to CD4+ T cells (live, singlet CD3+CD4+CD8-) and CD8+ T cells (live, singlet
CD3+CD4-CD8+), and exported the files as 240 individual FCS files. These 240 raw CyTOF
datasets are available for download through the public repository Dryad via the following link:
https://doi.org/10.7272/Q60R9MMK

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Human Subjects
Eight participants from the COVID-19 Host Immune Pathogenesis (CHIRP) cohort were
recruited for this study. Four were previously infected with SARS-CoV-2 as established by RTPCR, and had fully recovered from a mild course of disease. Importantly, infections of these four
individuals had all occurred in the San Francisco Bay Area between March – July of 2020, when
the dominant local strain was the original ancestral (Wuhan) strain. The remaining four
participants were not previously infected with the virus. All eight participants were vaccinated
with both doses of either of the Moderna or Pfizer/BioNTech mRNA vaccines (Table S1). Blood
was drawn from each of the 8 participants prior to vaccination, ~2 weeks after the first vaccine

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

dose, and ~2 weeks after the second vaccine dose (24 specimens total). On the day of each
blood draw, PBMCs were isolated from blood using LymphoprepTM (StemCell Technologies),
and then cryopreserved in 90% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 10% DMSO. For participant
PID4101, an additional blood-draw and intranasal swab specimens were obtained for
immunophenotyping studies. This study was approved by the University of California, San
Francisco (IRB # 20-30588).

METHOD DETAILS
Preparation of specimens for CyTOF
Cryopreserved PBMCs were revived and cultured overnight to allow for antigen
recovery. The cells were then counted, and then two million cells per treatment condition were
stimulated with the co-stimulatory agents 0.5 µg/ml anti-CD49d clone L25 and 0.5 µg/ml antiCD28 clone L293 (both from BD Biosciences), in the presence of 0.5 μM of overlapping 15-mer
SARS-CoV-2 spike peptides PepMix™ SARS-CoV-2 peptides from the original SARS-CoV-2
strain, B.1.1.7, or B.1.351, or overlapping 15-mer SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid peptides (all from
JPT Peptide Technologies). Stimulations were conducted for 6 hours in RP10 media (RPMI
1640 medium (Corning) supplemented with 10% FBS (VWR), 1% penicillin (Gibco), and 1%
streptomycin (Gibco)), in the presence of 3 µg/ml Brefeldin A Solution (eBioscience) to enable
detection of intracellular cytokines. To establish the phenotypes of total T cells in the absence of
stimulation, two million cells were cultured in parallel with the stimulated samples, but in the
presence of only 3 µg/ml Brefeldin A.
After culture, the cells were treated with cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) as a live/dead marker
and fixed with paraformaldehyde (PFA) as previously described (Ma et al., 2020; Neidleman et
al., 2020a). Cisplatin treatment and fixation was performed as follows: first, cells were
resuspended in 2 ml PBS (Rockland) with 2 ml EDTA (Corning), followed by addition of 2 ml

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

PBS/EDTA supplemented with 25 μM cisplatin (Sigma-Aldrich) for 60 seconds. Cisplatin
staining was then quenched with 10 ml of CyFACS (metal contaminant-free PBS (Rockland)
supplemented with 0.1% FBS and 0.1% sodium azide (Sigma-Aldrich)), centrifuged, and
resuspended in 2% PFA in CyFACS. Fixation was allowed to proceed for 10 minutes at room
temperature, after which cells were washed twice with CyFACS, and then resuspended in
CyFACS containing 10% DMSO. Fixed cells were stored at -80°C until analysis by CyTOF. For
paired blood/swab specimens from PID4101, cells were immediately cisplatin-treated and fixed,
without prior cryopreservation.

CyTOF staining and data acquisition
CyTOF staining was conducted in a fashion similar to recently described methods
(Cavrois et al., 2017; Ma et al., 2020; Neidleman et al., 2020a; Neidleman et al., 2020b;
Neidleman et al., 2021; Xie et al., 2021). Cisplatin-treated cells were thawed, counted, and each
treatment condition was barcoded using the Cell-ID 20-Plex Pd Barcoding Kit (Fluidigm). After
the cells were barcoded and washed, the barcoded samples were combined and diluted to 6 x
106 cells / 800 μl CyFACS per well in Nunc 96 DeepWellTM polystyrene plates (Thermo Fisher).
Cells were blocked with mouse (Thermo Fisher), rat (Thermo Fisher), and human AB (SigmaAldrich) sera for 15 minutes at 4°C, and then washed twice in CyFACS. Surface CyTOF
antibody staining (Table S2) was conducted for 45 minutes at 4°C, in a volume of 100 µl /
sample. Cells were then washed three times with CyFACS and fixed overnight at 4°C in 100 μl
of 2% PFA in PBS. The next day, samples were washed twice with Intracellular Fixation &
Permeabilization Buffer (eBioscience), and incubated for 45 minutes at 4°C. After two additional
washes with Permeabilization Buffer (eBioscience), samples were blocked for 15 minutes at 4°C
in 100 μl of Permeabilization Buffer containing mouse and rat sera. After one additional wash
with Permeabilization Buffer, samples were stained with the intracellular CyTOF antibodies

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Table S2) at 4°C for 45 minutes in a volume of 100 µl / sample. Cells were then washed once
with CyFACS, and stained for 20 minutes at room temperature with 250 nM of Cell-IDTM
Intercalator-IR (Fluidigm). Immediately prior to sample acquisition, cells were washed twice with
CyFACS buffer, once with MaxPar® cell staining buffer (Fluidigm), and once with Cell
acquisition solution (CAS, Fluidigm). Cells were resuspended in EQ™ Four Element Calibration
Beads (Fluidigm) diluted in CAS immediately prior to acquisition on a Helios-upgraded CyTOF2
instrument (Fluidigm) at the UCSF Parnassus flow core facility.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
CyTOF data analysis
CyTOF datasets, exported as flow cytometry standard (FCS) files, were de-barcoded
and normalized according to manufacturer’s instructions (Fluidigm). FlowJo software (BD
Biosciences) was used to identify CD4+ T cells (live, singlet CD3+CD19-CD4+CD8-) and CD8+
T cells (live, singlet CD3+CD19-CD4-CD8+) among all analyzed samples. IFNg+ in the
stimulated samples were considered to be the SARS-CoV-2-responsive cells. For highdimensional analyses of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells among the stimulated samples, we
excluded samples with an insufficient number of events (≤ 3) to limit skewing of the data.
Manual gating analysis was initially performed using FlowJo, and then select populations were
exported as FCS files and then imported into R software as GatingSet objects. Using the
CytoExploreR package, 2D-gates were manually drawn on the imported samples. The 2D dot
plots and statistical results were exported for data visualization, bar-graph generation, and
statistical comparisons as previously described
(https://github.com/DillonHammill/CytoExploreR). High-dimensional analyses (MDS, tSNE, and
flowSOM) were performed using R software by implementing a CyTOF workflow recently
described (Nowicka et al., 2017).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For MDS plot generation, we used the plotMDS function from the limma package with
default settings. Euclidean distances between all samples were calculated using the arcsinhtransformed median expression levels of the lineage and functional markers listed below.
CD8
CD4
CD161
HLADR
CD45RO
CD69
CRTH2
PD1
CXCR5
CD27
CD3
CD2
CD62L
CCR6
OX40
CD28
CD127
RORgt
CXCR4
CTLA4
NFAT
CCR5
CD137
CD95
ICOS
CD49d
CD7
Tbet
TIGIT
CCR7
CD45RA
CD57
CD38
a4b7
CD25
IFNg
IL6
IL4
IL17

Lineage
(Only for CD8 subset)
Lineage
(Only for CD4 subset)
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Lineage
Function
Function
Function
Function

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The first (MDS1) and second (MDS2) MDS dimensions were plotted to show the dissimilarities
between samples from the indicated conditions as described (Ritchie et al., 2015).
tSNE was performed using the Trsne function from the Rtsne package using arcsinhtransformed expression of lineage markers (no PCA step, iterations = 1000, perplexity = 30,
theta = 0.5). Events corresponding to unstimulated T cells were down-sampled to 1000 cells per
sample, and SARS-CoV-2-specific cells (cell numbers ranging from 4 to 229 per sample) were
all included in the tSNE analyses without down-sampling. Each cell was displayed in a tSNE
plot for dimension reduction visualization and colored with arcsinh-transformed cell marker
expression as heatmaps, or pseudo-colored by the appropriate group.
Unsupervised cell subset clustering was performed using FlowSOM (Van Gassen et al.,
2015) and ConsensusClusterPlus packages using arcsinh-transformed expression levels of the
lineage markers indicated above (Wilkerson and Hayes, 2010). For clustering of SARS-CoV-2specific T cells, we set the meta-cluster number to 8 and cluster number to 40. The frequency of
each cluster within each sample was calculated using the following equation:

(Frequency of cluster in specified sample) = (Cell count of cluster / Total cell count of specified
sample)

This was then converted to a percentage by multiplying by 100. The percentages of each cluster
from the selected samples were plotted as box plots with jittered points, followed by statistical
analysis between the groups. To compare the abundance distribution of clusters between
groups, frequencies of clusters in samples from each group were normalized using the equation
below:

(Normalized frequency of cluster in specified sample) = (Frequency of cluster in specified
sample/ Total number of samples in each group)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

This was then converted to a percentage by multiplying by 100, and plotted as stacked bar
charts.

Statistical Analysis
The statistical tests used in comparison of groups are indicated within the figure legends. For 2group comparisons, student’s t-tests were performed and p-values were adjusted for multiple
testing using the Holm-Sidak method where applicable. For comparisons of 3 or more groups,
significance between groups was first evaluated by one-way ANOVA, and then the p-values
were adjusted for multiple testing using the Holm-Sidak method where applicable. For datasets
with significant ANOVA-adjusted p-values (≤ 0.05), we performed Tukey’s honestly significant
difference (HSD) post-hoc test to determine the p-values between individual groups.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
Abu-Raddad, L.J., Chemaitelly, H., Butt, A.A., and National Study Group for, C.-V. (2021).
Effectiveness of the BNT162b2 Covid-19 Vaccine against the B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 Variants. N.
Engl. J. Med.
Bacchus-Souffan, C., Fitch, M., Symons, J., Abdel-Mohsen, M., Reeves, D.B., Hoh, R., Stone,
M., Hiatt, J., Kim, P., Chopra, A., et al. (2021). Relationship between CD4 T cell turnover, cellular
differentiation and HIV persistence during ART. PLoS Pathog. 17, e1009214.
Cavrois, M., Banerjee, T., Mukherjee, G., Raman, N., Hussien, R., Rodriguez, B.A., Vasquez, J.,
Spitzer, M.H., Lazarus, N.H., Jones, J.J., et al. (2017). Mass Cytometric Analysis of HIV Entry,
Replication, and Remodeling in Tissue CD4+ T Cells. Cell Rep. 20, 984-998.
Cele, S., Gazy, I., Jackson, L., Hwa, S.H., Tegally, H., Lustig, G., Giandhari, J., Pillay, S.,
Wilkinson, E., Naidoo, Y., et al. (2021). Escape of SARS-CoV-2 501Y.V2 from neutralization by
convalescent plasma. Nature.
Chen, G., Wu, D., Guo, W., Cao, Y., Huang, D., Wang, H., Wang, T., Zhang, X., Chen, H., Yu,
H., et al. (2020). Clinical and immunological features of severe and moderate coronavirus disease
2019. J. Clin. Invest. 130, 2620-2629.
Collier, D.A., De Marco, A., Ferreira, I., Meng, B., Datir, R., Walls, A.C., Kemp, S.S., Bassi, J.,
Pinto, D., Fregni, C.S., et al. (2021). Sensitivity of SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7 to mRNA vaccine-elicited
antibodies. Nature.
Dan, J.M., Mateus, J., Kato, Y., Hastie, K.M., Yu, E.D., Faliti, C.E., Grifoni, A., Ramirez, S.I.,
Haupt, S., Frazier, A., et al. (2021). Immunological memory to SARS-CoV-2 assessed for up to 8
months after infection. Science 371.
Davies, N.G., Jarvis, C.I., Group, C.C.-W., Edmunds, W.J., Jewell, N.P., Diaz-Ordaz, K., and
Keogh, R.H. (2021). Increased mortality in community-tested cases of SARS-CoV-2 lineage
B.1.1.7. Nature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Ebinger, J.E., Fert-Bober, J., Printsev, I., Wu, M., Sun, N., Figueiredo, J.C., Eyk, J.E.V., Braun,
J.G., Cheng, S., and Sobhani, K. (2021). Prior COVID-19 Infection and Antibody Response to
Single Versus Double Dose mRNA SARS-CoV-2 Vaccination. medRxiv.
Edara, V.V., Norwood, C., Floyd, K., Lai, L., Davis-Gardner, M.E., Hudson, W.H., Mantus, G.,
Nyhoff, L.E., Adelman, M.W., Fineman, R., et al. (2021). Infection- and vaccine-induced antibody
binding and neutralization of the B.1.351 SARS-CoV-2 variant. Cell Host Microbe 29, 516-521
e513.
Evavold, B.D., and Allen, P.M. (1991). Separation of IL-4 production from Th cell proliferation by
an altered T cell receptor ligand. Science 252, 1308-1310.
Garcia-Beltran, W.F., Lam, E.C., St Denis, K., Nitido, A.D., Garcia, Z.H., Hauser, B.M., Feldman,
J., Pavlovic, M.N., Gregory, D.J., Poznansky, M.C., et al. (2021). Multiple SARS-CoV-2 variants
escape neutralization by vaccine-induced humoral immunity. Cell.
Goel, R.R., Apostolidis, S.A., Painter, M.M., Mathew, D., Pattekar, A., Kuthuru, O., Gouma, S.,
Hicks, P., Meng, W., Rosenfeld, A.M., et al. (2021). Distinct antibody and memory B cell
responses in SARS-CoV-2 naive and recovered individuals following mRNA vaccination. Sci
Immunol 6.
Gupta, R.K. (2021). Will SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern affect the promise of vaccines? Nat.
Rev. Immunol.
Hoffmann, M., Arora, P., Gross, R., Seidel, A., Hornich, B.F., Hahn, A.S., Kruger, N., Graichen,
L., Hofmann-Winkler, H., Kempf, A., et al. (2021). SARS-CoV-2 variants B.1.351 and P.1 escape
from neutralizing antibodies. Cell.
Kaech, S.M., Tan, J.T., Wherry, E.J., Konieczny, B.T., Surh, C.D., and Ahmed, R. (2003).
Selective expression of the interleukin 7 receptor identifies effector CD8 T cells that give rise to
long-lived memory cells. Nat. Immunol. 4, 1191-1198.
Klenerman, P., and Zinkernagel, R.M. (1998). Original antigenic sin impairs cytotoxic T
lymphocyte responses to viruses bearing variant epitopes. Nature 394, 482-485.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Korber, B., Fischer, W.M., Gnanakaran, S., Yoon, H., Theiler, J., Abfalterer, W., Hengartner, N.,
Giorgi, E.E., Bhattacharya, T., Foley, B., et al. (2020). Tracking Changes in SARS-CoV-2 Spike:
Evidence that D614G Increases Infectivity of the COVID-19 Virus. Cell 182, 812-827 e819.
Kuzmina, A., Khalaila, Y., Voloshin, O., Keren-Naus, A., Boehm-Cohen, L., Raviv, Y., ShemerAvni, Y., Rosenberg, E., and Taube, R. (2021). SARS-CoV-2 spike variants exhibit differential
infectivity and neutralization resistance to convalescent or post-vaccination sera. Cell Host
Microbe 29, 522-528 e522.
Lederer, K., Castano, D., Gomez Atria, D., Oguin, T.H., 3rd, Wang, S., Manzoni, T.B., Muramatsu,
H., Hogan, M.J., Amanat, F., Cherubin, P., et al. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 mRNA Vaccines Foster
Potent Antigen-Specific Germinal Center Responses Associated with Neutralizing Antibody
Generation. Immunity 53, 1281-1295 e1285.
Ma, T., Luo, X., George, A.F., Mukherjee, G., Sen, N., Spitzer, T.L., Giudice, L.C., Greene, W.C.,
and Roan, N.R. (2020). HIV efficiently infects T cells from the endometrium and remodels them
to promote systemic viral spread. Elife 9, e55487.
Ma, T., Ryu, H., McGregor, M., Babcock, B., Neidleman, J., Xie, G., George, A.F., Frouard, J.,
Murray, V., Gill, G., et al. (2021). Protracted yet coordinated differentiation of long-lived SARSCoV-2-specific CD8+ T cells during COVID-19 convalescence. bioRxiv 2021.04.28.441880.
Madhi, S.A., Baillie, V., Cutland, C.L., Voysey, M., Koen, A.L., Fairlie, L., Padayachee, S.D.,
Dheda, K., Barnabas, S.L., Bhorat, Q.E., et al. (2021). Efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 Covid19 Vaccine against the B.1.351 Variant. N. Engl. J. Med.
Mamazhakypov, A., Viswanathan, G., Lawrie, A., Schermuly, R.T., and Rajagopal, S. (2019). The
role of chemokines and chemokine receptors in pulmonary arterial hypertension. Br. J.
Pharmacol. 178, 72-89.
Muik, A., Wallisch, A.K., Sanger, B., Swanson, K.A., Muhl, J., Chen, W., Cai, H., Maurus, D.,
Sarkar, R., Tureci, O., et al. (2021). Neutralization of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 pseudovirus
by BNT162b2 vaccine-elicited human sera. Science 371, 1152-1153.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Neidleman, J., Luo, X., Frouard, J., Xie, G., Gill, G., Stein, E.S., McGregor, M., Ma, T., George,
A.F., Kosters, A., et al. (2020a). SARS-CoV-2-Specific T Cells Exhibit Phenotypic Features of
Helper Function, Lack of Terminal Differentiation, and High Proliferation Potential. Cell Rep Med
1, 100081.
Neidleman, J., Luo, X., Frouard, J., Xie, G., Hsiao, F., Ma, T., Morcilla, V., Lee, A., Telwatte, S.,
Thomas, R., et al. (2020b). Phenotypic analysis of the unstimulated in vivo HIV CD4 T cell
reservoir. Elife 9, e55487.
Neidleman, J., Luo, X., George, A.F., McGregor, M., Yang, J., Yun, C., Murray, V., Gill, G.,
Greene, W.C., Vasquez, J., et al. (2021). Distinctive features of SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells
predict recovery from severe COVID-19. medRxiv 2021.01.22.21250054.
Nowicka, M., Krieg, C., Crowell, H.L., Weber, L.M., Hartmann, F.J., Guglietta, S., Becher, B.,
Levesque, M.P., and Robinson, M.D. (2017). CyTOF workflow: differential discovery in highthroughput high-dimensional cytometry datasets. F1000Res 6, 748.
Planas, D., Bruel, T., Grzelak, L., Guivel-Benhassine, F., Staropoli, I., Porrot, F., Planchais, C.,
Buchrieser, J., Rajah, M.M., Bishop, E., et al. (2021). Sensitivity of infectious SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7
and B.1.351 variants to neutralizing antibodies. Nat. Med.
Plante, J.A., Mitchell, B.M., Plante, K.S., Debbink, K., Weaver, S.C., and Menachery, V.D. (2021).
The variant gambit: COVID-19's next move. Cell Host Microbe 29, 508-515.
Redd, A.D., Nardin, A., Kared, H., Bloch, E.M., Pekosz, A., Laeyendecker, O., Abel, B., Fehlings,
M., Quinn, T.C., and Tobian, A.A. (2021). CD8+ T cell responses in COVID-19 convalescent
individuals target conserved epitopes from multiple prominent SARS-CoV-2 circulating variants.
medRxiv.
Ritchie, M.E., Phipson, B., Wu, D., Hu, Y., Law, C.W., Shi, W., and Smyth, G.K. (2015). limma
powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic
Acids Res. 43, e47.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rydyznski Moderbacher, C., Ramirez, S.I., Dan, J.M., Grifoni, A., Hastie, K.M., Weiskopf, D.,
Belanger, S., Abbott, R.K., Kim, C., Choi, J., et al. (2020). Antigen-Specific Adaptive Immunity to
SARS-CoV-2 in Acute COVID-19 and Associations with Age and Disease Severity. Cell 183, 9961012 e1019.
Skelly, D.T., Harding, A.C., Gilbert-Jaramillo, J., Knight, M.L., Longet, S., Brown, A., Adele, S.,
Adland, E., Brown, H., Team, M.L., et al. (2021). Vaccine-induced immunity provides more robust
heterotypic immunity than natural infection to emerging SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern.
Research Square.
Sloan-Lancaster, J., and Allen, P.M. (1996). Altered peptide ligand-induced partial T cell
activation: molecular mechanisms and role in T cell biology. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 14, 1-27.
Soresina, A., Moratto, D., Chiarini, M., Paolillo, C., Baresi, G., Foca, E., Bezzi, M., Baronio, B.,
Giacomelli, M., and Badolato, R. (2020). Two X-linked agammaglobulinemia patients develop
pneumonia as COVID-19 manifestation but recover. Pediatr. Allergy Immunol.
Stamatatos, L., Czartoski, J., Wan, Y.H., Homad, L.J., Rubin, V., Glantz, H., Neradilek, M.,
Seydoux, E., Jennewein, M.F., MacCamy, A.J., et al. (2021). mRNA vaccination boosts crossvariant neutralizing antibodies elicited by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Science.
Tarke, A., Sidney, J., Methot, N., Zhang, Y., Dan, J.M., Goodwin, B., Rubiro, P., Sutherland, A.,
da Silva Antunes, R., Frazier, A., et al. (2021). Negligible impact of SARS-CoV-2 variants on CD4
(+) and CD8 (+) T cell reactivity in COVID-19 exposed donors and vaccinees. bioRxiv.
Van Gassen, S., Callebaut, B., Van Helden, M.J., Lambrecht, B.N., Demeester, P., Dhaene, T.,
and Saeys, Y. (2015). FlowSOM: Using self-organizing maps for visualization and interpretation
of cytometry data. Cytometry A 87, 636-645.
Wang, P., Nair, M.S., Liu, L., Iketani, S., Luo, Y., Guo, Y., Wang, M., Yu, J., Zhang, B., Kwong,
P.D., et al. (2021). Antibody Resistance of SARS-CoV-2 Variants B.1.351 and B.1.1.7. Nature.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Weissman, D., Alameh, M.G., de Silva, T., Collini, P., Hornsby, H., Brown, R., LaBranche, C.C.,
Edwards, R.J., Sutherland, L., Santra, S., et al. (2021). D614G Spike Mutation Increases SARS
CoV-2 Susceptibility to Neutralization. Cell Host Microbe 29, 23-31 e24.
Wilkerson, M.D., and Hayes, D.N. (2010). ConsensusClusterPlus: a class discovery tool with
confidence assessments and item tracking. Bioinformatics 26, 1572-1573.
Woodruff, M.C., Ramonell, R.P., Nguyen, D.C., Cashman, K.S., Saini, A.S., Haddad, N.S., Ley,
A.M., Kyu, S., Howell, J.C., Ozturk, T., et al. (2020). Extrafollicular B cell responses correlate with
neutralizing antibodies and morbidity in COVID-19. Nat. Immunol. 21, 1506-1516.
Xie, G., Luo, X., Ma, T., Frouard, J., Neidleman, J., Hoh, R., Deeks, S.G., Greene, W.C., and
Roan, N.R. (2021). Characterization of HIV-induced remodeling reveals differences in infection
susceptibility of memory CD4(+) T cell subsets in vivo. Cell Rep. 35, 109038.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MAIN FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells elicited by vaccination recognize variants, and in a
manner that differs among individuals with prior COVID-19. (A) Identification of vaccineelicited spike-specific T cells. PBMCs before vaccination (Pre-Vac) or 2 weeks after each dose
of vaccination were stimulated with spike peptides and assessed by CyTOF 6 hours later for the
presence of spike-specific (IFNg-producing) CD4+ (left) or CD8+ (right) T cells. The “no peptide”
conditions served as negative controls. Shown are longitudinal data from an infection-naïve
(PID4101, top) and convalescent (PID4112, bottom) individual. (B) Quantification of the spikespecific CD4+ (left) and CD8+ (right) T cells recognizing the ancestral (squares), B.1.1.7
(triangles), and B.1.351 (circles) spike peptides in infection-naïve (top) and convalescent
(bottom) individuals before and after vaccination. Note the similar frequencies of T cells
responding to all three spike proteins in each donor, the clear boosting of spike-specific CD4+ T
cell frequencies in infection-naïve but not convalescent individuals, and the overall higher
proportion of responding CD4+ than CD8+ T cells. The dotted line corresponds to the
magnitude of the maximal pre-vaccination response in infection-naïve individuals and is
considered as background. The y-axes are fitted based upon the maximal post-vaccination
response values for each patient group and T cell subset. The p-values shown (**p < 0.01,
****p < 0.0001) were calculated by student’s t-test. (C) As expected, nucleocapsid-specific T
cell responses are generally low over the course of vaccination, with the exception of
convalescent donor PID4112. Shown are the frequencies of nucleocapsid-specific CD4+ (left)
and CD8+ (right) T cells, as measured by IFNg production upon stimulation with ancestral
nucleocapsid peptides, in infection-naïve (top) and convalescent (bottom) individuals. The
dotted line corresponds to the magnitude of the maximal pre-vaccination response infectionnaïve individuals, and is considered as the background signal. Y-axes are labeled to match the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

corresponding y-axes for spike-specific T cell responses in panel B. (D) The CD4+ T cell
response is boosted by the second vaccine dose to a greater extent in infection-naïve than
convalescents individuals. Shown are the frequencies of spike-specific CD4+ (left) and CD8+
(right) T cells stimulated by the three spike proteins (squares: ancestral; triangles: B.1.1.7;
circles: B.1.351) among the infection-naïve (aqua) and convalescent (coral) donors, after
removal of outlier PID4112. ****p < 0.0001 comparing the infection-naïve vs. convalescent postdose 2 specimens, were calculated using student’s t-test.

Figure 2. SARS-CoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells responding to B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 spike have
the same phenotypes as those responding to ancestral spike. (A) Datasets corresponding
to spike-specific CD4+ T cells after vaccination were visualized as a multidimensional scaling
(MDS) plot. Each datapoint reflects the cumulative phenotypes averaged across all the SARSCoV-2-specific CD4+ T cells from a single sample. Data for both infection-naïve and
convalescent individuals, and for both the post-dose 1 and post-dose 2 timepoints, are shown.
The lack of segregation of the cells responding to the ancestral, B.1.1.7, and B.1.351 spike
proteins suggest phenotypic similarities. (B) Visualization of the datasets by tSNE dot plots.
CD4+ T cells responding to ancestral or variant spike stimulation by producing high amounts of
IFNg (right) segregate together and away from the total CD4+ T cell population (left). Each dot
represents one cell. (C) CD4+ T cells responding to ancestral spike and its variants are
phenotypically similar, as shown by their complete mingling on a tSNE dot plot. (D, E) Spikeresponding CD4+ T cells are mostly memory cells, as indicated by high CD45RO and low
CD45RA expression levels, and include those expressing high levels of Tcm, Tfh, activation,
and respiratory tract migration markers. Shown is the tSNE depicted in panel C displaying the
relative expression levels of the indicated antigens (Red: high; Blue: low). (F) CD4+ T cells
responding to ancestral spike and its variants distribute in a similar fashion among the 8 clusters
identified by flowSOM. Shown on the left is the distribution of T cells responding to ancestral or

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

variant spike peptides on the tSNE depicted in panel C, colored according to the flowSOM
clustering. Shown on the right is the quantification of the flowSOM distribution data. No
significant differences were observed between the three groups in the distribution of their cells
among the 8 clusters, as calculated using a one-way ANOVA and adjusted for multiple testing
(n = 8) using Holm-Sidak method (p > 0.05).

Figure 3. Differentiation of spike-specific memory CD4+ T cells after vaccination of
convalescent individuals. (A) MDS plot depicting datasets corresponding to spike-specific
CD4+ T cells in convalescent individuals before and after vaccination. The blue line emphasizes
the nearly universal segregation of pre- from post-vaccination samples. (B) tSNE contour
heatmaps of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent individuals demonstrate phenotypic
differences between the pre- and post-vaccination cells. Cell densities are represented by color.
(C) tSNE dot plot of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent individuals, demonstrating
the distinct localization of the pre-vaccination cells in the upper right. (D) Spike-specific CD4+ T
cells are phenotypically distinct between the pre- and post-vaccination specimens. Shown are
tSNE plots depicting cells from the three indicated timepoints, colored according to the cells’
cluster classification as determined by flowSOM. (E) The distribution of spike-specific CD4+ T
cells classified as flowSOM clusters differs between the pre- and post-vaccination timepoints.
(F) Three clusters of spike-specific CD4+ T cells are differentially abundant between the preand post-vaccination specimens. **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ****p < 0.0001 as determined by oneway ANOVA and adjusted for multiple testing (n = 8) using the Holm-Sidak method followed by
Tukey's honestly significant difference (HSD) post-hoc test. (G) Vaccination of convalescent
individuals increases the proportion of spike-specific CD4+ T cells that are activated (CD38+
and HLADR+), and that express co-stimulatory receptors (ICOS+ and Ox40+) and checkpoint
molecules (PD1+ and CTL4+). The percentages of cells co-expressing the activation markers
CD38 and HLADR, the co-stimulatory molecules ICOS and Ox40, or the checkpoint molecules

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

PD1 and CTLA4, were assessed among spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent donors.
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001 as determined by one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey's
HSD post-hoc test.

Figure 4. Phenotypic features of spike-specific CD4+ T cells differ between infectionnaïve and convalescent individuals after vaccination. (A) The frequency of spike-specific
CD4+ T cells is similar in infection-naïve and convalescent individuals two weeks after the
second vaccination dose. Note that when convalescent donor PID4112, who had an unusually
high pre-vaccination frequency of spike-specific CD4+ T cells (Fig. 1D), was excluded, the
frequency was significantly lower among the convalescents. (B) MDS plots of the phenotypes of
spike-specific CD4+ T cells in infection-naïve and convalescent individuals after first and second
dose vaccinations. The blue divider emphasizes the general segregation of infection-naïve from
convalescent donors, which is more apparent after the second dose. (C) tSNE contour
heatmaps of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve and convalescent individuals, after
first and second dose vaccinations, highlighting the phenotypic differences between the two
groups of patients, particularly after the second dose. Cell densities are represented by color.
(D) tSNE dot plot of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve and convalescent
individuals after second dose of vaccination, demonstrating the segregation of the cells from the
two groups of patients. (E) Spike-specific CD4+ T cells are phenotypically distinct between the
infection-naïve and convalescent individuals. Shown are tSNE plots depicting cells after the
second dose of vaccination, colored according to the cells’ cluster classification as determined
by flowSOM. (F) The distribution of spike-specific CD4+ T cells into flowSOM clusters differs
between the infection-naïve and convalescent individuals after the second vaccine dose. (G)
Two clusters of spike-specific CD4+ T cells (A1 and A3) are differentially represented between
infection-naïve and convalescent individuals after the second dose of vaccination. *p < 0.05, as

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

determined by student’s t-tests adjusted for multiple testing (n = 8) using the Holm-Sidak
method.

Figure 5. The post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells of convalescents harbor
phenotypic features of elevated longevity and tissue homing. (A) Spike-specific CD4+ T
cells from convalescent vaccinated individuals harbor higher proportions of Tcm and lower
proportions of Ttm than those from infection-naïve vaccinated individuals. The proportions of Tn
(CD45RO-CD45RA+CCR7+CD95-), Tscm (CD45RO-CD45RA+CCR7+CD95+), Temra
(CD45RO-CD45RA+CCR7-), Tcm (CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7+CD27+), Tem
(CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7-CD27-), and Ttm (CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7-CD27+) cells among
spike-specific CD4+ T cells were determined by manual gating. **p < 0.01, ****p < 0.0001, ns =
non-significant, as determined by student’s t-test. (B) The proportions of Tfh
(CD45RO+CD45RA-PD1+CXCR5+) and Treg (CD45RO+CD45RA-CD25+CD127low) among
spike-specific CD4+ T cells are similar in infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals after
vaccination. ns = non-significant, as determined by student’s t-test. (C) Spike-specific CD4+ T
cells expressing the homeostatic proliferation marker CD127 and lacking expression of the
terminal differentiation marker CD57 are more frequent in vaccinated convalescent than
vaccinated infection-naïve individuals. ***p < 0.001, as determined by student’s t-test. (D) Spikespecific CD4+ T cells expressing the lymph node homing receptors CCR7 and CD62L are more
frequent in vaccinated convalescent individuals. *p < 0.05, as determined by student’s t-test. (E)
Spike-specific CD4+ T cells expressing CXCR4, which directs cells to tissues including the lung,
and CD69, a marker of T cell activation and tissue residence, are more frequent in convalescent
vaccinated individuals. **p < 0.01, as determined by student’s t-test. For panels C-E, the dot
plots on the left show concatenated data from all the donors. (F) The proportions of
CCR7+CD62L+ and CXCR4+CD69+ cells among spike-specific CD4+ T cells associate
negatively with the frequencies of spike-specific CD4+ T cells after the second dose of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

vaccination (correlation coefficient (R) < 0). P-values were calculated using t distribution with n2 degrees of freedom. (G) Expression levels (reported as mean signal intensity, or MSI) of
CCR7 and CD62L among spike-specific CD4+ T cells associate negatively (R < 0) with overall
frequencies of spike-specific CD4+ T cells after the second dose of vaccination. P-values were
calculated using t distribution with n-2 degrees of freedom. The 95% confidence intervals of the
regression lines in the scatter plots of panels F-G are shaded in grey. (H) CCR7+CD62L+ and
CXCR4+CD69+ CD4+ T cells are more frequent in nasopharynx than blood. Unstimulated
CD4+ T cells from the blood (grey) or from an intranasal swab (red) were obtained on the same
day from PID4101 and then phenotyped by CyTOF. Numbers indicate the percentages of the
corresponding cell population within the gate. Results are gated on live, singlet CD3+CD4+CD8cells.

Figure 6. Unique phenotypic features of post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells are
not due to different number of antigen exposures. (A) The proportions of CD57-CD127+,
CCR7+CD62L+, and CXCR4+CD69+ cells among spike-specific CD4+ T cells are similar after
the first and second doses of vaccination in convalescent individuals. (B) The proportions of
CD57-CD127+, CCR7+CD62L+, CXCR4+CD69+, Tcm, and Ttm among spike-specific CD4+ T
cells differ in infection-naïve individuals after their second vaccination dose compared to
convalescent individuals after their first vaccination dose. Note that the groups compared here
both were exposed to spike antigen twice and analyzed at similar timepoints after the second
exposure. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, ns = non-significant, as determined student’s ttest.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SUPPLEMENTARY FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure S1. Six-hour stimulation with spike peptides does not induce significant
expression of activation markers in SARS-CoV-2-specific T cells. (A) CD4+ T cells were
assessed for co-expression of the activation-induced markers (AIM) Ox40 and 4-1BB following
6 hours of stimulation with ancestral spike peptides using PBMC specimens from a
representative infection-naïve individual (PID4197) before vaccination (Pre-Vac), or two weeks
after dose 1 or dose 2 of vaccination. (B) CD8+ T cells were assessed for co-expression of the
AIM CD69 and 4-1BB following 6 hours of stimulation, using same specimens as panel A.
Baseline specimens not treated with peptide are shown as a comparison control. Numbers
correspond to percentages of cells within the gates. Note that the activated (AIM+) cells that
appear in stimulated specimens probably do not reflect peptide-specific stimulation as AIM+
cells are also detected in the baseline specimens.

Figure S2. Expression levels of all CyTOF phenotyping markers are equivalent between
CD4+ T cells responding to stimulation by spike from ancestral, B.1.1.7, and B.1.351
spike. Shown are the mean expression levels of each antigen in post-vaccination spikeresponding CD4+ T cells quantitated by CyTOF. Each datapoint corresponds to a single
specimen. No significant differences were observed in expression levels for any of the antigens
between any of the three groups, as assessed by one-way and ANOVA adjusted for multiple
testing (n = 39) using the Holm-Sidak method (p > 0.05).

Figure S3. Phenotypes of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve individuals are
similar following first and second dose of vaccination. (A) MDS plot depicting samples of
spike-specific CD4+ T cells in vaccinated infection-naïve individuals, showing interspersion of
the cells from the two post-vaccination timepoints. Each dot represents a single specimen. (B)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tSNE dot plot of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from vaccinated infection-naïve individuals. Each
dot represents a single cell. Although fewer cells are present at the first timepoint, these cells
spread over the same regions of the tSNE plot as do the cells from the second timepoint,
suggesting phenotypic overlap between the two timepoints. (C) Spike-specific CD4+ T cells
from vaccinated infection-naïve individuals are phenotypically similar at the first and second
vaccination timepoints. Shown are tSNE plots depicting cells from the two timepoints, colored
according to the cells’ cluster classification as determined by flowSOM. (D) Distribution among
flowSOM clusters of post-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve
individuals are similar between the two post-vaccination timepoints. (E) Lack of enrichment of
any clusters of spike-specific T cells in either post-vaccination timepoint relative to the other in
vaccinated infection-naïve individuals, as determined using student’s t-tests adjusted for
multiple testing (n = 8) using Holm-Sidak method. (F) The proportions of Tn (CD45ROCD45RA+CCR7+CD95-), Tscm (CD45RO-CD45RA+CCR7+CD95+), Temra (CD45ROCD45RA+CCR7-), Tcm (CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7+CD27+), Tem (CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7CD27-), and Ttm (CD45RO+CD45RA-CCR7-CD27+) among spike-specific CD4+ cells differ
little in infection-naive individuals after the first vs. second vaccination doses. *p < 0.05, ns =
non-significant as determined by student’s t-test. (I) The proportions of Tfh (CD45RO+CD45RAPD1+CXCR5+) and Treg (CD45RO+CD45RA-CD25+CD127low) among spike-specific CD4+ T
cells are similar in infection-naive individuals after the first vs. second vaccination doses. ns =
non-significant as determined by student’s t-test.

Figure S4. The distribution of spike-specific T cells among the canonical subsets of CD4+
T cells is similar in convalescent individuals pre- and post-vaccination. (A) The
proportions of Tn, Tscm, Temra Tcm, Tem, and Ttm among spike-specific CD4+ cells are
similar in convalescent individuals before and after vaccination. (B) The proportions of Tfh and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Treg among spike-specific CD4+ T cells are similar in convalescent individuals before and after
vaccination. Distributions were assessed by one-way ANOVA (p > 0.05).

Figure S5. Cluster C3, enriched in pre-vaccination spike-specific CD4+ T cells from
convalescent individuals, exhibits low activation phenotypes. Shown are histogram
depictions of the expression levels of the indicated activation markers in cluster C1 (A) or C3
(B). Both clusters were enriched in cells from the pre-vaccination specimens. While cluster C1
expressed activation markers at levels generally similar to those of total spike-specific CD4+ T
cells, cluster C3 expressed low levels of all activation markers. These results suggest that a
subset of unactivated, spike-specific CD4+ T cells of the C3 phenotype are depleted after
vaccination in convalescent individuals. Shown are concatenated data from all clustered cells
from both the pre- and post-vaccination specimens from convalescent participants.

Figure S6. Cluster A3, enriched among spike-specific CD4+ T cells from convalescent
vaccinated individuals, express high levels of markers of homeostatic proliferation and
tissue homing. (A) Shown are histograms of the expression levels of the alpha chain of the IL7
receptor (CD127), the lymph node homing receptor CCR7, and the chemokine receptor CXCR4
among clusters A1 or A3, both of which were enriched in convalescent relative to infection-naïve
individuals after vaccination. Cluster A3 expressed high levels of all three receptors relative to
total spike-specific CD4+ T cells. Data were concatenated from all clustered cells. (B) Relative
expression levels, as depicted by normalized mean signal intensity (MSI), of CD127, CCR7, and
CXCR4 among all specimens of spike-specific CD4+ T cells from infection-naïve and
convalescent individuals, after the second vaccination dose. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ns = nonsignificant, as determined using student’s t-tests and corrected for multiple testing (n = 39) using
the Holm-Sidak method.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S7. Phenotypic features of spike-specific CD8+ T cells from vaccinated,
convalescent individuals are unique and differ from those of their CD4+ T cell
counterparts. (A-C) MDS (A) or tSNE (B, C) plots demonstrating phenotypic similarities
between spike-specific CD8+ T cells responding to spike from the ancestral, B.1.1.7, or B.1.351
strains. Data are displayed in a format similar to that for CD4+ T cells presented in Fig. 2A-C.
(D) MDS plot depicting specimens of spike-specific CD8+ T cells in infection-naïve and
convalescent individuals after second vaccination dose. The blue divider emphasizes the
general segregation of infection-naïve from convalescent donor cells. (E) tSNE contour
heatmaps depicting spike-specific CD8+ T cells from infection-naïve and convalescent
individuals, after the second vaccination dose. Cell densities are represented by color. (F) tSNE
dot plot of spike-specific CD8+ T cells from infection-naïve and convalescent individuals after
second vaccination dose. (G) The distribution of spike-specific cells among the main canonical
CD8+ T cell subsets (Tn, Tscm, Temra, Tcm, Tem, Ttm) is similar in infection-naïve vs.
convalescent individuals after second vaccination dose. (H) T cell subsets that were
differentially enriched in infection-naïve vs. convalescent individuals among spike-specific CD4+
T cells after second vaccination dose (Fig. 6B) are not differentially enriched among spikespecific CD8+ T cells. Shown are the proportions of cells that are CD127+CD57-,
CCR7+CD62L+, or CXCR4+CD69+ cells among spike-specific CD8+ T cells as determined by
manual gating. (I) Cells co-expressing CD27 and CD38, and CTLA4 and CD137, are elevated
among spike-specific CD8+ T cells from vaccinated convalescent individuals relative to
vaccinated infection-naïve individuals. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 as determined by student’s t-test.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES

Table S1. Participant Characteristics
Patient
Gender Age Prior
ID
Infection
Status
PID4101
PID4197
PID4198
PID4199
PID4104
PID4112
PID4117
PID4118

Female
Female
Male
Female
Female
Female
Female
Female

45
76
79
32
33
59
51
39

Uninfected
Uninfected
Uninfected
Uninfected
Convalescent
Convalescent
Convalescent
Convalescent

Vaccine

Pfizer/BioNT
Pfizer/BioNT
Moderna
Pfizer/BioNT
Moderna
Moderna
Pfizer/BioNT
Pfizer/BioNT

Days post
PCR+ test
at prevaccination
timepoint
NA
NA
NA
NA
212
254
82
173

Days
post
vaccine
dose #1

Days
post
vaccine
dose #2

13
14
18
14
14
16
16
18

12
13
10
10
14
13
6
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S2. List of CyTOF antibodies used in study. Antibodies were either purchased from
the indicated vendor or prepared in-house using commercially available MaxPAR conjugation
kits per manufacturer’s instructions (Fluidigm).
Antigen
Target
HLADR
RORgt*
CD49d (a4)
CTLA4*
NFAT*
CCR5
CD137
CD95
CD7
ICOS
Tbet*
IL4*
CD2
IL17*
CD62L
TIGIT
CCR6
IL6*
CD8
CD19
CD14
OX40
CCR7
CD28
CD45RO
CD69
CRTH2
PD-1
CD127
CXCR5
CD27
IFNg*
CD45RA
CD3
CD57
CD38
a4b7
CD4
CXCR4
CD25
CD161

Clone
TÜ36
AFKJS-9
9F10
14D3
D43B1
NP6G4
4B4-1
BX2
CD76B7
C398.4A
4B10
MP4-25D2
TS1/8
BL168
DREG56
MBSA43
11A9
MQ2-13A5
RPA-T8
HIB19
M5E2
ACT35
G043H7
CD28.2
UCHL1
FN50
BM16
EH12.1
A019D5
RF8B2
L128
B27
HI100
UCHT1
HNK-1
HIT2
Act1
SK3
12G5
M-A251
NKR-P1A

*Intracellular antibodies

Elemental
Isotope
Qdot (112Cd)
115 In
141Pr
142Nd
143Nd
144Nd
145Nd
146Nd
147Sm
148Nd
149Sm
150Nd
151Eu
152Sm
153Eu
154Sm
155Gd
156 Gd
157Gd
157Gd
157Gd
158Gd
159Tb
160Gd
161Dy
162Dy
163Dy
164Dy
165Ho
166Er
167Er
168Er
169Tm
170Er
171Yb
172Yb
173Yb
174Yb
175Lu
176Yb
209 Bi

Vendor
Thermofisher
In-house
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
In-house
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
In-house
In-house
In-house
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
In-house
Fluidigm
Fluidigm
In-house
In-house

Figure 1
A.
Pre-Vac

No peptide

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

3

2

10

10

1

IFNγ

0

10

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

1

10

2

10

3

0

10

10

2

10

1

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

1

10

4

3

0

10

10

2

10

1

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

4

10

0.42

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

PID4199

0.1

0.50
0.25
Pre-Vac

PostDose 1

PostDose 2

D.

0.6
0.4

1

10

2

10

3

10

10

2

10

1

Post-Dose 2

10

0

10

2

10

1

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

10

2

10

1

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

0.3

0.0
Pre-Vac

PostDose 1

2

3

10

1

4

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

Post-Dose 2
10

0.11

10

10

1

10

4

0.81

3

2

1

0

4

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

CD8 nucleocapsid (infection-naive)
0.15

0.1

0.0

PID4101
PID4197
PID4198
PID4199

0.05

Pre-Vac

PostDose 1

0.0

PostDose 2

Pre-Vac

PID4104
PID4112
PID4117
PID4118

Pre-Vac

PostDose 1

0.15
0.1

0.05
0.0
Pre-Vac

PostDose 1

PostDose 2

PostDose 1

PostDose 2

CD8 nucleocapsid (convalescent)

PostDose 2

0.8
0.6
0.4

PID4104
PID4112
PID4117
PID4118

0.2
0.0
Pre-Vac

CD8 spike

PostDose 2

10

2

0.1

CD4 spike

0.1

10

3

PID4199

0.0

PostDose 2

1

4

PID4101
PID4197
PID4198

0.25

0.2

0.3

10

0

0

2

0

0

10

3

4

3

Post-Dose 1

0.033

0.50

0.2

10

CD4 nucleocapsid (infection-naive)

0.4

0.75

0.4

1

4

CD8

1.00

PostDose 1

10

CD4 nucleocapsid (convalescent)

PID4118

0.0

10

2

4

0

10

10

3

Pre-Vac
10

3

0

4

0

4

0.011

PostDose 2

PID4104
PID4112
PID4117

Pre-Vac

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

0.0

0.8

10

No peptide

4

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

PID4118

0

CD8

CD8 spike (convalescent)
% CD8 T cells IFNγ+

PID4104
PID4112
PID4117

PostDose 1

Pre-Vac

% CD8 T cells IFNγ+

PostDose 2

3

0

0.2

**** Infection-naive vs. convalescent

PostDose 1

Donor

Pre-Vac

Donor

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

0.75

PID4199

0.0

CD4 spike (convalescent)
1.00

**

PID4101
PID4197
PID4198

0.05

0.1
0.0

0.15

10

C.

CD8 rspike (infection-naive)
Donor

****

1

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

0.2

PID4101
PID4197
PID4198

% CD8 T cells IFNγ+

0.3

Donor

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

CD4 spike (infection-naive)

10

0

CD4

0.4

10

2

Post-Dose 2

1.11

10

3

0

4

0

0

10

2

Post-Dose 1
0.17

3

10

3

0

4

0

10

10

Pre-Vac

0.009

0

1

0

4

No peptide

4

10

10

Donor

0

0

B.

Post-Dose 1

4

Donor

10

10

2

10

% CD8 T cells IFNγ+

10

1

3

4

% CD8 T cells IFNγ+

Convalescent

10

10

10

Donor

CD4

10

10

2

0

IFNγ

0

10

Pre-Vac

No peptide

4

Infection-naive

Convalescent
(minus PID4112)

Spike
Variant

10

3

10

Donor

1

10

Post-Dose 2

4

Donor

10

10

IFNγ

10

2

10

4

IFNγ

Infection-naive

10

3

10

Post-Dose 1

bioRxiv preprint
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888
;0.28
this version posted May
12, 2021. The copyright
holder for0.003
this preprint (which0.19
0.003
0.003
0.005
0
0.072
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4

10

Ancestral
B.1.1.7
B.1.351

PostDose 1

PostDose 2

Figure 2
A.

B.
Total CD4

tSNE2

MDS1

tSNE1

tSNE1

C.
tSNE2

Spike-responding
Ancestral
B.1.1.7
B.1.351

D.

CD45RO

4
3
2
1

tSNE1

E.

5

CD45RA

tSNE2

MDS2

tSNE2

Spikeresponding

6
Spike-responding
IFNγ
bioRxiv preprintAncestral
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888Ancestral
; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright
holder for this preprint (which
4
B.1.1.7 by peer review) is the author/funder, who has
was not certified
granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made
B.1.1.7
2
B.1.351
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International license.
B.1.351
0

tSNE1

Tcm markers

Tfh markers

CCR7

tSNE2

CD27

tSNE1

5

PD1

4

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

tSNE1

Activation markers

CD38

5

CXCR5

CD69

HLADR

5

CD25

4
3
2

tSNE2

1

tSNE1

Respiratory tract migration markers
CCR5

CXCR4

CCR6

5

CD49d

4
3
2

tSNE2

1

tSNE1

Cluster A1

B.1.351

B.1.1.7

Cluster A2

75

Cluster A3

Percent

Ancestral

tSNE2

F.

100

Cluster A4

50

Cluster A5
Cluster A6
Cluster A7

25

Cluster A8
0

tSNE1

al

str

ce

An

.7

1.1

B.

51

1.3

B.

Figure 3
A.

MDS2

tSNE2

Pre-Vac
B.
Post-Dose 2
Post-Dose 1
Pre-Vac
Post-Dose 1
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888
; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
Post-Dose 2who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder,
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tSNE1
Min

MDS1

C.

Max

D.
Post-Dose 1

tSNE2

Pre-Vac

Post-Dose 2

Cluster C1
Cluster C2
Cluster C3

tSNE2

Cluster C4
Cluster C5
Cluster C6

Pre-Vac
Post-Dose 1
Post-Dose 2

tSNE1

Cluster C7
Cluster C8

tSNE1

F.

100

Cluster C1

Cluster C2
Cluster C4

50

G.

D

st-

Po

e
os

1

e
os

D

st-

Po

50

25

25

100
75

*
*

90

60

30

0

c
Va

e-

0

Cluster C5

100

**

**

Cluster C4
100
75

***

***

50
25

0

Cluster C6

0

Cluster C7

100

100

75

75

75

50

50

50

50

25

25

25

25

0

0

0

0

2

120

Pr

75

Po

D
st-

o

1
se
Po

D
st-

o

2
se

**
**
75

50

25

0

Pr

e-

c
Va
Po

D
st-

o

1
se
Po

D
st-

o

2
se

% of responding cells that are PD1+CTLA4+

e

Pr

c

a
-V

75
50

Cluster C7

0

100

25

Cluster C6
Cluster C8

100

50

0

Percent

25

Cluster C3

Cluster C2

****
****

75

Cluster C5

% of responding cells that are CD38+HLADR+

Percent

Cluster C3

Percent

Cluster C1

75

100

% of responding cells that are ICOS+Ox40+

E.

****
****

100

75

50

25

0

c

Va

e-

Pr

P

se

Do

tos

1
P

se

Do

tos

2

Cluster C8

Pre-Vac
Post-Dose 1
Post-Dose 2

Figure 4
A.

Post-Dose 1

B.

Post-Dose 2

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

Infection-naive
ns doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
0.5bioRxiv preprint
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is Convalescent
made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
0.4
MDS2

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
ct

e
Inf

C.

t
en
sc
e
l
a
nv
Co

ive

na

ion

MDS1

E.

D.

Convalescent

Post-Dose 1

Infection-naive

Post-Dose 2

tSNE2

tSNE2

tSNE2

Max

Post-Dose 2

Infection-naive

Convalescent

tSNE1
Infection-naive
Convalescent

Min

tSNE1

tSNE1

G.
Cluster A1

Percent

75

Cluster A2

100

Percent

100

Cluster A3
Cluster A5
Cluster A6
Cluster A7

25

Cluster A8
0

-n

on

cti

e
Inf

e
aiv

c

les

va

n
Co

t
en

75

Cluster A1

*

100

Cluster A2

75

100

50

50

25

25

25

100

0

Cluster A5

100

Cluster A3

75

50

0

Cluster A4

50

Percent

F.

Cluster A1
Cluster A2
Cluster A3
Cluster A4
Cluster A5
Cluster A6
Cluster A7
Cluster A8

100

Cluster A4

75

*

50
25

0

Cluster A6

100

0

Cluster A7

100

75

75

75

75

50

50

50

50

25

25

25

25

0

0

0

0

Cluster A8

Infection-naive
Convalescent

Tn

% of responding cells that are Tscm

A.

Tscm

% of responding cells that are Temra

Figure 5
B.

Temra

Tfh

-n

on

ti
fec

In

t
en

c

les

a
nv

Co

In

% of responding cells that are Tem

% of responding cells that are Tcm

**

50

25

0

e
aiv

-n

on

0

e
aiv

-n

on

D.

e

Inf

CD57

C

0

t
en

-n

4.12

Convalescent

t
en

Co

ns

15
10
5
0

In

E.

e

aiv

-n

on

25

o
cti

e

e

aiv

n
n-

a

C

v
on

34.42

**
60
40
20
0

t

en

c
les

Infection-naive

nt

ce

les

a
nv

Co

16.39

50

Inf

CD62L

20

75

0

t
en

Co

ti
fec

*

nt

ce

les

a
nv

Treg

c

les

a
nv

Infection-naive

c
les

a

e
aiv

on

ti
fec

In

12.88

v
on

****

c

les

a
nv

Co

10

o
cti

Ttm

10

30

n
n-

In

e

aiv

-n

on

ti
fec

40

5

In

e
aiv

Co

0

c

les

a
nv

20

***

0

-n

on

ti
fec

t
en

30

ti
fec

20

e
aiv

50

p=0.05

CCR7

Convalescent

% of responding cells
that are CD127+CD57-

Convalescent

e

aiv
-n

on
cti

e

Inf

CD69

C

t

en

sc

ale

v
on

G.
0.4

R = -0.65
p = 0.00056

0.2

0.3

R = -0.39
p = 0.061

0.2

0.0

20

40

60

80

% of responding that are CCR7+CD62L+

0

20

40

−0.2

60

% of responding that are CXCR4+CD69+

Infection-naive

H.

−0.2
30

50

70

MSI of CCR7

90
Infection-naive

Convalescent

0.065
41.2

0.1
53.5

CCR7

CD62L

R = -0.77
p = 0.000009

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0

R = -0.72
p = 0.000064

0.2

0.1

−0.2

0.4

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

0.4

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

0.4

CXCR4

CD127

6.5

0

In

Tem

c

les

a
nv

Co

t
en

40

% CD4 T cells IFNγ+

Co

10

Infection-naive

F.

c

15

In

14.04

t
en

les

a
nv

20

75

ti
fec

C.

-n

on

ti
fec

Tcm

e
aiv

20

% of responding cells
that are CXCR4+CD69+

e
aiv

0

% of responding cells that are Tfh

0

5

40

10

% of responding cells that are Treg

5

ns

CXCR4

10

% of responding cells that are Ttm

15

% of responding cells
that are CCR7+CD62L+

% of responding cells that are Tn

ns for this preprint (which
25
bioRxiv preprint
doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
60
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International
license.
20
ns
20
ns
10

CD69

2
Convalescent

Blood
Intranasal swabs

3

4

5

MSI of CD62L

6

Figure 6
A.

ns

20
10

50
25

P

nt

ce

s
ale

nv

Co

s

Do

tos

P

nv

Co

B.

% of responding cells
that are CCR7+CD62L+

20

10

Inf

e

o
cti

D

tos

eP

aiv

n
n-

e
os

n

Co

Po

nt

ce

s
ale

nv

Co

e
os

os

D
st-

Po

ale
nv
Co

*

60
40
20

o

tP

en

c
les

o

t

ec

Inf

e2

os

D
st-

o

eP

iv
na

ion

n

o

tP

en

c
les

va

Co

o
cti
nfe

75

50

25

Inf

e

ct

ive

20

iv
na
n-

e

Do
stPo

50

2
se

ale
nv
Co

***

40

30

20

10

0

s

Do

tos

P

e2

C

t

en

sc

ale

v
on

e
os

o

t-D

s
Po

1
se
-n
on

In

ti
fec

t-D
os
eP
v
i
a

2

ale
nv
Co

en
sc

2

*

I

**

100

na

ale
nv
Co

e
os

t-D
os
tP

40

o

D
st-

1

60

1
se

0

ion

en
sc

t-D
os
tP

0

1
se

D
st-

20

e2

0

2

va

os

D
st-

80

% of responding cells that are Tcm

% of responding cells
that are CD127+CD57-

*

0

nt

ce

s
ale

e1

% of responding cells
that are CXCR4+CD69+

nv

s

Do

tos

e2

% of responding cells that are Ttm

nt

ce

s
ale

e1

40

0

0

0

Co

ns

% of responding cells
that are CXCR4+CD69+

% of responding cells
that are CCR7+CD62L+

% of responding cells
that are CD127+CD57-

ns

40
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
60bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
was not certified by peer review)
75is the author/funder, who has granted
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
30

e
os

en
sc

t-D
os
tP

1

e
os

en
sc

t-D
os
tP

1

Figure S1
A.

No peptide
Post-Dose 2
Pre-Vac
Post-Dose 1
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
0.16 who has granted bioRxiv
0.09 is the author/funder,
0.18
was not0.10
certified by peer review)
a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
10

10

10

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

4

10

3

10

2

10

1

10

0

Ox40

CD4+ T cells

10

0

4-1BB

B.

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

CD8+ T cells

10

10

10

4

0

10

2

10

1

10

10

CD69

1

10

2

10

3

10

0

4-1BB

10

10

2

10

2

10

1

10

4

0

3

10

4

10

2

10

1

10

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

10

1

10

2

2

1

4

0

4

0.59

3

10

3

10

4

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

Post-Dose 2
10

10

2

10

1

10

4

0.40

3

2

1

0

0

0

3

Post-Dose 1
10

0.48

3

4

0

4

0

0

1

10

Pre-Vac
10

0.26

3

10

3

0

4

No peptide
10

4

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

0

10

1

10

2

10

3

10

4

Figure S2

mean

3

7

CD2

3

3

4

mean

mean

1
0
al

str

e
nc

A

.7

1.1

B.

1

1

0

0
l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
.
c
B
An

1

35

1.
B.

NFAT

3

2

2

2

CCR5

3

RORγt

2

1

0
l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
B.

l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
B.

3

c
An

c
An

CXCR4

CTLA4

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
.
B
B

A

CD137

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
.
B
B

A

CD95

2

0
al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
.
B
B

A

ICOS

1
al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
.
B
B

A

3

IL4

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
.
B
B

e
nc

e
nc

e
nc

5

3

1

0
e
nc

3

2

1

0
e
nc

3

CD127

IL6

4

3

3

3

mean

2

CD28

1

mean

4

4

3

1

2

0

1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

2

3

1

mean

OX40

CCR6
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was
by peer review)
who has granted
in 1perpetuity. It is made al
l
7
7 author/funder,
1a license to display trthe
1
1
1
al 1.7bioRxiv
al preprint
al is1the
a
.7
.7 not35certified
. 4.0 1International
.1.
. . available
35
35
35
35
str
str
str
str
under aCC-BY-NC-ND
license. es .1.1
1.1
. .
.1.
.1.
.1.
.1.
ce B.1
ce B.1
c
ce B.1
ce
B
B.
B
B
B
B
B
n
n
n
n
n
A
A
A
A
A

CD8

1
1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

CD62L

2

4

mean

mean

1
1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

5

4

4

0

6

5

mean

mean

mean

6

5

3

5

CD3

6

4

3

IFNγ
7

5

2

1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

2

2

mean

CD27

1
al
.7
35
str .1.1
e
.1.
c
B
B
n
A

3

3

mean

1

35

1.
B.

2

CXCR5
4

mean

An

1.7

1.
B.

3

PD1
4

1

3

mean

l

tra

s
ce

6

mean

mean

mean

0

3

CRTH2

2

4

4

1

0

5

5

2

1

6

6

3

2

CD69

mean

4

CD45RO

mean

HLADR

mean

3

CD161

A

3

CD49d

4

CD7

Tbet

5

4

4

1
al

str

e
nc

A

1.7

1.
B.

1

35

1.
B.

CD38

3

4

1
0
l

tra

es

c
An

.7

1.1

B.

51

1.3

B.

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

α4β7

CD4

e
nc

5

mean

2
l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
B.

c
An

l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
B.

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

A

CD25

l
51
tra 1.7
es B.1.
1.3
B.

c
An

mean

mean

CCR7

0
al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

A

4

A

CD45RA

CD57
4
3

2

2

2

1

1

1

0

0

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

A

e
nc

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

e
nc

e
nc

3

3

0
c
An

A

4

1

3

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

5

e
nc

3

0
e
nc

TIGIT

2

4

0

3

0
A

1

A

1

l
1
tra 1.7
35
es B.1.
.1.
c
B
n
A

mean

mean

2

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

e
nc

2

0

2

3

IL17

mean

mean

mean

1

3

1

2

2

A

2

3

3

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

e
nc

0

mean

l
1
tra 1.7
35
es B.1.
.1.
c
B
n
A

1

35

1.
B.

0

1

mean

A

1.7

1.
B.

0

2

1

1

mean

al

str

e
nc

2

1

mean

0

mean

1

2

3

mean

1

2

2

mean

3

5

2

mean

mean

2

mean

4

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

A

e
nc

al
.7
51
str .1.1
1.3
B
B.

A

e
nc

Figure S3
A.

B.

C.

tSNE2

tSNE2

MDS2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
Post-Dose
1 the preprint in perpetuity.
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxivPost-Dose
a license to display
It is 2
made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tSNE1
MDS1
Post-Dose 1
Post-Dose 2

D.

100

75

Percent

Cluster B1
Cluster B2

Cluster B3

Cluster B5

Cluster B7

Cluster B2

Cluster B4

Cluster B6

Cluster B8

Cluster B5

Percent

Cluster B7

25

Cluster B8

75

75

50

50

25

25

25

25

0

0

0

75

75

75

75

50

50

50

50

25

25

25

25

0

0

0

0

10

0

os

Po

75

50

25

0

Po

e1

os

Po

5.0

2.5

ns

0.0

e1

os

Po

Temra
15

10

ns

5

0

e2

os

D
st-

Po

e1

os

D
st-

Po

20

10

0

Po

e1

os

D
st-

Po

40

30

20

10

0

Po

e1

os

D
st-

60

40

20

0

e1

os

D
st-

e2

os

D
st-

Po

Treg
ns

60

40

20

0

e2

os

D
st-

Po

ns

Po

*

50

e2

os

D
st-

Tfh

os

Ttm

ns

G.

e2

D
st-

Po

Tem

30

e2

os

D
st-

7.5

D
st-

% of responding cells that are Tem

ns

D
st-

10.0

os

Tcm

100

Tscm

e2

D
st-

Po

Post-Dose 1
Post-Dose 2

Cluster B8

100

e2

% of responding cells that are Tscm

ns

D
st-

100

% of responding cells that are Tfh

Po

e1

100

0

Cluster B7

os

D
st-

Tn
20

Cluster B6

% of responding cells that are Treg

F.

Cluster B5

Cluster B4

100

50

% of responding cells that are Ttm

Po

e1

os

Cluster B3

75

0

D
st-

100

50

100

Cluster B6

Cluster B2

100

75

Cluster B4

50

Cluster B1

% of responding cells that are Temra

Percent

Cluster B3

% of responding cells that are Tn

Cluster B1

E.
100

% of responding cells that are Tcm

tSNE1

Post-Dose 1
Post-Dose 2

P

se

Do

tos

1
P

se

Do

tos

2

Figure S4
A.

30

20

10

0
V
e-

Pr

e1

os

t-D

s
Po

20

20

10

10

0

e2

os

t-D

s
Po

c
Va

e-

Pr

Do

tos

P

P

% of responding cells that are Tem

75

50

25

c

Va

e1

os

t-D

s
Po

e2

os

t-D

s
Po

40

30

20

10

0

c

Va

e-

Pr

Po

e1

os

D
st-

60

30

Do

tos

P

2
se

P

c

Va

e-

Pr

Do

tos

se

Do

st-

Po

Ttm

0
e-

Pr

1
se

Tem

100

Pr

c
Va

e-

Do

tos

90

0

2
se

% of responding cells that are Ttm

Tcm
% of responding cells that are Tcm

1
se

0

Po

e2

os

D
st-

1

se

Do

st-

Po

2

Treg
% of responding cells that are Treg

ac

30

% of responding cells that are Tfh

40

% of responding cells that are Temra

50

% of responding cells that are Tscm

% of responding cells that are Tn

B.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Tn
Tscmunder aCC-BY-NC-ND Temra
Tfh
available
4.0 International license.

50

40

30

20

10

30

20

10

0

0
c

Va

e-

Pr

e1

os

t-D

s
Po

e2

os

t-D

s
Po

c

Va

e-

Pr

se

Do

st-

Po

1

se

Do

st-

Po

2

Figure S5
A.

CCR5
CD28
CD38
CD69
bioRxiv preprint
doi: 0.8https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888
; this version
posted May
Cluster12,
C1 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
0.5
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who
has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
0.75
0.6
All responding
cells .
available under a0.4
CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
license

CD28
0.75

0.50

0.2

0.00

0.1
0.0

HLADR

0.4

0.75

0.4

4

2
PD1

0.6

0.4

0

5

4

OX40

ICOS

0.5

3

2

1

0

2

3

0.0
0

0.25

3

2

1

0

0.00

0.2

1

0.25

0.3

0.3

0.50
0.2

4

3

2

0.0
0

4

3

2

1

0

4

3

2

1

0

0.1

0.00

0.0

4

0.0

0.25

1

0.2

0.1

2

0.2

0

Density

0.3

0.50

0.4

Relative Expression

CCR5

CD28

CD69

0.9

0.2
0.3

0.2

0.5

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

4

2

5

4

3

2

1

0.6

Relative Expression

4

3

4

0

0.4

2

3

1.0

4

4

3

0.0

0.4

3

0.1

PD1

0.8

1.5

2

0.2

OX40

0.6

1

0.3

2

0.0

ICOS

0.4

1

2

1

HLADR
0.5

0

0.1

0.0
0

3

2

1

0

0.0

2

0.00

1

0.5

0

0.25

0.3

0.6

1.0

All responding cells

0.4

1.5

0.50

Cluster C3

0.5

0

0.75

Density

CD38

2.0

0

1.00

0

B.

Figure S6
Cluster A1

A.

CD127

Cluster A3

3

0.9

MSI

bioRxiv
; this version posted May 12, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
CD127
CD127 preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888
B.
was not certified
by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
1.00
2
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
0.75

0.6
0.3

0.25

0

CCR7

CXCR4

0.2

0.2

3

MSI
4

3

2

1

CXCR4
3

1

Relative Expression
Cluster A1

Cluster A3

All responding cells

All responding cells

ns

2

4

3

2

1

4

3

2

1

0

0.0

0.0

2

0

CXCR4

MSI

0.4

*

1

0.6

0.4

4
3

0

4

0.0
3

0.0
2

0.2

1

0.2

0

0.4

0

CCR7

CCR7

0.4

0.6

2

0

3

2

1

0

1

0.00

0.0

Density

**

1

0.50

0

tio

ec

Inf

e

aiv

n
n-

nv

Co

nt

ce

s
ale

Figure S7
B.

Spike-responding
Ancestral
B.1.1.7
B.1.351

B.1.1.7

tSNE2

tSNE2

tSNE2

E.

Post-Dose 2

Infection-naive

tSNE1

Post-Dose 2

F.

Convalescent

MDS2

tSNE2

tSNE2

Infection-naive
Convalescent

ns

60

40

20

e
aiv

n

n-

tio

ec
Inf

c

les

va

n
Co

60

t
en

% of responding cells
that are CD127+CD57-

Co

20

10

0

n

n-

tio

ec
Inf

e
aiv

t
en

c

les

va

n
Co

tio

ec

nv

Co

on

C

t

en

sc

le
va

0

ns

-n

n
tio

ec

Inf

e
aiv
nv

Co

n

Co

t

en

sc

le
va

40
30

**

20
10
0

e
aiv

n

n-

tio

c

les

va

n
Co

t
en

75

50

25

0

ec

Inf

e

aiv

-n

n
tio

Co

nt

ce

les

a
nv

ive

na

n-

o
cti

e

Inf

t
en

c

s
ale

ive

na

n-

o
cti

e

Inf

50

0

t
en

25

Ttm

60

20

c

s
ale

e

aiv

-n

on
cti

40

0

a

50

0

60

0

n
n-

20

ns

ns

20

ive

75

ec
Inf

40

20

*

40

I

ns

I.

60

nfe

Tem

30

ns

% of responding cells
that are CD27+CD38+

nt

ce

les

a
nv

60

ns

40

Inf

ive

na

n-

o
cti

e
Inf

Tcm

0

0

Temra
80

% of responding cells
that are CTLA4+41BB+

Co

5

% of responding cells that are Temra

nt

ce

les

a
nv

10

% of responding cells that are Tem

% of responding cells that are Tcm

I

e

aiv

-n

on
cti

ns

% of responding cells that are Ttm

0

15

Min

% of responding cells
that are CXCR4+CD69+

20

% of responding cells that are Tscm

40

Tscm
20

% of responding cells
that are CCR7+CD62L+

% of responding cells that are Tn

ns

nfe

H.

Max

Tn

60

tSNE1
Infection-naive
Convalescent

tSNE1

MDS1

G.

Ancestral

4

tSNE1

tSNE1

Post-Dose 2

6

2021. The copyright
holder for this preprint (whichB.1.351
2
to display the preprint
in perpetuity. It is made
0
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MDS1

D.

C.

IFNγ
8

Total CD8
Ancestral
B.1.1.7
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.05.12.443888
; this version posted May 12,
B.1.351
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder,
who has granted bioRxiv a license

MDS2

A.

Co

nt

ce

les

a
nv

