bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Androgen Regulates SARS-CoV-2 Receptor Levels
and Is Associated with Severe COVID-19 Symptoms in Men

Zaniar Ghazizadeh

1,2*

3*

3*

3*

, Homa Majd , Mikayla Richter , Ryan Samuel , Seyedeh Maryam Zekavat
7

3

3

3

4,5,6*

,

5,8

Hosseinali Asgharian , Sina Farahvashi , Ali Kalantari , Jonathan Ramirez , Hongyu Zhao , Pradeep
Natarajan

4,6,9

, Hani Goodarzi

7,10,11#

, Faranak Fattahi

3,7,12#

1

Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510.
Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, 06510.
3
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, CA, 94143.
4
Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142
5
Department of computational Biology & Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06510.
6
Cardiovascular Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114
7
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158.
8
Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT, 06510.
9
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115.
10
Department of Urology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158.
11
Bakar Computational Health Sciences Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158.
12
Program in Craniofacial Biology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94110 USA
2

* These authors contributed equally
# correspondence to:
Faranak Fattahi
Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research
University of California, San Francisco
35 Medical Center Way, RMB-1014, Box 0667
San Francisco, CA 94143
Tel: (415) 476-7979
Email: Faranak.Fattahi@ucsf.edu
Hani Goodarzi
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics
University of California, San Francisco
Genentech Hall, S312D, 600 16th St
San Francisco, CA 94158
Email: hani.goodarzi@ucsf.edu
Tel: (415) 230-5189

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection has led to a global health crisis,
and yet our understanding of the disease pathophysiology and potential treatment options remains limited.
SARS-CoV-2 infection occurs through binding and internalization of the viral spike protein to angiotensin
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) on the host cell membrane. Lethal complications are caused by damage and
failure of vital organs that express high levels of ACE2, including the lungs, the heart and the kidneys. Here,
we established a high-throughput drug screening strategy to identify therapeutic candidates that reduce
ACE2 levels in human embryonic stem cell (hESC) derived cardiac cells. Drug target analysis of validated
hit compounds, including 5 alpha reductase inhibitors, revealed androgen signaling as a key modulator of
ACE2 levels. Treatment with the 5 alpha reductase inhibitor dutasteride reduced ACE2 levels and
internalization of recombinant spike receptor binding domain (Spike-RBD) in hESC-derived cardiac cells
and human alveolar epithelial cells. Finally, clinical data on coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients
demonstrated that abnormal androgen states are significantly associated with severe disease
complications and cardiac injury as measured by blood troponin T levels. These findings provide important
insights on the mechanism of increased disease susceptibility in male COVID-19 patients and identify
androgen receptor inhibition as a potential therapeutic strategy.

Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) has become a pandemic affecting millions of people worldwide. Limited understanding of the
disease pathophysiology has impeded our ability to develop effective preventative and therapeutic
1
strategies. Multi-organ failure is the most lethal complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection . Early reports from
China show higher mortality rates in patients that develop myocardial injury, as measured by the elevation
2,3
of serum troponin T levels . Furthermore, COVID-19 patients presenting with cardiac injury were more
2
likely to have a baseline cardiovascular disease such as hypertensive disorders or heart failure .
It has been well documented that organ involvement and disease manifestation are correlated with the
4
expression of SARS-CoV receptor and co-receptors on the membrane of target cells . The spike (S) protein,
which is responsible for the characteristic crown-like shape of coronaviruses, facilitates the binding of the
5,6
virus to its receptors on the cell membrane . ACE2 has been identified as the main receptor utilized by
7
SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV-1 to enter cells . Additionally, recent findings using human and animal cell
lines have demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 relies on the serine protease TMPRSS2 for S protein priming
6
prior to ACE2 facilitated internalization . Research after the SARS-CoV-1 epidemic shows that knocking8
out ACE2 results in markedly decreased viral entry in lungs of mice infected with the virus . Recently,
Tucker et. al. showed expression of ACE2 in human adult cardiac cells, such as cardiomyocytes,
fibroblasts, pericytes, and vascular smooth muscle. Interestingly, ACE2 levels in cardiomyocytes are found
to be increased in patients with failing hearts, further linking the expression profile of ACE2 to clinical
9
findings in COVID-19 patients . In this study, we identified pharmacological strategies to reduce the levels
of ACE2 in human embryonic stem cell (hESC) derived cardiac cells in order to facilitate therapeutic
interventions aimed at reducing viral entry, thereby mitigating the multi-organ complications induced by
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
To identify candidate drugs capable of modulating ACE2 protein levels, we took advantage of our previously
10–12
established methods to generate cardiac cells from human embryonic stem cells at large scale
and
performed a high content screen with a library of 1443 FDA-approved drugs and a subsequent in silico
screen with the ZINC15 library of over 9 million drug-like compounds. We discovered that drugs most

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effective in reducing ACE2 protein levels converge on androgen receptor (AR) signaling inhibition as a
common mechanism of action. These drugs were effective in reducing ACE2 and TMPRSS2 levels on the
cellular membrane and resulted in reduced internalization of SARS-CoV-2 spike-RBD in hESC-derived
cardiac cells and human primary alveolar epithelial cells.
Clinical case studies have identified male sex as a major risk factor for SARS-CoV-2 complications. In fact,
1
70% of the patients on ventilators in the ICU were found to be males . To explore the possible role of
androgen signaling on poor disease outcomes in male COVID-19 patients, we conducted a study on two
independent cohorts of patients tested for SARS-CoV-2. Among males, we found a significant positive
association between free androgen index and the risk of severe COVID-19 and between prostatic disease
as a surrogate for androgen dysregulation and abnormal blood troponin T levels. Our data provide a
potential mechanistic link between clinical observations and pathways involved in COVID-19 pathogenesis.
The results identify AR signaling inhibition as a potential therapeutic strategy to reduce SARS-CoV-2 viral
entry and mitigate severe manifestations in COVID-19 patients.

High-throughput drug screen identifies ACE2 modulators in human cardiac cells
13–15

Our analysis of previously published single cell RNA sequencing datasets
showed abundant expression
of SARS-CoV-2 receptor, ACE2, and co-receptors, TMPRSS2 and FURIN in adult cardiac, esophageal,
lung and colon tissues (Supplementary Figure 1A). Given the highly significant association of poor
2,3
outcomes in COVID-19 patients with cardiovascular complications and the significant role of ACE2 in
16
cardiac physiology , we chose to focus on the regulation of ACE2 levels in cardiac cells. Due to limitations
associated with isolation and maintenance of human cells from primary tissue, we used our previously
established hESC differentiation method as an alternative strategy to generate cardiac cells
12
(Supplementary Figure 1B) Previously published transcriptomics data on hESC-derived cells generated
12
using this method confirmed the expression of SARS-CoV-2 receptor and co-receptors mRNAs in
cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocyte (Supplementary Figure 1C). The differentiated cells also stained
positive for ACE2 as assessed by immunofluorescence imaging (Supplementary Figure 1D).
Searching for modulators of ACE2 levels in hESC-derived cardiac cells, we screened a Selleckchem small
molecule library composed of 1443 FDA-approved drugs (Figure 1A). ACE2 levels were measured in drugtreated cells using high content imaging and a list of drugs that significantly down-regulate or up-regulate
ACE2 were identified based on their normalized ACE2 expression z-scores (Figure 1B, Supplementary
Table 1). We confirmed the effect of a compound with a high positive z-score (vincristine) and a compound
with a low negative z-score (dronedarone) on ACE2 fluorescence intensity (Figure 1C), and subsequently
selected several hit compounds with low and high z-scores (Supplementary Figure 1 E&,F) for further
analysis and validation at 1 μM and 2 μM concentrations (Figure 1D-E). The high-quality cell-based
measurements and the inherent diversity of the FDA library provided a unique opportunity to develop a
virtual high-throughput screening (vHTS) approach that allowed for rapid in silico screening and costeffective identification of compounds that can elicit the desired biological response. Combined analysis of
these in vitro measurements and in silico predictions allows us to nominate molecular entities that can
effectively modulate the signaling pathways responsible for ACE regulation.
To achieve this goal, we first randomly split our in vitro screening results into three datasets as training,
validation and test inputs (Supplementary Figure 2A-C). We used the model trained on the in vitro screening
data to predict changes in ACE2 expression in response to treatments with the in silico library. We then
variance normalized the model predictions to determine their associated z-scores. We selected the
compounds with a z-score smaller than -4 as “hit” compounds. To visualize these hits, we used Morgan

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

fingerprints to generate molecular features for all in vitro and in silico tested compounds and visualized their
relationship in a 2-dimensional space using Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) (Figure
1F). We then used K-means clustering to categorize in silico and in vitro hits and grouped them into 15
coarse-grained clusters based on their molecular features (Figure 1G). We observed a consistent coclustering of the FDA-approved drugs that are known to have structural similarities, such as the cluster
containing finasteride and dutasteride, confirming the utility of these clustering representations. Taken
together, this integrative cell-based and in silico screening strategy enabled the identification and
nomination of novel drug-like compounds with similar structure and potentially higher potency as compared
to the FDA-approved drugs utilized in the in vitro screen.

Drugs that reduce ACE-2 regulate steroid signaling and peptidase activities
We explored if a potential shared pathway exists among the candidates that decrease ACE2 levels on the
membrane of cardiac cells. We acquired isometric simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES)
for each drug in the FDA-approved library from Selleckchem and used them to predict drug-protein
17
interactions via the similarity ensemble approach (SEA) computational tool . The SEA-predicted drugprotein pairs were filtered, selecting human proteins and predicted interaction p-values <0.05, which yielded
2150 predicted proteins targeted by the drug library.
Weighted combined z-scores were then calculated by adding normalized z-scores across all compounds
18
that target each target protein . The p-values were then calculated based on the combined z-scores and
adjusted using p.adjust (method=false discovery rate(FDR)). As an orthogonal approach, for each protein,
we recorded the number of treatments with negative normalized z-scores as well as the total number of
compounds predicted to target that protein. Using the sum of counts for all other targets and drugs, we
performed a Fisher’s exact test to evaluate the degree to which negative z-scores were enriched among
the drugs likely to target a protein of interest. As expected, the two p-values, i.e. combined z-score and
Fisher’s, are generally correlated (R=0.6, p<1e-200). In Figure 2A, we have specifically compared these pvalues across the genes with negative average z-scores. Finally, we selected the likely target genes using
the following criteria: average z-score<0, FDR<0.25 based on combined z-score analysis, and Fisher’s
p<0.05. This selection process resulted in 30 proteins nominated as significant drug targets (Figure 2B,C,
Supplementary Table 2).
12

The previously published bulk transcriptomics data confirmed that 28 of these 30 proteins were expressed
by the in vitro generated cardiomyocytes and/or non-cardiomyocytes supporting their potential as drug
targets (Supplementary Figure 3A). Analysis of the collective expression of all 30 predicted targets using
module scoring revealed that some ACE2 expressing cell types, such as cardiac fibroblasts and ciliated
cells in the lung, express high levels of multiple predicted drug targets (Supplementary Figure 3B).
Additionally, expression of the predicted targets was detected in ACE2 expressing cell types of the adult
human heart, and the majority were also detected in ACE2 expressing cell types of other commonly affected
organs (Supplementary Figure 4). This analysis also provides insight into non-ACE2 expressing cell types
that may be affected by treatment with the hit compounds. In particular, tissue resident immune populations
of the myeloid lineage in the heart, esophagus and lung also collectively express many of the predicted
target genes (Supplementary Figure 3B,4). This is particularly interesting given the recent reports that
19
myeloid lineage and epithelial cells are affected in severe SARS-CoV-2 infection cases .
To identify biological pathways associated with changes in ACE2 expression, we used the combined zscores across all proteins using iPAGE gene ontology (GO) analysis (Supplementary Figure 5).
Interestingly, target proteins associated with compounds that reduce ACE2 expression were associated
with various GO terms related to peptidase activity and steroid metabolic processes (Figure 2D). These

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pathways were then validated with the SEA predicted protein targets from the in silico library screen.
Interestingly, hit compounds identified in the in silico screen also showed enrichment for targets involved in
steroid hormone activity, steroid metabolic processes, and peptidase activity (Figure 2E). Given the strong
clinical evidence on COVID-19 disproportionately affecting men, the well-established role of peptidase in
modulating ACE2 and SARS-Co-V-2 co-receptors, and the possible link between ACE2 expression and
sex hormones, we sought to uncover the specific drug-protein interactions driving enrichment of steroid and
peptidase pathways. We first mapped the drug-protein interactions for the full list of predicted targets and
compounds with z-score<-1.5 (Figure 3A). This revealed a list of 48 compounds with significant interactions
with target proteins (Supplementary Figure 6). Next we created drug-protein matrices on proteins in “steroid
metabolic process” and “serine-type peptidase” activity GO terms to map the interaction of drugs with
corresponding targets (Supplementary Figure 7A,B). This analysis highlighted the interaction of several
drugs including ketoconazole, spironolactone, finasteride and dutasteride with androgen signaling
modulators such as SRD5A1 and SHBG (Figure 3A, Supplementary Figure 7A,B) whereas other drugs
from the in vitro screen, such as camostat mesilate, sotagliflozin, and guanabenz acetate, are specific to
the serine-type peptidase activity pathway (Supplementary Figure 7B).
To build a working model of the drug-protein interactions in ACE2 regulation, we conducted a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network analysis to identify interactions between our list of significant predicted
targets (Figure 2C), androgen signaling pathway components (AR and SRD5A2), and proteins implicated
in ACE2 function regulation (ACE, ADAM10, ADAM17, FURIN, REN, TMPRSS2). We used the STRING
physical interaction database to draw a high confidence network of associating proteins (Figure 3B). In the
resulting network, AR and IL6 have the highest degree centrality, connecting to seven other nodes in the
network. Furthermore, AR and IL6 share high betweenness centrality, connecting the androgen pathway
module to the peptidases. The observed link between AR and IL6 is clinically important given the elevated
20
IL6 response in severe cases of COVID-19 infection .
The remarkable convergence of the gene set enrichment analysis and the PPI network on steroid hormone
related genes and pathways prompted us to hypothesize that the drug candidates may be reducing ACE2
expression via inhibition of AR signaling and peptidase pathways (Figure 3C-D). Seven of the predicted
drug targets are upstream regulators of AR signaling and are targeted by multiple drug candidates that
reduce ACE2 (Figure 3C). Furthermore, peptidases such as FURIN and TMPRSS2 which are important
21,22
players in ACE2 regulation and thereby SARS-CoV-2 viral entry
, are amongst the downstream targets
of AR. These receptors and their upstream regulators are also predicted to be targeted by the drug
candidates (Figure 3D).

Androgen receptor signaling modulates ACE2 and TMPRSS2
Although most highly expressed in male reproductive organs, AR mediates hormone signaling in many
23
male and female tissues . In agreement, expression of AR and testosterone converting enzymes SRD5A1
and SRD5A2 are detected in ACE2 expressing cell types in the adult heart, lung, esophagus and colon
(Supplementary Figure 8). Additionally, collective expression of genes involved in AR signaling
24–27
(GO:0030521), common receptors upstream of AR activation
, and common gene targets of AR
28
transcription factor activity , reveals potential organ and cell type specific differences in AR signaling
regulation (Supplementary Figure 8). A list of genes included in each module is provided in Supplementary
Table 3.
To determine whether AR regulates the expression of SARS-CoV-2 receptors directly, we used an existing
29
AR ChIP-seq dataset generated in LNCaP cells to identify direct transcriptional targets. The genes with

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

AR binding to this 5kb downstream or upstream of transcription start sites (TSS) were selected as direct
AR-bound targets. We next used a transcriptomics dataset generated using RNAi-mediated knockdown of
30
AR and compared gene expression changes in response to AR knockdown. We divided log-fold
expression changes into nine equally populated bins, which were also shown along with the patterns of AR
enrichment and depletion at the corresponding TSS across the data (Figure 4A). This analysis identified
ACE2, and other SARS-CoV-2 co-receptors TMPRSS2 and Furin as direct transcriptional targets that are
downregulated in response to AR knockdown (Figure 4A). Furthermore, after exposing hESC-derived
cardiac cells to the drug candidates that are known to inhibit AR signaling, we observed significant
reductions in ACE2 and TMPRSS2 protein levels (Figure 4B,C). Dutasteride and spironolactone, the top
candidates that modulate AR signaling, were both able to reduce ACE2 levels in a dose-dependent manner
(Supplementary Figure 9 A,B). Together, these results indicate that AR signaling regulates expression of
SARS-CoV-2 receptors.
To assess whether pharmacologic inhibition of AR signaling can reduce viral entry, hESC-derived cardiac
cells were exposed to recombinant spike-RBD protein. After a 24 hour exposure, immunofluorescence
imaging showed co-localization of spike-RBD protein with cells expressing ACE2 protein (Figure 4D-E).
This supports the findings by Sharma et al. that hPSC-derived cardiomyocytes can be infected with SARS31
CoV-2 virus . Remarkably, pre-incubation with the AR signaling inhibitor, dutasteride, significantly reduced
the levels of ACE2 and internalized spike-RBD, whereas, pre-incubation with the AR ligand and agonist,
5a-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), had the opposite effect. (Figure 4D-E). The effect of dutasteride on reducing
ACE2 and spike-RBD internalization was further confirmed in human primary alveolar epithelial cells (Figure
4F-G).

Androgen imbalance states are associated with COVID-19 complications in male patients
Our results suggest that androgen regulation can increase viral receptor and co-receptor expression
leading to increased Spike-RBD entry. To determine whether androgen plays a role in COVID-19 disease
manifestation, we explored the effect of disorders related to androgen imbalance on COVID-19 induced
cardiac injury, measured by elevated troponin T levels. We also included the previously described risk
32
factors associated with organ failure such as age, BMI, diabetes and hypertension in our data collection
(Figure 5A). In the de-identified aggregate data from Yale New Haven Hospital, 1577 individuals tested
positive for COVID-19 and had serum troponin T measured during the same encounter. There was a larger
number of males with abnormal serum troponin T levels in both selected age groups (Supplementary Figure
10A). Association analysis in the COVID-19 patients showed that most risk factors are correlated with
abnormal levels of troponin T in serum, but the risk factors also correlate with each other (Supplementary
Figure 10B). To account for associations between individual risk factors, we tested multiple multi-variate
models (as described in the methods section). In our final model, prostatic disease increased the odds of
having abnormal troponin T by 50.5% (OR=1.505, 95% CI, p-value 0.046), independent of the other risk
factors (Figure 5B).
To further test the effect of increased androgen on disease manifestations, we analyzed the association
between serum androgen levels with disease severity in the UK Biobank (UKBB) (Figure 5C). A total of
311,857 individuals in the UKBB passed quality control criteria and were among those with reported COVID19 testing from the UKBB English recruitment centers. 1,407 individuals were tested for COVID-19, of which
543 (37.5%) had at least one positive test. Of all the individuals who tested positive for COVID-19, 454
individuals (83.6%) were hospitalized, with evidence from their microbiological record of inpatient status
(i.e. severe COVID-19; Supplementary Figure 11A). Quantitative measures for testosterone, sex-hormone
binding globulin (SHBG), and free androgen index were first standardized to account for sex differences
(Supplementary Figure 11B). Free androgen index was significantly associated with COVID-19

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

susceptibility and severity in males (Figure 5D), with no significant effect in females (Supplementary Figure
S12), in both adjusted and unadjusted models. In particular, among males who were tested for COVID-19,
each standard deviation (SD) increase in free androgen index increased the risk of a positive test
(OR=1.22, 95% CI: 1.03-1.45, p-value 0.024), as well as severe COVID-19 infection (OR=1.22, 95% CI:
1.02-1.46, p-value 0.031), independent of age, Townsend deprivation index, BMI and the first ten principal
components of ancestry. Similarly, among all male patients from English recruitment centers with available
COVID-19 test reporting, each SD increase in free androgen index increased risk of a positive test
(OR=1.14, 95% CI: 1.02-1.28, p-value 0.027), as well as severe COVID-19 infection (OR=1.15, 95%
CI:1.01-1.31, p-value 0.037). In further sensitivity analysis, effects were not mitigated by additional
adjustment for prevalent Hypertension and type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (Supplementary Figure 13). We did not
identify any significant associations for Testosterone or SHBG status (Figure 5D, Supplementary Figure
14).

Discussion
There are two important observations in the COVID-19 pandemic: the higher prevalence of severe
complications in male individuals and the relative immunity in children. Our study identifies a link between
male sex hormone signaling and regulation of the SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 and co-receptor TMPRSS2
providing a potential explanation for these observations. Our results demonstrate that inhibitors of 5 alpha
reductases, which dampen androgen signaling, can reduce ACE2 levels and thereby decrease
internalization of the viral spike-RBD. These drugs, commonly prescribed for prostatic disorders, have good
safety profiles and show repurposing potential for the treatment of COVID-19.
The most lethal complication of COVID-19 is multiorgan failure affecting the lungs, the kidneys and the
heart. Although there has been tremendous effort towards understanding the biology of SARS-CoV-2
infection at the molecular level, the use of relevant experimental models has been limited. Modeling and
studying pathophysiology with cell types that are not directly affected by SARS-CoV-2 could potentially
delay the identification of effective therapeutic targets. Taking advantage of directed hESC differentiation,
we generated scalable cultures of disease-relevant human cardiac cells and performed high-throughput
screening to identify drugs that regulate ACE2 expression in these cell types. These experiments
underscore the potential of hESC-derived cardiac cells for in-depth investigation of cell-type specific
processes and offer a framework for rapid identification and validation of therapeutically-relevant
compounds. Other reports on the use of hESC-derived cell or organoid models highlight the utility of hESC33
derived cells in modeling SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID-19 pathophysiology .
Results from our in vitro high-throughput screening of the FDA-approved drugs enable us to develop a
novel deep learning strategy to screen millions of drug-like compounds in silico and identify candidates
predicted to show superior potency and efficacy. The diverse pharmacokinetic properties in these
candidates may enable the development of drugs with improved distribution to disease-relevant tissues.
Further experiments are needed to validate these compounds and characterize their pharmacokinetic and
pharmacodynamic properties in vitro and in vivo.
A common characteristic among our validated hit compounds is their ability to target androgen signaling.
Analysis of disease outcomes in COVID-19 patients in two independent cohorts revealed a significant
association between elevated free androgen and COVID-19 complications pointing to a possible link
between androgen-mediated ACE2 regulation and disease severity. Pathway and gene target analysis on
compounds that reduce ACE2 levels also highlighted the regulatory roles of peptidase pathways.
Interestingly, protein interaction maps suggested a possible cross-talk between AR signaling pathways,

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

inflammatory markers and peptidases relevant to the viral receptor and co-receptors, offering insights into
alternative pathways involved in ACE2 regulation.
Our FDA drug screen data revealed that many commonly used medications modulate ACE2 levels and
could affect disease severity in COVID-19 patients. Further studies evaluating the relationships between
these drugs and disease outcomes will be necessary to assess potential clinical impact and the need to
substitute medications that might pose a heightened risk for COVID-19 patients.
In conclusion, our results provide key insights into ACE2 regulatory mechanisms, present strong molecular
and clinical evidence for the role of androgen signaling in SARS-CoV-2 infection and identify potential
therapeutic candidates for the treatment of COVID-19.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods
Cell culture and differentiation. H9 human embryonic stem cells were maintained and differentiated as
10,12
described previously
. Briefly, human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) were maintained in mTeSR
medium. hESCs were re-plated 72 hours prior to initiating differentiation. The cardiac differentiation was
started with a mesoderm induction cocktail comprised of with 1.5 μM CHIR99021 (CHIR, Stem-RD), 20
ng/mL BMP4 and 20 ng/mL Activin A in RPMI (Cellgro) supplemented with B27 minus insulin, 2 mM
GlutaMAX, 1x NEAA and 1x Normocin (InvivoGen) for 3 days (RPMI+B27 w/o insulin). Next, cells were
treated with 5 µM XAV939 from day 3-6 in RB27-INS. From day 6 onward, differentiation of cells was carried
out in RPMI supplemented with B27, 2 mM GlutaMAX, 1x NEAA and 1x Normocin (RPMI+complete B27).
The protocol is outlined in supplementary Figure 1B.
Human pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells were purchased from Sciencell (cat#3200) and maintained
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
High-throughput screening and drug candidate selection. hESC-derived cardiac cells were replated at
day 25 of differentiation in 384 well plates. 72 hours after re-plating, the cells were treated with compounds
from an FDA-approved chemical library (Selleckchem). 24 hours after treatment, cells were fixed stained
with ACE2 antibody. High-throughput imaging and quantification of fluorescence signals were carried out
using the In Cell Analyzer 2000 (GE Healthcare, USA). ACE2 signal intensity was normalized to total cell
number within each well as measured by DAPI staining. Z-score calculation was performed and normalized
for each plate.
Spike-RBD cell internalization assay. 24 hours after replating into 96 well plates, hESC-derived cardiac
cells were treated with either vehicle or drug candidates. After 24 hours, 0.5 μM/mL human Fc-tagged
recombinant spike-RBD protein with (Sino Biological Inc. 40592-V02H) was added to the medium and
incubated for 30 minutes. The cells were subsequently fixed, permeabilized and stained with antibodies
against ACE2 and human Fc receptor. Image analysis was performed as described above.
Immunofluorescence staining. Cells were washed with PBSx3 and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for
30 minutes at 4 °C. Non-specific antigen binding was blocked by treating the cells with PBS+0.5% BSA
prior to adding the primary antibodies (ACE2 or TMPRSS2, Proteintech cat#21115-1-AP and Novus
Biologicals cat# NBP1-20984, respectively). Cells were incubated with the primary antibody solution
overnight at 4 °C then washed with PBSx3. Secondary antibodies and fluorophore conjugated anti human
Fc antibody were incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. Finally, cells were washed with PBSx3
and stained with DAPI for nuclear counterstaining.
Virtual high-throughput screening dataset.
In order to train vHTS platform, we first split the data into training (n=1048), validation (n=131), and test
datasets (n=131) (Supplementary Figure 2A-C) , and used the validation set to evaluate increasingly
complex models. We used Morgan fingerprints to represent the chemical features of each compound in the
screened FDA-approved library (CircularFingerprint function available in DeepChem with SMILES as input).
2
We tested a random forest regressor (scikit-learn), which failed to perform adequately (validation R score
~0). We then used an XGBoost model (XGBRegressor) with the following parameters: colsample_bytree =
0.3, learning_rate = 0.1, max_depth = 5, alpha = 10, n_estimators = 10. While the model performance
improved (correlation coefficient of 0.1), it was largely driven by positive z-score values and the prediction
of the negative side was substantially less reliable. We then tested graph convolutional neural networks
after featurizing the molecules using ConvMolFeaturizer (DeepChem) and testing a default model
architecture with dropout set to 0.2. This initial model was promising with an R of 0.05; therefore, we

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

performed a systematic hyperparameter tuning using a grad search on the size of the graph convolutional
and dense layers, as well as dropout rates. The best-performing model contained two graph convolutional
(size 64) and dropout of 0.5 (and uncertainty set to true) and achieved an R of 0.1. We also tested messagepassing models (MPNN) in a similar fashion; however, the performance was not improved. Therefore to
further boost the performance of the models, we first focused on improving the dataset itself. In addition to
the ACE2 in vitro screening data, we included data from five additional screens with the same library, added
an inverse normal transformation when appropriate, and performed a multi-task learning. These
modifications allowed the model to generalize better and learn faster with better R scores (this allowed us
to reduce the dropout to 0.25). Second, instead of using a single model, we utilized a bagging ensemble
model instead, where five models were trained on random samplings (with replacement) of training data.
This ensemble model achieved an R of >0.2 on the validation dataset. We then continued training while the
Pearson coefficient for validation set remained above 0.2 (early stopping). Finally, we tested this final
ensemble model on the test dataset, which achieved a similar R=0.22 (p-value 0.01).
In silico screening: The final model described above was used to evaluate 9.2 million compounds from the
ZINC15 database. We downloaded SMILES from this database and featurized them (same as above). The
resulting predictions were variance normalized and the molecules with z-scores below -4 for ACE2
expression were selected as hits. This resulted in 169 potential small molecules.
Data visualization: To visualize the relationship between the identified hits in a lower dimension, we used
Morgan fingerprints to represent all compounds and used UMAPs to project each compound down to 2
dimensions. For the screened ZINC15 database, we sampled 1 from 1000 compounds for visualization
purposes. We also used the Morgan fingerprints to cluster in silico and in vitro hits using K-means clustering
(number of clusters set to 15).
Predicting drug-protein-pathway interactions
Identification of drug targets in FDA-approved library Isomeric SMILES for each drug in the library were
acquired from Selleckchem and used to run a similarity ensemble approach (SEA) library search. The SEA
predicted targets were filtered, selecting human targets and predicted interaction p-values <0.05, which
yielded 2150 predicted proteins targeted by the drug library.
Target drug selection: The normalized z-score values reported for all the compounds were first transformed
to N(0,1) using the bestNormalize package (v1.4.0) in R (v3.5.1). The treatments with transformed z-scores
smaller than -1.5 were selected, which resulted in 41 compounds.
Target gene selection: For every compound, possible target genes were identified as above. Weighted
combined z-scores were then calculated for each gene by combining normalized z-scores across all
treatments. The p-values were then calculated based on the combined z-scores and adjusted using p.adjust
(method=FDR). As an orthogonal approach, for each gene, we recorded the number of treatments with
negative normalized z-scores as well as the total number of compounds predicted to target that gene. Using
the sum of counts for all other genes and drugs, we performed a Fisher’s exact test to evaluate the degree
to which negative z-scores were enrichment among the treatments likely to affect a gene of interest. As
expected, the two p-values, i.e. combined z-score and Fisher’s, are generally correlated (R=0.6, p<1e-200).
Gene-set enrichment analysis: We used the combined z-scores across all genes to identify pathways and
gene-sets that are associated with changes in ACE2 expression. For this analysis, we used our iPAGE
34
toolkit , in conjunction with annotations from MSigDB and Gene Ontology (GO). The following parameters
were set: --ebins=9 --nodups=1 --independence=0.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Drug-protein-pathway analysis: For drugs with a normalized z-score <-1, drug-protein interactions per
biological pathway were analyzed. The SEA predicted drug-protein interaction dataset was filtered to
exclude drugs with a normalized z-score ≥-1. Protein pathway gene lists were generated per gene set,
comprised of the gene set genes present in the pre-ranked gene list. For each protein pathway gene list,
drug-protein matrices were plotted by the SEA p-value for the interaction. The reported interaction
significance scores represent the.
Single cell sequencing data analysis
Data sources: Single cell transcriptomics data and associated metadata were obtained from Tissue Stability
Cell
Atlas
(https://www.tissuestabilitycellatlas.org/),
Gene
Expression
Omnibus
(GEO;
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), and Single Cell Portal (https://singlecell.broadinstitute.org/single_cell).
Human lung and esophageal datasets containing samples from 5 and 6 previously healthy, post-mortem
14
donors, respectively, were obtained from research published by Madissoon et al. A human heart dataset
containing samples from 12 previously healthy, post-mortem donors was obtained from research published
15
by Wang et al, GSE109816 . A human colon epithelia dataset containing biopsy samples from 12 healthy
13
individuals were obtained from research published by Smillie et. al.

Quality control: Cells were identified as poor quality and subsequently removed based on the criteria
implemented by the original authors of each dataset.
Lung and esophagus datasets: RData objects deposited to Tissue Stability Cell Atlas were pre-filtered by
14
the authors. Filtering criteria can be found in the methods of Madissoon et al. Briefly, cells were excluded
if they did not meet all the following criteria: more than 300 and fewer than 5,000 genes detected, fewer
than 20,000 UMI, and less than 10% mitochondrial reads. Genes were removed if they were detected in
fewer than three cells per tissue.
Colon dataset: The gene by cell counts matrix deposited to GEO was pre-filtered by the authors. Filtering
15
criteria can be found in the methods of Wang et al. Briefly, cells were removed if they did not meet all the
following criteria: detected at least 500 genes, UMI’s within 2 standard deviations of the mean of log10UMI
of all cells, unique read alignment rate at least 50%, and fewer than 72% mitochondrial reads. Further,
cardiomyocytes (CM) from CM-enriched datasets were included if UMIs detected were greater than 10,000.
13

Heart dataset: Based on the methods of Smillie et al, cells were removed if they did not meet one of the
following criteria: minimal expression of 500 genes per cell; nUMIs within two standard deviations from the
mean of log10 nUMIs of all cells; unique read alignment rate (# of assigned reads/ # total aligned reads)
greater that 50%; and a mitochondrial read percentage of less than 72%.Mitochondrial genes were
subsequently removed from the dataset prior to dimensionality reduction.
35

Data integration, dimensionality reduction and cell clustering: Different methods available in Seurat were
implemented respective to individual datasets.
Lung and esophagus datasets: Batch correction, data normalization variable gene identification, data
scaling, principal component analysis (PCA) and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP)
dimensionality reduction was performed by the original authors and included in the RData objects deposited
to Tissue Stability Cell Atlas. The original UMAP coordinates generated by the authors were used for any
visualizations.
Colon Dataset: Batch correction by patient sample was performed using the Seurat v3 integration functions.
The dataset was split by “Subject”, individual gene matrices were log normalized using a scaling factor of

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

10,000 and 2,000 variable features were identified per individual gene matrix using variance stabilizing
transformation. 2,000 integration anchors were found using the first 30 dimensions of the canonical
correlation analysis and individual datasets were integrated using the same number of dimensions. PCA
was performed and UMAP coordinates were found based on the first 20 principal components.
36
Heart Dataset: Batch correction by patient sample was performed using mutual nearest neighbor (MNN)
matching through the “RunFastMNN” function from the SeuratWrappers package. The dataset was log
normalized using a scaling factor of 10,000 and 2,000 variable features were identified per individual gene
matrix using variance stabilizing transformation. “RunFastMNN” was performed on the dataset split by
“Individual” and UMAP coordinates were found based on the first 30 MNN dimensions. A shared nearest
neighbor graph was constructed with the same number of MNN dimensions and clusters were identified
using clustering resolution of 0.2.
Cell type identification and gene expression analysis: Lung, esophagus and colon datasets: Cell type cluster
annotations determined by the original authors were available through the metadata downloaded with each
dataset. These original cluster annotations were used for any visualizations.
Heart Dataset: Clusters were annotated based on cluster specific expression of marker genes identified in
the original publication. Cluster markers were identified using a Wilcoxon Rank Sum test.
Following cell type annotation, gene dropout values were imputed using adaptively-thresholded low rank
37
approximation (ALRA) . The rank-k approximation was automatically chosen for each dataset and all other
parameters were set as the default values. The imputed gene expression in shown in all plots and used in
all downstream analysis.
Gene signature scoring: The Seurat “AddModuleScore” function was used to score each cell in the datasets
for their expression of high confidence drug target genes (Figure 2C) and genes associated with AR
signaling (Supplementary Table 3). 100 control genes selected from the same bin per analyzed gene were
24–
used to calculate each module score. “Upstream AR Activators” were identified through literature search
27
, “AR Signaling” genes were taken from the androgen receptor signaling pathway gene ontology term
(GO:0030521), and “Common AR Target Genes” are the common “core” target genes transcribed by AR
28
activated identified by Jin et. al. through comparison of multiple microarray studies.
Bulk RNA sequencing analysis. The bulk RNA sequencing dataset analyzed here was previously
12
reported . Briefly, human pluripotent stem cell (H9 with knock-in MYH6:mCherry reporter)-derived
10,12
cardiomyocytes were prepared as described previously
. Reporter tagged cardiomyocytes were isolated
from the negative fraction of the culture by FACS sorting. Both the purified cardiomyocytes and negative
fractions were prepared and sent for bulk RNA sequencing. The resulting datasets included two negative
fraction biological replicates and two positive fraction biological replicates. Gene expression between the
cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocytes was compared by averaging the read count per gene and
normalizing by the average read count of GAPDH.
Protein-protein interaction network construction. Protein-protein interaction network analysis was
performed using the Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes (STRING) database. The minimum
required interaction score was set to 0.7 corresponding to high confidence with the edge thickness
indicating the degree of data support from the following active interaction sources: textmining, experiments,
databases, co-expression, neighborhood, gene fusion and co-occurrence.
Signaling pathway illustration. SEA predicted drug-protein interactions were connected by lines. Lines
were dashed if the MaxTC score was below 1. Proteins corresponding with the 30 significantly enriched
genes from 2C were highlighted in yellow. To identify pathways involving our candidate proteins, we

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

combined data from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
reports in the literature. Adobe Illustrator 24.1 was used for visualization.

38

database and previous

Transcriptional changes associated with AR down-regulation. We used an existing AR ChIP-seq
dataset generated in LNCaP cells to identify direct transcriptional targets of AR. We downloaded processed
peaks from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSM3148987) and lifted the peaks from hg19 over to hg38.
We then used annotatePeak function (package ChIPseeker v1.8) to identify peaks 5kb downstream or
upstream of transcription start sites (TSS). The genes with AR binding to this 10kb window around their
TSS were selected as direct AR-bound targets.
We also used an RNA-seq dataset generated using RNA-mediated knockdown of AR (SRR7120653,
SRR7120649, SRR7120646, and SRR7120642). We downloaded raw fastq files and aligned them to the
transcriptome (gencode.v28) using Salmon (v0.14.1 using --validateMappings and -l ISR flags). We then
used DESeq2 (1.22.2) to compare gene expression changes in response to AR knockdown. We then used
the AR-bound gene-set from the previous step to assess how the AR targets respond to its down-regulation.
34
For this, we used our iPAGE tool , which uses mutual information (MI) and an associated z-score to assess
the enrichment/depletion patterns of a gene-set across gene expression modulations. To visualize this data,
we included a volcano plat, with genes of interest shown in red. For this analysis, we divided log-fold
changes into nine equally populated bins, which were also included along with the patterns of enrichment
and depletion across the data.
Yale New Haven Hospital patient dataset. EPIC’s SlicerDicer feature was used to collect the Yale New
Haven Hospital (YNHH) electronic health record anonymous aggregate-level data. Using this feature, a
total of 8657 patients had a COVID-19 ICD-10 diagnosis code at YNHH during November 28, 2019-April
28 2020 time period. Among them, 1577 patients had a Troponin T checked during the same encounter
and were selected for subsequent analysis. Out of 1577 patients, 787 were female and 790 were male.
Next, we focused on males above age 40 for subsequent risk factor analysis. Risk factors associated with
disease outcome, including age, BMI, status of hypertensive disorder, status of diabetes mellitus disorder
and prostate disease were collected as dichotomized variables during data download. Variable cutoffs were
set as follows: age, 40-65y vs. 65+ y, BMI, <30 vs. >=30, troponin T <0.01 ng/ml vs. >=0.01 ng/ml. Diabetes,
hypertension and prostatic disease were binary originally and were collected as a visit diagnosis.
Appropriate SNOMED-CT (systematized nomenclature of medicine–clinical terms) were used to include or
exclude patients according to their pre-existing conditions. The following terms were used to identify
patients with pre-existing conditions in the database: “disorders of glucose metabolism” to select the
patients with any form of the Diabetes Mellitus, “Hypertensive disorder” to select the patients with any form
of hypertension and “hyperplasia of prostate or Neoplasm of Prostate” to select patients with disorders of
prostate gland. The study was in accordance with Institutional Review Board policy.
A total of 681 subjects exist in this dataset with 239 high troponin and 442 low troponin cases. The
interdependence of all variables was explored through their correlation matrix (Supplementary Figure 10B)
and pairwise Fisher’s exact tests. To find the optimal model, we used a backward selection approach. We
started with a logistic regression model with troponin as response and all the other variables and their
pairwise interaction terms as covariates. In successive steps, least significant terms were eliminated one
at a time and the model was refitted until all remaining terms were significant at p<0.05. Odds of having
abnormal troponin T in the baseline group (40-65y, no prostate disease, low BMI, no diabetes, no
hypertension, n=58) was 0.038.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

UK Biobank dataset. Individual-level longitudinal phenotypic data from the UK Biobank, a large-scale
population-based cohort with genotype and phenotype data in approximately 500,000 volunteer participants
39
recruited from 2006-2010 was used . Baseline assessments were conducted at 22 assessment centers
across the UK using touch screen questionnaire, computer assisted verbal interview, physical tests, and
sample collection including for DNA. Additional details regarding the study protocol are described online
(www.ukbiobank.ac.uk).
Of 488,377 individuals genotyped in the UK Biobank, we used data for 311,857 participants from English
40
recruiting centers where COVID-19 testing was reported in the UK Biobank, as done previously .
Additionally, we further filtered to individuals with white British ancestry consenting to genetic analyses,
with genotypic-phenotypic sex concordance, without sex aneuploidy, and removed one individual from each
st
nd
pair of 1 or 2 degree relatives selected randomly. Secondary use of the data was approved by the
Massachusetts General Hospital institutional review board (protocol 2013P001840) and facilitated through
UK Biobank Application 7089.
UK Biobank androgen indices and phenotypic covariates:
Free androgen index was calculated in the UK Biobank by using total testosterone and sex hormonebinding globulin (SHBG) as in the equation: Free androgen index= 100*(total Testoterone/SHBG).
Testosterone (nmol/L), SHBG (nmol/L), and free androgen index (unitless) phenotypes were observed to
have varying distributions by sex, with outliers. Sex-specific extreme outliers for each phenotype were
identified and excluded by adjusting the traditional box and whisker upper and lower bounds, accounting
for skewness in the phenotypic data identified using the Robustbase package in R (setting range=3)
(https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/robustbase/robustbase.pdf). After excluding extreme outliers, we
performed inverse rank normalization of each phenotype by sex to a mean of 0 and SD 1 for use in analysis
(Supplementary Figure 11B).
Definitions for phenotypic covariates included in sensitivity analysis are included in Supplementary Table
4. In brief, hypertension was defined by self-reported hypertension and billing codes for essential
hypertension, hypertensive disease with and without heart failure, hypertensive heart and renal diseases,
and secondary hypertension. Type 2 diabetes was defined by billing codes for non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus or self-reported type 2 diabetes. Enlarged prostate was defined by combining self-reported
enlarged prostate and billing codes for prostatic hyperplasia.
UK Biobank COVID-19 case/control models:
COVID-19 phenotypes used in the present analysis are from UK Biobank downloaded on May 2, 2020 and
include combined nose/throat swabs and lower respiratory samples analyzed using PCR. Four case/control
definitions were used in analysis to iterate over COVID-19 susceptibility and severity across both tested
individuals and all individuals with reported COVID-19 testing from the UK Biobank English recruitment
40
centers . COVID+ cases were defined as any individual with at least one positive test. Severe COVID+
cases were defined as any individual with at least one positive test who also had evidence from their
microbiological record that they were hospitalized inpatient. Additionally, individuals with COVID-19 of
unknown severity were excluded from the Severe COVID+ analyses. Thus, the four definitions were as
follows: for individuals tested with COVID: comparing 1) COVID+ vs. COVID- test results, 2) Severe
COVID+ vs. COVID-; and for all white British individuals from the UK Biobank English recruitment centers
with available COVID-test reporting: 3) COVID+ vs. All, 4) Severe COVID+ vs. All.
UK Biobank statistical models:
Association of the three androgen indices (Free androgen index, testosterone, and SHBG) with COVID-19
across the four case/control definitions was performed using logistic regression in R-3.5. Three main

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

association models were used for analysis: 1) an unadjusted model, 2) a sparsely adjusted model using
age, normalized Townsend deprivation index (a marker of socioeconomic status), and the first ten principal
components of genetic ancestry, and 3) a fully adjusted model that additionally adjusted for normalized
body mass index (BMI). Analyses were performed across males and females as well as separately by sex.
Several additional sensitivity analyses were performed to assess for the robustness of associations. In
particular, analyses were performed additionally adjusting for prevalent hypertension and prevalent type 2
diabetes, showing consistent associations.
Statistical methods:
Experiments were carried out in a minimum of 3 biological replicates unless specified otherwise. Two-tailed
student’s t-test was performed to compare treatment groups unless otherwise indicated in the methods
section or legends. Error bars in s represent standard error of the mean.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the UCSF program for breakthrough biomedical research and Sandler foundation for the
grant to F.F. that supported this work. F.F. is also supported by the NIH Director’s New Innovator Award
(DP2NS116769) and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
(R01DK121169). H.M. is supported by Larry L. Hillblom Foundation postdoctoral fellowship. S.M.Z. is
supported by the National Institutes of Health’s NHLBI under award number 1F30HL149180-01 and the
National Institutes of Health’s Medical Scientist Training Program at the Yale School of Medicine. H.A. is
supported by the NIH postdoctoral fellowship F32GM133118 and the postdoctoral grant from the program
for breakthrough biomedical research grant and the Sandler foundation at UCSF. H.G. is supported by the
National Cancer Institute (R01 CA240984) and the National Institute of General Medical Sciences (R01
GM123977). P.N. is supported by a Hassenfeld Scholar Award from the Massachusetts General Hospital,
and grants from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (R01HL1427, R01HL148565, and
R01HL148050) and Fondation Leducq (TNE-18CVD04).

Competing interests
P.N. receives grants from Apple, Amgen, and Boston Scientific, and personal fees from Apple and
Blackstone Life Sciences, all outside the submitted work. F.F. receives grants from Takeda
Pharmaceuticals on work outside of the submitted work.

Author contributions:
Z.G., H.M, M.R., R.S., S.F., A.K., J.R. performed the experiments, H.A. performed statistical analysis
S.M.Z, H.Z., P.N. performed the UKBB study analysis, H.G. performed pathway analysis and in silico library
screen, F.F.: designed, conceptualized, performed and supervised the experiments, Z.G., H.M, M.R., R.S.
H.G., F.F.: wrote the manuscript.
Data availability:
The supporting raw data of this study are available from the corresponding authors upon request.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. High-throughput in-vitro and in silico screenings identify drugs that modulate ACE2
expression in hESC-derived cardiomyocytes. A-B) High-throughput screening of Selleckchem FDAapproved drug library identifies drugs that increase and decrease ACE2 expression in hESC-derived
cardiomyocytes. C) Representative immunofluorescent images of cells treated with vehicle, vincristine and
dronedarone at 1μM. Scale bar:100 μm. Dose response of hits that D) decreased, and E) increased ACE2
expression in hESC-derived cardiomyocytes culture. F) two dimensional visualization of molecular features
(Morgan fingerprints) for the in vitro and in silico tested compounds using UMAP. For the ZINC15 library,
3
the points are sub-sampled by a factor of 10 . G) UMAP visualization of the in vitro (labeled) and in silico
(unlabeled) hit compounds. Also shown are the K-means cluster memberships based on their Morgan
fingerprints.
Figure 2. Target prediction analysis identified shared pathways among ACE2 regulators. A) We
employed two independent tests for identifying the genes that are most likely targeted by the effective
treatments: (i) a combined z-score approach, where normalized z-scores from all the treatments associated
with a gene are integrated, and (ii) a Fisher’s exact test to assess the enrichment of a gene among those
that are targets of treatments with negative z-scores. Here we have shown the correlation between the p-values reported by these two independent approaches. B) A one-sided volcano plot showing the average
z-score vs. -log of p-value for all genes with negative z-scores. The genes that pass our statistical thresholds
are marked in gold (combined z-score FDR<0.25 and Fisher’s p-value <0.05). C) The identified target genes
along with their combined z-score, associated p-value and FDRs. Also included are the total number of
compounds each gene is likely targeted by, and the number of those that result in lower ACE2 expression
(z-score<0). D) Gene-set enrichment analysis using iPAGE for the target genes identified from FDAapproved library with negative z-score. Genes were ordered based on their combined z-score from left to
right and divided into nine equally populated bins. The enrichment and depletion pattern of various genesets is then assessed across this spectrum using mutual information. Red boxes show enrichment and blue
boxes show depletion. E) Gene-set enrichment analysis for the in silico hits. Similar to (D), genes were
grouped into those that are likely targeted by the identified compounds and those that are not (i.e.
background). We then assessed the enrichment of each pre-compiled gene-set among the targets using
iPAGE.
Figure 3. Androgen signaling regulates peptidase expression. A) The drug-gene interaction matrix for
the 30 significantly enriched drug target genes from Figu 2C that are deemed functional in their respective
analyses. Shading represents the significance of the predicted interaction. B) STRING protein-protein
interaction network was used to identify interactions between our list of significantly enriched genes from
Figure 2C (depicted as significantly predicted targets and yellow circles), androgen signaling pathway
components (AR and SRD5A2), and proteins implicated in ACE2 regulation (ACE, ADAM10, ADAM17,
FURIN, REN, TMPRSS2). Minimum required interaction score was set to 0.7 corresponding to high
confidence and edge thickness indicating the degree of data support. C) SEA predicted drug-protein target
interactions (blue lines and boxes) in the androgen signaling pathway. Yellow ovals represent significantly
enriched genes from Figure 2C. Dashed lines represent MacTC <1. D) The expression of ACE2 related
peptidases is regulated by AR and other transcription factors that are targets of our candidate drugs.
MaxTC, maximum tanimoto similarity between compounds from ref_target to compounds from query_target
in [0,1] with 1 being identical upto the resolution of the fingerprint.
Figure 4. Androgen receptor signaling modulates ACE2 and TMPRSS2 levels and Spike-RBD
internalization A) Volcano plot visualizing gene expression changes in response to AR knockdown in
LNCaP cells. Genes of interest are labeled and shown in red. Also shown are the enrichment and depletion

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pattern of AR target genes (i.e. genes with promoter AR binding) as a heatmap along with the mutual
information value and its associated z-score. The log-fold change values were divided into equally
populated bins and the enrichment of AR-bound genes in each bin was assessed using hypergeometric pvalues and colored accordingly (gold for enrichment and blue for depletion; red and blue borders mark bins
that are statistically significant. B-C) Effect of candidate androgen signaling inhibitors on ACE2 and
TMPRSS2 levels on the surface of cardiac cells with their corresponding Immunofluorescence images. DG) Differential effect of Dutasteride (potent inhibitor of Testosterone to DHT conversion) and DHT on the
membrane ACE2 levels and spike-RBD protein entry to cardiomyocytes (D-E) and Pulmonary epithelial
cells (F-G) with their corresponding immunofluorescence images. Scale bar= 50 μm in C and 100 μm in E
&G.*p-value<0.05 **p-value<0.01 ***p-value<0.001
Figure 5. Effects of Androgen signaling on outcomes associated with COVID-19 A. Schematic
representation of outcomes and risk factors studied in patients with Covid-19 at Yale New Haven Hospital.
B. The effects of age, BMI, prostatic disease, hypertension and diabetes on the odds of having abnormal
troponin T in male patients with Covid-19 in Yale patients. Age, troponin T and BMI were dichotomized
during data collection. Age: 40-65y vs 65+, BMI: <30 vs >=30, troponin T: normal (<0.01 ng/ml) vs abnormal
(>=0.01 ng/ml). For the primary outcome, the odds ratio were calculated for the pre-specified subgroups.
C. Schematic representation of the outcomes and risk factors studied in the UK Biobank (UKBB) cohort. D.
Association of androgen indices on Covid-19 susceptibility and severity in males among the UKBB.
Association of normalized free androgen index, testosterone, and SHBG indices with two COVID-19
case/control models: for individuals tested with COVID comparing Severe COVID+ cases vs. COVIDcontrols, and for all white British individuals from the UK Biobank English recruitment centers with available
COVID-test reporting, comparing Severe COVID+ cases vs. All controls. Severe COVID+ is defined as
hospitalized with at least one COVID-19+ test. Analyses were adjusted for age, normalized Townsend
deprivation index, normalized body mass index, and the first ten principal components of genetic ancestry.
SHBG= sex-hormone binding globulin, Severe COVID+ = Tested positive for coronavirus disease 2019 and
hospitalized, COVID- = Tested negative for coronavirus disease 2019, All = all individuals with reported
COVID-19 testing from the UK Biobank English recruitment centers, OR = odds ratio, SD = standard
deviation, CI= confidence interval.
Supplementary Figure 1. Cell type specific Expression of SARS-CoV-2 receptors A) Violin plots
showing the cell type specific expression of ACE2, TMPRSS2 and FURIN for human adult heart, lung colon
and esophagus. The expression is displayed as the log normalized values. B) Schematic representation of
cardiac differentiation protocol C) Expression of ACE2, FURIN, and TMPRSS2 in hPSC-derived
cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocytes. Expression is normalized by GAPDH read count. D)
Immunofluorescence imaging of cardiac cells stained with ACE2 antibody. E-F) Normalized z-score of
compounds in FDA-approved library that up/down-regulate ACE2 in human cardiac cells.
Supplementary Figure 2. Assessment of the final ensemble model of GCNNs. Comparison of
predicted and measured z-scores for the training (A), validation (B) and test (C) datasets in virtual highthroughput screening experiment. Also shown are the Pearson correlation coefficients and their associated
p-values.
Supplementary Figure 3. Cell type specific expression of predicted targets. A) Expression of predicted
targets in hPSC-derived cardiomyocytes and non-cardiomyocytes. Expression is normalized by GAPDH
read count. B) Violin plots showing the cell type specific module scores for the 30 predicted gene targets
for human adult heart, lung colon and esophagus.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 4. Cell type specific expression of individual predicted target genes. Violin
plots showing the cell type specific expression of the 30 predicted gene targets for each organ. The
expression is displayed as the log normalized values.
Supplementary Figure 5. Pathway analysis of target proteins. Pathways discovered by iPAGE and their
pattern of representation across proteins associated with high/low z-scores in the FDA-approved library
screen. Each expression bin includes genes within a specific range of expression values (top panel). Bins
to the left contain genes associated with lower z-scores and the ones to the right contain genes associated
with higher z-scores. Rows correspond to pathways and columns to expression bins. Red entries indicate
enrichment of pathway genes in the corresponding expression bin.
Supplementary Figure 6. Chemical structure of hit compounds that interact with predicted targets.
Canonical SMILES and Punchem sketecher were used to draw the structures.
Supplementary Figure 7. Drug-target interactions in selected GO terms. A) Drug-protein interaction
matrix for GO:0008202 steroid metabolic process gene set. B) Drug-protein interaction matrix for
GO:0008236 serine-type peptidase activity gene set.
Supplementary Figure 8. Cell type specific expression of AR signaling modulators. A) Violin plots
showing the cell type specific expression of AR, SRD5A1, SRD5A2 and cell type specific module scores
for 8 RTK’s upstream of AR activity, 30 genes associated with the androgen receptor signaling pathway
and 34 common downstream targets of AR transcriptional regulatory activity in the human adult heart. B)
Violin plots showing the cell type specific expression of AR, SRD5A1, SRD5A2 and cell type specific module
scores for 8 RTK’s upstream of AR activity, 30 genes associated with the androgen receptor signaling
pathway and 34 common downstream targets of AR transcriptional regulatory activity in the human adult
lung. C) Violin plots showing the cell type specific expression of AR, SRD5A1, SRD5A2 and cell type
specific module scores for 8 RTK’s upstream of AR activity, 30 genes associated with the androgen receptor
signaling pathway and 34 common downstream targets of AR transcriptional regulatory activity in the
human adult colon. D) Violin plots showing the cell type specific expression of AR, SRD5A1, SRD5A2 and
cell type specific module scores for 8 RTK’s upstream of AR activity, 30 genes associated with the androgen
receptor signaling pathway and 34 common downstream targets of AR transcriptional regulatory activity in
the human adult esophagus.
Supplementary Figure 9. Dose specific effect of selected AR modulators on ACE2 levels. Dose
response analysis for dutasteride (A) and spironolactone (B)
Supplementary Figure 10. Effects of risk factors on abnormal troponin T in COVID-19 patients. A.
Distribution of sex among patients with abnormal troponin T. B. Correlogram of variables in the Yale Covid19 patients dataset. The size and color of each circle illustrates the direction and strength of the correlation.
Only significant correlations (at p<0.05) are painted.
Supplementary Figure 11. Distribution of demographic and androgen indices in UKBB cohort. A.
Baseline characteristics among analyzed UKBB participants. * These values reflect the samples used in
analysis after quality control filters were applied. †COVID+= Tested positive for Coronavirus disease 2019,
COVID-=Tested negative for Coronavirus disease 2019, all= all individuals with reported Covid-19 testing
from the UKBB English recruitment centers. B. Distribution of androgen indices in the UKBB. Testosterone
(nmol/L), SHBG (nmol/L), and free androgen index (unitless) were observed to have varying distribution by
sex, with outliers. Sex-specific extreme outliers for each phenotype were identified and excluded.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Additionally, sex-specific normalization was performed to standardize each phenotype to mean 0 and SD
1 for analysis. SHBG= Sex-Hormone Binding Globulin; SD= Standard Deviation.
Supplementary Figure 12. Association of free androgen index with Covid-19 in the UKBB dataset
Association of normalized free androgen index with four Covid-19 case/control models; for individuals
tested with Covid-19: comparing 1) COVID+ vs. COVID- test results, 2) Severe COVID+ vs COVID-; and
for all white British individuals from the UKBB English recruitment centers with available Covid-19 test
reporting: comparing 3) COVID+ vs. all, 4) Severe COVID+ vs. all. Analyses are presented across three
separate models: 1) unadjusted, 2) Sparsely adjusted for age, normalized Towndend deprivation index,
and the first ten principal components of genetic ancestry, and 3) fully adjusted which additionally includes
normalized body mass index as a covariate on top of the sparsely adjusted model covariates. Associations
are displayed as A. Among males and females, B. among males, C. among females.
COVID+= Tested positive for Coronavirus disease 2019, COVID-=Tested negative for Coronavirus disease
2019, all= all individuals with reported Covid-19 testing from the UKBB English recruitment centers., OR=
Odds Ratio, SD= Standard Deviation, CI= Confidence Interval.
Supplementary Figure 13. Adjusting for additional phenotypic covariates does not significantly
influence the effect of free androgen index on COVID-19 risk. Association of normalized free androgen
index in males across three separate adjustment models: 1) unadjusted, 2) Model 1 which is adjusted for
age, normalized Townsend deprivation index, normalized body mass index, and the first ten principal
components of genetic ancestry, and 3) Model 2 which additionally includes prevalent hypertension and
diabetes as covariates on top of the sparsely adjusted model covariates. Analyses are presented across
four COVID-19 case/control models: for individuals tested with COVID: comparing 1) COVID+ vs. COVIDtest results, 2) Severe COVID+ vs. COVID-; and for all white British individuals from the UK Biobank English
recruitment centers with available COVID-test reporting: comparing 3) COVID+ vs. All, 4) Severe COVID+
vs. All.
COVID+ = Tested positive for coronavirus disease 2019, COVID- = Tested negative for coronavirus disease
2019, All = all individuals with reported COVID-19 testing from the UK Biobank English recruitment centers,
OR = odds ratio, SD = standard deviation, CI= confidence interval.
Supplementary Figure 14. Association of testosterone and SHBG with COVID-19 in UK Biobank
Males. Association of normalized testosterone and SHBG with four COVID-19 case/control outcome
definitions: for individuals tested with COVID: comparing 1) COVID+ vs. COVID- test results, 2) Severe
COVID+ vs. COVID-; and for all white British individuals from the UK Biobank English recruitment centers
with available COVID-test reporting: comparing 3) COVID+ vs. All, 4) Severe COVID+ vs. All. Analyses are
presented across three separate models: 1) unadjusted, 2) sparsely adjusted for age, normalized
Townsend deprivation index, and the first ten principal components of genetic ancestry, and 3) fully adjusted
which additionally includes normalized body mass index as a covariate on top of the sparsely adjusted
model covariates.
SHBG = sex-hormone binding globulin, COVID+ = Tested positive for coronavirus disease 2019, COVID= Tested negative for coronavirus disease 2019, All = all individuals with reported COVID-19 testing from
the UK Biobank English recruitment centers, OR = odds ratio, SD = standard deviation, CI= confidence
interval.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Tables
Supplementary Table 1. Complete list of normalized z-scores for FDA drug library.
Supplementary Table 2. List of significantly predicted drug targets.
Supplementary Table 3. List of genes in “GO AR signaling”, “Upstream AR activators” and “AR target
genes” expression modules.
Supplementary Table 4. List of phenotypic covariates included in sensitivity analysis.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References

1.
Guan, W.-J. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. N. Engl. J. Med.
382, 1708–1720 (2020).
2.
Shi, S. et al. Association of Cardiac Injury With Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With COVID19 in Wuhan, China. JAMA Cardiol (2020) doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.0950.
3.
Guo, T. et al. Cardiovascular Implications of Fatal Outcomes of Patients With Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiol (2020) doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.1017.
4.
Hamming, I. et al. Tissue distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS
coronavirus. A first step in understanding SARS pathogenesis. J. Pathol. 203, 631–637 (2004).
5.
Vabret, N. et al. Immunology of COVID-19: current state of the science. Immunity (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.002.
6.
Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked
by a Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271-280.e8 (2020).
7.
Lan, J. et al. Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2
receptor. Nature (2020) doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2180-5.
8.
Kuba, K. et al. A crucial role of angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS coronavirusinduced lung injury. Nat. Med. 11, 875–879 (2005).
9.
Tucker, N. R. et al. Myocyte Specific Upregulation of ACE2 in Cardiovascular Disease:
Implications for SARS-CoV-2 mediated myocarditis. medRxiv 2020.04.09.20059204 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.04.09.20059204.
10.
Ghazizadeh, Z. et al. Metastable Atrial State Underlies the Primary Genetic Substrate for MYL4
Mutation-Associated Atrial Fibrillation. Circulation 141, 301–312 (2020).
11.
Ghazizadeh, Z. et al. Prospective Isolation of ISL1+ Cardiac Progenitors from Human ESCs
for Myocardial Infarction Therapy. Stem Cell Reports 10, 848–859 (2018).
12.
Tsai, S.-Y. et al. A human embryonic stem cell reporter line for monitoring chemical-induced
cardiotoxicity. Cardiovasc. Res. 116, 658–670 (2020).
13.
Smillie, C. S. et al. Intra- and Inter-cellular Rewiring of the Human Colon during Ulcerative
Colitis. Cell 178, 714-730.e22 (2019).
14.
Madissoon, E. et al. scRNA-seq assessment of the human lung, spleen, and esophagus tissue
stability after cold preservation. Genome Biol. 21, 1 (2019).
15.
Wang, L. et al. Single-cell reconstruction of the adult human heart during heart failure and
recovery reveals the cellular landscape underlying cardiac function. Nat. Cell Biol. 22, 108–119 (2020).
16.
Guzik, T. J. et al. COVID-19 and the cardiovascular system: implications for risk assessment,
diagnosis, and treatment options. Cardiovasc. Res. (2020) doi:10.1093/cvr/cvaa106.
17.
Keiser, M. J. et al. Relating protein pharmacology by ligand chemistry. Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 197–
206 (2007).
18.
Zaykin, D. V. Optimally weighted Z-test is a powerful method for combining probabilities in
meta-analysis. J Evol Biol 24, 1836–1841 (2011).
19.
Bost, P. et al. Host-viral infection maps reveal signatures of severe COVID-19 patients. Cell
(2020) doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.006.
20.
Liu, B., Li, M., Zhou, Z., Guan, X. & Xiang, Y. Can we use interleukin-6 (IL-6) blockade for
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)-induced cytokine release syndrome (CRS)? J. Autoimmun. 102452
(2020) doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102452.
21.
Heurich, A. et al. TMPRSS2 and ADAM17 cleave ACE2 differentially and only proteolysis by

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

TMPRSS2 augments entry driven by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus spike protein. J.
Virol. 88, 1293–1307 (2014).
22.
Hasan, A. et al. A review on the cleavage priming of the spike protein on coronavirus by
angiotensin-converting enzyme-2 and furin. J. Biomol. Struct. Dyn. 1–9 (2020)
doi:10.1080/07391102.2020.1754293.
23.
Matsumoto, T. et al. The androgen receptor in health and disease. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 75, 201–
224 (2013).
24.
Girling, J. S., Whitaker, H. C., Mills, I. G. & Neal, D. E. Pathogenesis of prostate cancer and
hormone refractory prostate cancer. Indian J Urol 23, 35–42 (2007).
25.
Azevedo, A., Cunha, V., Teixeira, A. L. & Medeiros, R. IL-6/IL-6R as a potential key signaling
pathway in prostate cancer development. World J Clin Oncol 2, 384–396 (2011).
26.
Cao, Z. & Kyprianou, N. Mechanisms navigating the TGF-β pathway in prostate cancer. Asian J
Urol 2, 11–18 (2015).
27.
Wang, M., Gu, H., Brewster, B. D. & Huang, C. Role of endogenous testosterone in TNF-induced
myocardial injury in males. Int J Clin Exp Med 5, 96–104 (2012).
28.
Jin, H.-J., Kim, J. & Yu, J. Androgen receptor genomic regulation. Transl Androl Urol 2, 157–
177 (2013).
29.
Independence of HIF1a and androgen signaling pathways in prostate cancer | bioRxiv.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/848424v1.
30.
Zhang, D. et al. Intron retention is a hallmark and spliceosome represents a therapeutic
vulnerability in aggressive prostate cancer. Nat Commun 11, 1–19 (2020).
31.
Sharma, A., Garcia, G., Arumugaswami, V. & Svendsen, C. N. Human iPSC-Derived
Cardiomyocytes are Susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 Infection. bioRxiv 2020.04.21.051912 (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.04.21.051912.
32.
Goyal, P. et al. Clinical Characteristics of Covid-19 in New York City. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020)
doi:10.1056/NEJMc2010419.
33.
Han, Y. et al. Identification of Candidate COVID-19 Therapeutics using hPSC-derived Lung
Organoids. bioRxiv 2020.05.05.079095 (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.05.05.079095.
34.
Goodarzi, H., Elemento, O. & Tavazoie, S. Revealing global regulatory perturbations across
human cancers. Mol. Cell 36, 900–911 (2009).
35.
Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Smibert, P., Papalexi, E. & Satija, R. Integrating single-cell
transcriptomic data across different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 411–420
(2018).
36.
Haghverdi, L., Lun, A. T. L., Morgan, M. D. & Marioni, J. C. Batch effects in single-cell RNAsequencing data are corrected by matching mutual nearest neighbors. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 421–427
(2018).
37.
Linderman, G. C., Zhao, J. & Kluger, Y. Zero-preserving imputation of scRNA-seq data using
low-rank approximation. bioRxiv 397588 (2018) doi:10.1101/397588.
38.
Kanehisa, M. & Goto, S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic Acids Res.
28, 27–30 (2000).
39.
Bycroft, C. et al. The UK Biobank resource with deep phenotyping and genomic data. Nature
562, 203–209 (2018).
40.
Armstrong, J. et al. Dynamic linkage of COVID-19 test results between Public Health England’s
Second Generation Surveillance System and UK Biobank. (2020) doi:10.6084/m9.figshare.12091455.v2.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Figure 1
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B
Normalized ACE2 levels

Cardiac
cell
hESC

.5

FDA library

C

Vincristine

No treatment

Dronedarone

5.0

ACE2 DAPI

A

2.5
0.0

−2.5
Tested compounds

G

10

2.5

UMAP2

UMAP2

5.0

0

−5

0

5

0.0

Methyclothiazide

10

15

20

Cyclosporin A

Tamsolusin

Spironolactone
Dronedarone
Rosiglitazone

Camostat

Amiodarone
Ketoconazole

Saxagliptin Alibendol

Butoconazole

−5.0

UMAP1

Cisatracurium

Artemisinin

Flubendazole

0

Finasteride
Dutasetride

−2.5
In silico hit (169)
FDA library (1310)
ZINC15 library (108)

25

In silico and FDA hit compounds

15

5

100
50

clusters

In silico Screen

F

1uM
2uM

150

Albendazole

Sulindac
Rosiglitazone
CX-4945
Propanolol
Deflazacort
Fenoprofen
Zalcitabine
Dronedarone
Amiodarone
Saxagliptin
Aspartame
Raltegravir
Brompheniramine
Camostat
Vitamin C
Alibendol
Finasteride
Dutasteride
Methylclothiazide
Butoconazole

-20

200

Vincristine

0

250

Vinorelbin

ACE2 levels (normalized)

1uM
2uM

20

ACE2 levels (normalized)

E

D

−2

0

UMAP1

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure 2

3
R=0.68
P<1e-140
2

1

B

C

FDA library signiﬁcant targets

FDA library targets

z-score

0

Signiﬁcant targets
3
z-score FDR <0.25

2

1

2

3

D

−1.5

FDA library targets
Combined z-scores
lower
higher
enrichment score
-3

3

Extracellular matrix disassembly
Collagen catabolic process
Steroid binding
One-carbon metabolic process
Notch receptor processing
Dopamine transport
Amyloid precursor protein catabolic process
Folic acid metabolic process
Carbonate dehydratase activity
Bicarbonate transport
Metallopeptidase activity
Endopeptidase activity
Peptidase activity
Aminopeptidase activity
Steroid metabolic process
Serine-type peptidase activity
Apoptotic signaling pathway

−1.0

−0.5

0.0

Average z-score

E

-3

CYP19A1
SERPINA6
NR3C1
MMP1
LTA4H
GABRA1
SPR
SHBG
NR1I2
NMT1
NCEH1
SLC22A3
MMP9
SLC6A3
DHFR
SPHK2
MMP7
TACR1
GABRB2
MTNR1A
F2
TAF1
MMP13
MMP8
MTHFD2
SRD5A1
NAALAD2
CHRM4

In silico hit compound targets
Background
Target

1

-log10 p-value (combined Z)

-2

IL6

Fisher’s P <0.05

0

0

-1

GLUL

Target name

FDA library targets

-log10 p-value (combined Z)

-log10 p-value (Fisher’s)

A

enrichment score
-3

3

Cysteine-type endopeptidase activity
Serine-type exopeptidase activity
Cholesterol homeostasis
Endopeptidase activity
Male genitalia development
Steroid hormone mediated signaling pathway
Peptidase activity
Steroid hormone receptor activity
Steroid metabolic process
Cysteine-type peptidase activity
Dipeptidyl-peptidase activity
Serine-type peptidase activity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure 3

A

B
TACR
D

1
2

SRD5 1
DHFR
4
P1
P8
P
R 1
S 6
R 1
R 2
FD2
D2
P1
MMP7
R 4
S 22
GLUL
6

FURIN
D

uanabenz cetate
−4 45 (Silmitasertib)
etoconazole
Dronedarone HCl
Sotagli ozin ( 4211)
− h ro ine
enzethonium hloride
Sul amerazine
Chloramphenicol
iconazole
utoconazole nitrate
Oxybuprocaine HCl
Chlorprothixene
Trimipramine Maleate
Arecoline
Trospium chloride
Brompheniramine
Pheniramine Maleate
Imipramine HCl
Tolnaftate
Propranolol HCl
Camostat Mesilate
aladegib ( 2 40680)
Mianserin HCl
za erone
eclizine 2
l
etirizine Di
l
Rosiglitazone maleate
Domiphen Bromide
Tamoxifen Citrate
Fenoprofen Calcium
Mometasone furoate
Fluticasone propionate
olazamide
Resminostat
Gliquidone
Sertraline HCl
Flumazenil
Triamcinolone
De azacort
Meprednisone
Pralatrexate
Aspartame
Finasteride
Dutasteride
Spironolactone
Estradiol
Formestane

C

De azacort
Meprednisone
Mometasone furoate
Triamcinolone

De azacort
Estradiol
Finasteride
Formestane
Meprednisone
Spironolactone
Triamcinolone

HDL

P8

1

Testosterone

P1
1 -

dro testosterone

P1

Cortisol

1 1

1

Feno ro encalcium

5a-Dih drotestosterone
(D )

otestosterone
P1

SHBG
SRD5 2
S RP
P1

D
Aspartame
Fenoprofen calcium

Signiﬁcantl

2

S

a

<1

S

ACE

MAPK
Alibendol
Sul amerazine

P1

P

D

1

PRSS2

2

Gliquidone

4

Aspartame
Fenoprofen calcium

Aspartame
enzethonium chloride
Camostat mesilate
etirizine Di l
Domiphen bromide
Fenoprofen calcium
- h ro ine
Rosiglitazone
Sotagli ozin
Tamoxifen citrate

FURIN

AR

Nucleus

2 F R
PRSS2-

MMPs

S
Smads

AR
NFkB
6
2 F R

PRSS2-

P8

MMP7

NFkB

AR

=1

P1

ng (1- )

Aspartame
Camostat mesilate
uanabenz acetate

Nucleus

a

ACE

Ang II

Aspartame
Imipramine HCl
Trimipramine
maleate

Chloramphenicol
Estradiol
Finasteride
Spironolactone

Chloramphenicol
Estradiol
Finasteride
Spironolactone

redicted targets

ng (1- )

Aspartame
Camostat mesilate

JAK

1

utoconazole nitrate
Estradiol
Formestane
etoconazole
Meprednisone
iconazole
Spironolactone
Tamoxifen
Triamcinolone

Aspartame
Chloramphenicol
Fenoprofen Calcium
Fluticasone propionate
Gliquidone
Mometasone furoate
Resminostat
olazamide
Triamcinolone

Aspartame
Imipramine HCl
Trimipramine maleate

2

REN

Aspartame
Pralatrexate

STAT3

S

Ps

6

1

SRD5 1

MAPKK

AR

1

PRSS2

D2
Dutasteride
Estradiol
Finasteride
Formestane
Spironolactone

R

AR

SRD5 2

stradiol-1

De azacort
Estradiol
Fluticasone propionate
Meprednisone
Mometasone furoate
Spironolactone
Triamcinolone

Hit compounds

1

redicted targets

0

R1
F1
1
1
R1
SPR
P1 1
S RP
6
SHBG

Ang I
MAPKKK

Peptidase
Signiﬁcantl

50

Propranolol HCl
Tolnaftate

Cholesterol

R

4

100

AGT

6R

ACE

P

Peptidases

6

SRD5 1

REN
6

150

Aspartame
Tamsolusin

SR- 1
Cholesterolester

MMP7

200

6

SHBG Testosterone S RP

10

250

F2

Androgen receptor signaling

F2

P1

P1

Peptidase
Signiﬁcantl
Hit compounds

Camostat mesilate
Flumazenil

redicted targets
S

a

<1

S

MMPs

NFkB

a

=1

Alibendol
Sul amerazine

0

15

25

20

10

5

2

0

*

10

0

4

1

Spike-RBD ACE2

DHT

Dutasteride

*

15

Spike-RBD ACE2

**
*

No treatment

Finasteride

DHT

*

normalized uorescence intensity

5

Dutasteride

2

No treatment

6

Internalized Spike-RBD

*

8

normalized uorescence intensity

DHT

Dutasteride

DAPI ACE2 TMPRSS22

No treatment

Internalized Spike-RBD

*

10

DHT

4

Dutasteride

No treatment

ACE2 levels

normalized uorescence intensity

0

No treatment

F
ACE2 levels

D

normalized uorescence intensity

C
Dutasteride

Camostat

E

G

3

0

Ketoconazole

*

*

25

Spironolactone

Ketoconazole

Camostat

Dutasteride

Finasteride

No treatment

***

**

***

**

4

Camostat

Dutasteride

15

Finasteride

0

No treatment

ACE2 levels

*

normalized uorescence intensity

A

Spironolactone

TMPRSS2 levels

normalized uorescence intensity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Figure 4
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B
6

2

20

10
5

Ketoconazole

Spironolactone

No treatment
Dutasteride

DHT

No treatment
Dutasteride

DHT

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Figure 5

A

B

COVID-19
Abnormal
Troponin T

Effect of speciﬁed risk factors on abnormal
Troponin T status in COVID+ males

Risk factors:
Age
Diabetes
Hypertension
BMI
Prostatic disease

Prostatic disease
Age
Hypertension
Diabetes
BMI
Age:BMI
Age:Hypertension
0.01

C

0.1 0.5 1 2
10
OR, high vs. low group

[1.008; 2.249]
[7.918; 49.768]
[2.341; 11.215]
[1.748; 3.650]
[0.716; 2.162]
[0.214; 0.912]
[0.066; 0.444]

Effect of Exposures
on COVID−19 risk in males
Severe
D vs.
Severe COVID+ vs. All

Testosterone

Severe
D vs.
Severe COVID+ vs. All

SHBG

Severe
D vs.
Severe COVID+ vs. All

P

Cases (N) Controls (N)

4.58e−02
1.8 e−10
4. 6e−05
8.04e−0
4. e−01
2. 2e−02
2. 8e−04

164
325
471
338
292
126
252

517
356
210
343
389
365
292

55

OR

95% CI

D−

1.22
1.15

[1.02; 1.46] 0.031
[1.01; 1.31] 0.037

188
188

318
107,047

D−

1.12
1.09

[0.95; 1.31] 0.17
[0.96; 1.23] 0.18

251
251

430
142,457

D−

1.11
1.12

[0.94; 1.30] 0.22
[0.99; 1.26] 0.07

234
234

389
131,866

Free Androgen Index
Risk factors:
Free Androgen index
Total testosterone
SHBG

COVID-19

95% CI

1.50
19.85
5.12
2.53
1.24
0.44
0.17

D
UKBB

OR

0.9

1

1.25

OR per SD Exposure

1.5

P Cases (N) Controls (N)

Normalized z-score
-2

-3

0
Tamsulosin

Albendazole

Artemisinin

D

Cyclosporin A

F

Upper Epi
Stratiﬁed Epi
Dividing Epi
Suprabasal Epi
Gland Ductal
Gland Mucousal
Basal Epi
Lymphatic Vessel
Blood Vessel
Stroma
Macrophage
Dendritic Cell
B Cell
T Cell
Mast

Secretory TA

Cycling TA

TA 2

TA 1

Immature Goblet

Goblet

Enteroendocrine

Enterocyte Progenitors

Immature Enterocytes

Enterocytes

BEST4+ Enterocytes

Alveolar Type1
Alveolar Type2
Ciliated
Fibroblast
Smoothe Muscle Cell
Blood Vessel
Lymphatic Vessel
Dendritic Cell
Macrophage
Mast
Monocyte
Natural Killer Cell
CD4 T
CD8 T
B Cell
Plasma Cell

Macrophages

Smooth Muscle 2

Smooth Muscle 1

Fibroblast

Endothelial Cell

ACE2

Colon

Cisatracurium

C

Flubendazole

TMPRSS2

FURIN

ACE2

10-4

Camostat

Amiodarone

Dutasteride

RPMI +
complete B27

gene read counts per GAPDH

RPMI+ B27 w/o insulin

Raltegravir

Alibendol

Fenoprofen

Zalcitabine

Vitamin C

XAV (5 uM)

Saxagliptin

Aspartame

Methylclothiazide

CX-4945

BMP4 (20 ng/ml)
Activin A (20 ng/ml)
CHIR (1.5 uM)

Brompheniramine

Deﬂazacort

Finasteride

Sulindac

days of differentiation
6
2
3
4
5
100

Normalized z-score

-1

Rosiglitazone

1

Butoconazole

B
Lung

Vincristine

0
Atrial Cardiomyocyte

Ventricular Cardiomyocyte

TMPRSS2

Heart

Vinorelbin

E
Dronedarone

0

Propanolol

FURIN

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 1 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A
Esophagus

ACE2 DAPI

non-cardiomyocyte
cardiomyocyte

10-1

10-2

10-3

4

3

2

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 2 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

B

C

Alveolar Type1
Alveolar Type2
Ciliated
Fibroblast
Smoothe Muscle Cell
Blood Vessel
Lymphatic Vessel
Dendritic Cell
Macrophage
Mast
Monocyte
Natural Killer Cell
CD4 T
CD8 T
B Cell
Plasma Cell

Macrophages

Smooth Muscle 2

Smooth Muscle 1

Fibroblast

Heart

Colon

Upper Epi
Stratiﬁed Epi
Dividing Epi
Suprabasal Epi
Gland Ductal
Gland Mucousal
Basal Epi
Lymphatic Vessel
Blood Vessel
Stroma
Macrophage
Dendritic Cell
B Cell
T Cell
Mast

Secretory TA

Cycling TA

TA 2

TA 1

Immature Goblet

Goblet

B

Endothelial Cell

Ventricular
Cardiomyocyte
Atrial
Cardiomyocyte

C
C HR
YP M
19 4
D A1
H
FR
G
AB F
G R 2
AB A
R 1
G B2
LU
L
LT IL6
A
M 4H
M
M P
M 1
P
M 13
M M
T P
M HF 9
TN D
N R 2
AA 1
L A
N AD
C 2
E
N H1
M
N T1
R
N
SE R 1I2
R 3C
PI 1
N
A
SL SH 6
C BG
SL 22A
C 3
SP 6A
H 3
K
SR SP 2
D R
TA 5A1
C
R
TA 1
F1

100

Enteroendocrine

Enterocyte Progenitors

Immature Enterocytes

Enterocytes

BEST4+ Enterocytes

gene read counts per GAPDH

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 3 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A
non-cardiomyocyte

10-1

cardiomyocyte

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

Lung

Esophagus

GLUL

IL6

CYP19A1

SERPINA6

NR3C1

MMP1

LTA4H

GABRA1

SPR

SHBG

NR1I2

NMT1

NCEH1

SLC22A3

MMP9

DHFR

SPHK2

SLC6A3

MMP7

TACR1

GABRB2

MTNR1A

F2

TAF1

MMP13

MMP8

MTHFD2

SRD5A1

NAALAD2

CHRM4
Secretory TA

Cycling TA

TA 2

TA 1

Immature Goblet

Goblet

Lung
Enteroendocrine

Enterocyte Progenitors

Immature Enterocytes

Enterocytes

BEST4+ Enterocytes

Esophagus
Alveolar Type1
Alveolar Type2
Ciliated
Fibroblast
Smoothe Muscle Cell
Blood Vessel
Lymphatic Vessel
Dendritic Cell
Macrophage
Mast
Monocyte
Natural Killer Cell
CD4 T
CD8 T
B Cell
Plasma Cell

Heart
Upper Epi
Stratiﬁed Epi
Dividing Epi
Suprabasal Epi
Gland Ductal
Gland Mucousal
Basal Epi
Lymphatic Vessel
Blood Vessel
Stroma
Macrophage
Dendritic Cell
B Cell
T Cell
Mast

Macrophages

Smooth Muscle 2

Smooth Muscle 1

Fibroblast

Endothelial Cell

Atrial Cardiomyocyte

Ventricular Cardiomyocyte

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 4 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Colon

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 5 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Combined z-scores
lower
higher

enrichment score
-3

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 6 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Formestane

Spironolactone

Estradiol

Finasteride

Dutasteride

Pralatrexate

Aspartame

O

O

F

F

O

O

O

O

F

O

O
O

O
O

N

F

N

O

O
N

F

S

O

F

N
C

C

O

N

N

O

N

O

O

O
O

O

z-score = -2.03

z-score = -1.83

Meprednisone

O

z-score = -2.95

Sertraline HCl

Flumazenil

N
N

N

z-score = -1.75

Triamcinolone

De azacort

N

N

z-score = -1.63

O

z-score = -2.65

z-score = -1.62

N

Resminostat

Gliquidone

O
N

N
O

O

O
O
O

O

O

O
O

O

O

N

O

O
O

N

O

O

O
O

F

O

O

O

Cl

O

N

S

N

N

O

N

O

S

O

N

F

O

N

O
O

O

Cl
N

z-score = -1.91

z-score = -1.51

z-score = -2.91

Tolazamide

z-score = -1.58

z-score = -2.42

z-score = -1.96

Domiphen bromide

Tamoxifen citrate

Fenoprofen calcium

Mometasone furoate

Fluticasone propionate

Cl

z-score = -1.58

Rosiglitazone maleate
O
S

O
O
O
O

O

O

N
N

F

S

O

O

O

O
O

O

O

F

O

Ca

O
Cl

O
O

N

O

O

O

O

O

O

Br

O

O

Cl
N

O

S
O

O

O

O

N

O

O

O
F

z-score = -2.23

z-score = -1.98

z-score = -1.53

Cetirizine diHCl

Meclizine 2HCl

Taladegib

Mianserin HCl

Azaperone

z-score = -1.51

z-score = -1.57

F
O

N

N

O

z-score = -1.52

O

N

z-score = -3.27

Propranolol HCl

Camostat mesilate

F

O

O

N

F
O

O

F

F

N

N

O

O

O

O

O
N
Cl

Cl

Cl
N

O

N

N

N

S

Cl

O

O

O

O

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

z-score = -1.72

z-score = -2.06

Tolnaftate

N

N

Cl

Cl

z-score = -1.68

z-score = -1.77

Imipramine HCl

Pheniramine maleate

Brompheniramine maleate

N

z-score = -2.12

N

N

Trospium chloride

z-score = -3.63

z-score = -1.91

Arecoline

Trimipramine maleate

O

O
O

O

O

O
Cl

O

O

O

N
N

N

O

S

O

O

N

Cl
N

O

N

O

O

O

N

N

N

O

N

O
Br
N

z-score = -1.92

z-score = -1.93

Chlorprothixene

z-score = -1.99

z-score = -2.69

Miconazole

Butoconazole nitrate

Oxybuprocaine HCl

O

O

Cl

N

z-score = -1.51

z-score = -1.72

Sulfamerazine

Chloramphenicol

Cl

Cl

Cl

N

O

O

N

O

O

N

N

N
N

O

O
O

O

N

O

O

N

N

Cl

z-score = -1.69

Benzethonium chloride

Cl

Cl

Cl

O

N
S
Cl

O

N

Cl
Cl

S

N

z-score = -2.15

L-Thyroxin

z-score = -2.46

z-score = -3.27

Dronedarone HCl

Sotagli ozin

N

Cl

z-score = -1.62

O

Ketoconazole

O

z-score = -1.73

O
S

O

Cl
N

O
N

O

I

O

Cl
O

I

S

O

O

O

O

Cl

N

N
O

N

N

N

Cl

O

Cl

O

O
N

O

O

z-score = -2.08

N

N

N

O
N
I

N
O

O

O

z-score = -1.80

Cl

Guanabenz acetate

Silmitasertib

O
O

I

z-score = -1.75

N

z-score = -1.77

z-score = -3.48

z-score = -2.42

z-score = -2.65

Cl

z-score = -1.85

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 7 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

10

6

4

2

Interaction Signiﬁcance

8

FURIN
HGFAC
F2
KLK1
KLKB1
DPP4
C1R
CFD
CTSG
F10
PROC
F11
F7
PCSK6
TMPRSS6
ACR
2
PLG
KLK8
PRSS1

10

6

4

2

P1 1
DHCR7
R1 4
R1 10
R0 2
AKR1C1
R1 2
SD 1
STS
FDPS
PPARD
NPC1L1
SHH
R1 4
R1 2
P11 2
P 5
S P2
SD1 14
SCARB1
S
2
TSPO
SD11 2
R0 1

8

Interaction Signiﬁcance

Meprednisone
Desonide
Triamcinolone
Clotrimazole
Butoconazole nitrate
Formestane
Estradiol
Estradiol Cypionate
Finasteride
Dutasteride
Spironolactone
Dydrogesterone
Nimodipine
− h ro ine
Glafenine HCl
Aspartame
Pramoxine HCl
Fluorometholone Acetate
Chromocarb
Nilvadipine
Nialamide
Azaperone
Bitopertin
Ethacridine lactate monohydrate
Ketoconazole
Lornoxicam
Diclofenac Sodium
Galeterone
Ebastine
Nicorandil
Domiphen Bromide
Cetirizine DiHCl
Amiodarone HCl
Pyrilamine Maleate
ArbinoxaMine Maleate
Oxybuprocaine HCl
Rosiglitazone maleate
Tamoxifen Citrate
Fenoprofen Calcium
Bufexamac
Pregnenolone
Sodium salicylate
−4 45 (Silmitasertib)
Acemetacin
Curcumin

cti it
erine−T pe eptidase
B

etabolic rocess
teroid

ela revir ( − 50)
obicistat ( S− 50)
Glafenine HCl
Ketoconazole
Moxalactam Disodium
Lopinavir
Oxybuprocaine HCl
Acemetacin
Sulfaguanidine
Sotagli ozin ( 4211)
Bufexamac
Silibinin
1
Saxagliptin hydrate
Saxagliptin
Guanabenz Acetate
Salmon Calcitonin Acetate
Nialamide
atimastat ( − 4)
Camostat Mesilate
Aspartame

Upper Epi
Stratiﬁed Epi
Dividing Epi
Suprabasal Epi
Gland Ductal
Gland Mucousal
Basal Epi
Lymphatic Vessel
Blood Vessel
Stroma
Macrophage
Dendritic Cell
B Cell
T Cell
Mast

Alveolar Type1
Alveolar Type2
Ciliated
Fibroblast
Smoothe Muscle Cell
Blood Vessel
Lymphatic Vessel
Dendritic Cell
Macrophage
Mast
Monocyte
Natural Killer Cell
CD4 T
CD8 T
B Cell
Plasma Cell

Alveolar Type1
Alveolar Type2
Ciliated
Fibroblast
Smoothe Muscle Cell
Blood Vessel
Lymphatic Vessel
Dendritic Cell
Macrophage
Mast
Monocyte
Natural Killer Cell
CD4 T
CD8 T
B Cell
Plasma Cell

D

GO
AR signaling

AR

Colon

Upstream
AR activators

SRD5A1

SRD5A2

AR
Target genes

Macrophages

Smooth Muscle 2

Smooth Muscle 1

Fibroblast

Endothelial Cell

Ventricular
Cardiomyocyte
Atrial
Cardiomyocyte

AR
Target genes

SRD5A2

Upstream
AR activators

SRD5A1

Upstream
AR activators

SRD5A1

GO
AR signaling

AR

GO
AR signaling

AR

B

AR
Target genes

SRD5A2

GO
AR signaling

Macrophages

Smooth Muscle 2

Smooth Muscle 1

Fibroblast

Endothelial Cell

Ventricular
Cardiomyocyte
Atrial
Cardiomyocyte

Heart

Upper Epi
Stratiﬁed Epi
Dividing Epi
Suprabasal Epi
Gland Ductal
Gland Mucousal
Basal Epi
Lymphatic Vessel
Blood Vessel
Stroma
Macrophage
Dendritic Cell
B Cell
T Cell
Mast

Secretory TA

Cycling TA

TA 2

TA 1

Immature Goblet

Goblet

Enteroendocrine

Enterocyte Progenitors

Immature Enterocytes

Enterocytes

BEST4+ Enterocytes

Upstream
AR activators

AR

A

AR
Target genes

SRD5A1

C

Secretory TA

Cycling TA

TA 1
TA 2

Immature Goblet

Goblet

Enteroendocrine

Enterocyte Progenitors

Immature Enterocytes

Enterocytes

BEST4+ Enterocytes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 8 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Lung

Esophagus

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
e e tar
re available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B

ACE2 levels

15
10
5
0

NT

0.5uM

2.5uM

5uM

or a ze ﬂ ore ce ce

ACE2 levels

or a ze ﬂ ore ce ce

Spironolactone

20

te

t

Dutasteride

20

te

t

A

15
10
5
0

NT

1uM

5uM

10uM

Diabetes

Hypertension

Female
Male

BMI

Troponin

1

Troponin

0.6

0.8

0.6

Prostatic disease

0.4

0.4

0.2

Age

0.2

0

BMI

0.0

Age 40-80

0.2

Age >=81

0.4

Hypertension
0.6

Diabetes

0.8

1

Correlation

Percentage Troponin+ in
patients with COVID19

0.8

Age

B

A

Prostatic disease

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 10available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 11

A

B
0.4

Female
Male

1.5

0.6

1.0

0.5

density

density

density

0.3

Female

Male

0.2

0.1

0.0

0.0
0

250

500

750

1000

0.0

1250

0

25

50

Free Androgen Index

5.0
1.00

0.4

Female

0.2
Male

75

100

2.5

Free Androgen Index

0.0

2.5

5.0

7.5

Free Androgen Index (SD by Sex)

7.5

ndrogen Index (SD by Sex)
0.4

0.75

0.75

0.50

density

density

density

0.3

0.50

Female

Female

Male

Male

0.2

0.25

0.25

0.1

0.00

0.00
0

20

0.0
0

40

10

20

30

2

Testosterone

Testosterone

0

2

4

6

Testosterone (SD by Sex)
0.5

0.4

0.02

0.02

0.01

density

density

density

0.3
Female

Female

Male

Male

0.2

0.01

0.1

0.00

0.0

0.00
0

50

100

150

200

250

0

50

SHBG

100

150

200

250

2.5

0.0

SHBG

After removing extreme
outliers by sex

After normalizing by sex

2.5

SHBG (SD by Sex)

5.0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 12

A

Effect of Free Androgen Index
on COVID19 risk

OR

95% CI

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.02
1.03
1.04

[0.90; 1.15]
[0.91; 1.16]
[0.93; 1.17]

0.77
0.67
0.49

368
380
386

589
610
618

e ere COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.02
1.03
1.05

[0.90; 1.16]
[0.91; 1.17]
[0.93; 1.19]

0.76
0.66
0.46

308
317
322

589
610
618

COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.10
1.10
1.09

[1.00; 1.21]
[1.00; 1.20]
[1.00; 1.20]

0.039
0.052
0.055

368
380
386

206,261
209,819
212,641

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.10
1.10
1.10

[1.00; 1.22]
[1.00; 1.22]
[0.99; 1.21]

0.062
0.061
0.063

308
317
322

206,261
209,819
212,641

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

0.7
0.9 1
1.25
1.5
R er Se −S eciﬁc SD Free ndrogen nde

B

Effect of Free Androgen Index
on COVID19 risk in Males

OR

95% CI

COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.22
1.22
1.24

[1.03; 1.45]
[1.03; 1.44]
[1.05; 1.46]

0.024
0.022
0.01

229
236
238

318
334
339

e ere COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.22
1.22
1.25

[1.02; 1.46]
[1.02; 1.45]
[1.05; 1.48]

0.031
0.031
0.012

188
194
196

318
334
339

COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.14
1.14
1.14

[1.02; 1.28]
[1.01; 1.28]
[1.01; 1.28]

0.027
0.032
0.031

229
236
238

107,047
109,039
110,349

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.15
1.14
1.14

[1.01; 1.31]
[1.01; 1.30]
[1.01; 1.30]

0.037
0.041
0.039

188
194
196

107,047
109,039
110,349

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

0.7
0.9 1
1.25
1.5
R er SD Free ndrogen nde

C

Effect of Free Androgen Index
on COVID19 risk in Females

OR

95% CI

COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

0.83
0.83
0.86

[0.68; 1.01]
[0.68; 1.02]
[0.71; 1.04]

0.064
0.074
0.11

139
144
148

271
276
279

e ere COVID+ s COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

0.82
0.83
0.86

[0.66; 1.02]
[0.67; 1.03]
[0.70; 1.05]

0.077
0.094
0.14

120
123
126

271
276
279

COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.04
1.03
1.03

[0.89; 1.22]
[0.88; 1.21]
[0.88; 1.20]

0.63
0.69
0.72

139
144
148

99,214
100,780
102,292

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.03
1.04
1.03

[0.87; 1.23]
[0.87; 1.23]
[0.87; 1.22]

0.73
0.68
0.69

120
123
126

99,214
100,780
102,292

0.7
0.9 1
1.25
1.5
R er SD Free ndrogen nde

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 13 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Effect of Free Androgen Index
on COVID19 risk in Males

OR

95% CI

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

COVID+ vs. COVID−
Model 2
Model 1
Unadjusted

1.23
1.22
1.24

[1.02; 1.49]
[1.03; 1.45]
[1.05; 1.46]

0.032
0.024
0.01

229
236
238

318
334
339

Severe COVID+ vs. COVID−
Model 2
Model 1
Unadjusted

1.22
1.22
1.25

[1.00; 1.50]
[1.02; 1.46]
[1.05; 1.48]

0.051
0.031
0.012

188
194
196

318
334
339

COVID+ vs. All
Model 2
Model 1
Unadjusted

1.13
1.14
1.14

[0.99; 1.28]
[1.02; 1.28]
[1.01; 1.28]

0.06
0.027
0.031

229
236
238

107,047
109,039
110,349

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Model 2
Model 1
Unadjusted

1.13
1.15
1.14

[0.98; 1.30]
[1.01; 1.31]
[1.01; 1.30]

0.094
0.037
0.039

188
194
196

107,047
109,039
110,349

0.7
0.9 1
1.25
1.5
OR per SD Free Androgen Index

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.091082; this version posted May 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
Supplementary Figure 14 available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

Effect of Testosterone
on COVID19 risk in Males

OR

95% CI

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

COVID+ vs. COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.08
1.11
1.14

[0.92; 1.25]
[0.95; 1.28]
[0.99; 1.32]

0.35
0.18
0.077

305
313
316

430
447
453

COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.05
1.08
1.08

[0.94; 1.18]
[0.97; 1.21]
[0.97; 1.21]

0.36
0.16
0.14

305
313
316

142,457
145,093
146,835

Severe COVID+ vs. COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.12
1.15
1.18

[0.95; 1.31]
[0.98; 1.34]
[1.01; 1.37]

0.17
0.082
0.037

251
258
261

430
447
453

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.09
1.12
1.12

[0.96; 1.23]
[0.99; 1.26]
[1.00; 1.26]

0.18
0.067
0.06

251
258
261

142,457
145,093
146,835

0.7

B

0.9 1
1.25
1.5
OR per SD Testosterone

Effect of SHBG
on COVID19 risk in Males

OR

95% CI

P

Cases (N)

Controls (N)

COVID+ vs. COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.06
1.05
1.08

[0.91; 1.23]
[0.90; 1.22]
[0.94; 1.25]

0.48
0.53
0.29

286
294
297

389
404
410

Severe COVID+ vs. COVID−
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.11
1.10
1.12

[0.94; 1.30]
[0.94; 1.28]
[0.97; 1.31]

0.22
0.23
0.13

234
241
244

389
404
410

COVID+ vs. All
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted
Fully Adjusted

1.09
1.10
1.07

[0.97; 1.21]
[0.99; 1.22]
[0.96; 1.20]

0.13
0.09
0.21

294
297
286

134,307
135,914
131,866

Severe COVID+ vs. All
Fully Adjusted
Sparsely Adjusted
Unadjusted

1.12
1.13
1.14

[0.99; 1.26]
[1.01; 1.28]
[1.02; 1.29]

0.07
0.039
0.023

234
241
244

131,866
134,307
135,914

0.7

0.9 1
1.25
OR per SD SHBG

1.5

