bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fast Ion Beam Inactivation of Viruses, Where Radiation Track
Structure Meets RNA Structural Biology.
B. Villagomez-Bernabe1, S. W. Chan2, J. A. Coulter3, A. M. Roseman2 and F. J.
Currell1, *
1

The Dalton Cumbrian Facility and the Department of Chemistry, The University of Manchester,
Westlakes Science & Technology Park, Moor Row, Cumbria, CA24 3HA, UK
2

School of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, The University of Manchester,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK
3

School of Pharmacy, Queen’s University Belfast, 97 Lisburn Road, Belfast, BT9 7BL

*

frederick.currell@manchester.ac.uk

Abstract
Here we show an interplay between the structures present in ionization tracks and nucleocapsid RNA
structural biology, using fast ion beam inactivation of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) virion as an example. This interplay is one of the key factors in predicting dose-inactivation
curves for high energy ion beam inactivation of virions. We also investigate the adaptation of wellestablished cross-section data derived from radiation interactions with water to the interactions involving
the components of a virion, going beyond the density-scaling approximation developed previously. We
conclude that solving one of the grand challenges of structural biology — the determination of RNA
tertiary/quaternary structure — is intimately linked to predicting ion-beam inactivation of viruses and that
the two problems can be mutually informative. Indeed, our simulations show that fast ion beams have a
key role to play in elucidating RNA tertiary/quaternary structure.

Introduction
At the time of writing the world is gripped with its fifth global pandemic since the Spanish flu outbreak of
1918 [1]. During the last decade viral epidemics have become a prevalent global health threat requiring
techniques for rapid vaccine development [2]. Radiation has long been used to inactivate virions [3]
although the uncorrelated nature of the ionization produced by gamma rays means that the protective
outer envelope of the virus is highly damaged. High energy ion beams however produce long-thin
(nanoscale) damage tracks which can be used for much more selective virion inactivation [4]. Currently,
in an important extension of this concept, a large-scale ion beam facility, is using beams of heavy, high
energy ions to attempt to produce a vaccine for SARS-CoV-2 [5]. Since the ions form long straight
damage tracks, each of the ions interacting with a single virion will produce many ionizations or
excitations in the nucleocapsid. Each of these events has a chance to damage the RNA, rendering the
virion inactive. Damage to the envelope is typically limited to one or two locations, on the ion’s ‘way in’
and on its ‘way out’, thus limiting the amount of structural damage to the surface spike proteins integral
to activation of a host immune response. RNA is a highly serial structure in its biological information
expression; damage it in one or a few critical places and you probably render the virion inactive. In
contrast the envelope proteins and phospholipid membrane are highly parallel structures so several of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

them can be radio-damaged without affecting the structure of the envelope significantly, leaving its
function unchanged. This assertion points to an informatic aspect of the problem, one we will investigate
in this paper - there are two structures involved, the structure of the virion being irradiated and the
structure of the radiation tracks doing the irradiation. As we show below, the interplay between these two
structural forms is a governing factors determining the predicted dose inactivation curve for any given
virion.
If one can thus inactivate sufficient numbers of virions, they could be used as the key component for
developing viral vaccines in a universal manner. The inactivation process, perhaps uniquely, produces
little or no apparent change to the structure of the virions’ envelopes. Hence, they can be expected to enter
a host in the usual way, including, in the case of SARS-CoV-2, using angiotensin-converting enzyme 2
(ACE2)-mediated cellular entry [6]. Upon encountering host immune cells, these inactivated antigenic
virions would stimulate an immune response in the usual manner, but critically would lack reproductive
capability. Hence, we call virions modified in this way Structurally Intact Radiation Inactivated Virions
(SIRI-Vs).
It is worth asking the question “What would the specifications of an ion beam facility designed to produce
sufficient quantities of SIRI-Vs look like?”. High-energy, large scale ion facilities such as the one
currently being used [5] are rare and very expensive. However, we believe it is also possible to use midrange ion facilities, such as those more traditionally associated with nuclear energy research [7].
In order to support such endeavors, it is important to have a set of predictive tools able to determine doseinactivation curves reliably. Here we show rapid prediction of inactivation responses and discuss some of
the barriers which must be overcome to produce reliable predictions. We believe it is currently premature
to rely on radiation transport simulations such as those in [5] or those presented here. This does not mean
they are unimportant. Instead a concerted, community effort is required to develop tools able to support
calculations of this type. It is in this spirit that several new approaches are offered in this paper.
Even before the current coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, total human vaccine business
was projected to be worth ~$60 Bn annually by 2024 [8] whilst that for animals is projected to reach
~$11Bn by 2025 [9]. Clearly then there would be commercial benefit in developing mid-range ion
facilities similar to [7] but designed specifically for purpose.

Results
Fast ion irradiation of the SARS-CoV virion
A putative model of the SARS-CoV virion was developed using available structural biology information
[10-13]. We chose to do this for SARS-CoV rather than the more topical SARS-CoV-2 since the
structural biology database is more mature, allowing us to work with a realistic putative geometry. There
is important information about the tertiary structure of at least part of the RNA in the nucleocapsid [10,
11]. The two virions are very similar so general conclusions reached should also apply to SARS-CoV-2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Geometry of the SARS-CoV virion and its interaction with six randomly generated 3 MeV He2+
ions shown from two different viewpoints. Tracks 1 and 6 completely miss the virion, whilst the core of
track 2 misses but one of the child electrons produces an ionisation event in one of the spike proteins. The
cores of tracks 3 and 4 pass through a spike protein, whilst 5 passes through the nucleocapsid causing
RNA-candidate damage events (red dots), envelope damage events (green dots) and spike-damage events
(magenta dots). It is necessary to include tracks such as 1 and 6 with cores far from the nucleocapsid to
ensure a correct weighting of the spike-damage, i.e through tracks like 2. Full details of the geometry and
how it was derived are given in the Methods section.
The full details of the RNA tertiary/quaternary structure within the nucleocapsid are unknown. To test the
importance of this unknown structure we considered three extreme forms of RNA arrangement, without
making reference to any published structural forms. These structural forms were i) all RNA concentrated
in a small sphere at the centre of the nucleocapsid, ii) all RNA concentrated in a spherical shell at the
inner surface of the nucleocapsid shell and iii) all RNA uniformly and randomly distributed throughout
the entire volume of the nucleocapsid and with no persistence from ion to ion. In each case the same total
amount of RNA was included, as dictated by its sequence [14]. Whilst forms i) and ii) are obviously
extremes, it is not immediately obvious that form iii) represents an extreme. Indeed, this form has been
implicitly assumed in modelling inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 [5]. However, this form represents an
extreme when viewed informatically as it places the tertiary/quaternary structure of RNA in its highest
entropic state, something not typically found in biology. The whole field of structural biology derives
much of its relevance from the fact that biological systems assume highly ordered structures, sometimes
at considerable energy cost, in order to dictate function. This general tenet is ignored in assuming the
RNA takes up such a high-entropy conformation. Furthermore, it is known that much of the RNA-protein
complex of the SARS-CoV virion is highly ordered [10, 11]. Accordingly, SARS-CoV-2 cannot have its
RNA in such a high entropic state.
For the geometry shown in figure 1, many 3 MeV He2+ ions were successively passed through the virion
each entering the simulation at a different random location. The location of ionisation events were
recorded, with ~42% of events being direct He2+ ion-interactions with the remaining ~58% being due to
child electrons produced upstream. The range of initial positions of the ion trajectories was chosen to be

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

significantly bigger than the area of the virion presented to the ion beam so that roughly 50% of the ions
had no interaction with the virion, properly mimicking the effect of ions passing in close proximity to the
virion causing damage to the membrane or spike proteins. This damage is generated through the creation
of electrons which travel several nm from the main ion trajectory before causing an ionisation event. An
example of this phenomenon is track 2, figure 1. An ion was considered to have interacted with the virion
if even a single ionisation process occurred anywhere in the virion geometry. Hence, proper weighting
was given to the effect of peripheral ion trajectories on the outer parts of the virion structure. Only
ionisation events were used for this process, rather than energy deposition events as was done previously
[5]. Although energy deposition approaches have been very successful in predicting biological outcomes
in other nanoscale radiobiology contexts [15-17], we argue in the discussion section that more of a targettheory inspired approach [3, 18] is appropriate, although we admit this is an open question and one
worthy of further investigation. However, none of the conclusions reached regarding the role of RNA
tertiary/quaternary structure depend on the choice between energy deposition or target theory approaches.

Figure 2. RNA distribution affects propensity for ionisation interactions. The top row symbolically shows
the RNA configurations under consideration (column by column). The second row shows histograms of
the probability of inflicting a number of ionising events to the virion’s RNA per ion track interacting with
the virion on a linear scale whist the bottom row uses a logarithmic scale to show the long tail involving
multiple hits to the RNA.
There are clear differences in the probability of inflicting damage to the RNA. In case i), the RNA
presents the smallest area to the incoming ion beam, so it is not surprising to find the probability of no
ionisations in the RNA to be significantly larger than in the other two scenarios. Although scenarios ii)
and iii) have apparently similar histograms on a linear scale, there are noticeable differences. When
examined on the logarithmic scale the histogram of the number of hits to the RNA shows marked

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

differences in all 3 cases. Assuming a single ionizing event to the RNA is sufficient to inactivate a virion,
then the key parameter is the probability of no ionizing events occurring within the RNA per ion track
interacting with the virion. This probability has a value of 0.88, 0.50 and 0.52 for cases i) – iii)
respectively. From these probabilities one can deduce a dose-inactivation curve using Poisson statistics
[5]. However, it is not yet clear how much of the RNA constitutes the critical target, another factor which
will also affect this curve.
Figure 3 shows histograms recording the average number of hits to spikes per ion track and the total
number of spikes hit per ion track. These histograms are the same regardless of the RNA
tertiary/quaternary structural form so only one set are shown. Unsurprisingly, the forms of the histograms
for number of hits per spike and number of hits to the RNA in case ii) are similar since they both involve
the ion track interacting with a hollow, essentially spherical structure. Typically, either 1 or 2 spikes are
hit per ion, as might be expected since an ion has a chance to interact with spikes on its way in and on its
way out. This result confirms that shown in [5] and is encouraging for the field of ion-beam inactivation
of virions.

Figure 3. Probability of ionisation interactions with spike proteins. Histograms of (left) the
probability of any selected spike protein complex being subject to an ionising event per ion track
interacting with the virion and (right) the number of spikes undergoing an ionizing event per ion track
interacting with the virion.

Radio-density scaling
In order to differentiate between RNA and proteins, one must account for the differences in their
interactions when subject to fast charged particles. Here, results of an analytical analysis of the scaling
properties are presented and used to generate either scaled effective volumes or scaled effective densities
for the biomolecules concerned.
Because there are not yet a good set of well curated charged-particle interaction cross sections for either
proteins or RNA, one must rely on a well curated set for water. One particularly useful and reliable set are
those in Geant4 DNA. One can simulate other biological materials by scaling the density of Geant4 water
[19, 20] to that of the material concerned, as was done in [5] and in producing the data shown in figures 2
and 3. However, it is not a-priory clear that the mass-density is the appropriate parameter when scaling
from water. The fast ions are really interacting with charge, not mass, as is evidenced by the Bethe
formula [21, 22], which for non-relativistic ion velocities reduces to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

!"

− !# =

$%&' !
(" ) !

,

*!

,(" ) !

#$%+ $ ln #
#

-

$. (1)

Here 𝑣 is the velocity of the ion, 𝑧 is its change in multiples of the electron charge, 𝑛 is the electron
density of the material through which the ion is passing and 𝐼 is the mean excitation potential. All other
symbols take their usual meanings. The electron density is given by
𝑛=

. 0 2$
1 3%

, (2)

where the material dependent parts are 𝑍, its atomic number, 𝜌, its mass density and 𝐴, is its relative
atoms mass. The other two symbols are 𝑁1 , the Avogadro number and 𝑀4 , the molar mass constant. One
can calculate the electron density for a compound as if it was simply a mixture of the atoms, i.e. one sums
over all of the atoms present, replacing the density by the density of that atom in the material.
For most light atoms the ratio 𝑍⁄𝐴 ≈ 1/2, allowing factorization of 𝑍⁄𝐴 out of the expression for the
compound electron density, providing a scaling directly between charge and mass density. However,
hydrogen is a notable exception where the ratio 𝑍⁄𝐴 = 1. Hence more hydrogen-rich materials will have
proportionally greater electron densities and hence will interact with charged particle beams more
intensely.
,(" ) !

The other material-dependent term in equation (1) is ln #

-

$. It has been shown that a range of

biomolecules including water, proteins and RNA all have a mean excitation energy of approximately 70
eV [23]. Hence, this term can be ignored in scaling from charged interactions of water to those of other
biomolecules. This argument can also be applied to the child electrons; hence one can find a set of scaling
densities which can be applied to water, so it has approximately the same interaction rate as the material
of interest. Taking known elemental compositions of biomolecules, it is then possible to generate a set of
radio-equivalent densities such as those of table 1. These radio-equivalent densities are the density water
would have to have to have the same electron density and hence the same rate of energy loss as per
equation 1.
fractional density

S

relative
density electron
[g/cc]
density

Scaled
radiodensity
[g/cc]

0

0

1

0.555

1

0.2

0

0.027

1.41

0.758

1.367

0.17

0.21

0

0.012

1.41

0.755

1.360

0.53

0.17

0.22

0

0.008

1.41

0.752

1.355

0.07

0.54

0.18

0.21

0

0.005

1.41

0.757

1.364

0.03

0.36

0.16

0.35

0.1

0

1.75

0.898

1.618

Biomaterial

H

C

N

O

P

water

0.111

0

0

0.889

Protein C

0.07

0.54

0.17

Rubisco

0.07

0.54

Myosin

0.07

Collagen
RNA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1 showing the elemental compositions of various biomolecules, their densities and the resultant
scaled radio-densities, i.e. the density water would have to have to produce the equivalent materialdependent term in equation 1. Elemental compositions are taken from [24].
If the density of the biomolecule is not known in the particular configuration of interest, usually both its
elemental composition and total mass are known, e.g. from primary sequence information. The density of
the biomolecule can then be estimated from atomic volumes to generate a mass-density. Hence results
like those of table 1 can be generated for many biomolecules as required.
The choice to scale the densities is somewhat ad hoc, indeed there is an assumption being made about the
volumes of the objects which is used to determine their mass-densities. Since these are small objects
compared with the length-scales over which the ion slows down one could fix the densities of the objects
representing the various biomolecules in a simulation and instead scale their volumes, i.e. instead of
slightly perturbing the densities of objects in a simulation to account for their different interactions with
charged particles, one could instead slightly perturb their volumes. This second approach has the
advantage that the entire nanoscale radiation transport simulation can now be performed at a constant
mass-density. A set of ion tracks can be calculated for one density and then be ‘replayed’ many times
with different starting positions and angles. Because the tracks do not pass through regions of different
densities, the computationally expensive boundary-crossing checks are not required, instead one simply
has to consider the volumes in which the transformed ionisations occur to determine the effects of the
track.
We have explored both approaches (i.e. density and volume scaling) in the next section where we present
results for ions passing through the RNA-protein nucleocomplex of the SARS-CoV virion. The scaled
radio-density approach and the scaling of volumes instead of densities appear to be general procedures
which can be applied in the calculation of radiation transport through nanoscale biological systems and
they will be subject of a future publication.

Simulations of the RNA-protein complex
In order to begin to assess the effect of RNA tertiary structure, we created a geometrical model of the
RNA nucleocapsid complex for which there exists a putative RNA structure. The geometry of the
simulation was drawn from the putative structure for the RNA-protein complex [10, 11]. Of course, the
structures presented in these papers are far more sophisticated than the geometry used in our simulations –
our geometry was simply constructed to capture the salient radiation biology effects. The RNA forms two
helices separated and held in place by a protein complex, with the sugar-phosphate backbone lying on the
inside of the helix and the RNA bases facing outwards. These two separate RNA strands are about 5 nm
apart and their bases are not paired. The volumes and densities of the RNA bases were chosen in 3 ways.
In the first set of simulations the entire volume was treated as having a density of 1.40 g/cm3, close to the
asymptotic value for large proteins [25], and the volumes of the RNA bases and phosphate backbone were
taken from [26]. This is equivalent to transferring the assumption made in [5] and our simulations above
that the density is the same across the entire capsid down to the scale of the RNA-protein complex –
clearly this is wrong but it serves as a useful starting point.
Simulations were performed in two ways, one where a full Geant4 DNA calculation was performed, and
the locations of the ionisations was recorded. In a second simulation a group of tracks were replayed
many times having been translated to enter the simulations at random places. The locations of the
ionisations were scored using Mathematica’s geometry primitives. In both cases the density was set to
1.40 g/cm3 throughout.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In a second pair of simulations the density for the RNA was calculated using appropriate atomic volumes
[26] so that the RNA backbone had a density of 1.83 g/cm3 and the bases had a density of 1.65 g/cm3.
This simulation did not take account of the specific bases in the sequence as the motif being simulated is a
repeating unit throughout the capsid, accounting for containment of more than half of the RNA complex
[10, 13]. Instead the known RNA sequence [14] was used to calculate an average volume and density for
the nucleobases. These densities were used in a second Geant4 DNA simulation otherwise similar to the
one described above, whilst the same densities were used to scale volumes in a simulation which again
replayed many tracks and used Mathematica’s geometry primitives to determine which ionisations
occurred within the RNA backbone and base structures. Here the volumes of the bases and backbone
elements were scaled by a factor of 1.65/1.40 and 1.83/1.40 respectively so that each element of the
simulation had the same probability of interacting with the radiation.
In a third set of simulations, the same procedures were carried out using scaled radio-densities taken from
table 1. Again, this was used to scale the density in a full Monte Carlo simulation and also to scale the
volumes in a simulation where many tracks were replayed. The results of these simulations are presented
in table 2. These simulations were conducted with the ions only coming in from one direction. In all
cases, the fraction of ionisations found in simulation was greater than expected on purely geometrical
grounds, suggesting the localised structure of the RNA does play a role, i.e. the probability is 5-10%
greater than would be expected if transferring an approach like case iii) for the whole virion down to the
scale of the RNA-protein complex. Since this result shows it is not appropriate to apply the approximation
used in case iii) to the RNA-protein complex shown in figure 4 and given that approximately half of the
RNA is in these RNA-protein complexes, it follow that this approximation made by us in case iii) and
also used in [5] is not valid. Although they are generally in close agreement, the scaled volumes approach
(scored using Mathematica) produces consistently smaller values than the scaled density approach
calculated using Monte Carlo radiation transport. This could be due to differences in the volume-scoring
algorithms when applied at sub-nm scale and will be the subject of further investigation.
Method

Vbase
[nm3]

rbase
[g/cm3]

Fbase
sim/10-3

Fbase
geo/10-3

Vbbone
[nm3]

rbbone
[g/cm3]

Fbbone
sim/10-3

Fbbone
geo/10-3

Average Density M/C

0.13

1.40

0.57

0.52

0.18

1.40

0.76

0.71

Average density
Mathematica

0.13

1.40

0.55

0.52

0.18

1.40

0.78

0.71

Mass-density-scaled
densities M/C

0.13

1.65

0.68

0.61

0.18

1.83

1.02

0.93

Mass-density scaled
volumes

0.15

1.40

0.65

0.61

0.23

1.40

1.00

0.93

Charge-density scaled
densities M/C

0.13

1.54

0.65

0.57

0.18

1.70

0.98

0.87

Charge-density scaled
volumes

0.14

1.40

0.62

0.57

0.21

1.40

0.94

0.87

Table 2: Volumes and densities used for the various simulations of the RNA-protein complex. F denotes
the fraction of ionisations, with sim denoting the value obtained from the simulation and geo denoting the
fraction expected on purely geometrical grounds, i.e. the fraction of the density-volume product occupied
by either the base or backbone components. Typical statistical errors associated with the simulated Fs
were between ±0.005 and ±0.01 ´ 10-3.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Unlike the virion as a whole, the protein-RNA complex does not have quasi-spherical symmetry, so a full
simulation should average irradiation over all orientations although this is computationally more
expensive. Using volume-scaling with scaled radio-densities, we performed another simulation. Here we
not only scored hits to the various RNA structures; we also stored the full track identification for each
ionisation within any of the RNA structures. The simulation geometry is shown in figure 4.

Figure 4 nucleocapsid protein-RNA geometry showing three separate tracks due to 3 MeV He2+ ions (red,
green and blue), showing the various volumes used to define the simulation geometry.
These were then analysed for coincident events, i.e. when a single primary ion caused ionising events in
two different parts of the RNA structure. The results are shown in figure 5. Unsurprisingly, most of the
coincidental ionisation events concern proximal backbone/base units, i.e. where the difference in index
(explained in figure 5’s caption) is < 5. However, it is interesting to note that there are persistent features
in this map, even when structures are several nm apart. The most prominent features are found when the
difference in indexes is 32 or 53, which corresponds to the kinds of coincident events shown by the pink
arrows in figure 5a). However, there is not a feature found corresponding to a difference in index of 44,
i.e. a pair of events on directly opposite units of the two strands. There is also a weak shoulder on the
same-strand distribution corresponding to a difference in index of about 17 although there is no
immediately obvious cause of this feature. If each ionizing event corresponds to a chance to break the
RNA strand where the ionisation took place, it follows that, depending on details of how the RNA is
ordered within the nucleocapsid, the lengths of strands produced by multiple events from a single ion will
reflect features of the map shown in figure 5b), i.e. they will reflect the tertiary RNA structure. This idea
is discussed in more detail in the Discussion section.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5 Plot showing the effect tertiary RNA structure has on coincidental ionisation of two separate
parts of the RNA structure by a single ion. Panel a) shows the indexing system used to denote locations
within the two helices of the RNA. The index increases from 1 to 43 running along one strand and then
(right to left as shown here) and then back to the rightmost nucleotide of the opposite strand running 44 to
86. Pertinent differences in indexes are illustrated by the labelled double-headed arrows. Panel b) shows a
2-D map of the number of times two separate ionizing events happen on the backbone/base combination
from the same ion as a function of the indexes at which the two events occur. Note this plot contains 4
quadrants, those bottom-left and top-right corresponding to two events on the same helix, those top-left
and bottom-right corresponding to two events, one on each helix. Panels c) and d) show the projections of
these plots, summing all features with a constant difference together. The dots represent the sums over the
2-D map (i.e. the Monte Carlo data), the solid lines represent predictions made using our ‘Method of
Ionizing Lines’ described in the main text.

Method of ionising lines (MoILs)
Another fast analytical technique was developed, this time to account for the spectrum of coincident
events from single ion tracks causing ionising events in two separate parts of the RNA structure, with a
view to developing a framework for rapidly assessing the likely effect of tertiary structure on two-site
damage to various RNA structures. Every pair of structures was considered in turn with a histogram
constructed with the bins being the difference in position along the strand of the pair and the contribution
to the height being 1⁄𝑟 , , where 𝑟 is the Euclidean distance between the two structural elements. This

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

factor acknowledges the fact that an ion track is long and narrow so that the chance of it interacting with
two structures of fixed volume is proportional the solid angle one of the structures presents to the other
and hence proportional to the inverse square of their separation. This method could be a cornerstone of an
approach to critique RNA structures in general. As can be seen in figure 5c) and d) this method is able to
rapidly predict the distribution of coincident ionizing events as a function of index difference, i.e. for a
suitable RNA ordering within the nucleocapsid it is able to rapidly predict the strand-length distribution
for coincident single-strand breaks. This concept is considered further in the discussion section.

Discussion
The histograms presented in figure 2 clearly show that 3D arrangement of the RNA (i.e. the
tertiary/quaternary structure) within the virion is important. Different assumed tertiary structures give
different probabilities of delivering one or more ionisations to the RNA and hence give different
probabilities of rendering a virion inactive per ion. In coronavirus most of the viral RNA lies within ~25
nm of the inner face of the membrane [12], making the arrangement similar to case ii). However, in this
region it is believed to be largely in highly ordered RNA-protein complexes such as those shown in figure
4 [10]. As table 2 and figure 5 show, the probability of hitting the RNA in such a configuration is roughly
proportional to the fractional volume occupied by the RNA, although it is consistently higher by 5-10% –
something possibly related to the RNA’s tertiary structure. The separate RNA-protein complexes will
keep RNA far apart meaning that the coincident damage probability across two of these complexes will
be small. Taken together these factors suggest something close to case iii) would apply. However, the
predicted inactivation probability would be raised somewhat due of ionising events on the RNA due to
the structure in the RNA-protein complex. Hence, one might suggest that the actual dose inactivation
curve might lie somewhere between that for cases ii) and iii) considered.
To make more firm predictions, among other things, one would need a better knowledge of the RNA
tertiary/quaternary structure, something which is considered a major challenge of structural biology.
However, it is not possible to deduce the tertiary/quaternary RNA structure from the dose-inactivation
curve – there could be many different tertiary/quaternary structures which lead to the same doseinactivation curve. Furthermore, there is currently significant uncertainty in radiation transport crosssections, the probability of an RNA strand-break either per ionizing event (target theory) or the amount of
energy required to make a break (energy deposition theory). These factors will need to be systematically
addressed before meaningful dose-inactivation curves can be deduced, even for an assumed
tertiary/quaternary RNA structure.
Historically there have been broadly two approaches to relate physical radiation transport processes to
biological outcome, target theory [3, 18] and energy deposition [15-17]. Although it is an open question
and one requiring further research, we argue that a target theory-based approach is more appropriate. The
energy deposition approach accounts for energy deposition by excitation (of water) as well as its
ionisation. In liquid water both processes lead to the formation of reactive products which mediate
biological damage. However, in biological structures such as proteins and RNA, there is a larger network
of bonds through which electronic energy can be transferred to stabilise the system, hence reducing bond
breaking. In contrast, ionisation will almost inevitably lead to rapid bond breaking. Indeed, the system is
more complex and might need an entirely new theory altogether. For example, it is reasonable to consider
a highly folded 3D biological structure to be more robust to effects of ionizing radiation than a more open
one.
We have presented some new tools for the rapid evaluation of the effects of ion beams on biological
systems. The concept of volume-scaling rather than density-scaling needs further investigation although

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ultimately what is required is a set of cross-sections for atomic and molecular processes for RNA, DNA
and proteins. The entire gamut of these biomolecules is clearly too large to study as a whole, representing
the entire ‘Holy Trinity’ of structural biology. However, the charge-density scaling approach leading to
table 1 is general, only requiring primary sequence information and atomic volumes. The approach, then,
could form the basis of a new way of generating the required cross-section data as required.
In figure 5 we showed that there are preferred differences along the sequence for locations of coincident
strand-breaks produced by a single ion. This was manifest as the differences in indexes which produced
peaks in figure 5c) and d). Coincident ionisation events could lead to the RNA being broken in two
places. Since the threading of the RNA through the SARS-CoV collection of RNA-protein complexes is
not yet understood, it is impossible to say if these peaks in the differences of indexes will manifest as
peaks in the differences of RNA strand-lengths observable after low dose irradiation (ensuring one or less
ions ionise a given RNA strand) and disassembling of the capsid. If there were peaks in the strand-length
distribution, this would then directly be informative of the RNA tertiary/quaternary structure in an
entirely new fashion and in turn informative of the way the virion forms. This idea then points to the idea
of using coincident RNA strand-breaks induced under single-ion hit conditions as a new means of
deducing tertiary/quaternary RNA structure.
The method of ionizing lines (MoILs) presented here is completely general and allows for the rapid
prediction of RNA strand-length distributions after irradiation in this manner. To illustrate this, we show
an example of a prediction taken from the RNA-Puzzles collection, as is shown in figure 6. This clearly
shows that the ion beam induced coincident fragment pattern is able to critique the best computationally
derived tertiary structure from within the RNA-Puzzles collaboration compared to the ‘golden standard’
crystallography structure. Hence ion-beam induced fragment length distributions can provide clear
indications of RNA tertiary structure. Essentially, the low-entropy pattern of ionisations induced by the
ion beam is able to encode the tertiary structural information in the RNA in the fragmentation pattern.

Figure 6. comparison of MoILs-predicted fragment length distributions of the best predicted (but not
entirely correct) structure (blue dots on the histogram) and the ‘gold standard’ X-ray crystallographic
structure (red dots on the histogram) for RNA puzzle #9 (a 71 nt RNA aptamer) from the RNA puzzles
collection [27]. The X-ray crystallographic structure was also used to make the space-filling model shown
in the inset. Note the peak at a fragment length of ~23 is indicative of incorrect structure prediction.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Features like this in the fragment length distribution could form the basis for critiquing and predicting
RNA tertiary structures.

Conclusion
We have shown that the interplay between radiation track structure and RNA’s 3D arrangement in space
(i.e. the tertiary/quaternary structure) has a significant effect on predicted dose-inactivation curves for
virions and that this effect can be traced back to the localised, low-entropy/highly informatic fashion ion
beams transfer energy to biological systems. Indeed, it is this localised transfer which offers the promise
of structurally intact radition inactivated virions (SIRI-Vs). This informatic transfer can potentially
encode tertiary/quaternary structure structural information in the lengths of ion-beam induced RNA
fragments, pointing to a new field of radio-structural biology. Methods such as charge-density based
volume scaling of targets and MoILs have been proposed as tools to help develop this field with its
promise of ab-initio RNA tertiary structure determination, provision of constraints for hybrid methods,
detection of quaternary interactions and signatures to identify or monitor structures in-situ.

Methods
TOPAS [28] version 3.3p01 that wraps the geant4-10-05-patch-01version [29] was used to transport 3
MeV alpha particles through a volume of water with a density of 1.4 g/cc over a distance of 0.8 µm. The
slowing down of the ion is negligible over this distance. The vertices for ionization by either the primary
ion or any child electrons were recorded on an ion-by-ion basis for future simulations. 100 such ion tracks
were recorded and saved for future use. For the simulations shown in figures 2 and 3, one of this set of
tracks was chosen at random and a 150 nm long section of the track was extracted. This extracted track
was then shifted by a random amount in the x- and y- directions (the z-direction being the direction of
propagation of the ion). The locations of the resulting ionization events were then recorded to produce the
histograms shown in figures 2 and 3. For each of these, ionizations from 200, 000 independent ion tracks
were recorded.
The geometry used for the Virion was derived from available structural biology information [10-13]. The
inner and outer radii of the envelope were set to 40 and 44 nm respectively with the RNA being confined
within a spherical region of radius 39 nm, subject to other conditions defining cases i) – iii) for the RNA
secondary structure. A total of 75 protein spike complexes were distributed penetrating outwards through
the virion’s envelope. Each spike complex was represented by an 8 nm long 1.6 nm radius cylinder
starting from the inside of the envelope and pointing radially outward. The other end of the cylinder was
joined to a truncated cone, exactly matching the 1.6 nm radius at the narrow end, widening 5 nm in radius
at the wide end, also with its axis point away radially and also being 8 nm long. These spike complexes
were positioned so that the axis of each one pointed directly away from the centre of the virion so as to be
approximately equally spaced on the envelope’s surface. Each of these objects was represented by a
Mathematica geometrical region, using Mathematica 12.1 with the RegionMember function being used to
determine if an ionisation vertex was within a region of interest.
For simulation of the RNA-protein complex, again structural information was taken from [10-13]. The
outside of the complex was constructed as a 30 nm long, 15 nm radius cylinder. Spiralling around the axis
of this cylinder were two strands of RNA, each nucleotide being represented by two spheres, one of
radius 0.35 nm (backbone) and one of radius 0.31 nm (base). The backbone was constructed along a 4.35
nm radius helix of pitch 14 nm with two complete revolutions of the helix being included for each strand.
The bases were placed so as to just touch the backbone, with the axis joining them pointing directly
outwards. This geometry was used for all the Monte Carlo (Geant4 [29]) simulations reported in table 1,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with the RNA chain modelled as water spheres with densities as per table 1 and immersed in a protein
environment modelled as a water with density of 1.4 g/cc.
Geant4 DNA [19] was used to track alpha particles and all secondary particles produced down to 10 eV
and all deexcitation processes were included, such as Fluorescence, Auger cascade, and PIXE. The beam
consisted of a rectangular field of 30 by 30 nm2 of 3 MeV mono-energetic alphas launched along an axis,
perpendicular to the RNA chain. A TOPAS extension was implemented in order to retrieve all the
pertinent information each time an ionization occurred such as position, energy deposited in the material,
particle type that indicated the interaction, material where ionization took place, track ID, and event ID of
the particle. The last two parameters allow to associate the track of all secondary particles that were
created in the same event.
For the volume-scaled simulations, the volumes of the spheres representing the backbone and bases were
modified as per table 1 with the scoring being done by replaying ion tracks and using Mathematica’s
RegionMember function as described above. 200,000 ion trajectories were considered for each
simulation. For the simulation shown in figures 4 and 5, the same process was repeated but the ion
trajectories were rotated as well as translated so the sphere shown in figure 4 was uniformly and
isotropically irradiated. The inner cylinder shown in figure 4 was used to speed up the simulations by
using nested region checking since only ionisation events inside this cylinder can also be inside one of the
spheres representing the RNA strands. 3.5 million ion trajectories were used in this simulation.

Data availability
Once the manuscript is accepted all of the data used to produce the figures will be placed in Manchester
University’s Institutional Repository as per the university’s policies to be publicly available and
searchable.

Author contributions
BVB performed the Monte Carlo simulations used throughout. FJC developed the Mathematica
simulations, the charge-density and volume-scaling concepts as well as the Method of Ionizing Lines. He
produced the manuscript and prepared all the figures. JC, SWC and AR provided advice on the biological
systems being modelled. All authors reviewed the manuscript.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Trilla, A., G. Trilla, and C. Daer, The 1918 "Spanish flu" in Spain. Clin Infect Dis, 2008. 47(5): p.
668-73.
Afrough, B., S. Dowall, and R. Hewson, Emerging viruses and current strategies for vaccine
intervention. Clin Exp Immunol, 2019. 196(2): p. 157-166.
Buzzell, A., F.B. Brandon, and M.A. Lauffer, Effects of X-Radiation on Influenza Virus. Archives of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, 1955. 58(2): p. 318-331.
Smolko, E.E. and J.H. Lombardo, Virus inactivation studies using ion beams, electron and gamma
irradiation. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section B: Beam Interactions
with Materials and Atoms, 2005. 236(1-4): p. 249-253.
Francis, Z., et al. Monte Carlo simulation inactivation of SARS-COV2 radiationinducedinactivation for vaccine development
https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2005/2005.06201.pdf. 2020.
Chen, M., et al., Elevated ACE2 expression in the olfactory neuroepithelium: implications for
anosmia and upper respiratory SARS-CoV-2 entry and replication. Eur Respir J, 2020.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Dalton-NI. p. https://www.dalton.manchester.ac.uk/research/facilities/cumbria-facilities/.
Statistia. p. https://www.statista.com/statistics/943867/size-of-the-global-vaccine-market/.
Market-Reports. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/animal-veterinaryvaccines-market-1233.html].
Chang, C.K., et al., The SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein--forms and functions. Antiviral
Res, 2014. 103: p. 39-50.
Chen, C.Y., et al., Structure of the SARS coronavirus nucleocapsid protein RNA-binding
dimerization domain suggests a mechanism for helical packaging of viral RNA. J Mol Biol, 2007.
368(4): p. 1075-86.
Neuman, B.W., et al., Supramolecular architecture of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus revealed by electron cryomicroscopy. J Virol, 2006. 80(16): p. 7918-28.
Gui, M., et al., Electron microscopy studies of the coronavirus ribonucleoprotein complex. Protein
Cell, 2017. 8(3): p. 219-224.
Ruan, Y., et al., Comparative full-length genome sequence analysis of 14 SARS coronavirus
isolates and common mutations associated with putative origins of infection. The Lancet, 2003.
361(9371): p. 1779-1785.
Elsasser, T., M. Kramer, and M. Scholz, Accuracy of the local effect model for the prediction of
biologic effects of carbon ion beams in vitro and in vivo. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 2008. 71(3):
p. 866-72.
McMahon, S.J., et al., Biological consequences of nanoscale energy deposition near irradiated
heavy atom nanoparticles. Sci Rep, 2011. 1: p. 18.
Villagomez-Bernabe, B. and F.J. Currell, Physical Radiation Enhancement Effects Around Clinically
Relevant Clusters of Nanoagents in Biological Systems. Sci Rep, 2019. 9(1): p. 8156.
Nomiya, T., Discussions on target theory: past and present. J Radiat Res, 2013. 54(6): p. 1161-3.
Incerti, S., et al., The GEANT4-DNA Project. International Journal of Modeling, Simulation, and
Scientific Computing, 2010. 1(2): p. 157-78.
Bernal, M.A., et al., Track structure modeling in liquid water: A review of the Geant4-DNA very
low energy extension of the Geant4 Monte Carlo simulation toolkit. Phys Med, 2015. 31(8): p.
861-874.
Bethe, H. and A. J., Experimental Nuclear Physics, ed. E. Segré. 1959, New York: J. Wiley.
Sigmund, P., Particle Penetration and Radiation Effects. Springer Series in Solid State Sciences.
Vol. 151. 2006.
Sauer, S.P.A., J. Oddershede, and J.R. Sabin, Mean Excitation Energies for Biomolecules. 2011. p.
215-242.
Elemental Composition of Biomolecules. Available from:
https://www.ecologycenter.us/population-dynamics-2/elemental-composition-ofbiomolecules.html.
Fischer, H., I. Polikarpov, and A.F. Craievich, Average protein density is a molecular-weightdependent function. Protein Sci, 2004. 13(10): p. 2825-8.
Voss, N.R. and M. Gerstein, Calculation of standard atomic volumes for RNA and comparison
with proteins: RNA is packed more tightly. J Mol Biol, 2005. 346(2): p. 477-92.
Miao, Z., et al., RNA-Puzzles Round IV: 3D structure predictions of four ribozymes and two
aptamers. 2020.
Perl, J., et al., TOPAS: an innovative proton Monte Carlo platform for research and clinical
applications. Med Phys, 2012. 39(11): p. 6818-37.
Agostinelli, S., et al., Geant4—a simulation toolkit. Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment, 2003.
506(3): p. 250-303.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.24.265553; this version posted September 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

