bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

1

Scalable Analysis of Authentic Viral Envelopes
on FRONTERA
Fabio González-Arias∗ , Tyler Reddy† , John E. Stone‡ , Jodi A. Hadden-Perilla∗§ and Juan R. Perilla∗§
∗ Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716
† Applied Computer Science (CCS-7), Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544
‡ Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61801
§ Correspondence: jperilla@udel.edu, jhadden@udel.edu
Abstract—Enveloped viruses infect host cells via fusion of their viral envelope with the plasma membrane. Upon cell entry, viruses
gain access to all the macromolecular machinery necessary to replicate, assemble, and bud their progeny from the infected cell. By
employing molecular dynamics simulations to characterize the dynamical and chemical-physical properties of viral envelopes,
researchers can gain insights into key determinants of viral infection and propagation. Here, the Frontera supercomputer is leveraged
for large-scale analysis of authentic viral envelopes, whose lipid compositions are complex and realistic. VMD with support for MPI is
employed on the massive parallel computer to overcome previous computational limitations and enable investigation into virus biology
at an unprecedented scale. The modeling and analysis techniques applied to authentic viral envelopes at two levels of particle
resolution are broadly applicable to the study of other viruses, including the novel coronavirus that causes COVID-19. A framework for
carrying out scalable analysis of multi-million particle MD simulation trajectories on Frontera is presented, expanding the the utility of
the machine in humanity’s ongoing fight against infectious disease.

F

1

I NTRODUCTION

V

IRUSES are pathogens that cause infectious diseases in
living organisms. Because of their of lack metabolic
capabilities, viruses require the molecular machinery of
a host cell to replicate [1]. Virus particles, referred to as
virions, exhibit chemical and structural diversity across
families. The detailed architecture of a virus determines its
fitness, mechanism of infection and replication, and host cell
tropism.
The most basic virions consist of genomic material protected by a protein shell, called a capsid. The viral genome
contains the blueprint for synthesis of the macromolecular
components that will form progeny virions. Depending
on the virus, the genome may be encoded as RNA or
as DNA [2], [3]. More complex virus structures exhibit
an exterior membrane, called an envelope, composed of a
lipid bilayer. Fusion of the viral envelope with the plasma
membrane of the host cell initiates infection. Enveloped
viruses typically incorporate surface glycoproteins that interact with host cell receptors to mediate adhesion and
facilitate membrane fusion [4]. The composition of the viral
envelope, along with the specificity of the adhesion proteins,
contributes to the recognition, attachment, and fusion of the
pathogen with its host [5], [6]. Other membrane-embedded
structures that may be displayed by a virion include viral ion channels, called viroporins, proteins that provide
particle scaffolding or assembly support, or proteins that
participate in the release of progeny virions [7].
Enveloped viruses, such as influenza A, Ebola, and
HIV-1, account for numerous cases of infection and death
in humans each year. SARS-CoV-2, the novel coronavirus
that causes COVID-19, is also enveloped. The SARS-CoV-2
virion incorporates a class-I fusion glycoprotein called the

spike (S), a purported viroporin known as the envelope (E)
protein, and a structurally essential integral membrane (M)
protein [8]. While each of these components plays a key
role in the viral life cycle, it is ultimately the envelope that
enables each to carry out its function successfully. As the
envelope is derived from the host cell membrane, particularly from the plasma membrane or organelle in which
the virion assembles, its lipid composition may be highly
complex [9]. Further, the envelope may be asymmetric, or
present different lipid compositions across the inner versus
outer leaflets of the bilayer; membrane asymmetry is crucial
to the function of most organelles and may likewise be important in the assembly or infection processes of viruses [10],
[11].
Detailed characterization of viruses is critical to the
development of new antiviral therapies [12]. Computational
studies now routinely contribute to the foundation of basic science that drives innovation in pharmacy, medicine,
and the management of public health. Notably, molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations have emerged as a powerful
tool to investigate viruses. Following advances in highperformance computing, MD simulations can now be applied to elucidate chemical-physical properties of large,
biologically relevant virus structures, revealing insights into
their mechanisms of infection and replication that are inaccessible to experiments [13]–[16]. In recent years, MD
simulations of intact enveloped virions, including influenza
A, dengue, and an immature HIV-1 particle, have been
reported. State-of-the art lipidomics profiling of viruses has
enabled some of these models to contain realistic lipid
composition, leading to the first computational studies of
authentic viral envelopes [17]–[20]. Here, next-generation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

simulation and analysis of authentic viral envelopes is
discussed, leveraging the resources of the leadership-class
Frontera supercomputer. A framework for deploying largescale analysis of MD simulation trajectories on Frontera is
presented.

2

C OMPUTATIONAL CHALLENGES

MD simulations of membranes can be carried out at coarsegrained (CG) or atomistic levels of detail. CG models employ particles that consolidate groups of atoms. Atomistic
models employ discrete particles for each constituent atom,
including hydrogen. Due to the size and chemical complexity of authentic viral envelopes, MD simulations can include
millions – even hundreds of millions – of particles, particularly when the physiological solvent environment of the
system is taken into account. Moreover, MD simulations of
membranes must be performed on timescales of hundreds
of nanoseconds to microseconds in order to characterize
dynamical properties, such as lipid lateral diffusion and flipflop between leaflets of the bilayer [16], [21].
CG models reduce computational expense by eliminating degrees of freedom, enabling the exploration of extended simulation timescales; however, the loss of detail
versus atomistic models reduces simulation accuracy. An
approach that combines the strengths of both methods involves building and simulating a CG model, which reproduces essential features of the membrane and allows equilibration of lipid species [22], then backmapping the CG representation to an atomistic model for further study [23], [24].
The backmapping process can be precarious and depends
on the molecular mechanics force field and energy minimization scheme to resolve structural artifacts. Either way,
the incredible number of particle-particle interactions that
must be computed to reproduce the behavior of a membrane
bilayer over extended simulation timescales, especially for
complex, large-scale systems like viral envelopes, presents a
significant computational challenge [25].
Furthermore, the amount of data generated by MD simulations of intact viral envelopes is tremendous, both in terms
of chemical intricacy and storage footprint. MD simulation
trajectories, which may range from tens to hundreds of
terabytes in size, fail to provide new information about
viruses until they are analyzed in painstaking detail. The
magnitude of trajectory files and the sheer numbers of
particles that must be tracked during analyses necessitates
massively parallel computational solutions. It follows that
such large datasets cannot be feasibly transferred to other
locations for analysis or visualization, and interaction with
the data to yield scientific discoveries must be conducted on
the same high-performance computing resource used to run
the simulation in the first place.

3

C OMPUTATIONAL SOLUTIONS ON F RONTERA

Frontera is a leadership-class petascale supercomputer,
funded by the National Science Foundation, and housed at
the Texas Advanced Computing Center at the University
of Texas at Austin. It is ranked as the fifth most powerful
supercomputer in the world, and the fastest on any university campus. Frontera provides an invaluable computational

2

resource for furthering basic science research of large biological systems, including enveloped viruses.
Frontera comprises multiple computing subsystems. The
primary partition is CPU-only and consists of 8,008 compute
nodes powered by Intel Xeon Platinum 8280 (CLX) processors; each node provides 56 cores (28 cores per socket)
and 192 GB of RAM. The large memory partition includes
16 additional compute nodes with 112 cores (28 cores per
socket) and memory upgraded to 2.1 TB NVDIMM. Another
partition is a hybrid CPU/GPU architecture, consisting of
90 compute nodes powered by Intel Xeon E5-2620 v4 processors and NVIDIA Quadro RTX 5000 GPUs; each node
provides 16 cores (8 cores per socket), four GPUs, and
128 GB of RAM. All Frontera nodes contain 240 GB solidstate drives and are interconnected with Mellanox HDR
InfiniBand. The Longhorn subsystem consists of 96 hybrid
CPU/GPU compute nodes powered by IBM POWER9 processors and NVIDIA Tesla V100 GPUs; each node provides
40 cores (20 cores per socket), four GPUs, 256 GB of RAM,
and 900 GB of local storage. Eight additional nodes have
RAM upgraded to 512 GB to support memory-intensive calculations. Longhorn is interconnected with Mellanox EDR
InfiniBand.
Frontera has a multi-tier file system and provides 60 PB
of Lustre-based storage shared across nodes. The ability to
store massive amounts of data and analyze this data in
parallel enables the investigation of biological systems at
an unprecedented scale. Researchers gain access, not only
to the computational capability to perform MD simulations
of millions of particles, but also to the capability to extract
more complex and comprehensive information from their
simulation trajectories, leading to deeper discoveries relevant to the advancement of human health.
Frontera’s Lustre filesystem is crucial for the performance of large-scale biomolecular analysis. Lustre decomposes storage resources among a large number of so-called
Object Store Targets (OSTs) that are themselves composed
of moderate sized high-performance RAID-protected disk
arrays. In much the same way that a RAID-0 array can stripe
a file over multiple disks, Lustre can similarly stripe files
over multiple OSTs. This second level of striping over OSTs
is particularly advantageous when working with very large
files, since I/O operations at different file offsets can be serviced in parallel by multiple independent OSTs, according
to the stripe count and stripe size set by the user, or by system defaults. Figure 1A illustrates how an MD simulation
trajectory (and potentially even individual frames) can be
striped over OSTs. Figure 1B demonstrates the scalability
of multi-million particle biomolecular analysis on Frontera
when using the Lustre filesystem.

4

PARALLEL A NALYSIS WITH VMD

Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD) is a widely-used software for biomolecular visualization and analysis [26]. Commonly utilized as a desktop application to setup MD simulations and interact with trajectory data, VMD exploits
multi-core CPUS, CPU vectorization, and GPU-accelerated
computing techniques to achieve high performance on key
molecular modeling tasks. VMD can also be used in-situ on
massive parallel computers to perform large-scale modeling

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

tasks, exploiting computing and I/O resources that are
orders of magnitude greater than those available on even the
most powerful desktop workstations. MPI implementations
of VMD have already been employed on supercomputers to
enable novel investigation of large virus structures, such as
the capsid of HIV-1 [27].
To facilitate large-scale molecular modeling pipelines,
VMD incorporates support for distributed memory message
passing with MPI, a built-in parallel work scheduler with
dynamic load balancing, and easy to use scripting commands, enabling large-scale parallel execution of molecular
visualization and analysis of MD simulation trajectories.
VMD’s Tcl and Python scripting interfaces provide a userfriendly mechanism to distribute and schedule user-defined
work across MPI ranks, to synchronize workers, and to
gather results. This approach allows user-written modeling
and analysis scripts to be readily adapted from existing
scripts and protocols that have been developed previously
on local computing resources, allowing robust tools to be
deployed on a large-scale, often with few changes.

3

distributed memory parallel computers. Computationally
demanding VMD commands are executed by the fastest
available hardware-optimized code path, with a general
purpose C++ implementation as the standard fall-back.
When run in parallel, the I/O operations of each VMD MPI
rank are independent of each other, allowing I/O intensive
trajectory analysis tasks to naturally exploit parallel filesystems.
VMD supports I/O-efficient MD simulation trajectory
formats that have been specifically designed for so-called
burst buffers and flash-based high-performance computing
storage tiers, with emerging GPU-Direct Storage interfaces
achieving I/O rates of up to 70 GB/sec on a single GPUdense compute node, and conventional parallel I/O rates
approaching 1 TB/sec. VMD startup scripts can be customized to run one or multiple MPI ranks per node, while
avoiding GPU sharing conflicts or other undesirable outcomes, allowing compute, memory, and I/O resources to be
apportioned among MPI ranks, and thereby best-utilized for
the task at hand.
To facilitate large-scale simulation and analysis of biological systems containing millions of particles, VMD has been
compiled on Frontera with MPI enabled. Frontera’s capacity for massively parallel investigation of intact, authentic
viral envelopes is demonstrated by application to envelope
models at two levels of particle resolution.

5
5.1

M ODELING AUTHENTIC VIRAL ENVELOPES
Coarse-grained model of HIV-1 envelope

Lipidomics profiling by mass spectrometry has established
the lipid composition of the HIV-1 viral envelope [28], [29].
Based on this experimental data, a CG model of an authentic
HIV-1 envelope was constructed (Fig. 2A). The model exhibits a highly complex chemical makeup, with 24 different
lipid species and asymmetry across the inner and outer
leaflets of the membrane bilayer. The envelope is 120 nm in
diameter and, with solvent, comprises 29 million CG beads,
represented as MARTINI [30] particles. The CG model was
equilibrated using GROMACS 2018.1 [31], and its dynamics
were investigated over a production simulation time of over
five microseconds. The MD simulation system, complete
with solvent environment, is shown in Figure 2B.
5.2

Fig. 1. Analysis of large-scale MD simulation trajectories using Lustre
filesystem A Illustration of trajectory file striping using Lustre filesystem.
Each frame on the file is striped across multiple OSTs, where the
number of stripes are spawned according to the stripe count and stripe
size of the storage file. Upon submission of the job, the compute nodes
access a series of frames, from the OSTs, to perform the analysis of the
trajectory using parallel I/O. Instructions from the Tcl scripting interface
involving reading and writing files are requested through the Metadata
Server (MS), fetching the layout extended attributes (EAs) and using this
information to perform I/O on the file. B Wall-clock time for the transverse
diffusion analysis of authentic viral envelopes on Frontera, using a stripe
count of 16 with different stripe sizes.

VMD exploits node-level hardware-optimized CPU and
GPU kernels, all of which are also used when running on

Atomistic model of HIV-1 envelope

All-atom MD simulations are the most accurate classical
mechanical approach that can be applied to study largescale biological systems [13]. Following simulation of the
CG HIV-1 envelope model, which facilitated equilibration
of lipid distributions over an extended simulation timescale,
an atomistic model was constructed based on backmapping.
The equilibrated CG model was mapped to an atomistic
representation using the Backward tool [24], which enables
transformation of CG systems built with MARTINI [30].
The approach utilizes a series of mapping files that contain
structural information and geometric restrictions relevant
to the modeling of each lipid species. Local geometries
of atomistic lipids are reconstructed, taking into account
stoichiometry and stereochemistry, to project the CG configuration into an atomistic configuration. An example of an

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4

can catalyze this movement of lipids, or it can occur spontaneously over longer timescales. Computational approaches
to characterize transverse diffusion in heterogeneous lipid
mixtures have been described previously and indicate that
flip-flop occurs at relatively slow rates [32], [33]. Current
strategies to measure flip-flip events are based on tracking
the translocation and reorientation of lipid headgroups (i.e.,
colored beads in Fig. 2A).
A feature released in VMD 1.9.4 by the authors (measure
volinterior) [34] facilitates tracking of headgroup dynamics
by providing rapid classification of their locations in the
inner versus outer leaflets of the bilayer. The method equips
VMD with a mechanism to identify the inside versus outside
of a biomolecular container. If the container surface is specified as the region of the bilayer composed of lipid tail groups
(i.e., silver in Fig. 2A), VMD can detect the presence of lipid
headgroups in the endoplasmic versus exoplasmic leaflets.
By tracking the number of headgroups that flip-flop from
one leaflet to the other during intervals of simulation time,
rates of transverse diffusion can be readily calculated [34].
Frontera was leveraged to measure transverse lipid diffusion in the CG model of the authentic HIV-1 viral envelope using measure volinterior in VMD compiled with MPI
support. The entire 5.2 µs of MD simulation, comprising
5,200 frames with a storage footprint of 170 GB, was used
for the calculation. To obtain high I/O performance, the
trajectory files were set to a 1 MB stripe width, striping over
a total of 16 Lustre OSTs. The analysis was run on Frontera’s
primary compute partition, utilizing 56 Intel CLX cores per
node.

Fig. 2. Authentic model of HIV-1 viral envelope A Cross-section of CG
envelope model. Inset shows details of the inner (endoplasmic) and
outer (exoplasmic) leaflets of the membrane bilayer. Envelope is 120
nm in diameter and comprises 29 million MARTINI particles. B CG
envelope model suspended in physiological solvent environment, used
for long-timescale MD simulations. C Chemical structure and atomistic
representation of DPSM, one of 24 lipid species included in the HIV-1
envelope model. Each CG lipid in the envelope was backmapped to an
atomistic version exhibiting full chemical detail.

atomistic representation of a lipid, along with its chemical
structure, is given in Figure 2C. The final atomistic model
of an authentic HIV-1 viral envelope comprises over 280
million atoms including solvent and ions. To complete the
backmapping process, the system must be relaxed to a local
energy minimum to resolve structural artifacts introduced
by the CG to all-atom transformation.

6
6.1

V IRAL ENVELOPE ANALYSIS ON F RONTERA
Measuring transverse lipid diffusion

Transverse diffusion of lipids occurs when they flip-flop
between leaflets of the membrane bilayer. Cellular enzymes

Flip-flop events for the lipid DPSM were found to occur
at a rate of 2.62 × 10−4 ± 1.49 × 10−5 molecules per
nanosecond from the exoplasmic to endoplasmic leaflet, and
2.33 × 10−5 ± 1.41 × 10−6 molecules per nanosecond from
the endoplasmic to exoplasmic leaflet (Fig. 3A). Because
inward versus outward diffusion of this lipid species is
not occurring at the same rate, the calculation reveals the
process of lipid distributions being equilibrated across the
asymmetric bilayer over the course of the simulation. The
Tcl framework for performing the calculation with VMD, the
VMD startup script, and the SLURM job submission script
used to run the calculation on Frontera, are given in the
Supplementary Information.
Figure 3B shows the wall-clock time for the transverse
diffusion calculation with one VMD MPI rank per node and
two VMD MPI ranks per node. By running multiple VMD
MPI ranks per node, I/O operations are more effectively
overlapped with computations, thereby achieving better
overall I/O and compute throughput both per-node, and in
the aggregate, leading to an overall performance gain. It is
worth noting, however, that finite per-node memory, GPU,
and interconnect resources ultimately restrict the benefit
of using multiple MPI ranks per-node to achieve better
compute-I/O overlap. Ongoing VMD developments aim to
improve compute-I/O overlap both for CPUs and for GPUaccelerated molecular modeling tasks through increased
internal multithreading of trajectory I/O to allow greater
asynchrony and decoupling of I/O from internal VMD
computational kernels.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 3. Parallel analysis of authentic viral envelopes. A Transverse diffusion analysis of the lipid DPSM in the CG model of the viral envelope. B
Wall-clock time for calculation of transverse diffusion on Frontera.

6.2

Iterative relaxation of an atomistic envelope

The atomistic model of an authentic HIV-1 viral envelope
presented here was derived via backmapping from a CG
model. A major limitation of the backmapping approach
involves structural artifacts introduced by the CG to allatom transformation. Figure 4A shows an example of such
structural artifacts in the lipid DPSM, including distorted
bond lengths and angles. The current strategy for remedying these artifacts is to subject the backmapped model
to molecular mechanics energy minimization, relaxing the
geometry of each molecule, and the system as a whole, to
a local energy minimum. Figure 4B shows an example of a
post-minimization structure in which the distortions have
been successfully resolved.
Energy minimization is a common procedure applied to
biomolecular systems to eliminate close contacts and nonideal geometries prior to the start of MD simulations. The
energy of atomistic systems is described as an empirical
potential energy function V(ri ), where the terms depend on
the positions r of i atoms [35]. Here, energy minimization of
the system is performed on Frontera using NAMD 2.14, an
MD engine based on C++ and charmm++ that is amenable
to large systems by virtue of being highly scalable on
massive parallel computers [36], [37]. Energy minimization
is implemented in NAMD using the conjugate gradient
algorithm [38] for maximum performance. The atomistic
model of an authentic HIV-1 viral envelope was subjected to

5

energy minimization based on the CHARMM36 force field,
with all the latest corrections in parameters for lipids and
heterogenous protein-lipid systems [39].
Figure 4C diagrams the complete procedure for constructing an atomistic envelope model from an initial CG
model. Following backmapping of the CG representation
to an all-atom representation, explicit ions must be added
to achieve electrostatic neutralization of the system, given
the numerous charged lipid headgroups present in the envelope. Coordinate and topology files are generated using
the js plugin in VMD, utilizing a binary file format that
overcomes the fixed-column limitation of pdb files. The minimization of multi-million atom systems can occasionally
cause memory overflow or significant loss of performance
in NAMD, due to the I/O, even on large-scale computational resources. In remedy, the memory-optimized version of NAMD implements parallel I/O and a compressed
topology file, reducing the memory requirements for large
biomolecular systems.
Following initial conjugate gradient minimization with
NAMD, the model is assessed for major contributors to
energetic instability, including structural clashes, close contacts, bond lengths or angles significantly exceeding equilibrium values, and unfavorable dihedral configurations. Such
assessments can be rapidly accomplished using VMD compiled with MPI support on Frontera, using existing VMD
commands like measure contacts, measure bond, measure angle,
and measure dihed. In a second iteration of minimization, regions of the system that are relatively stable are restrained in
order to focus further minimization efforts on regions of that
remain the most energetically unfavorable. Useful NAMD
commands for minimization of unstable systems include
minTinyStep and minBabyStep, which control the magnitude
of steps for the line minimizer algorithm for initial and
further steps of minimization, respectively. This process is
repeated until all geometric distortions are resolved, and the
atomistic model has been driven to a local energy minimum,
representative of the stable biological system at equilibrium.

7

C ONCLUSIONS

Increased computational capability presents the opportunity for researchers to push the envelope and extend the
bounds of scientific knowledge. Building, simulating, and
analyzing models of intact, authentic viral envelopes, particularly at atomistic detail, is a relatively new research
endeavor under active development. The leadership-class
Frontera supercomputer provides a powerful resource to
support the continued growth of this field. The combination
of Frontera’s state-of-the-art, massively parallel architecture
and high-performance software applications, such as VMD,
that can exploit it will enabling researchers to make discoveries relevant to the treatment and prevention of disease
at an unprecedented scale. All of the techniques discussed
here are applicable to modeling and investigation of other
enveloped viruses, including SARS-CoV-2, which likewise
comprises a complex lipidome. Owing to resources like
Frontera, the computational biological sciences will play an
increasingly important role in driving future innovations
that improve human health and longevity.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

6

is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration under Contract No.
89233218CNA000001.

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]

[7]

[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
Fig. 4. Resolving distortions in backmapped lipids. A Atomistic representation of DPSM with structural artifacts post-backmapping. CG
representation of the lipid is superimposed to the all-atom structure.
B Atomistic representation of DPSM post-minimization with structural
artifacts resolved. CG representation of the lipid is superimposed to
the relaxed all-atom structure. C Iterative relaxation process for largescale authentic atomistic viral envelopes. Following backmapping from
CG representations to all-atom, the system is subjected to charge neutralization, followed by generation of topology and coordinate files. Conjugate gradient minimization using NAMD, in combination with parallel
analysis using VMD MPI, is employed iteratively to eliminate structural
artifacts of the membrane and drive the system to a local minimum.

[14]

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

[19]

This work is supported by National Science Foundation
award MCB-2027096, funded in part by the Delaware Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This research is part of the Frontera computing
project at the Texas Advanced Computing Center. Frontera
is made possible by National Science Foundation award
OAC-1818253. VMD development has been supported by
National Institutes of Health grant P41-GM104601. This
research used resources provided by the Los Alamos National Laboratory Institutional Computing Program, which

[15]
[16]
[17]
[18]

[20]
[21]

[22]

P. Cossart and A. Helenius, “Endocytosis of viruses and bacteria,”
Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology, vol. 6, no. 8, p. a016972,
2014.
J. L. Van Etten, L. C. Lane, and D. D. Dunigan, “DNA viruses: the
really big ones (giruses),” Annual review of microbiology, vol. 64, pp.
83–99, 2010.
P. Poltronieri, B. Sun, and M. Mallardo, “RNA viruses: RNA roles
in pathogenesis, coreplication and viral load,” Current genomics,
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 327–335, 2015.
F. A. Rey and S.-M. Lok, “Common features of enveloped viruses
and implications for immunogen design for next-generation vaccines,” Cell, vol. 172, no. 6, pp. 1319–1334, 2018.
S. C. Harrison, “Viral membrane fusion,” Nature structural &
molecular biology, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 690–698, 2008.
S. S. Rawat, M. Viard, S. A. Gallo, A. Rein, R. Blumenthal, and
A. Puri, “Modulation of entry of enveloped viruses by cholesterol
and sphingolipids,” Molecular membrane biology, vol. 20, no. 3, pp.
243–254, 2003.
J. L. Nieto-Torres, C. Verdiá-Báguena, C. Castaño-Rodriguez, V. M.
Aguilella, and L. Enjuanes, “Relevance of viroporin ion channel
activity on viral replication and pathogenesis,” Viruses, vol. 7,
no. 7, pp. 3552–3573, 2015.
A. Wu et al., “Genome composition and divergence of the novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) originating in China,” Cell host & microbe,
2020.
T. Tang, M. Bidon, J. A. Jaimes, G. R. Whittaker, and S. Daniel,
“Coronavirus membrane fusion mechanism offers as a potential
target for antiviral development,” Antiviral research, p. 104792,
2020.
S. Chiantia and E. London, “Lipid bilayer asymmetry,” in
Encyclopedia of Biophysics, G. C. K. Roberts, Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 1250–1253. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-16712-6 552
G. van Meer, “Dynamic transbilayer lipid asymmetry,” Cold Spring
Harbor perspectives in biology, vol. 3, no. 5, p. a004671, 2011.
D. D. Richman and N. Nathanson, “Antiviral therapy,” in Viral
Pathogenesis. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 271–287.
J. R. Perilla et al., “Molecular dynamics simulations of large macromolecular complexes,” Current opinion in structural biology, vol. 31,
pp. 64–74, 2015.
J. K. Marzinek, R. G. Huber, and P. J. Bond, “Multiscale modelling
and simulation of viruses,” Current Opinion in Structural Biology,
vol. 61, pp. 146–152, 2020.
J. A. Hadden and J. R. Perilla, “All-atom virus simulations,”
Current opinion in virology, vol. 31, pp. 82–91, 2018.
T. Reddy and M. S. Sansom, “Computational virology: from the
inside out,” Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes, vol.
1858, no. 7, pp. 1610–1618, 2016.
T. Reddy et al., “Nothing to sneeze at: a dynamic and integrative
computational model of an influenza A virion,” Structure, vol. 23,
no. 3, pp. 584–597, 2015.
T. Reddy and M. S. Sansom, “The role of the membrane in
the structure and biophysical robustness of the dengue virion
envelope,” Structure, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 375–382, 2016.
J. D. Durrant, S. E. Kochanek, L. Casalino, P. U. Ieong, A. C.
Dommer, and R. E. Amaro, “Mesoscale all-atom influenza virus
simulations suggest new substrate binding mechanism,” ACS
central science, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 189–196, 2020.
G. S. Ayton and G. A. Voth, “Multiscale computer simulation of
the immature HIV-1 virion,” Biophysical journal, vol. 99, no. 9, pp.
2757–2765, 2010.
S. J. Marrink, V. Corradi, P. C. Souza, H. I. Ingolfsson, D. P.
Tieleman, and M. S. Sansom, “Computational modeling of realistic
cell membranes,” Chemical reviews, vol. 119, no. 9, pp. 6184–6226,
2019.
S. V. Bennun, M. I. Hoopes, C. Xing, and R. Faller, “Coarse-grained
modeling of lipids,” Chemistry and physics of lipids, vol. 159, no. 2,
pp. 59–66, 2009.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.05.188367; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
[23] A. J. Rzepiela, L. V. Schäfer, N. Goga, H. J. Risselada, A. H.
De Vries, and S. J. Marrink, “Reconstruction of atomistic details
from coarse-grained structures,” Journal of computational chemistry,
vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1333–1343, 2010.
[24] T. A. Wassenaar, K. Pluhackova, R. A. Bockmann, S. J. Marrink,
and D. P. Tieleman, “Going backward: a flexible geometric approach to reverse transformation from coarse grained to atomistic
models,” Journal of chemical theory and computation, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 676–690, 2014.
[25] D. Poger, B. Caron, and A. E. Mark, “Validating lipid force fields
against experimental data: Progress, challenges and perspectives,”
Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes, vol. 1858, no. 7,
pp. 1556–1565, 2016.
[26] W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, and K. Schulten, “VMD – visual molecular dynamics,” Journal of molecular graphics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 33–38,
1996.
[27] J. R. Perilla and K. Schulten, “Physical properties of the HIV1 capsid from all-atom molecular dynamics simulations,” Nature
communications, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2017.
[28] B. Brügger, B. Glass, P. Haberkant, I. Leibrecht, F. T. Wieland,
and H.-G. Kräusslich, “The HIV lipidome: a raft with an unusual
composition,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol.
103, no. 8, pp. 2641–2646, 2006.
[29] M. Lorizate et al., “Comparative lipidomics analysis of HIV-1
particles and their producer cell membrane in different cell lines,”
Cellular microbiology, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 292–304, 2013.
[30] S. J. Marrink, H. J. Risselada, S. Yefimov, D. P. Tieleman, and A. H.
De Vries, “The MARTINI force field: coarse grained model for
biomolecular simulations,” The journal of physical chemistry B, vol.
111, no. 27, pp. 7812–7824, 2007.
[31] S. Pronk et al., “GROMACS 4.5: a high-throughput and highly
parallel open source molecular simulation toolkit,” Bioinformatics,
vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 845–854, 2013.
[32] F. Ogushi, R. Ishitsuka, T. Kobayashi, and Y. Sugita, “Rapid flipflop motions of diacylglycerol and ceramide in phospholipid
bilayers,” Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 522, pp. 96–102, 2012.
[33] R.-X. Gu, S. Baoukina, and D. P. Tieleman, “Cholesterol flipflop in heterogeneous membranes,” Journal of chemical theory and
computation, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 2064–2070, 2019.
[34] A. J. Bryer, J. A. Hadden-Perilla, J. E. Stone, and J. R. Perilla, “High-performance analysis of biomolecular containers to
measure small-molecule transport, transbilayer lipid diffusion,
and protein cavities,” Journal of chemical information and modeling,
vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 4328–4338, 2019.
[35] B. R. Brooks, R. E. Bruccoleri, B. D. Olafson, D. J. States, S. a.
Swaminathan, and M. Karplus, “CHARMM: a program for macromolecular energy, minimization, and dynamics calculations,” Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 187–217, 1983.
[36] J. C. Phillips et al., “Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD,”
Journal of computational chemistry, vol. 26, no. 16, pp. 1781–1802,
2005.
[37] L. Kalé and S. Krishnan, “Parallel programming using c; wilson,
gv; lu, p., eds,” 1996.
[38] M. C. Payne, M. P. Teter, D. C. Allan, T. Arias, and a. J. Joannopoulos, “Iterative minimization techniques for ab initio total-energy
calculations: molecular dynamics and conjugate gradients,” Reviews of modern physics, vol. 64, no. 4, p. 1045, 1992.
[39] J. B. Klauda et al., “Update of the CHARMM all-atom additive
force field for lipids: validation on six lipid types,” The journal of
physical chemistry B, vol. 114, no. 23, pp. 7830–7843, 2010.

7

