bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Dissecting the common and compartment-specific features of COVID-19
severity in the lung and periphery with single-cell resolution
Kalon J. Overholt1*†, Jonathan R. Krog1*†, Bryan D. Bryson1,2
1

Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
02139, USA
2
Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT, and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA

*These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Correspondence should be addressed to K.J.O. and J.R.K. (overholt@mit.edu, jkrog@mit.edu).

ABSTRACT
As the global COVID-19 pandemic continues to escalate, no effective treatment has yet been
developed for the severe respiratory complications of this disease. This may be due in large part to the
unclear immunopathological basis for the development of immune dysregulation and acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS) in severe and critical patients. Specifically, it remains unknown whether the
immunological features of the disease that have been identified so far are compartment-specific responses
or general features of COVID-19. Additionally, readily detectable biological markers correlated with strata
of disease severity that could be used to triage patients and inform treatment options have not yet been
identified. Here, we leveraged publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing data to elucidate the common
and compartment-specific immunological features of clinically severe COVID-19. We identified a number
of transcriptional programs that are altered across the spectrum of disease severity, few of which are
common between the lung and peripheral immune environments. In the lung, comparing severe and
moderate patients revealed severity-specific responses of enhanced interferon, A20/IκB, IL-2, and IL-6
pathway signatures along with broad signaling activity of IFNG, SPP1, CCL3, CCL8, and IL18 across cell
types. These signatures contrasted with features unique to ARDS observed in the blood compartment, which
included depletion of interferon and A20/IκB signatures and a lack of IL-6 response. The cell surface
marker S1PR1 was strongly upregulated in patients diagnosed with ARDS compared to non-ARDS patients
in γδ T cells of the blood compartment, and we nominate S1PR1 as a potential marker for
immunophenotyping ARDS in COVID-19 patients using flow cytometry.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

HIGHLIGHTS
•

COVID-19 disease severity is associated with a number of compositional shifts in the cellular
makeup of the blood and lung environments.

•

Transcriptional data suggest differentially expressed cell surface proteins as markers for COVID19 immunophenotyping from BALF and PBMC samples.

•

Severity-specific features COVID-19 manifest at the pathway level, suggesting distinct changes to
epithelia and differences between local and systemic immune dynamics.

•

Immune-epithelial cellular communication analysis identifies ligands implicated in transcriptional
regulation of proto-oncogenes in the lung epithelia of severe COVID-19 patients.

•

Network

analysis

suggests

broadly-acting

dysregulatory

ligands

in

the

pulmonary

microenvironment as candidate therapeutic targets for the treatment of severe COVID-19.
KEYWORDS
COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, ARDS, single-cell RNA sequencing, re-analysis, BALF, PBMC, cell
surface marker, immunophenotyping

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
Within months of the identification of the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 in Wuhan, China in
December 2019, the virus had spread to every major country on Earth [1, 2, 3, 4]. The pandemic disease
caused by SARS-CoV-2, termed coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), has diverse clinical presentations
ranging from asymptomatic infection, to moderate symptomatic infection with possible pneumonia, to
severe respiratory distress, to critical respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or multiple organ dysfunction or
failure [1, 4, 5, 6]. A hallmark of severe and critical COVID-19 cases is a rampant dysregulation of the
immune system concomitant with the development of a hypoxemic respiratory condition widely
characterized as acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) [1, 7, 8, 9, 10]. The serological profile of
severe COVID-19 patients largely resembles the cytokine profile of ARDS [9] and has been characterized
by high levels of many cytokines including IL-2, IL-6, IL-7, IL-8, IL-18, CCL2, CCL8, TNF-α, and IFN-γ
[9,11, 12, 13, 14]. Post-mortem examinations of COVID-19 patients reveal the aftermath of these disease
dynamics: diffuse alveolar damage, multi-organ infiltration of lymphocytes and alveolar macrophages [1,
7, 15, 16], and pneumocyte hyperplasia and peribronchiolar metaplasia in the epithelium resembling
adenocarcinomas [15, 16, 17]. These morphological findings suggest local and systemic activation and
infiltration of inflammatory immune cells that may contribute to the inflammatory injuries of the respiratory
system consistent with ARDS phenotypes in severe COVID-19 [15].
While months of clinical observations in hospitals across the world have led to consistent
descriptions of COVID-19 severity at a clinical level [18, 19, 20], the biological underpinnings of immune
hyperactivation in severe and critical COVID-19 are only beginning to be defined. Bulk RNA sequencing
(bulk RNA-seq) and single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) studies have identified stark transcriptional
differences between bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and peripheral blood mononuclear cell (PBMC)
samples in hospitalized COVID-19 patients, indicating that immunological responses may be highly
compartment-specific [21, 22]. A number of recent studies have compared severe patients to healthy control
subjects in an effort to define immunological hallmarks of disease severity in both the lung and peripheral
circulation using scRNA-seq. These studies have identified that severe disease in the lung compartment is
associated with lymphopenia, T cell hyperactivation, and inflammatory macrophage polarization, while
severe disease in the blood is associated with lymphopenia, suppression of type I and type II interferon
activity, and decreased monocyte HLA class II expression [23, 24, 25, 26]. Although these studies describe
immunological dysregulation in severe COVID-19 patients requiring intensive care, they do not explore
immunological features distinguishing COVID-19 patients who experience moderate or non-ARDS
pathology from those who progress to life-threatening disease courses. Single-cell resolution studies
specifically comparing disease severity strata are needed to reveal the immunological mechanisms

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

responsible for severity-specific immune dysregulation and to identify signatures of disease severity that
may inform COVID-19 patient triage and treatment.
While many studies have endeavored to apply transcriptional profiling to understand the cellular
dynamics underlying coronavirus infection, to our knowledge, a single integrative study comparing
responses across the spectrum of disease severity in both the lung and blood compartments has not yet been
reported. Isolated analyses of BALF samples have shown neutrophil and proliferating T cell enrichment in
severe over moderate patients accompanied by CD8+ T cell lymphopenia, a shift towards inflammatory
macrophage polarization, and increased transcriptional expression of a variety of cytokines [27, 28].
Previous investigations focusing only on peripheral blood responses have shown various compositional
shifts between severe and moderate disease including cytopenias of monocytes, natural killer (NK) cells,
dendritic cells (DCs), and T cells, [28, 29, 30, 31, 32] accompanied by increases in plasmablasts, B cells,
and neutrophils [33, 34, 35, 36]. Serum cytokine levels are reportedly altered between severe and moderate
patients, including increased IL-6, IL-8, and TNF-ɑ [11, 35] and deficient IFN-α and IFN-γ [33], while
blood single-cell transcriptional analyses have shown alteration of the TNF-α/NF-κB pathway, interferon
signatures, and HLA class II expression [33, 34, 36, 32].
While individual studies have increased our understanding of severe COVID-19 in the lung and
blood separately, transcriptional dynamics have not been leveraged to propose detectable cell surface
markers correlated with the level of a patient’s disease severity in cell types of either compartment. Another
large gap in the literature persists regarding the transcriptional similarities and differences between the local
and peripheral immune environments. Critically, dysregulated biological pathways and their correlation
with clinical severity levels remain poorly understood in immune cells of both compartments. Immuneepithelial signaling dynamics at the site of local infection likely play a supporting role in severe responses
but have also not been rigorously described. An overarching unaddressed question is the possibility for
therapeutic interventions to affect the lung and blood compartments differently; thus, generating
comparative transcriptional data will be useful for determining efficacious treatment strategies for severe
COVID-19.
In this study, we present comparisons between immunological signatures of COVID-19 based on
clinical severity level in both the lung and blood compartments using identical methods. We re-analyzed
two publicly available scRNA-seq datasets: one containing BALF cells from donors stratified by the
original authors as “moderate” and “severe” COVID-19 patients as well as healthy control subjects,
obtained from Liao et al. [27], and one containing PBMCs from donors stratified by the original authors as
“non-ARDS” and “ARDS” patients as well as healthy control subjects, obtained from Wilk et al. [32] For
both of these datasets we conducted identical pre-processing, integration and analysis in order to obtain
comparable results. We first evaluated differential gene expression and pathway-level changes across the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

disease severity stratifications mentioned above for each cell type in the BALF and the PBMC datasets.
Next, we leveraged differential expression data to identify cell surface proteins that could be promising
markers for COVID-19 severity immunophenotyping. Finally, we investigated ligand-receptor interactions
implicated in regulating severity-specific immunophenotypes using NicheNet network analysis [37] and
we propose multiple ‘pan-ligands’ as potential key regulators specific to severe disease. Our integrative
analysis adds to a growing knowledge-base and contributes to a finer understanding of the mechanisms that
drive ARDS-related immune dysregulation in severe COVID-19. Our findings may guide future work
informing potential interventional strategies to improve patient outcomes as the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to unfold.

RESULTS
Single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) reveals severity-specific compositional changes across the
diversity of cells in the lung microenvironment and blood
Severe COVID-19 has been thought to result in profound immune dysregulation at both a local and
systemic level. Here, we performed a re-analysis of single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) data to
identify common and compartment-specific signatures of COVID-19 disease severity. We used identical
methods to separately analyze multi-donor scRNA-seq datasets from bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in COVID-19 patients classified by severity strata as well
as healthy control subjects to investigate severity-specific immune dysregulation in the lung and periphery.
BALF and PBMC raw gene-barcode matrices were downloaded from separate studies in the GEO [27, 32].
The BALF dataset consisted of 9 patients (6 severe and 3 moderate) and 4 healthy control donors, while
the PBMC dataset consisted of 7 patients (4 patients with ARDS, 4 patients without ARDS, where one
patient who was sampled twice fell within both groups at different stages of the disease course) and 6
healthy control donors. We performed our analyses on BALF and PBMC datasets separately with the goal
of identifying common and compartment-specific gene signatures.
To analyze the compositional changes in cell populations occurring during severe COVID-19, we
first sought to identify clusters in transcriptionally heterogeneous scRNA-seq data of the lung. After
preprocessing raw BALF gene-barcode matrices, a filtered dataset consisting of 66,452 cells was clustered
using Seurat and visualized by uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), as shown in
Figure 1A. A total of 33 clusters were identified showing distinct separation in a two-dimensional UMAP
space. Annotation of these clusters based on the expression of canonical cell type markers showed the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

presence of myeloid cells, lymphoid cells, and epithelial cells, closely matching the cell types found by the
original publication [27]. Of 13 annotated cell types, 12 contained cells from moderate, severe, and control
donors, with the exception of plasma cells which were not recovered from moderate donors (Figure S1A).
Compositional changes across disease severity categories were assessed by z-scored percentages of cell
types in each donor sample. Analyzing BALF compositional changes showed trends of increased donor
specific percentages of NK cells, mixed T cells, and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) in moderate donors
over control and severe donors as displayed in the Figure 1A heatmap.
We next preprocessed raw PBMC gene-barcode matrices, resulting in a filtered dataset of 31,957
cells. The blood single-cell landscape was visualized by UMAP (Figure 1B). A total of 26 clusters were
identified, showing distinct populations in a two-dimensional UMAP space. Annotation of these clusters
revealed the presence of myeloid cells and lymphoid cells, roughly matching the cell types found by in the
original publication using a different method [32]. We termed the blood cells observed in this dataset as
“PBMCs”, although cell type annotation revealed the presence of anuclear platelets and erythrocytes, as
well as polymorphonuclear basophils and neutrophils. All 20 annotated cell types contained cells from
ARDS, non-ARDS, and control donors (Figure S1D). Cluster 16 (CD14+/CD3D+/IGHG4+) was annotated
as probable doublets using the marker gene panel shown in Figure S1F. Analyzing PBMC compositional
changes across severity categories using z-scored percentages as described above, we observed trends
indicating a decrease in erythrocyte and CD8+ effector memory T cell percentages as well as an expansion
of plasma cells and proliferating plasma cells in both ARDS and non-ARDS patients compared to control
donors.
To examine the population of NK and T cells in the BALF at finer resolution, we performed
iterative data integration on the “NK”, “Mixed T”, and “Proliferating T” populations, using 5 severe donors,
3 moderate donors, and 3 healthy control donors. Severe donor S3 and healthy control donor HC2 were
omitted as a consequence of having too few NK and T cells to allow integration and alignment. After reintegration, a total of 8,832 NK and T cells were visualized via UMAP (Figure 1C). A total of 14 clusters
were identified, which were annotated according to 8 distinct cell type labels with additional cluster 13
labeled as “uncertain” and clusters 6 (CD3D+/CD68+) and 12 (CD3D+/FCGR3B+) classified as probable
doublets using the marker gene panel shown in Figure S1I). Analyzing NK and T cell compositional
changes across severity categories, we observed trends indicating expansion of CD4+ naive T and CD4+
effector Treg cells in moderate donors compared to severe and control donors.
The distinctive heterogeneity observed in mononuclear phagocytes (MPs) of the BALF seen in
Figure 1A led us to address severity-specific changes in individual MP populations. We again performed
iterative data integration on 19 clusters identified as MPs in the original BALF dataset (Figure 1A).
Following iterative data integration using 6 severe donors, 3 moderate donors, and 4 healthy controls, a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

total of 50,146 MP cells were visualized by UMAP (Figure 1D). The 16 MP clusters were left unannotated
in further analysis. The clusters were evaluated using a panel of BALF marker genes to identify probable
doublets (Figure S1L), and clusters 12 (CD68+/CD3D+) and 16 (CD68+/IGHG4+) were classified as such.
Analysis of compositional changes of MP clusters across disease categories showed more pronounced
compositional changes than we observed in the BALF in general. Clusters 0, 1, and 6 (expressing
chemokines CCL2, CCL3, CCL8 as well as SPP1) appear to be expanded in severe donors compared to
moderate and control donors, while clusters 2, 3, and 8 (expressing MRC1, C1QA, and FABP4) appear to
be expanded in control donors compared to moderate and severe donors. Cluster 5 (expressing HLADQA1
and HLADQA2) appears to be uniquely expanded in moderate donors compared to control and severe
donors.

Transcripts coding for cell surface proteins are differentially expressed across the COVID-19 severity
spectrum and may be useful as markers for immunophenotyping
Cellular markers corresponding to clinical categories of COVID-19 disease severity have not yet
been rigorously characterized. Here, we sought to leverage transcriptional differences across severity strata
to identify surface-bound proteins in both the lung and blood that could be used as markers for
immunophenotyping. To nominate putative cell surface markers, we conducted differential gene expression
analysis between severe and moderate patient groups for lung (BALF) cells and between ARDS and nonARDS patient groups for blood (PBMC) cells and selected significant differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) with a fold change (FC) cutoff of |log2FC>1|. Figure 2A shows significantly up- and downregulated transcripts for pDCs in the BALF, one of 17 lung cell types studied. From the large number of
significant DEGs, we observed the upregulation of AREG and CD55, which were verified as cell surface
protein-coding genes using the Cell Surface Protein Atlas [38]. The AREG and CD55 transcripts show
robustly increased expression in pDCs in severe compared to moderate disease (Figure 2B) and compared
to pDCs in healthy control subjects (Figure S2A). We additionally showed that AREG and CD55 are not
upregulated in moderate disease compared to controls (Figure S2A). The expression of AREG and CD55
was cross-referenced with bulk RNA-seq blood data from the human Immune Cell Atlas (Figure S2C),
and expression of these transcripts in various subtypes of DCs was verified [39, 40]. Differential expression
of transcripts coding for cell surface proteins was evaluated for every cell type in the BALF, resulting in a
matrix of potential severity-specific surface markers for each cell type (Figure 2C). Upregulation of the
AREG gene was also observed in myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs, also known as conventional dendritic
cells), indicating a possible conserved response across DC subtypes. Extending our analysis beyond

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

immune cell types and relaxing the stringency cutoff of |log2FC>1|, we made the interesting observation
that epithelial (club and ciliated) cells demonstrate significant upregulation of ICAM1 and LDLR, the two
main entry receptors for respiratory rhinoviruses. We confirmed that markers identified as differentially
regulated between severe and moderate disease were not differentially regulated in the same direction
between moderate disease and control (Figure S2B), with the exception of HLADRA and VAMP5 on MPs
and CCR7 on mDCs, indicating that all other identified cell surface protein transcripts in Figure 2C are
unique markers of severe disease.
We also sought to identify ARDS-specific cell surface markers in the blood in order to nominate
immunophenotyping markers on cells that may be accessible through a blood draw. In gamma delta T (γδ
T) cells, we observed ARDS-specific differentially expressed genes including the surface marker S1PR1
(Figure 2D), a G-protein coupled receptor that interacts with multiple inflammatory pathways such as
JAK/STAT and mTOR/PI3K/Akt [41, 42]. S1PR1 expression was robustly upregulated in ARDS compared
to non-ARDS patients (Figure 2E) and ARDS compared to control (Figure S2D), and additionally did not
show upregulation between non-ARDS patients and controls. Similarly to our analysis of the BALF, we
analyzed differential expression of surface protein genes in every cell type of the PBMC pool, and the
matrix of potential markers is shown in Figure 2E. We found that S1PR1 was also differentially expressed
in CD8+ effector T cells, and its general expression on T cells was verified in bulk RNA-seq data (Figure
S2F). Immunoglobulin heavy chain genes also appeared to be differentially expressed in unexpected blood
cell types. In both BALF and PBMCs, we observed that increasing disease severity was associated with the
common downregulation of HLA class II genes HLADQA1 and HLADQA2 on CD16+ monocytes and
BALF MPs and HLADRA on CD14+ monocytes and BALF MPs. Overall, these results suggest cell surface
proteins whose transcripts are differentially expressed across disease severity categories as candidate
immunophenotyping markers in cells of the lung and blood.
To complement our transcriptomic analysis, we employed gene ontology (GO) analysis to identify
the biological functions of DEGs (Figure S2G-I). GO analysis of the DEGs in BALF and PBMCs shows
differential expression of transcripts belonging to ontologies of the innate immune system, cytokine
signaling, and adaptive immune cell proliferation and activation.

Pathway-level regulation differentiates COVID-19 severity categories, with distinct differences
arising between responses in the pulmonary microenvironment and systemic circulation
To probe the molecular mechanisms of severe COVID-19 at a broader scale, we sought to utilize
the large number of differentially expressed transcripts to identify biological pathways that are altered

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

across the spectrum of disease severity in the local lung microenvironment (BALF) and systemic circulation
(PBMCs). Significant transcriptional changes in cells of the BALF were abundant in all cell types with the
exception of plasma cells. We first directed our attention to the epithelium, where substantial morphological
damage and histological atypia were observed in deceased COVID-19 patients [1, 7, 15, 17, 16]. At the
level of individual gene regulation, we first noted a surprisingly strong significant upregulation of FOS and
JUN, which code for proteins implicated in the development of cancer (Figure 3A). Additionally, we noted
a strong significant downregulation of the tumor suppressor gene C2orf40. When comparing ciliated cells
between moderate disease and healthy control subjects (Figure S3A), we did not observe differential
expression of proto-oncogenic transcripts. We next leveraged gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) to
dissect pathway-level regulation. GSEA provides positive and negative enrichment readouts; here, we
define pathways with positive normalized enrichment score as “enriched” and those with a negative
normalized enrichment score as “depleted”. GSEA revealed the enrichment of pathways involved in the
innate immune response, general inflammatory response, and, surprisingly, oncogenic signaling in severe
versus moderate donors. Specifically, we observed the significant enrichment of the epithelial-tomesenchymal transition, K-Ras, PI3K/Akt and p53 pathways in addition to the TNF-α signaling via NF-κB
and IL-2/STAT5 pathways.
When we increased this analysis to include all of the cell types found in the BALF (Figure 3A),
we found enriched pathways including hypoxia, TNF-α signaling via NF-κB (involving TNFAIP3 and
NFKBIA), and general inflammatory response to be conserved across many BALF cell types. The IFN-α
and IFN-γ pathways showed a mixed response among cell types, including enrichment of these pathways
in ciliated cells, mast cells, mucosal-associated invariant T cells (MAITs), and neutrophils, but depletion in
proliferating plasma cells and most T cell populations Additionally, IL-2/STAT5 signaling was enriched in
MPs, ciliated cells, mast cells, neutrophils, pDCs, MAITs and proliferating T cells, and IL-6/JAK/STAT3
was enriched in MPs, mast cells and neutrophils. When comparing the BALF pathway-level response
between moderate disease and healthy controls (Figure S3A), we observed enrichment of the TNF-α
signaling via NF-κB pathway in MPs, mature B cells, mDCs, neutrophils, pDCs, CD4+ effector Tregs, and
NK cells. The IFN-α and IFN-γ pathways showed strong enrichment in all BALF cell types. IL-2/STAT5
signaling was enriched in MPs, club cells, mature B cells, mDCs, neutrophils, pDCs, and CD8+ effector
memory T cells, while IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling was enriched in MPs, mature B cells, mDCs,
neutrophils, and pDCs. When comparing the BALF pathway-level response between severe disease and
healthy control donors (Figure S3D), we observed enrichment of the IFN-α and IFN-γ pathways across
every cell type in the BALF.
We next investigated pathway-level changes occurring in PBMCs and found that differential gene
expression between ARDS and non-ARDS patients supported the detection of statistically enriched

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pathways through GSEA. We first examined CD14+ blood monocytes, a cell type whose severe disease
response could be compared to that of BALF MPs. In ARDS patients, CD14+ monocytes demonstrated
pronounced downregulation of ISG15, TNFAIP3, and NFKBIA compared to non-ARDS patients,
manifesting in the depletion of the IFN-α, IFN-γ, and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB pathways (Figure 3B).
Expression of the immunoglobulin G and M heavy chains appeared to be altered at the transcriptional level
but did not contribute to significantly enriched pathways. When expanding this analysis to all PBMC cell
types (Figure 3B), we observed a striking depletion of IFN-α, IFN-γ, and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB
pathways in a conserved trend across nearly every cell type. The IL-2/STAT5 and IL-6/JAK/STAT3
pathways did not appear to be significantly altered in the majority of cell types. Comparing PBMCs of nonARDS donors to healthy controls revealed a strong enrichment of the IFN-α, IFN-γ, and TNF-α signaling
via NF-κB pathways, as well as some inclusion of the IL-2/STAT5 and IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathways (Figure
S3B). Interestingly, comparing ARDS donors to healthy controls showed that these same pathways
exhibited weaker enrichment (Figure S3E).
To establish a comparison between blood monocytes and BALF MPs and explore the heterogeneity
of BALF MPs observed in our dataset, we analyzed differential expression and pathway-level responses
across 14 of the 16 clusters resulting from iterative data integration of the MP population. Two clusters
containing probable doublets were excluded from the analysis, namely cluster 12 (CD68+/CD3D+) and
cluster 16 (CD68+/IGHG4+). Differential gene expression in MP cluster 10 is shown as a representative
example result (Figure 3C); this population exhibits upregulation of CXCL8, CCL3, CCL4, and SPP1, as
well as NFKBIA and TNFAIP3. Pathway-level analysis of cluster 10 showed enrichment of TNF-α signaling
via NF-κB, IL-2/STAT5 signaling, IL-6/JAK/STAT3 signaling, among others. Examining the
transcriptionally heterogeneous subpopulations of MPs revealed a surprisingly homogeneous response at
the pathway level. In particular, apoptosis, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, IL-2/STAT5, IL6/JAK/STAT3, and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB were significantly enriched in severe compared to
moderate disease in all or many of the clusters. The IFN-γ response appeared to be variable among clusters
but trending toward enrichment. Comparison of MPs in moderate donors to healthy controls showed that
most of the same pathways are broadly enriched, with the exception of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
and hypoxia (Figure S3C). Further comparison between severe donors and healthy controls demonstrated
a homogenous enrichment of many pathways related to cytokine signaling and innate immune responses
(Figure S3F).
To nominate potential transcription factors related to differentially expressed gene sets, we sought
to identify transcription factors linked to DEG lists using the ENCODE and ChEA ChIP-X databases.
Consistent with the identified activity of the IL-6/JAK/STAT3 pathway, we observed enrichment of STAT3
in many cells of the BALF (Figure S3G). CEBPB and CEBPD appeared to be depleted in the PBMC but

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

enriched in the BALF, and opposite directionality of these genes was observed between MPs and CD14+
monocytes in particular. NELFE appeared to be enriched in T cells of the BALF and PBMC (Figure S3GH), representing a commonality between the lung and blood responses to increasing disease severity.

Broadly-acting dysregulatory cues induce severity-specific transcriptional changes in the lung
microenvironment through receptor-ligand interactions
Following the identification of severity-specific pathway-level regulation differentiating severe and
moderate disease courses, we sought to construct a putative network for how these transcriptional programs
could be induced by soluble and surface-level cell-cell interactions. Specifically, we aimed to identify
ligands acting as potential key regulators of severe disease in many cell types of the lung in order to
nominate targets for further study as therapeutic options for severe COVID-19. Figure 4A shows a flow
diagram detailing the steps carried out to nominate severity-specific “pan-ligands” local to the site of viral
infection. Briefly, differential gene expression between moderate and severe donors was first evaluated for
each cell type in the BALF. We classified these transcripts as “target genes” whose differential expression
is potentially regulated through ligand-receptor interactions [37]. Next, we employed NicheNet to identify
potential ligands linked to regulation of these differentially expressed target genes [37]. We applied two
filtering criteria to nominate potential ligands: Ligands should (1) act on over one-third of the cell types in
the BALF and (2) be differentially expressed by at least one cell type in severe disease.
To follow up on our observation of AREG upregulation in pDCs during severe disease, we used
NicheNet to nominate potential soluble or cell-surface mediators of pDC differential gene expression.
Ligand activities were ranked using a NicheNet-generated Pearson correlation coefficient indicating the
correlation between the target genes of a given ligand and the list of differentially expressed target genes in
the “receiver” cell (Figure 4B). The receptors for the top predicted ligands ANXA1, SPP1, TNF, CSF,
CXCL9, IFNG, CD40LG, ITGB2, CD28, ICAM1, ADM, and IL18 all showed non-zero expression in pDCs.
To identify which genes may be regulated by top-ranked ligands, putative ligand-gene interactions were
scored by NicheNet according to “regulatory potential”, a graph-based likelihood for a ligand to regulate a
particular target gene [37]. We next sought to identify candidate “sender cells” expressing these ligands
(Figure S4A). We found that MPs and neutrophils expressed transcripts for pDC ligands, and we chose to
further investigate these relationships. Ligand-mediated cell-cell interactions between MPs, neutrophils,
and pDCs are visualized in the network diagram in Figure 4B. As shown, the differential expression of
AREG is potentially regulated by IL-6 and SPP1 from MPs, and IL1-β from neutrophils, although the
receptors for IL-6 and IL1-β could not be verified at the transcript level in pDCs in our dataset.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Additionally, given the enrichment of oncogenic pathways in epithelial cells of the BALF, we
identified cell types and signaling molecules potentially regulating epithelial DEGs. We applied the
NicheNet procedure outlined above for pDCs to club and ciliated cells of the BALF, resulting in the ligandgene regulatory matrix shown in Figure 4C. The ligands IL1B, IL1A, TNF, IFNG, APOE, IL1RN, OSM,
EDN1, LIF, MIF, CSF2, SPP1, CD28, CCL2, VEGFA, and CCL5 show potential for regulating differential
expression, and receptors for all of these ligands were manually verified at the transcript level in club or
ciliated cells. Interestingly, FOS and JUN are among the genes potentially driven by the proposed ligands.
As MPs and neutrophils appear to express the ligands of interest (Figure S4B), we investigated the role of
these cells in regulating epithelial gene expression, visualized in the network diagram in Figure 4C (at
larger scale in Figure S4E). As shown, MPs may induce both FOS and JUN through IL1-α, while
neutrophils may induce both FOS and JUN through IL1-β, TNF, and IFNG, with additional regulation of
JUN by EDN1.
Finally, we aggregated ligand-receptor relationships across all of the cell types in the BALF and
proposed broadly-acting “pan-ligands” possibly contributing to the induction of transcriptional programs
in the lung microenvironment. Following the procedure described above (Figure 4A) using each cell type
in the BALF as a receiver, we identified a list of potential pan-ligands and developed a ligand-receiver cell
correlation matrix (Figure S4C). This matrix was subsequently filtered to preserve ligands acting on over
one-third of cell types in the BALF (≥6 cell types) with >10% receptor expression and thresholded Pearson
correlation values. Of these candidates, we selected ligands differentially expressed between severe and
moderate disease in one or more BALF cell types (Figure S4D) to further filter the ligand-receiver matrix.
Interestingly, the IL6 transcript was not found to be differentially expressed in any of the BALF cell types
and failed at this filtering step. After filtering, we arrived at a list of differentially expressed pan-ligands
implicated in broad severity-specific responses across cell types in the lung, consisting of IFNG, IL18,
CCL3, CCL8, and SPP1. These ligands were differentially expressed in at least one BALF sender cell type
and act on over one-third of the cell types in the BALF (Figure 4D), indicating these ligands should be
further investigated to elucidate their role in the life-threatening immunopathology of severe COVID-19.

DISCUSSION
In the course of a severe SARS-CoV-2 viral infection, acute pulmonary damage has been observed
concomitantly with elevated cytokine levels in serum and infiltration of macrophages and lymphocytes into
multiple organs, indicative of both local and systemic immunological responses [11, 15]. To better
understand these dynamics, we leveraged scRNA-seq data from BALF and blood to compare severity-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

specific shifts in cellular composition at the local and systemic levels. In BALF, compositional analysis
indicated expansion of NK cells, T cells (general T cell population, CD4+ naive T cells, and CD4+ effector
Treg cells), and pDCs in moderate patients compared to both severe and control patients. Although severityspecific compositional changes in BALF samples remain largely unaddressed in the literature [27], the
severity-specific lymphopenia of NK cells and CD4+ naive T cells that we report in BALF agrees with
findings from compositional studies of PBMCs [30, 31, 34]. We additionally report severity-specific
compositional shifts in lung MP populations and identify clusters expressing MRC1, C1QA, and FABP4
suggesting an M2 macrophage-like phenotype expanded in control subjects. Moderate donors showed
expanded clusters expressing HLADQA1 and HLADQA2, indicating increased antigen presentation through
HLA class II. Expanded clusters in severe donors expressing SPP1 as well as various chemokines including
CCL2, CCL3, and CCL8 are likely associated with an M1 macrophage-like phenotype, in agreement with
previous analyses [27]. Strong macrophage expression of osteopontin, the gene product of SPP1, has been
previously observed during influenza A infection, suggesting that macrophages in severe COVID-19 may
be following a similar viral response to influenza [43]. Compositional changes were not readily apparent in
PBMCs when comparing ARDS patients to non-ARDS patients, although we observed an expansion of
multiple plasma cell types in ARDS patients compared to healthy control subjects, consistent with previous
reports [23, 33, 34, 44].
Despite recent advances, the immunological signatures of severe COVID-19 remain largely
uncharacterized in both the lung [27, 28] and systemic circulation [34, 36]. In particular, a need exists to
define markers of severity that can be used to assess patient disease trajectory in a clinical setting for the
purposes of triage or to inform the use of immunomodulatory treatment strategies [34]. Here, we leveraged
BALF and PBMC transcriptional data to nominate cell surface proteins that could be incorporated into a
flow cytometry panel for COVID-19 patient immunophenotyping. Notably, in BALF samples we observed
upregulation of AREG in pDCs and mDCs of patients undergoing a severe disease course compared to
patients who experienced moderate disease. The AREG transcript was verified to be expressed by dendritic
cells in bulk RNA-seq data [39, 40], has been previously shown to orchestrate tissue homeostasis during
influenza infection [45, 46], and has been previously labeled in flow cytometry studies [47]. Additionally,
TIMP1, VAMP5, and IL1R2 were strongly differentially expressed in BALF MPs during severe disease and
have been previously documented to play a role in the immune response to respiratory viral infections.
TIMP1 has been shown to promote deleterious immune responses in the lung during murine influenza
infection [48], VAMP5 is implicated in signaling pathways regulating influenza viral replication in vitro
[48, 49], and IL1R2 encodes a decoy receptor for IL1-β that is upregulated during severe influenza [50].
All of the BALF identified surface markers in Figure 2C with the exception of VAMP5, HLA-DRA, and
CCR7 were specifically differentially expressed between severe and moderate donors but not between

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

moderate and control donors (Figure S2B). Investigating cell surface markers in PBMCs, we found that
IL7R on NK cells as well as S1PR1 (CD363) on γδ T cells differentiate ARDS from non-ARDS COVID19 blood samples. IL-7 stimulation through IL-7R has been shown to promote NK cell survival by inhibiting
apoptosis [50, 51]. S1PR1 is a particularly interesting marker due to previous literature documenting its
role in stimulating highly inflammatory pathways such as JAK/STAT and mTOR/PI3K/Akt. Additionally,
suppression of the S1PR1 cognate ligand S1P1 decreased mortality rates during influenza infection in mice
[41, 42, 52]. All of the identified PBMC surface markers in Figure 2F were specifically differentially
expressed between ARDS and non-ARDS donors but not between non-ARDS and control donors (Figure
S2E). Our investigation revealed a small number of common surface markers of interest between BALF
and PBMC samples, namely HLADQA1 and HLADQA2 on MPs/CD16+ monocytes and HLADRA on
MPs/CD14+ monocytes; these HLA class II transcripts are downregulated with increasing severity level in
both compartments. Similar observations of a severity-specific loss of HLA-DR on CD14+ monocytes and
T cells have been previously observed in recent scRNA-seq and flow cytometry studies [29, 30, 31, 32, 34,
36]. Together, these findings suggest transcripts that should be studied further at the protein level as
potential markers of a severe or ARDS disease course for immunophenotyping patients through BALF
sampling or a convenient blood draw.
Cell type-specific immunopathological responses in severe COVID-19 have been investigated at
both local and systemic levels in recent studies comparing severe patients to healthy controls [21, 22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 32, 53, 54, 55]. We sought to build on this knowledge by determining the cell-type specific
biological responses that differentiate more finely stratified disease severity levels in the lung and systemic
circulation. In myeloid and lymphoid cells of the BALF, we observed a concerted enrichment of the TNFα signaling via NF-κB pathway in severe compared to moderate donors, indicating the upregulated
expression of factors such as NFKBIA and TNFAIP3 in severe disease. We further noted IL-2 and IL-6
signaling pathway enrichment in cell types including MPs, mast cells, and neutrophils. IL2RA expression
was observed in mast cells, IL6R was expressed in MPs, mast cells and neutrophils, and neither the IL2 nor
IL6 transcripts were well-captured in the dataset. IFN-α (type I) and IFN-γ (type II) pathway responses
showed mixed enrichment and depletion, with type I and II interferon signaling apparently decreased in a
majority of BALF T cell subtypes. These data are consistent with previous observations of low expression
of IFNG and TNF in cytotoxic T lymphocytes of BALF derived from severe patients [28]. MPs in the BALF
demonstrated a nearly homogenous enrichment of the IL-6, IL-2, and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB pathways
across the diversity of clusters. When we compared disease strata based on ARDS diagnosis in PBMCs,
fewer pathways demonstrate enrichment with increasing disease severity. Nevertheless, a striking depletion
of the type II interferon response was observed in nearly every cell type studied, along with a broad
depletion of the type I interferon response and TNF-α signaling via NF-κB pathways (including

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

downregulation of TNFAIP3 and NFKBIA). This result corroborates a previously reported correlation
between suppressed type I and II interferon responses and disease severity in a study of PBMCs that was
not specific to cell type [33], as well as extending findings of increased interferon response in monocytes
during moderate disease but not severe disease [34, 36]. Our findings do not preclude the observation of
increased TNF-α signaling in the bloodstream of severe and critical COVID-19 patients [33], as TNFAIP3
depletion has been shown to cause increased TNF-α expression [56].
We next examined the similarity of pathway-level changes across the severity stratifications
provided in the BALF and PBMC datasets. Comparing BALF and PBMC responses to increasing disease
severity level in consanguineous cell types showed shared suppression of the type I interferon response in
CD4+ naive, CD8+ effector, and γδ T cells and of the type II interferon response in mature B, proliferating
plasma, CD4+ naive, CD8+ effector, and γδ T cells. For other cell types including MPs/monocytes, NK
and CD8+ effector T cells, the type II interferon response appears to be increased in cells of the lung but
decreased in the blood. Moreover, our analysis identifies divergent severity-specific responses in the BALF
and blood in terms of the TNF-α signaling via NF-κB pathway for nearly all cell types. Notably, the
concerted TNF-α/NF-κB pathway enrichment across BALF cell types is indicative of a strong upregulation
of TNFAIP3 and NFKBIA. Conversely, the depleted pathway across PBMC cell types corresponds to
TNFAIP3 and NFKBIA downregulation. The A20 protein encoded by TNFAIP3 is an NF-κB inhibitor that
functions as a “brake” on antiviral signaling and inflammatory responses [56, 57, 58, 59] whose deletion in
mouse models improved survival during influenza infection [59]. TFNAIP3 differential expression was
largely co-directional with NFKBIA (coding for IκBα), a gene whose upregulation is a key feature of the
human blood response to SARS-CoV as well as the lung response to SARS-CoV and MERS-CoV infection
[60]. Our results suggest that the A20/IκBα axis likely plays a role in SARS-CoV-2 infection as well, with
TNFAIP3 inhibiting NF-κB-mediated antiviral responses during severe disease at the site of local infection
yet promoting a systemic inflammatory response through its absence during ARDS in the periphery. We
note in this compartmental comparison that the BALF and PBMC clinical stratifications represent different
parts of the disease severity spectrum. Therefore, we interpret differences in compartmental responses with
respect to relative levels of clinical severity rather than absolute severity stages. Taken together, our data
suggest that transcriptional programs are differentially induced with increasing COVID-19 severity, while
the specific responses are nuanced according to cell type and local versus systemic immune environment.
In epithelial cells of the BALF, we detected the surprising upregulation of FOS and JUN, along
with the downregulation of C2orf40 in severe compared to moderate donors. Due to the involvement of
these genes in oncogenic programs, we further investigated pathway-level alterations in epithelial cells and
detected the enrichment of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, K-Ras, PI3K/AKT and p53 pathways. We
note that a separate analysis of epithelial cells from the same BALF dataset failed to detect differential

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

enrichment of these pathways through GSEA when comparing control samples to pooled moderate and
severe samples [21, 53], likely as a result of this pooling and using a much shorter list of statistically tested
genes (a single set of 118 genes common to all epithelial cells compared to sets of 1,561 genes for ciliated
cells and 1,092 genes for club cells). Our results may be cautiously interpreted as providing evidence for
the molecular underpinnings of the morphological changes known to occur in the severely damaged lung
epithelia of severe COVID-19 patients, previously described as cellular proliferation resembling atypical
adenomatous hyperplasia, in situ adenocarcinoma, or even invasive adenocarcinoma [15].
Following the observation of pathways enriched in the epithelia of severe COVID-19 patients, we
employed ligand-receptor network analysis to nominate potential immune-epithelial communication
networks that may explain transcriptional differences between severe and moderate disease courses. We
identified 16 ligands implicated in driving the differential expression in ciliated and club cells, of which
IL1B, TNF, and IFNG are predicted to regulate FOS and JUN, with IL1A additionally regulating JUN.
Exploring the expression of these 16 ligands across the diversity of BALF cell types indicates that MPs and
neutrophils may act as “sender cells” signaling to the epithelium, as suggested in recent reports [21, 28,
53]. In particular, aberrant neutrophil responses have been implicated in severe COVID-19 through a
number of studies focusing on either the lung or the blood [21, 28, 34, 35, 36, 53]. On further analysis, we
observed potential MP signaling through CCL2, SPP1, CCL13, APOE, INHBA, and IL1A, and neutrophil
signaling through CCL3, CCL5, EDN1, IFNG, TNF, IL1RN, and IL1B, among others. These ligands may
represent key players in immune-to-epithelial signaling networks distinguishing moderate from severe
disease progression in the lung microenvironment during SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Our analysis of the transcriptional regulation of cell surface proteins implicated AREG as a potential
marker unique to severe disease in pDCs. This finding appears consistent with previous literature showing
that amphiregulin aids in the maintenance of epithelial integrity and tissue repair during infection or injury,
[45, 61] as patients with severe COVID-19 experience extreme pulmonary damage. Expanding on this
knowledge, we utilized ligand-receptor network analysis to provide orthogonal information suggesting how
pDC differentially expressed genes, including AREG, may be regulated through soluble or cell-surface
mediators. NicheNet revealed that MPs and neutrophils appear to signal to pDCs through SPP1/IL6 and
IL1B respectively to regulate the expression of AREG as well as various other genes. SPP1 in particular
appears to be better-evidenced than IL6 and IL1B as its active receptors CD44 and ITGB1 are present on
over 20% of pDCs in severe donors. Our network analysis suggests that the expansion of a population of
SPP1-expressing MPs during severe disease, observed here and in Liao et al. [27], may partly account for
the upregulation of AREG by pDCs. We recommend further study of the potential for AREG induction by
SPP1 in addition to investigation of AREG surface expression as a marker of severe disease.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Immune blockades, including the IL-6R antagonist Tocilizumab, are a class of treatments currently
under clinical use and research for COVID-19 intended to dampen the hyperactive immune response by
targeting key nodes in a signaling network [23, 30, 31]. Here, we sought to utilize ligand-receptor network
analysis to nominate ligands as potential key regulators of severity-specific dysregulation in the lung
microenvironment during severe COVID-19. Our analysis suggests IFNG, IL18, CCL3, CCL8, and SPP1
as candidate “pan-ligands” that may induce transcriptional regulation in over one-third of cell types
identified in the BALF during severe disease. Notably, we did not identify IL6 as a potential pan-ligand as
its differential expression between moderate and severe patients in our study was not statistically significant
in any cell type. All of the pan-ligands we report have been previously implicated in SARSr-CoV infection,
with IL-18, CCL8, and IFN-γ having been detected in serum from COVID-19 patients [9, 13, 14], SPP1
upregulation measured in microarrays from SARS-CoV-infected nonhuman primates, and CCL3, CCL8,
IL18, and IFNG upregulation detected in single-cell or bulk RNA-seq from the lungs of COVID-19 patients
[21, 22, 27, 28]. Importantly, our data supports accumulating evidence for a nuanced interferon response in
COVID-19 depending on disease severity, cell type, and local versus systemic immune environment, as
discussed above [25, 26, 28, 33, 34, 36, 55]. We suspect that treatment strategies consisting of a direct type
II interferon blockade (NIH clinical trial NCT04324021) [62, 63] could exert different effects systemically
and locally depending on the patient’s clinical condition when administered. Taken together with previous
findings, our data suggests IFNG, IL18, CCL3, CCL8, and SPP1 as candidate targets for the treatment of
severe COVID-19 that warrant further study.
In summary, our findings emphasize unique roles for the cells of the lung microenvironment and
systemic circulation in the immunopathology of ARDS and severe COVID-19. We recommend further
investigation of differentially expressed cell surface markers to determine their utility in
immunophenotyping patients according to suspected disease course to aid in triage or to inform optimal
treatment options. Our transcriptional analyses show that pathway enrichment differs between cells of the
lung and blood, with concerted immunological responses within each compartment mirroring viral
respiratory diseases including influenza, SARS, and MERS. Finally, we nominate a small number of
broadly-acting ligands as potential drivers of severity-specific transcriptional regulation in the severely
damaged lung microenvironment of COVID-19 patients.

METHODS
Data Acquisition

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

All single cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data used in this analysis were obtained from
publicly available datasets. BALF scRNA-seq gene-barcode matrices from 9 COVID-19 patients (6 severe
and 3 moderate), and 3 healthy control subjects were obtained from the GEO under accession number
GSE145926. [27] ScRNA-seq data from an additional healthy BALF donor was obtained from the GEO
under accession number GSM3660650. [27, 64] Severity-level stratifications for BALF donors
(severe/moderate/healthy) were used exactly as provided in the original manuscript. 5 out of 6 severe BALF
donors were invasively ventilated, with the exception of S1. [27] PBMC scRNA-seq gene-barcode matrices
from 7 patients (4 samples from patients with ARDS and 4 samples from patients without ARDS, where
one patient who was sampled twice fell contributed to both groups at different stages of the disease course)
and 6 healthy control donors were obtained from the GEO under accession number GSE150728. Severitylevel stratifications of PBMC donors (ARDS/non-ARDS/healthy) were implemented using the exact ARDS
classification provided in the original manuscript based on the Berlin criteria. One donor in the PBMC
dataset was sampled in the non-ARDS stage (M4) and re-sampled after the onset of ARDS (S7). All ARDS
patients in the PBMC dataset required invasive ventilation. [32]
Data Preprocessing and Multi-Donor Integration
Gene-barcode matrices obtained from the GEO were preprocessed using Seurat (v. 3.1.5) in R (v.
4.0.0). Matrices were filtered to preserve cells with a UMI count over 1,000, gene count between 200 and
6,000, and expression of less than 10% mitochondrial RNA. For PBMC data, cells were additionally filtered
to preserve cells expressing less than 20% 18S RNA and less than 20% 28S RNA. Gene-barcode matrices
unique to each donor were subsequently normalized using the ‘NormalizeData’ function and the 2,000 most
highly variable genes (features) were identified via the ‘FindVariableFeatures’ function using a variance
stabilizing transformation. Individual donor datasets were subsequently aligned and integrated using the
standard Seurat v3 multi-donor integration workflow, finding pairwise anchors using the
‘FindIntegrationAnchors’ function acting on 50 dimensions with default parameters (k.filter=200), then
applying the ‘IntegrateData’ function on 50 dimensions. Multi-donor integration and all further analyses
were performed separately on BALF and PBMC datasets. Following integration, “raw” RNA expression
values were normalized using log-normalization via the ‘NormalizeData’ function and the 2,000 most
variable features were identified using ‘FindVariableFeatures’. Raw expression levels were left unscaled
so that scaling could later be applied as needed (e.g. for generating marker gene heatmaps). In parallel,
“integrated” expression values were scaled using the ‘ScaleData’ function, regressing out UMI count,
number of genes, and percent rRNA. PBMC data contained rRNA transcripts to regress, whereas BALF
data did not.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Dimensionality Reduction and Clustering
Dimensionality reduction via principal component analysis (PCA) was carried out using the
‘RunPCA’ function and the first 100 principal components were retained. This reduction was projected
onto the entire dataset prior to clustering. Clustering was performed by finding nearest neighbors using the
‘FindNeighbors’ function in Seurat acting on 50 dimensions, then running the Louvain algorithm via the
‘FindClusters’ function with a resolution parameter of 1.4. The resulting clustered datasets for BALF and
PBMC were separately visualized by uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) acting on
the first 50 principal components.
Cell Type Annotation and Iterative Data Integration
Cell type annotation was conducted using the resultant clusters for BALF and PBMC data. Clusters
were annotated according to the average expression levels of canonical marker genes identified in the
original papers for the BALF and PBMC datasets [27, 32], the broader literature, and the Human Protein
Atlas [65]. Clusters deemed identical by similar presence of marker genes were merged during annotation.
A list of the marker genes used for cell type annotation is available in Supplemental Figure S1, along with
a visualization of expression levels. Following cell type annotation for the BALF, populations annotated as
mononuclear phagocytes (consisting of one merged cluster) and T/NK cells (consisting of clusters
annotated as “NK”, “Proliferating T” and “Mixed T” cells) were separately re-integrated to enable
clustering at a finer resolution. For mononuclear phagocytes, iterative data integration was performed using
the integration procedure described above, with a k.filter parameter of 112 for ‘FindIntegrationAnchors’
and a resolution parameter of 0.8 for ‘FindClusters’. The resulting fine-scale mononuclear phagocyte
clusters were left unannotated during further analysis, but were tested using the BALF marker gene panel
to identify probable doublets. For T and NK cells, iterative data integration was performed using the
integration procedure described above, with a k.filter parameter of 175 and a resolution parameter of 0.8.
In order to filter anchors for T/NK re-integration, one healthy control donor (HC2, 60 cells) and one severe
donor (S3, 72 cells) with small numbers of T/NK cells were excluded from the integration and subsequent
analysis. T and NK cell fine-level clusters were annotated according to a panel of canonical T and NK cell
marker genes, available in Supplemental Figure S1. The original integration of PBMC mutli-donor datasets
allowed cell type annotation at a fine level and did not require iterative data integration.
Compositional Analysis
Compositional changes across disease severity categories were assessed for BALF and PBMC
datasets separately using: 1) donor-specific fractional contributions to each cell type in the total pool of
cells recovered from all donors, 2) donor-specific percentages of cell types comprising each pool of cells

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

recovered from individual donor severity conditions (severe, moderate, or healthy control for BALF,
ARDS, non-ARDS, or healthy control for PBMCs), and 3) percentages of cell types in each donor sample
z-scored across donors. Here, we did not employ low-powered statistical tests but instead sought to use
method 3 to highlight donor-to-donor variation in cell type composition and identify robust trends across
donors indicating possible expansion or cytopenia.
Differential Expression Analysis
Differential expression analysis was performed in Seurat using the ‘FindMarkers’ function utilizing
model-based analysis of single-cell transcriptomics (MAST) statistical framework through the “MAST” R
package (v. 3.11) [66]. Differential expression analysis was conducted for all cell types in the integrated
BALF dataset across three permutations of donor groups: severe vs. moderate, moderate vs. control, and
severe vs. control. For all cell types in the PBMC dataset, differential expression analysis was conducted
across three permutations of donor groups: ARDS vs. non-ARDS, non-ARDS vs. control, and ARDS vs.
control Significantly differentially expressed genes (DEGs) are indicated by having a MAST adjusted
p<0.05 and a natural log fold change threshold of 0.25 was applied.
Surface Marker Identification
The identification of cell surface markers indicative of severe disease was performed by crossreferencing all DEGs across disease severity levels in the integrated BALF and PBMC datasets with entries
in the Cell Surface Protein Atlas (CSPA) [38]. DEGs were considered to be differentially expressed surface
markers if they were included in the “high confidence” CSPA category and showed significant differential
expression (adjusted p<0.05) with an absolute value average natural log fold change greater than 0.693 (or
log2 fold change >1). Differentially expressed surface markers were further analyzed to verify low
expression in moderate or non-ARDS and control donor samples. Finally, differentially expressed surface
markers were verified to be expressed in the cell type indicated by our data by cross referencing with the
Immune Cell Atlas human bulk RNA-seq data [39, 40].
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA)
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) [67] was performed using the “fgsea” package (v. 1.12.0)
[68] in R. Differentially expressed gene lists generated using MAST were ranked by -log10(p) multiplied
by the sign of the average natural log change, as previously demonstrated in Debski et al. and Riemand et
al. [69, 70], using the MAST adjusted p-value. Average natural log fold change was used to break ranking
ties and this value also served as an input to GSEA to quantify the correlation between the gene and
phenotype, as -log10(p) values become arbitrarily large. GSEA results were interpreted according to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

normalized enrichment score (NES) and an adjusted p-value, with a p<0.05 significance threshold.
Pathways with positive NES were defined throughout the text as “enriched” and pathways with negative
NES were defined as “depleted”.
Gene Ontology (GO) and Transcription Factor (TF) Analysis
Further analysis of significantly differentially expressed genes was performed using the “EnrichR”
(v. 2.1) package in R. Gene ontology (GO) analysis was conducted on the DEGs between the severe and
moderate samples for both the BALF and PBMC, evaluating the GO “biological function” annotations
representing large scale biological programs. Transcription factor (TF) analysis was similarly conducted on
the DEG list to query the regulation of TFs identified by the ENCODE and ChEA ChIP-X databases [71,
72]. GO and TF results were ranked based on the EnrichR ‘Combined Score’ metric and significance was
determined using an adjusted p-value threshold of p<0.05.
Ligand-Receptor Network Analysis for BALF Cells
To investigate the intracellular interactions potentially contributing to the observed differential
gene expression between the severe and moderate sample populations in the BALF, we employed the
ligand-receptor interaction tool NicheNet via the “nichenetr” package (v. 0.1.0) in R. [37] Differentially
expressed target genes between severe and moderate disease in a “receiver” cell population of interest were
identified using the ‘FindMarkers’ function in Seurat with criteria of p<0.05, average natural log fold
change >0.25, and expression in over 10% of the receiver cells. Concurrently, a list of potential receptors
expressed in over 10% of cells in the severe disease receiver population was generated using NichNet. A
list of “sender” cells was created comprising all cell types in the BALF, including the receiver cell type to
account for the possibility of autocrine signaling. For each sender cell population, potential ligands were
inferred using the NichNet ligand-receptor network applied to genes expressed in over 10% of the severe
disease sender population. Ligand activities were predicted using the ‘predict_ligand_activities’ function
in NicheNet, and the top 20 ligands were selected by Pearson correlation coefficient. Differentially
expressed target genes ranking among the 100 most strongly predicted targets of the top 20 ligands were
given a “regulatory potential” interaction score. The upper 50% of targets by regulatory potential were
visualized for plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), and the upper 15% of targets were visualized for
epithelial cells (ciliated cells and club cells). To specifically analyze signaling from mononuclear
phagocytes and neutrophils, differentially expressed target genes ranking among the 250 most strongly
predicted targets of the top 20 ligands were used, with the upper 25% of these targets according to regulatory
potential visualized in circos plots. Non-signaling molecules and molecules acting on non-coding RNA
targets were manually removed. Receptors for the top 20 ligands were identified using the CellPhoneDB

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

web server [73], and non-zero expression was verified in the severe disease receiver cell population of
interest using Seurat.
Identification of potential broadly acting “pan-ligands” was conducted by replicating the above
NicheNet procedure iteratively using each cell type of the BALF as a receiver. For each receiver cell type,
ligands with positive Pearson correlation were filtered based on 1) either belonging to the list of top 20
ligands or having a Pearson correlation greater than 0.1, and 2) presence of the corresponding receptor in
over 10% of cells (manually validated using CellPhoneDB [73]). Only ligands meeting these criteria for
over one-third of cell types in the BALF were preserved for further analysis. Of these, the ligands
differentially expressed in severe disease compared to moderate disease in at least one BALF cell type were
classified as potential pan-ligands.
Statistical Analysis
Differential gene expression was analyzed using the “MAST” package statistical framework
through the ‘FindMarkers’ function in Seurat. Differential expression statistical significance was qualified
using the MAST false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted p-value, with a significance threshold of p<0.05.
Pathway enrichment was analyzed using the standard GSEA method in the “fgsea” package. Statistical
significance of normalized enrichment scores was qualified using the fgsea FDR adjusted p-value, with a
significance threshold of p<0.05. Differential gene expression relevant to ligand-receptor interactions was
evaluated using the NichNet pipeline implementing the Wilcoxon rank sum test through the ‘FindMarkers’
function in Seurat. Statistical significance was qualified using the ‘FindMarkers’ Bonferroni-adjusted pvalue, with a significance threshold of p<0.05. GO and TF analysis was conducted using the “EnrichR”
package, and statistical significance was qualified using the EnrichR adjusted p-value based on Fisher’s
exact test, with a significance threshold of p<0.05.
Data and Code Availability
All data used in the study are available in the GEO under accession numbers GSE145926,
GSM3660650, and GSE150728. All code used for analysis will be made available in a public repository.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Paul Blainey, Cal Gunnarsson, Bianca Lepe, Megan Tse,
Andy Kim, and Harvey Yang for providing early-phase feedback. Figures were partially created using
BioRender.com. The authors thank Jon Henninger for input on figure design. K.O. is funded by the National

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. The authors would like to thank the MIT
Department of Biological Engineering for additional support throughout the research effort.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
K.O. and J.K. conceived of the ideas as a course project for 20.440 at MIT then undertook an
independent research effort. K.O. and J.K. contributed equally to the analysis and sought guidance and
supervision from B.B. throughout the research process. K.O., J.K., and B.B. wrote and edited the
manuscript.
DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors have no conflict of interest to declare.

REFERENCES
1.

Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen Y-M, Wang W, Song Z-G, Hu Y, Tao Z-W, Tian J-H, Pei Y-Y, Yuan M-L, Zhang Y-L,
Dai F-H, Liu Y, Wang Q-M, Zheng J-J, Xu L, Holmes EC, Zhang Y-Z (2020) A new coronavirus associated with
human respiratory disease in China. Nature 579:265–269.

2.

Andersen KG, Rambaut A, Ian Lipkin W, Holmes EC, Garry RF (2020) The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nat
Med 26:450–452.

3.

Morteza Abdullatif Khafaie FR (2020) Cross-Country Comparison of Case Fatality Rates of COVID-19/SARS-COV2. Osong Public Health and Research Perspectives 11:74.

4.

Baj J, Karakuła-Juchnowicz H, Teresiński G, Buszewicz G, Ciesielka M, Sitarz E, Forma A, Karakuła K, Flieger W,
Portincasa P, Maciejewski R (2020) COVID-19: Specific and Non-Specific Clinical Manifestations and Symptoms:
The Current State of Knowledge. J Clin Med Res 9:1753.

5.

Wu Z, McGoogan JM (2020) Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72 314 Cases From the Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention. JAMA 323:1239–1242.

6.

Chan J, Yuan S, Kok KH, To KKW, Chu H, Yang J. (2020) A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the 2019
novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family cluster. Lancet 395:514–523.

7.

Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, Zhang J, Huang L, Zhang C, Liu S, Zhao P, Liu H, Zhu L, Tai Y, Bai C, Gao T, Song J, Xia P,
Dong J, Zhao J, Wang F-S (2020) Pathological findings of COVID-19 associated with acute respiratory distress
syndrome. Lancet Respir Med 8:420–422.

8.

Ramanathan K, Antognini D, Combes A, Paden M, Zakhary B, Ogino M, MacLaren G, Brodie D, Shekar K (2020)
Planning and provision of ECMO services for severe ARDS during the COVID-19 pandemic and other outbreaks of
emerging infectious diseases. Lancet Respir Med 8:518–526.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

9.

Wilson JG, Simpson LJ, Ferreira A-M, Rustagi A, Roque J, Asuni A, Ranganath T, Grant PM, Subramanian A,
Rosenberg-Hasson Y, Maecker HT, Holmes SP, Levitt JE, Blish CA, Rogers AJ (2020) Cytokine profile in plasma of
severe COVID-19 does not differ from ARDS and sepsis. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.15.20103549.

10. Gattinoni L, Chiumello D, Rossi S (2020) COVID-19 pneumonia: ARDS or not?. Crit Care 24, 154 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-020-02880-z.
11. Del Valle DM, Kim-Schulze S, Hsin-Hui H, Beckmann ND, Nirenberg S, Wang B, Lavin Y, Swartz T, Madduri D,
Stock A, Marron T, Xie H, Patel MK, van Oekelen O, Rahman A, Kovatch P, Aberg J, Schadt E, Jagannath S,
Mazumdar M, Charney A, Firpo-Betancourt A, Mendu DR, Jhang J, Reich D, Sigel K, Cordon-Cardo C, Feldmann
M, Parekh S, Merad M, Gnjatic S (2020) An inflammatory cytokine signature helps predict COVID-19 severity and
death. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20115758.
12. Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall RS, Manson JJ, HLH Across Speciality Collaboration, UK
(2020) COVID-19: consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet 395:1033.
13. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z, Yu T, Xia J, Wei Y, Wu W,
Xie X, Yin W, Li H, Liu M, Xiao Y, Gao H, Guo L, Xie J, Wang G, Jiang R, Gao Z, Jin Q, Wang J, Cao B (2020)
Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 395:497.
14. Blanco-Melo D, Nilsson-Payant BE, Liu W-C, Uhl S, Hoagland D, Møller R, Jordan TX, Oishi K, Panis M, Sachs D,
Wang TT, Schwartz RE, Lim JK, Albrecht RA, tenOever BR (2020) Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2
Drives Development of COVID-19. Cell 181:1036–1045.e9.
15. Wang C, Xie J, Zhao L, Fei X, Zhang H, Tan Y, Zhou L, Liu Z, Ren Y, Yuan L, Zhang Y, Zhang J, Liang L, Chen X,
Liu X, Wang P, Han X, Weng X, Chen Y, Yu T, Zhang X, Cai J, Chen R, Shi Z, Bian X (2020) Aveolar Macrophage
Activation and Cytokine Storm in the Pathogenesis of Severe COVID-19. Research Square.
https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-19346/v1.
16. Carsana L, Sonzogni A, Nasr A, Rossi R, Pellegrinelli A, Zerbi P, Rech R, Colombo R, Antinori S, Corbellino M,
Galli M, Catena E, Tosoni A, Gianatti A, Nebuloni M (2020) Pulmonary post-mortem findings in a large series of
COVID-19 cases from Northern Italy. The Lancet Infections Disease https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)304345.
17. Schaller T, Hirschbühl K, Burkhardt K, Braun G, Trepel M, Märkl B, Claus R (2020) Postmortem Examination of
Patients With COVID-19. JAMA. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.8907.
18. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, Wei Y, Li H, Wu X, Xu J, Tu
S, Zhang Y, Chen H, Cao B (2020) Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19
in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet 395:1054–1062.
19. Grasselli G, Zangrillo A, Zanella A, Antonelli M, Cabrini L, Castelli A, Cereda D, Coluccello A, Foti G, Fumagalli
R, Iotti G, Latronico N, Lorini L, Merler S, Natalini G, Piatti A, Ranieri MV, Scandroglio AM, Storti E, Cecconi M,
Pesenti A (2020) Baseline Characteristics and Outcomes of 1591 Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 Admitted to
ICUs of the Lombardy Region, Italy. JAMA 323:1574–1581.
20. Arentz M, Yim E, Klaff L, Lokhandwala S, Riedo FX, Chong M, Lee M (2020) Characteristics and Outcomes of 21
Critically Ill Patients With COVID-19 in Washington State. JAMA 323:1612–1614
21. Xiong Y, Liu Y, Cao L, Wang D, Guo M, Jiang A, Guo D, Hu W, Yang J, Tang Z, Wu H, Lin Y, Zhang M, Zhang Q,
Shi M, Liu Y, Zhou Y, Lan K, Chen Y (2020) Transcriptomic characteristics of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid and
peripheral blood mononuclear cells in COVID-19 patients. Emerg Microbes Infect 9:761–770.
22. Daamen AR, Bachali P, Owen KA, Kingsmore KM, Hubbard EL, Labonte AC, Robl R, Shrotri S, Grammer AC,
Lipsky PE (2020) Comprehensive Transcriptomic Analysis of COVID-19 Blood, Lung, and Airway. bioRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.121889.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

23. Guo C, Li B, Ma H, Wang X, Cai P, Yu Q, Zhu L, Jin L, Jiang C, Fang J, Liu Q, Zong D, Zhang W, Lu Y, Li K, Gao
X, Fu B, Liu L, Ma X, Weng J, Wei H, Jin T, Lin J, Qu K (2020) Tocilizumab treatment in severe COVID-19 patients
attenuates the inflammatory storm incited by monocyte centric immune interactions revealed by single-cell analysis.
bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.08.029769.
24. Huang L, Shi Y, Gong B, Jiang L, Liu X, Yang J, Tang J, You C, Jiang Q, Long B, Zeng T, Luo M, Zeng F, Zeng F,
Wang S, Yang X, Yang Z (2020) Blood single cell immune profiling reveals the interferon-MAPK pathway mediated
adaptive immune response for COVID-19. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20033472.
25. Liu X, Zhu A, He J, Chen Z, Liu L, Xu Y, Ye F, Feng H, Luo L, Cai B, Mai Y, Lin L, Zhang Z, Chen S, Shi J, Wen
L, Wei Y, Zhuo J, Zhao Y, Li F, Wei X, Chen D, Zhang X, Zhong N, Huang Y, Liu H, Wang J, Xu X, Wang J, Chen
R, Chen X, Zhong N, Zhao J, Li Y, Zhao J, Chen J (2020) Single-Cell Analysis Reveals Macrophage-Driven T Cell
Dysfunction in Severe COVID-19 Patients. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.23.20100024.
26. Mudd PA, Crawford JC, Turner JS, Souquette A, Reynolds D, Bender D, Bosanquet JP, Anand NJ, Striker DA, Martin
RS, Boon ACM, House SL, Remy KE, Hotchkiss RS, Presti RM, OHalloran JA, Powderly WG, Thomas PG, Ellebedy
AH (2020) Targeted Immunosuppression Distinguishes COVID-19 from Influenza in Moderate and Severe Disease.
medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.28.20115667.
27. Liao M, Liu Y, Yuan J, Wen Y, Xu G, Zhao J, Cheng L, Li J, Wang X, Wang F, Liu L, Amit I, Zhang S, Zhang Z
(2020) Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. Nat Med.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0901-9.
28. Chua RL, Lukassen S, Trump S, Hennig BP, Wendisch D, Pott F, Debnath O, Thürmann L, Kurth F, Kazmierski J,
Timmermann B, Twardziok S, Schneider S, Machleidt F, Müller-Redetzky H, Krannich A, Schmidt S, Balzer F,
Liebig J, Loske J, Eils J, Ishaque N, von Kalle C, Hocke A, Witzenrath M, Goffinet C, Drosten C, Laudi S, Lehmann
I, Conrad C, Sander L-E, Eils R (2020) Cross-talk between the airway epithelium and activated immune cells defines
severity in COVID-19. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.29.20084327.
29. Anft M, Paniskaki K, Blazquez-Navarro A, Doevelaar AAN, Seibert F, Hoelzer B, Skrzypczyk S, Kohut E, Kurek J,
Zapka J, Wehler P, Kaliszczyk S, Bajda S, Thieme C, Roch T, Konik MJ, Brenner T, Tempfer C, Watzl C, Dolff S,
Dittmer U, Westhoff T, Witzke O, Stervbo U, Babel N (2020) COVID-19 progression is potentially driven by T cell
immunopathogenesis. medRxiv. 2020.04.28.20083089.
30. Chu C-F, Sabath F, Sun S, Chao Y-Y, Zielinski CE (2020) In-depth phenotyping of human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells in convalescent COVID-19 patients following a moderate versus severe disease course. medRxiv.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.25.20112763.
31. Giamarellos-Bourboulis EJ, Netea MG, Rovina N, Akinosoglou K, Antoniadou A, Antonakos N, Damoraki G,
Gkavogianni T, Adami M-E, Katsaounou P, Ntaganou M, Kyriakopoulou M, Dimopoulos G, Koutsodimitropoulos I,
Velissaris D, Koufargyris P, Karageorgos A, Katrini K, Lekakis V, Lupse M, Kotsaki A, Renieris G, Theodoulou D,
Panou V, Koukaki E, Koulouris N, Gogos C, Koutsoukou A (2020) Complex Immune Dysregulation in COVID-19
Patients with Severe Respiratory Failure. Cell Host Microbe 27:992–1000.e3.
32. Wilk AJ, Rustagi A, Zhao NQ, Roque J, Martinez-Colon GJ, McKechnie JL, Ivison GT, Ranganath T, Vergara R,
Hollis T, Simpson LJ, Grant P, Subramanian A, Rogers AJ, Blish CA (2020) A single-cell atlas of the peripheral
immune response to severe COVID-19. medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069930.
33. Hadjadj J, Yatim N, Barnabei L, Corneau A, Boussier J, Pere H, Charbit B, Bondet V, Chenevier-Gobeaux C, Breillat
P, Carlier N, Gauzit R, Morbieu C, Pene F, Marin N, Roche N, Szwebel T-A, Smith N, Merkling S, Treluyer J-M,
Veyer D, Mouthon L, Blanc C, Tharaux P-L, Rozenberg F, Fischer A, Duffy D, Rieux-Laucat F, Kerneis S, Terrier B
(2020) Impaired type I interferon activity and exacerbated inflammatory responses in severe Covid-19 patients.
medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.20068015.
34. Kuri-Cervantes L, Pampena MB, Meng W, Rosenfeld AM, Ittner CAG, Weisman AR, Agyekum R, Mathew D, Baxter
AE, Vella L, Kuthuru O, Apostolidis S, Bershaw L, Dougherty J, Greenplate AR, Pattekar A, Kim J, Han N, Gouma
S, Weirick ME, Arevalo CP, Bolton MJ, Goodwin EC, Anderson EM, Hensley SE, Jones TK, Mangalmurti NS,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Luning Prak ET, Wherry EJ, Meyer NJ, Betts MR (2020) Immunologic perturbations in severe COVID-19/SARSCoV-2 infection. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.18.101717.
35. Morrissey SM, Geller AE, Hu X, Tieri D, Cooke EA, Ding C, Woeste M, Zhange H-G, Cavallazi R, Clifford SP, Chen
J, Kong M, Watson CT, Huang J, Yan J (2020) Emergence of Low-density Inflammatory Neutrophils Correlates with
medRxiv.
Hypercoagulable
State
and
Disease
Severity
in
COVID-19
Patients.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.22.20106724.
36. Schulte-Schrepping J, Reusch N, Paclik D, Baßler K, Schlickeiser S, Zhang B, Krämer B, Krammer T, Brumhard S,
Bonaguro L, De Domenico E, Wendisch D, Grasshoff M, Kapellos TS, Beckstette M, Pecht T, Saglam A, Dietrich O,
Mei HE, Schulz AR, Conrad C, Kunkel D, Vafadarnejad E, Xu C-J, Horne A, Herbert M, Drews A, Thibeault C,
Pfeiffer M, Hippenstiel S, Hocke A, Müller-Redetzky H, Heim K-M, Machleidt F, Uhrig A, de Jarcy LB, Jürgens L,
Stegemann M, Glösenkamp CR, Volk H-D, Goffinet C, Raabe J, Kaiser KM, Vinh MT, Rieke G, Meisel C, Ulas T,
Becker M, Geffers R, Witzenrath M, Drosten C, Suttorp N, von Kalle C, Kurth F, Händler K, Schultze JL,
Aschenbrenner AC, Li Y, Nattermann J, Sawitzki B, Saliba A-E, Sander LE, Deutsche COVID-19 OMICS Initiative
(DeCOI) (2020) Suppressive myeloid cells are a hallmark of severe COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020.06.03.20119818.
37. Browaeys R, Saelens W, Saeys Y (2020) NicheNet: modeling intercellular communication by linking ligands to target
genes. Nat Methods 17:159–162.
38. Bausch-Fluck D, Hofmann A, Bock T, Frei AP, Cerciello F, Jacobs A, Moest H, Omasits U, Gundry RL, Yoon C,
Schiess R, Schmidt A, Mirkowska P, Härtlová A, Van Eyk JE, Bourquin J-P, Aebersold R, Boheler KR, Zandstra P,
Wollscheid B (2015) A mass spectrometric-derived cell surface protein atlas. PLoS One 10:e0121314.
39. Immune Cell Atlas. http://immunecellatlas.net/. Accessed 13 Jun 2020.
40. Villani A-C, Satija R, Reynolds G, Sarkizova S, Shekhar K, Fletcher J, Griesbeck M, Butler A, Zheng S, Lazo S,
Jardine L, Dixon D, Stephenson E, Nilsson E, Grundberg I, McDonald D, Filby A, Li W, De Jager PL, RozenblattRosen O, Lane AA, Haniffa M, Regev A, Hacohen N (2017) Single-cell RNA-seq reveals new types of human blood
dendritic cells, monocytes, and progenitors. Science. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aah4573.
41. Tong S, Tian J, Wang H, Huang Z, Yu M, Sun L, Liu R, Liao M, Ning Z (2013) H9N2 avian influenza infection
altered expression pattern of sphiogosine-1-phosphate receptor 1 in BALB/c mice. Virol J 10:296
42. Rivera J, Proia RL, Olivera A (2008) The alliance of sphingosine-1-phosphate and its receptors in immunity. Nat Rev
Immunol 8:753–763.
43. Morimoto J, Sato K, Nakayama Y, Kimura C, Kajino K, Matsui Y, Miyazaki T, Uede T (2011) Osteopontin Modulates
the Generation of Memory CD8+ T Cells during Influenza Virus Infection. The Journal of Immunology 187:5671–
5683.
44. Mathew D, Giles JR, Baxter AE, Greenplate AR, Wu JE, Alanio C, Oldridge DA, Kuri-Cervantes L, Pampena MB,
D’Andrea K, Manne S, Chen Z, Huang YJ, Reilly JP, Weisman AR, Ittner CAG, Kuthuru O, Dougherty J, Nzingha
K, Han N, Kim J, Pattekar A, Goodwin EC, Anderson EM, Weirick ME, Gouma S, Arevalo CP, Bolton MJ, Chen F,
Lacey SF, Hensley SE, Apostolidis S, Huang AC, Vella LA, UPenn COVID Processing Unit, Betts MR, Meyer NJ,
Wherry EJ (2020) Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals patient heterogeneity and distinct
immunotypes with implications for therapeutic interventions. bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.20.106401.
45. Zaiss DMW, Gause WC, Osborne LC, Artis D (2015) Emerging functions of amphiregulin in orchestrating immunity,
inflammation, and tissue repair. Immunity 42:216–226.
46. Guo X-ZJ, Thomas PG (2017) New fronts emerge in the influenza cytokine storm. Semin Immunopathol 39:541–550.
47. Monticelli LA, Osborne LC, Noti M, Tran SV, Zaiss DMW, Artis D (2015) IL-33 promotes an innate immune pathway
of intestinal tissue protection dependent on amphiregulin–EGFR interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112:10762–
10767.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

48. Allen JR, Ge L, Huang Y, Brauer R, Parimon T, Cassel SL, Sutterwala FS, Chen P (2018) TIMP-1 Promotes the
Immune Response in Influenza-Induced Acute Lung Injury. Lung 196:737–743.
49. Forst CV, Zhou B, Wang M, Chou T-W, Mason G, Song W-M, Schadt E, Ghedin E, Zhang B (2017) Integrative gene
network analysis identifies key signatures, intrinsic networks and host factors for influenza virus A infections. NPJ
Syst Biol Appl 3:35.
50. Hoang LT, Tolfvenstam T, Ooi EE, Khor CC, Naim ANM, Ho EXP, Ong SH, Wertheim HF, Fox A, Van Vinh Nguyen
C, Nghiem NM, Ha TM, Thi Ngoc Tran A, Tambayah P, Lin R, Sangsajja C, Manosuthi W, Chuchottaworn C,
Sansayunh P, Chotpitayasunondh T, Suntarattiwong P, Chokephaibulkit K, Puthavathana P, de Jong MD, Farrar J,
van Doorn HR, Hibberd ML (2014) Patient-based transcriptome-wide analysis identify interferon and ubiquination
pathways as potential predictors of influenza A disease severity. PLoS One 9:e111640.
51. Su N, Shi SX, Zhu X, Borazanci A, Shi F-D, Gan Y (2014) Interleukin-7 expression and its effect on natural killer
cells in patients with multiple sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol 276:180–186.
52. Teijaro JR, Walsh KB, Cahalan S, Fremgen DM, Roberts E, Scott F, Martinborough E, Peach R, Oldstone MBA,
Rosen H (2011) Endothelial cells are central orchestrators of cytokine amplification during influenza virus infection.
Cell 146:980–991.
53. Chen H, Liu W, Liu D, Zhao L, Yu J (2020) SARS-CoV-2 activates lung epithelia cell proinflammatory signaling and
leads to immune dysregulation in COVID-19 patients by single-cell sequencing. medRxiv
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.08.20096024.
54. Wen, Wen W, Su W, Tang H, Le W, Zhang X, Zheng Y, Liu X, Xie L, Li J, Ye J, Dong L, Cui X, Miao Y, Wang D,
Dong J, Xiao C, Chen W, Wang H (2020) Immune cell profiling of COVID-19 patients in the recovery stage by singlecell sequencing. Cell Discovery 6. Cell Discovery 6:30.
55. Yan Q, Li P, Ye X, Huang X, Mo X, Wang Q, Zhang Y, Luo K, Chen Z, Luo J, Niu X, Feng Y, Ji T, Feng B, Wang
J, Li F, Zhang F, Li F, Wang J, Feng L, Chen Z, Lei C, Linbing QU, Chen L (2020) Longitudinal peripheral blood
transcriptional analysis of COVID-19 patients captures disease progression and reveals potential biomarkers.
medRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20091355.
56. Giordano M, Roncagalli R, Bourdely P, Chasson L, Buferne M, Yamasaki S, Beyaert R, van Loo G, Auphan-Anezin
N, Schmitt-Verhulst A-M, Verdeil G (2014) The tumor necrosis factor alpha-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3, A20)
imposes a brake on antitumor activity of CD8 T cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111:11115–11120.
57. Das T, Chen Z, Hendriks RW, Kool M (2018) A20/Tumor Necrosis Factor α-Induced Protein 3 in Immune Cells
Controls Development of Autoinflammation and Autoimmunity: Lessons from Mouse Models. Front Immunol.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2018.00104.
58. Priem D, van Loo G, Bertrand MJM (2020) A20 and Cell Death-driven Inflammation. Trends Immunol 41:421–435.
59. Maelfait J, Roose K, Vereecke L, Mc Guire C, Sze M, Schuijs MJ, Willart M, Ibañez LI, Hammad H, Lambrecht BN,
Beyaert R, Saelens X, van Loo G (2016) A20 Deficiency in Lung Epithelial Cells Protects against Influenza A Virus
Infection. PLoS Pathog 12:e1005410.
60. Moni MA, Liò P (2014) Network-based analysis of comorbidities risk during an infection: SARS and HIV case
studies. BMC Bioinformatics 15:333.
61. Adib-Conquy M, Pedron T, Petit-Bertron A-F, Tabary O, Corvol H, Jacquot J, Clément A, Cavaillon J-M (2008)
Neutrophils in cystic fibrosis display a distinct gene expression pattern. Mol Med 14:36–44.
62. McGonagle D, Sharif K, O’Regan A, Bridgewood C (2020) The Role of Cytokines including Interleukin-6 in COVID19 induced Pneumonia and Macrophage Activation Syndrome-Like Disease. Autoimmun Rev 19:102537.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

63. Jamilloux Y, Henry T, Belot A, Viel S, Fauter M, El Jammal T, Walzer T, François B, Sève P (2020) Should we
stimulate or suppress immune responses in COVID-19? Cytokine and anti-cytokine interventions. Autoimmunity
Reviews 19:102567.
64. .Morse C, Tabib T, Sembrat J, Buschur KL, Bittar HT, Valenzi E, Jiang Y, Kass DJ, Gibson K, Chen W, Mora A,
Benos PV, Rojas M, Lafyatis R (2019) Proliferating SPP1/MERTK-expressing macrophages in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis. Eur Respir J 54. https://doi.org/10.1183/13993003.02441-2018.
65. Uhlén M, Fagerberg L, Hallström BM, Lindskog C, Oksvold P, Mardinoglu A, Sivertsson Å, Kampf C, Sjöstedt E,
Asplund A, Olsson I, Edlund K, Lundberg E, Navani S, Szigyarto CA-K, Odeberg J, Djureinovic D, Takanen JO,
Hober S, Alm T, Edqvist P-H, Berling H, Tegel H, Mulder J, Rockberg J, Nilsson P, Schwenk JM, Hamsten M, von
Feilitzen K, Forsberg M, Persson L, Johansson F, Zwahlen M, von Heijne G, Nielsen J, Pontén F (2015) Proteomics.
Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 347:1260419
66. Finak G, McDavid A, Yajima M, Deng J, Gersuk V, Shalek AK, Slichter CK, Miller HW, Juliana McElrath M, Prlic
M, Linsley PS, Gottardo R (2015) MAST: a flexible statistical framework for assessing transcriptional changes and
characterizing heterogeneity in single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome Biology 16.
67. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA, Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR,
Lander ES, Mesirov JP (2005) Gene set enrichment analysis: A knowledge-based approach for interpreting genomewide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102:15545–15550.
68. Korotkevich G, Sukhov V, Sergushichev A (2019) Fast gene set enrichment analysis. bioRxiv 060012.
69. Dębski KJ, Pitkanen A, Puhakka N, Bot AM, Khurana I, Harikrishnan KN, Ziemann M, Kaspi A, El-Osta A, Lukasiuk
K, Kobow K (2016) Etiology matters - Genomic DNA Methylation Patterns in Three Rat Models of Acquired
Epilepsy. Sci Rep 6:25668.
70. Reimand J, Isserlin R, Voisin V, Kucera M, Tannus-Lopes C, Rostamianfar A, Wadi L, Meyer M, Wong J, Xu C,
Merico D, Bader GD (2019) Pathway enrichment analysis and visualization of omics data using g:Profiler, GSEA,
Cytoscape and EnrichmentMap. Nature Protocols 14:482–517.
71. ENCODE Project Consortium (2012) An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome. Nature
489:57–74.
72. Lachmann A, Xu H, Krishnan J, Berger SI, Mazloom AR, Ma’ayan A (2010) ChEA: transcription factor regulation
inferred from integrating genome-wide ChIP-X experiments. Bioinformatics 26:2438–2444.
73. Efremova M, Vento-Tormo M, Teichmann SA, Vento-Tormo R (2020) CellPhoneDB: inferring cell–cell
communication from combined expression of multi-subunit ligand–receptor complexes. Nature Protocols 15:1484–
1506.

A

B

C

D

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Single cell RNA sequencing reveals cellular diversity of bronchoalveolar lavage (BALF)
fluid and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) in healthy controls and across the spectrum
of COVID-19 severity.
A) (Left) UMAP projection and clustering of 66,452 cells identified in BALF across healthy (n=4, HC1HC4), moderate (n=3, M1-M3), severe (n=6, S1-S6) donors. (Middle) Annotation of BALF clusters
following merging into 13 cell types. pDC=plasmacytoid dendritic cell, mDC=myeloid dendritic cell,
NK=natural killer cell. (Right) Percent composition (z-score) of BALF cell types in each donor sample.
B) (Left) UMAP projection and clustering of 31,957 cells identified in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) across healthy (n=6, HC5-10), non-ARDS (n=4, M4-M7), and ARDS (n=4, S7-S10) donors.
(Middle) Annotation of PBMC clusters following merging into 19 cell types. Prolif Plasma
Cell=proliferative plasma cell, gd T= gamma delta T cell. (Right) Percent composition (z-score) of PBMC
cell types in each donor sample
C) (Left) UMAP projection and clustering of BALF “NK”, “Proliferating T”, and “Mixed T” populations
across healthy (n=3), moderate (n=3), and severe (n=5) donors following iterative data integration.
(Middle) Annotation of BALF NK and T cell types following iterative data integration. MAIT=mucosalassociated invariant T cell. (Right) Percent composition (z-score) of BALF NK and T cell types in each
donor sample.
D) (Left) UMAP projection and clustering of mononuclear phagocyte cell population from the BALF
across healthy (n=4), moderate (n=3), and severe (n=6) donors. (Right) Percent composition (z-score) of
BALF mononuclear phagocytes in each donor sample.

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pDC

B

Moderate

4

Expression Level

C

AREG
Severe

3

2

G

1

0

CD55
Moderate

Expression Level

Severe
2

1

0

Surface Protein Genes

γδ T

E

F

S1PR1
Non-ARDS

3

Expression Level

D

ARDS

2

1

0

Surface Protein Genes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Transcriptional signatures of COVID-19 severity include surface markers in cells of the
lung microenvironment and peripheral blood.
A) Differentially expressed genes were identified in 17 of 18 cell types found in the BALF between
moderate and severe COVID-19 patients. An example volcano plot of differentially expressed genes is
shown for plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Genes denoted by red dots meet a threshold of p<0.01 and
natural log fold change (ratio of severe to moderate expression) greater than 0.5. The circled cell surface
markers AREG and CD55 are significantly unregulated in severe disease in pDCs.
B) Transcriptional expression levels of the cell surface markers AREG and CD55 in pDCs of moderate
COVID-19 patients (blue violins, n=3) and severe COVID-19 patients (red violins, n=6).
C) Differentially expressed surface markers for all cell types identified in the BALF (moderate donors:
n=3, severe donors: n=5 for T and NK cells, n=6 for all other cell types). Only genes with significant
differential expression (|log2FC|>1 and adjusted p<0.05) are shown.
D) Differentially expressed genes were identified for all 19 of the cell types found in PBMCs between nonARDS and ARDS-diagnosed COVID-19 patients. An example volcano plot of differentially expressed
genes is shown for gamma delta (γδ) T cells. Genes denoted by red dots meet a threshold of p<0.01 and
natural log fold change greater than 0.5. The circled cell surface marker S1PR1 is significantly upregulated
in γδ T cells of ARDS patients compared to non-ARDS patients.
E) Transcriptional expression levels of the cell surface marker S1PR1 in non-ARDS COVID-19 patients
(blue violins, n=4) and ARDS-diagnosed COVID-19 patients (red violins, n=4).
F) Differentially expressed surface markers for all PBMC cell types identified in the peripheral blood (nonARDS donors: n=4, ARDS donors: n=4). Only genes with significant differential expression (|log2FC|>1
and adjusted p<0.05) are shown.

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Ciliated Cell

B

CD14 Monocyte

C
MP (Cluster 10)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Transcriptional changes across COVID-19 severity levels indicate dysregulation of
molecular pathways in cells of the blood and lung microenvironment.
A) (Left) Volcano plot showing significantly differentially expressed genes (red dots) in ciliated cells from
BALF when comparing severe and moderate patients. (Middle) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of
hallmark gene sets in the ciliated cells of the lung. Bars colored blue are significantly enriched or depleted
(adjusted p-value <0.05) while bars colored red do not pass the significance threshold. (Right) Hallmark
gene sets indicate severity-specific enrichment of molecular pathways for all cell types found in the BALF.
Normalized enrichment score is shown by a blue-red color scale and dot size is proportional to -log10(p),
with the smallest dot size indicating non-significant adjusted p-values (p<0.05). MP=mononuclear
phagocytes.
B) (Left) Volcano plot showing significantly differentially expressed genes (red dots) in CD14+ monocytes
from blood when comparing non-ARDS and ARDS-diagnosed patients. (Middle) Gene set enrichment
analysis (GSEA) of hallmark gene sets in CD14+ monocytes. Bars colored blue are significantly enriched
or depleted (adjusted p-value <0.05) in ARDS while bars colored red do not pass the significance threshold.
(Right) Hallmark gene sets indicate ARDS-specific enrichment of molecular pathways for all PBMC cell
types found in the blood.
C) (Left) Volcano plot showing significantly differentially expressed genes (red dots) in the one of 16
mononuclear phagocyte populations (cluster 10) from the BALF when comparing severe and moderate
patients. (Middle) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of hallmark gene sets in cluster 10 of BALF
mononuclear phagocytes. Bars colored blue are significantly enriched or depleted (adjusted p-value <0.05)
while bars colored red do not pass the significance threshold. (Right) Hallmark gene sets indicate severityspecific enrichment of molecular pathways for all mononuclear phagocyte clusters found in the BALF.
Clusters 12 and 16 represent suspected doublets.

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted
a license to display the preprintDiffferentially
in perpetuity.expressed
It is made
1) Filter bioRxiv
by Pearson
Ligands
available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND
4.0 International
MAST
NicheNet
2) Receptor
present? license.
in severe disease?

Receiver
cell types

B

Ligand Activity

DEGs

Ligands signaling
to >1/3 of cell types

potentially driving
differential expression

Potential
pan-ligands
pDC
DEGs

Predicted pDC Target Genes

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*
*
*

Mononuclear
Phagocyte
Ligands

*

*
*

*

*
*

C

Shared Ligands

Neutrophil
Ligands

Epithelial
DEGs

Predicted Epithelial Target Genes

Ligand Activity
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*

*

Mononuclear
Phagocyte
Ligands

*

*

*
*

*

*
*
*

*

*

*

Sender Cells

Receiver Cells

D

*

Ligands

Ligands

*

*

*

Neutrophil
Ligands

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.15.147470; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Ligand-receptor interaction networks drive severity-specific changes in gene expression in
the lung microenvironment.
A) Methods flow schematic for the identification of severity-specific pan-ligands linked to differential
expression in over one-third of cell types in the BALF.
B) Left) Predicted ligand activity driving differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs) in severe disease ranked by Pearson correlation coefficient (orange color scale). The potential
of each ligand for inducing differential expression of pDC target genes is shown by regulatory potential
(purple color scale). Asterisks (*) indicate ligands whose receptors were manually validated at the transcript
level on pDCs in severe donors. (Right) Circos plot of ligand-target relationships between DEGs in pDCs
(red) and ligands expressed by mononuclear phagocytes (yellow), neutrophils (blue), and shared ligands
between both cell types (green).
C) (Left) Predicted ligand activity driving differentially expressed genes in epithelial cells (ciliated cells
and club cells) in severe disease ranked by Pearson correlation coefficient (orange color scale). The
potential of each ligand for inducing differential expression of epithelial target genes is shown by regulatory
potential (purple color scale). Asterisks (*) indicate ligands whose receptors were manually validated at the
transcript level on epithelial cells in severe donors. (Right) Circos plot of ligand-target relationships
between DEGs in epithelial cells (red) and ligands expressed by mononuclear phagocytes (yellow) and
neutrophils (blue).
D) (Left) “Sender” cells differentially express potential pan-ligands in the BALF between severe and
moderate disease. Colored ligand-cell pairings indicate cell types in which the corresponding ligand is
significantly differentially expressed in severe disease with adjusted p<0.05. Average natural log fold
change (ratio of severe to moderate expression) is shown in the blue-red color scale. (Right) Potential panligands implicated in severe COVID-19 are correlated with differential gene expression in over one-third
of “receiver” cell types in the BALF. The pink color scale indicates Pearson correlation, a measure of a
ligand’s ability to induce the differential gene expression measured in the corresponding “receiver” cell.

