medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

Superspreading as a Regular Factor of the COVID-19 Pandemic:
I. A Two-Component Model
Juri Dimaschko∗
Fachhochschule, Lübeck
(Dated: July 4, 2020)
We consider the impact of superspreading on the course of the COVID-19 epidemic. A twocomponent model of the epidemic has been developed, in which all infected are divided in two
groups. The groups are asymptomatic superspreaders spreading the infection and sensitive persons
which can only get infection. Once infected the sensitive exhibit clear symptoms and become
isolated. It is shown that the ratio of increment of the number of daily cases in the beginning of the
epidemic and decrement at the end of the epidemic is equal to the ratio of the spreading rates of
the infection transmission from the superspreaders to potential superspreaders and to the sensitive
persons, respectively. On the basis of data from 12 countries and territories it is found that the
superspreaders transmit the infection to potential superspreaders approximately 4 times more often
then to the sensitive persons. Specific measures to limit the epidemical incidence are proposed. The
possibility of an allergic component in the disease is discussed.

I.

INTRODUCTION

The COVID-19 pandemic has a number of differences
from previous flu epidemics.
1. One of its main features is the existence of active
asymptomatic carriers of the virus - superspreaders [1].
They cause a significant contribution to the spread of
the virus because once infected do not sick and therefore
are not isolated. Such carriers can be detected by random testing or by testing of contacts of already infected
persons (which, of course, is more effective).
2. Another feature of the COVID-19 pandemic is the
significantly lower number of cases (about 0.2 −2%) than
the normal flu epidemic (10 − 20%). This suggests that
only a small fraction of people are sensitive to the SARS
CoV-2 virus that is responsible for the current pandemic.
As in the case of the superspreaders, they have also been
successful in reproducing the virus, but this is now accompanied by a noticeable immune response and thus a
disease.
The aim of this work is to take into account the impact
on the spread of the COVID-19 epidemic of both factors.
1. The presence of a limited number of people who are
susceptible and insensitive to the virus and who, once
infected, become asymptomatic carriers and spreaders of
the virus;
2. The presence of a limited number of people who are
both susceptible to and sensitive to the virus and who,
been infected, exhibit a strong immune response and get
sick.
This approach treats superspreaders not as an exotic
factor leading to separate outbreaks of the virus, but as a
regular element in the dynamics of the epidemic. It is this
element that defines the main features of the development
of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The article is structured as follows.

∗

Electronic address: dimaschko@gmx.net

The second part classifies those infected by the nature
and intensity of the immune response, which is the basis
for the further proposed epidemiological model.
In the third section, a corresponding two-component
model of the epidemic is constructed and its analytical
solution is found.
The fourth part compares the found results with observed epidemics in a number of countries and territories.
The final part summarizes the application of the model
and discusses the possibilities for limiting the incidence
resulting from this model.

II.

IMMUNOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION OF
INFECTED

From an epidemic point of view, the mobility of infected persons is the most important factor, as only the
mobile infected persons can transmit the infection. It
is therefore reasonable to divide those infected into two
broad groups by degree of mobility. Since mobility, in
turn, is determined by the presence of pronounced symptoms of disease that are linked to immune response, such
separation must be based precisely on the nature and
degree of the immune response.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, a significant amount
of data was collected describing the nature and diversity of the human immune response to the virus. In this
section, we will use part of this data to limit and give
an immunologically accurate definition of the two main
groups of the model - superspreaders and sensitive.
The basis of the definition is the appearance of antibodies to the virus in the mucous membrane (IgA immunoglobulin), as well as in the blood (IgG immunoglobulin). Tests taken in persons with different degrees of
severity, from asymptomatic to acute, show the following
pattern [2].
1. For asymptomatically infected persons, both types
of antibodies are largely absent. This fact points to the
category of superspreaders and indirectly explains the

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

2
Table 1: Definition of two groups (superspreaders and
sensitive/supersensitive) by the type of immune reaction

large number of viruses in such carriers, resulting in numerous cases under certain circumstances.
2. For those infected in mild form, antibodies are found
mainly in the mucosa (immunoglobulin IgA). These infected individuals must be classified as sensitive, as the
presence of signs of a disease confirmed by a positive virus
test results in their immediate isolation.
3. For those who have suffered an acute infection, antibodies are found both in the mucosa and in the blood
(IgA and IgG immunoglobulins). These infected people
should also be classified as sensitive, as they are usually hospitalized and anyway isolated. Unlike those who
have experienced the disease in mild form, we will further
refer this part of the category sensitive to the subcategory supersensitive. This separation does not affect the
proposed two-component model, which is concerned only
with the fact that the carrier is isolated.
In this way, one can give an immunologically precise definition of the groups superspreaders and sensitive.
The first includes only asymptomatic carriers, which are
not subject to any isolation and spread the infection. The
second is symptomatic, isolated and therefore unable to
spread the infection. This division is presented in the Table 1. The sensitive group has a subgroup supersensitive.
It includes those infected who exhibit the strongest immune response, including antibodies in both the mucous
membrane and the blood.
From an epidemic perspective, sensitive and supersensitive groups are equivalent, as in both cases the infected
persons are isolated and unable to spread the infection
further.
III.

THE TWO-COMPONENT MODEL OF THE
EPIDEMIC

Consider an epidemic model involving only two types
of potential carriers. These are superspreaders and sensitive persons. The superspreader, once infected, remains
asymptomatic. He does not get sick and begins to spread
the infection. Sensitive persons, been infected get sick,
isolated, and unable to transmit the infection. Thereby
in accordance with classification in Table 1, the supersensitive persons in this model are included in the group
of sensitive.
Unlike the conventional one-component model of the
epidemic, where anyone infected continues the chain of
infection, in this model only superspreaders have this capability. The sensitive persons play a passive role only.

Table 2: Definitions of model variables and parameters

Fig. 1: Scheme of the two-component epidemic model

They can get the infection but not spread it. Thus, the
epidemic is two-component. The two components of the
epidemic, sensitive and superspreaders, are progressing
in parallel. The latter has a unilateral impact on the
former, while the former cannot influence the latter.
Let the full number of the sensitive persons be N1 , of
which n1 are infected by time t. The total number of the
superspreaders is N2 , of which n2 are infected by time
t. Then the dynamics of the epidemic is described by a
system of equations
dn1
N1
= g1
dt
N



dn2
N2
= g2
dt
N



n1
N1



n2
1−
N2



1−

n2 ,

(1)

n2 .

(2)

where N is the total population, and g1 , g2 are spread
rates. They are average numbers of sensitive and potential superspreaders which can be infected by one superspreader in one day.
The definitions of all variables and parameters of the
model are given in Table 2, and the scheme of interaction
between the groups of the superspreaders and sensitive
leading to the dynamic system of equations (1, 2), is
presented in Fig.1.
After introducing new dimensionless variables
n1
= s1 ,
N1

(3)

n2
= s2 ,
N2

(4)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

3
g2

N2
t = gt = τ,
N

(5)

the initial system of equations (1, 2) acquires a form of
ds1
= α (1 − s1 ) s2 ,
dτ

(6)

ds2
= (1 − s2 ) s2 ,
dτ

(7)

where
α=

g1
g2

(8)

is a Relative Spread Rate (RSR), and parameter g =
g2 N2 /N introduced by (5) is an effective spread rate.
The resulting system of equations (6, 7) has an exact
solution
−α

s1 = 1 − [1 + s (eτ − 1)]
s2 =

,

s
,
s + (1 − s) e−τ

(9)

(10)

that meets the initial conditions
s1 (0) = 0,

(11)

s2 (0) = s.

(12)

The given solution corresponds to the initial state, in
which there is already a non-zero number of infected superspreaders, n2 = sN2 , but no sick persons yet,n1 = 0.
The empirical value observed is the daily number of cases
dn1 /dt, which according to the solution (9) depends on
time as follows (see Appendix A):
dn1
αsegt
= gN1
1+α .
dt
[1 + s (egt − 1)]

(13)

An important property of this solution is the asymmetry
of its exponential asymptotic at the beginning and end
of the epidemic, i.e. for t → 0 and for t → ∞. At the
beginning of the epidemic, it behaves as
dn1
∝ egt
dt

(t → 0) ,

(14)

and at the end of the epidemic as
dn1
∝ e−αgt
dt

(t → ∞) .

(15)

Three graphs in Fig.2 demonstrate the growth of this
asymmetry as α parameter decreases. The smaller the
value of the parameter α, the slower the daily number
of cases decreases. This is quite natural, because the increase of dn1 /dt is due to activation of the superspreaders

Fig. 2: Dependence of the daily number of cases on
time at different values of α = g1 /g2

with the rate of g, whereas the decline is due to exhausting the fraction of susceptible among the sensitive with
the rate of αg.
As follows from the asymptotic (14, 15), the ratio of the
exponential decrement at the end of the epidemic and the
increment at its beginning directly gives the parameter
α = g1 /g2 , i.e. the Relative Spread Rate.
The analytical solution (9, 10) enables to find the exact position of the maximum point for the daily number
of cases, as is done in Appendix A. If the spread rate constant g increases, the maximum is reached earlier. The
increase in the number of superspreaders, expressed in
the growth of the parameter α = g1 /g2 , has the same
effect, as shown in Fig.2.
The found solution (13) is invariant under following
rescaling of parameters and variables: g1 → g1 λ, g2 →
g2 λ, N2 → N2 /λ, n2 → n2 /λ,, because the parameters of
this solution (g, N1 , α and s) remain unchanged. Thereby
(13) gives no concrete value of the number of superspreaders. On the other hand, this solution enables to reproduce the observable dependence of the daily number of
cases on time and to find (by fitting) all four its parameters.
Comparing the course of two epidemics, the Spanish
flu, in 1918. and the current COVID-19 epidemic, shown
in Fig.3, exhibits a marked difference between them in
the final phase of the decline. In the case of COVID-19, it
occurs much more slowly. The two-component epidemic
model can explain this by assuming a relatively small
Relative Spread Rate, α  1, as shown by the third graph
in Fig.2.
In the proposed model, the virus first undergoes exponentially rapid spread among potential superspreaders
and sequential activation, which means infection, most of
them. Then activated superspreaders continue to spread
the virus among the sensitive persons. The number of
spreaders at the point of maximum is already saturated,
and the base for further spreading of the virus among
sensitive is also gradually being exhausted. Thereby the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

4

Fig. 3: Course of two epidemics in the UK: flu (1918)
and COVID-19 (2020)

epidemic is subsiding.

IV. ANALYSIS OF THE EPIDEMIC IN
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES AND STATES.

First of all, in many countries, as in the world as
a whole, the COVID-19 epidemic is accompanied by a
crossover of the very type of dependence of the number
of infected on time. For a short time, about two weeks,
it changes from exponential to purely linear growth. One
possibility to explain this phenomenon was presented in
[3], whose authors connected it with a phase transition
from the mean field mode to the mode of personal interaction, when the number of contacts for each carrier
becomes less than some critical value.
However, the two-component model can provide a
simple and transparent explanation of the observed
exponential-to-linear crossover.
Indeed, if every infected person can transmit an infection to anyone, then the increase in the number of
infected can be only exponential. The first 10 infected
people infect 20, the latter 40, then 80, and so on in
geometric progression until the base of susceptible is exhausted.
On the other hand, if only a relatively small fraction of
all susceptible people, superspreaders , can spread the infection, then they are first exponentially activated. After
that, the number of active superspreaders n2 reaches the
limit of N2 - for example, 1000 persons - and no longer
grows. Now every day they infect the same number of
people, and therefore the total number of infected grows

over time, not in geometric but in arithmetic progression
- 1000, 2000, 3000, etc. This linear law persists until it
is affected by a reduction in the base of people who are
not yet infected and sensitive to the infection.
The only condition for the appearance of the extended
linear segment in the n1 (t) dependence is a relatively
small value of the Relative Spread Rate, α  1. It is this
case that is represented by the third graph in Fig.2.
Next, consider the course of the epidemic in a number of countries and states where it has already peaked
and is expected to end soon. In each case, we fit the
empirical daily number of cases by the result (13) of the
two-component model.
Fig.5 shows the results of this fitting for 12 countries
and states: Austria, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Netherlands, New Jersey and New York, Spain,
Switzerland and the United Kingdom. The empirical values are shown by points, and the model result is shown by
a red line. In each case both the Relative Spread Rate
α = g1 /g2 and the effective spread rate g = g2 N2 /N
were found. The parameters following from this fitting
are summarized in Table 3.
In all cases shown in Fig.5, the exponential growth of
daily morbidity at the start of the epidemic is much faster
than its further decline. The reason for this is that in all
cases the Relative Spread Rate α = N2 /N1 is less than
one. The very narrow range of values of the parameter α ,
mainly from 0.2 to 0.3, is noteworthy, while the incidence
varies much more widely - from 0.2% to 2%.
Based on the found tipical values of the Relative Spread
Rate α = 0.24 ± 0.06 one can conclude, that superspreaders transmit the infection to potential superspreaders approx. 4 time more often then to the sensitive or supersensitive. Apparently this means, that absolute majority of
infected are asymptomatic superspreaders exhibiting no
clear immune response. On the other hand, the infected
supersensitive are absolute minority among all infected.
Table 3: Model parameters for some countries and
states. Here N is the population of the country or state,
N1 is the total number of sensitive, 100% × N1 /N is the
asymptotic incidence, α = g1 /g2 is the Relative Spread
Rate , g = g2 N2 /N is the effective spread rate.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

5

Fig. 4: Possible hierarchy of COVID-19 according to
the strength of the immune response

Following to the initial classification, see Fig.1, one can
suggest a hierarchy of disease according to the strength
of the immune response shown in Fig.4.

V.

CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

Thus, despite all its simplicity and schematicity, the
proposed two-component model gives a plausible description of the course of the COVID-19 epidemic in all considered cases.
The proposed model is based on two specific types of
virus carriers. They are
1) superspreaders, in which the infection results in active reproduction of viruses without appreciable immune
response and any symptoms of the disease, and
2) sensitive persons, in which infection leads to the
reproduction of viruses, and to a noticeable, and in the
case of supersensitive often to an acute immune response.
It is this reaction that manifests itself as the terminal
course of the disease.
The rest of the population is neutral in relation to the
virus - in most cases the virus appears not to be reproducible in significant amounts in cells. It should be noted
that this is the absolute majority, currently 99.84% of the
total population of the Earth.
The comparison of possible variants of the body’s immune response to the COVID-19 pathogen presented in
the Table 1 raises the question of which of these variants is adequate. There are two possible answers to this
question:
1) The immune response is generally adequate to the
degree of damage that the virus causes to the cell. In the
case of superspreaders, the virus for some reason does not
cause significant damage to the cells, and therefore there
is no immune response. In the case of supersensitive, the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

6

Fig. 5: Comparison of course of COVID-19 epidemic in
12 countries and territories (points) with
two-component model (red line)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.29.20138008; this version posted August 27, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

7
virus causes significant damage, which causes a strong
immune response and leads to the terminal course of the
disease.
2) The immune response is largely inadequate to the
degree of damage that the virus causes or may cause to
the cell. In the case of superspreaders, the immune system ignores the appearance and reproduction of the virus
and the person remains virtually healthy. In the case of
supersensitive, a strong immune response occurs and the
person is exposed to the disease in an acute form.
Both approaches describe the same infection with the
same result, the difference between them is in the interpretation of the nature of the immune response.
In the first case, it is considered as an adequate response to the virus. In the second case, the immune
response is interpreted as an inadequate allergic reaction
to the very presence of the virus, or to the products of
its activity. And then the allergic component plays a
significant role in the course of the disease.
In the first case, a viral infection is the cause and the
immune response is a consequence of the disease. In the
second case, the viral infection is a virus agent that provokes an inadequate response of the immune system.
The answer to this question determines what measures
can reduce the incidence.
In the first case, it is necessary to activate a specific
immune response through a proper vaccination. The target group of the vaccination here is superspreaders. Then
the reduction of incidence is achieved by reduction of the
number of the superspreaders via transferring them to an
intermediate group of sensitive.
In the second case, the aim of a proper vaccination
is to reduce a specific immune response of the supersensitive. Then the target group of the vaccination is
supersensitive, and the reduction of incidence and lethality is achieved by transferring the supersensitive to the
more safe intermediate group of sensitive.
And in both cases it seems reasonable to take preventive measures to early identify superspreaders and supersensitive, followed by limiting their contacts.
Extending the two-component model by taking into account the deactivation of superspreaders over time does
not lead to any qualitative change in the results. However, this deactivation turns out to be important in the
transition processes after the abolition of quarantine and
in the emergence of the second wave. These issues will
be discussed in the next article.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am deeply indebted to Prof. Mykola Iabluchanskiy
and Vadym Mogilevsky for valuable remarks and discussions, and to Dr. Daniel Genin for help in use of Mathe-

matika tools.
Appendix A

As follows from formula (10) of the main text for s1 ist
derivative is
ds1
αseτ
=
1+α .
dτ
[1 + s (eτ − 1)]

(A1)

After replacing the variables (3-5), this gives formula (13)
for the daily number of cases.
To find the point of the maximum, we write out the
logarithm of ds1 /dτ and turn to zero its derivative:


ds1
ln
= ln (αs) + τ − (1 + α) ln [1 + s (eτ − 1)] ,
dτ
(A2)


d ds1
(1 + α) seτ
=1−
= 0.
(A3)
dτ dτ
1 + s (eτ − 1)
This directly follows the point of maximum:

 
1 1
−1
τmax = ln
α s

(A4)

and the maximum number of daily cases


ds1
dτ




=
max

α
1+α

1+α
(1 − s)

−α

.

(A5)

Taking into account the replacement of variables (3-5),
this gives the point of the maximum tmax and its peak
value:
 

1
1 1
tmax = ln
−1 ,
(A6)
g
α s


dn1
dt




= gN1
max

α
1+α

1+α
(1 − s)

−α

.

(A7)

REFERENCES

[1] Kupferschmidt K. Case clustering emerges as key
pandemic puzzle Science 22 May 2020: Vol. 368, Issue
6493, pp. 808-809
[2] Boyman O, Cervia C, Nilsson J, et al. Systemic and mucosal antibody secretion specific to SARSCoV-2 during mild versus severe COVID-19 biorxiv
2020.05.21.108308
[3] Thurner S, Klimek P, Hanel R. Why are
most COVID-19 infection curves linear?
medRxiv
2020.05.22.20110403

