medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Study Protocol
Design and rationale of the Longitudinal Evaluation of Norms and Networks Study (LENNS): A
cluster-randomized trial assessing the impact of a norms-centric intervention on exclusive
toilet use and maintenance in peri urban communities of Tamil Nadu
Sania Ashraf1*, Cristina Bicchieri1*, Maryann G. Delea1,2, Upasak Das 1,3, Kavita Chauhan1, Jinyi
Kuang 1, Peter McNally1, Alexey Shpenev1 , Erik Thulin1,4
1

Center for Social Norms and Behavioral Dynamics, University of Pennsylvania, McNeil Building,
3718 Locust Walk, Philadelphia, PA, United States
2

Gangarosa Department of Environmental Health & Hubert Department of Global Health,
Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, 1518 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA, United States

3

Global Development Institute, University of Manchester, Arthur Lewis Building, Oxford Road,
Manchester, United Kingdom
4

Center for Behavior and the Environment, Rare, 1310 N. Courthouse Road, Suite 110,
Arlington, VA, United States

* Corresponding author:
Email: asania@upenn.edu, cb36@sas.upenn.edu

Abstract
Introduction: Inconsistent toilet usage is a continuing challenge in India. Despite the impact of
social expectations on toilet usage, few programs and studies have developed theoretically
grounded norms-centric behavior change interventions to increase toilet use in low-income
settings. This protocol details the rationale and design of an ex-ante, parallel clusterrandomized trial evaluating the impact of a demand-side, norms-centric behavior change
intervention on exclusive toilet use and maintenance in peri-urban Tamil Nadu, India.
Methods and Analysis: Following two years of formative research, we developed an evidencebased norm-centric behavior change intervention called Nam Nalavazhvu (Tamil for “Our
wellbeing”). The multi-level intervention aims to shift collective beliefs by shifting empirical
expectations or beliefs about other relevant people’s sanitation practices. It also provides
action-oriented information to aid individuals to set goals and overcome barriers to build,
consistently use and maintain their toilets. This trial includes 76 wards in Pudukkottai and Karur
districts, where half were randomly assigned to receive the intervention and the remaining
serve as counterfactuals. During baseline and endline (conducted one year after the initiation of
intervention) assessments, we collect relevant data and compare results between study arms to
determine the impacts of the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention on sanitation-related behavioral,
health, wellbeing outcomes and potential moderators. This study is powered to detect
differences in the prevalence of exclusive toilet use between study arms. We will also conduct a
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

process evaluation to understand the extent to which the intervention was implemented, as
designed.

Ethics and Dissemination: The study protocol has been reviewed and approved by the ethics
board at the University of Pennsylvania, USA and the Catalyst Foundation, India. Research
findings will be disseminated through open access peer reviewed publications and
presentations to stakeholders, government officials and conferences.
Trial registration: NCT04269824.
Keywords
Behavior change, toilet use, norms, social networks, sanitation, open defecation, India

Strengths and limitations of this study
•

•

•

This ex-ante, parallel cluster randomized trial assesses the impact of a norm-centric behavior
change intervention strategy to improve sanitation practices. These behavior change techniques
are novel to the sanitation sector but has been effective in changing a variety of behaviors, such
as water use, drinking behavior, and energy consumption.
The study outcomes include health, wellbeing outcomes, and a careful assessment of changes in
social beliefs, expectations, and social determinants of collective sanitation behaviors.
This study is being rolled out during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This can potentially
impact the effectiveness of this intervention package that uses community and network-based
group activities. However, through a detailed process monitoring and evaluation we will be able
to assess the impact on delivery, and subsequent behavior change in this unique setting.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Study rationale
Low toilet use enables environmental contamination and contributes to poor health, wellbeing,
and safety globally 1-3. In the past decade, national sanitation programs that aimed to curb
persistent open defecation practices in India, including the Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM),
significantly increased coverage of individual and shared toilets and promoted their use4,5.
Despite increased access to toilets, complex sociocultural norms, technological and financial
barriers prevented exclusive toilet use among low-income Indian communities 6–8. Recent
behavior change interventions designed to promote toilet use in rural India have yielded, on
average, a 5% increase in reported use amongst toilet owners, which is comparable to results
generated by SBM. 9–11. Sustaining exclusive toilet use among all household members is a
national priority for the current Swachh Bharat Mission 2.0, also known as the Open Defecation
Free (ODF)-plus scheme12,13. This is in line with the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goal 6.2, which calls for the ‘achieve access to adequate and equitable sanitation and hygiene
for all and end open defecation’ by 203014.
Numerous studies have highlighted the importance of social beliefs and preferences on toilet
construction and adoption15–18. Previous studies in India have specifically noted the role of
social beliefs and perceptions in sanitation practices, including ownership and usage6,7,10,19–21.
Social networks were also found to be relevant; a study in rural Karnataka showed that
individuals were more likely to own toilets if their social contacts owned one22. Following the
achievements of SBM, in a context of high toilet ownership and use, perceptions of others’
toilet ownership and (dis)approval might be particularly important motivators of toilet-related
behavior change in India10,19.
Previous behavior change studies that assessed psychosocial determinants of toilet use and
included norm-based messaging to promote toilet use in India were primarily guided by
Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS), the Risks, Attitudes, Norms, Abilities, and Selfregulation (RANAS) approach, or the Behavior Centric Design (BCD). All these approaches
include norms as one driver of behavior10,23–25. No known study has used the “normsdiagnostic” approach detailed in the Social Norms Theory (SNT) to diagnose the social
determinants of toilet use, which can then be leveraged to inform specific components of
behavior change strategies26.
In our study, we aim to address several knowledge gaps in the norms-based literature with
regards to sanitation behavior change. Our first objective was to diagnose the nature of
collective patterns of toilet use in peri-urban communities of Tamil Nadu as a part of the
formative research for Longitudinal Evaluation of Norms and Networks Study (LENNS) 28. Such
collective behaviors may or may not be socially conditional. Social conditionality means that the
preference for adopting a specific behavior is driven by social expectations. Social expectations
refer to a specific reference network, that we measure and may vary depending on the target

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

behavior. These expectations can be empirical or normative (i.e., beliefs about what relevant
others do or beliefs about what relevant others think one should do, respectively). In our
formative research, we assessed the degree to which the preference for toilet use was
conditional on these expectations to determine whether descriptive or social norms drive toilet
use 26-27. We found that toilet use was conditional on empirical, but not normative expectations,
and therefore diagnosed toilet use in these communities as a descriptive norm28. This is
consistent with other recent studies that reported empirical expectations as a significant
psychosocial determinant for toilet ownership10,16. Based on these findings, we designed a
theoretically-grounded, evidence-based behavior change intervention, and will evaluate its
effectiveness on the uptake of exclusive toilet use and maintenance through this randomized
trial.
Second, prior studies have not explored norms-based intervention techniques specifically
designed to change empirical expectations of sanitation behaviors. An additional objective of
this study is to test novel techniques and implementation approaches in low-income
communities to change descriptive norms and downstream sanitation behaviors.
Third, there is only limited evidence on whether intervening upon empirical expectations of
others’ sanitation behaviors can lead to the emergence of normative expectations of toilet use.
Such a phenomenon is theoretically plausible, and if demonstrated through this study, our
findings can lead to insights that can inform the design of behavior change strategies 29,33.
Lastly, our study is based in peri-urban communities, which will add to the currently limited
sanitation literature regarding interventions that benefit peri-urban populations 30–32.

Objectives
This study protocol summarizes the rationale and methods of a cluster randomized trial
(LENNS) that aims to evaluate the impact of a multi-level, demand-side behavior change
intervention package called Nam Nalavazhvu on exclusive toilet use and maintenance.
The Nam Nalavazhvu intervention design leverages two years of formative research that found
toilet use in peri urban Tamil Nadu is a descriptive norm (i.e., toilet is conditional on the belief
that most relevant others are using a toilet). The intervention reflects a norm- and networkcentric approach that will employ dynamic information dissemination to signal others’
sanitation practices while also addressing other barriers to the adoption of improved sanitation
practices28.
The primary research aim of this study is to evaluate the impact of the Nam Nalavazhvu
intervention on behavioral and health outcomes, specifically on:
-

Exclusive toilet use among individuals aged five years and older (primary outcome)

Secondary aims include assessing the impact of the intervention on:
-

Coverage and access to improved toilet

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

-

Maintenance of sanitation facilities
Empirical expectations, normative expectations, and other behavioral antecedents
Mental wellbeing of respondents
Diarrheal and respiratory health of all household members

Methods
Study setting
The study is being conducted in 76 wards in peri-urban areas of Pudukkottai and Karur districts
in Tamil Nadu, India (Figure 1). The unit of randomization for this study is the ward, the smallest
administrative unit of a Town Panchayat (TP). According to the 2011 Census, these are
urbanizing districts, where in Pudukkottai and Karur respectively, the residents were mainly
agricultural laborers (31%, 34%), workers in industries (1.3%,1.2%) and other private businesses
(16%, 43%). These districts are comprised primarily of Hindus (88%, 93%) and a minority of
Muslims (7.1%, 5.1%). While both districts were declared open defecation free in October 2019,
there were variations in toilet coverage and use across constituent wards, which we captured
through informal conversations with officials.

Study design
The LENNS trial is an ex-ante, parallel cluster randomized controlled trial (CRT). We will collect
data relevant to our research questions in both study arms and compare results between
intervention and counterfactual arms to determine the impact of the intervention on the
primary and intermediate outcomes. This study is powered to detect differences in the
prevalence of exclusive toilet use between study arms.
Clusters are defined as wards within purposively selected town panchayats. Half of the clusters
were randomized to receive the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention, while the other half will not
receive any active intervention as part of study. Prior to our enrollment of study participants,
we created a buffer zone, minimally one ward in distance, between study clusters to minimize
spillover. Since this study is being conducted in a context where the Indian government is
actively implementing Swachh Bharat Mission – Urban (SBM), both study arms may be subject
to government-led sanitation program activities.
The Nam Nalavazhvu intervention is further detailed in a following section. We co-designed this
intervention with our implementation partner, a local NGO called Swasti (https://swasti.org/).
Prior to the CRT, we conducted a three-month trial of improved practices (TIPs) to test, refine
and revise our behavior change intervention activities and materials among a separate
population in the same study districts (Fig 2). In the CRT, the intervention will be implemented
for 12 months. A baseline and one-year follow up survey will be used to assess the impact of
the intervention. We will also conduct a process evaluation to determine the extent to which
the intervention was implemented, as designed, and identify successful pathways or barriers to
the adoption of improved sanitation behaviors. Our process evaluation will assess fidelity of

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

intervention implementation, reach, and contextual changes in community and household
conditions that may facilitate improved behavioral adoption and/or outcomes. In addition, we
will also conduct qualitative research with respondents and stakeholders to assess exposure
and dose received of the intervention. Further, we aim to assess the extent of spillover in the
control and the adjacent wards using mixed method research tools.

Description of intervention

Nam Nalavazhvu means ‘Our Wellbeing’ in Tamil and reflects a demand-side, norm-centric

intervention designed to improve exclusive use of sanitation facilities for defecation purposes.
Intervention activities focus on i) shifting empirical expectations by broadcasting improved
sanitation behavior of relevant others in the community through activities at all levels (i.e. norm
signaling) ii) capacity building and increased action knowledge through expanded social
networks and access at the group level. It will not directly provide hardware or build toilets but
address opportunity limitations. Details of the intervention design process, theoretical and
behavioral framework will be published in separate forthcoming articles.
This multi-level intervention includes activities at the individual, household, group, and ward
levels (Box 1).
Box 1: Nam Nalavazhvu intervention activities for peri urban area, Tamil Nadu
At the ward level:
● Community mobilization and public commitment events
● Mass media broadcasting descriptive information
● Wall paintings promoting toilet ownership and use
At the group level:
● Peer learning sessions
● Descriptive norm messages delivered to social network members via community influencers
At the household level:
● Tailored counselling sessions with household members
● Visual signals of improved sanitation practices
At the individual level, in concurrence with household counselling sessions:
● Personalized advice, including information regarding similar others’ practices

Dynamic descriptive information dissemination and capacity building
To update empirical expectations regarding others’ improved sanitation practices, we will
periodically collect information about sanitation practices from all households in study clusters.
We will then disseminate related descriptive norm information during community events,
household visits, and text messages from their peers. Action knowledge and social connections
between ward members, will be increased by disseminating contact information of neighbors,
outreach workers and similar others in the ward who have adopted improved sanitation

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

practices. Details about available financial schemes, sanitation markets and masons will be
provided, and the outreach workers will assist in setting goals and taking steps to make
progress towards them. Details of the activities are as follows:

Ward Level
Prior to the intervention delivery, ward outreach workers (WOWs) meet local stakeholders to
conduct a social and resource mapping to engage them, foster support for the project goals and
identify influencers who can be leveraged during the activities. Preliminary meetings will be
conducted with these influencers (e.g., teachers, religious leaders, self-help group coordinators)
to mobilize them. WOWs will also leave their contact cards to establish communication
channels.

Roving audio announcements: Automobiles with loudspeakers will announce the launch of the
program and invite community members to group sessions and community events. The audio
content will include customized jingles to promote toilet use and later disseminate ward level
data regarding people’s actual and intended sanitation practices.
Wall paintings (6*4 feet) will be used in at least 4 public locations per ward. Permissions will be
secured from required private or government officials to paint the publicly visible wall. The
motto, tagline and norm-centric images will be painted to encourage others to “Join the proud
toilet owners”.
Community Mobilization and Commitment Events: Participants will include influential political
and community leaders to applaud exclusive toilet users and promote improved sanitation
practices. Messages will highlight the change happening in their communities, the benefits of
using a toilet for families, and facilitate a public commitment to exclusive toilet use. These
messages will reinforce those residents hear through other group and household activities.

Group Level
Peer learning session: Six sex-segregated groups will be convened in each ward over one year
to facilitate social networking between toilet users and non-toilet users. The WOW supervisor
will facilitate these 60-90-minute sessions. He/she will use SBCC materials (story cards/video
content) to facilitate norm-focused conversations and information sharing among group
members on how to access sanitation markets, barrier identification, planning, and coping by
discussing personal experiences, challenges, solutions regarding target sanitation practices.
Peer-to-peer knowledge sharing will be encouraged.
Social media to reference networks: Influential community members who are active on social
media will be recruited as volunteer promoters or advocates. We will invite them to use their
social media groups to send key messages promoted by the project. The LENNS team will
develop messages and monitor their deployment as per schedule. These advocates will also use
their social groups to broadcast testimonials from toilet adopters, related community events
and activities.
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Household Level
Household counselling visits allow outreach workers to get information about the household’s
potential for change. The outreach workers communicate ward-specific toilet use of similar
households to motivate change. Flipbooks and story cards will be used to engage and motivate
household members. The outreach worker will counsel them how to achieve their goals by
mapping out the next steps using goal cards. These households will also be informed of their
neighbors’ improved practices. WOWs will focus on those lagging behind to motivate them to
change, signaling others like them who already have.
Visual signals of improved practices: Improved behaviors of neighbors are signaled using bright
decals or stickers, placed in public view on the household wall. These aim to serve as a goal and
a source of pride for the households who receive and display them.
The implementation team is hired and managed by Swasti. Investigators at the Center for Social
Norms and Behavioral Dynamics (CSNBD) at the University of Pennsylvania provide training,
technical input, and oversight to the implementation process. The main delivery agent is a ward
outreach worker (WOW). They are residents of the ward with a minimum of 12 years of formal
education. Field supervisors help organize and facilitate group and ward-level activities. In
addition, the study includes influential members from the community to disseminate
promotional and motivational messages to their social network.
Participation in these activities is voluntary. The audio announcements and visual cues or
paintings in public spaces will be apparent during the intervention. Ward outreach workers will
consider any requests to adjust the recipient’s level engagement in the activities to ensure
consent and comfort of participants.

Public involvement
As mentioned in the intervention details, members of the public are used to disseminate
promotional messages through social media, using decals, active participation in groups and
community events. We also incorporated their feedback in improving intervention delivery
techniques and platforms prior to the trial.

Eligibility criteria
We randomly selected five town panchayats from each district. Researchers visited several
wards with local Swasti officials to ensure they reflected the generalized peri-urban setting. To
identify potential study wards within these TPs, we met local executive officers to assess ward
maps. We used the following exclusion criteria:
-

Commercialized wards with few residential households
Urbanized wards with known high or complete coverage of improved toilet access
according to TP official records
Wards which bordered two or more adjoining wards, to reduce spillover

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Our sampling frame excluded TPs where we piloted our interventions (n=3), or those where we
did not receive permission to proceed due to political concerns (n=1).
The unit of randomization for this CRT is the ward. The demarcation of the ward is derived from
the 2011 census conducted by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India34. Trained
field teams generated ward maps to delineate the ward boundaries, confirmed it with
residents, and ensured a buffer zone. We also engaged ward-level stakeholders to assist in the
mapping process and gain access to communities.
All ward residents from intervention clusters were eligible to participate in the intervention
activities. For data collection, field workers surveyed randomly selected household members
who were 18 years or above, planned to reside in that household continuously for the next year
and were willing and able to participate.
Selection and assignment of interventions
Following the baseline data collection, a co-investigator (UD) randomly assigned the wards to
counterfactual and intervention arms in a 1:1 ratio, using a computer-generated randomization
sequence. The randomization is geographically pair-matched within each town panchayat
(Table S1). Balancing the study arms across geography will allow us to adjust for spatially
clustered features or events that may be associated with our outcome. Given the nature of the
intervention, the study investigators and the participants will not be masked to the intervention
assignment. The data collection team will be masked to the treatment assignment.
Recruitment
Trained enumerators conducted a listing exercise to generate a sampling frame of eligible
individuals within the ward. Enumerators approached the household and asked the selected
individual if they would consent to participate in the study. If the selected individual was absent
or unavailable, up to three repeat visits were made to enroll them. If unsuccessful, the
enumerators approached the next randomly selected individual from that cluster. Following
randomization, households in intervention wards will be enrolled following an oral consent
process.
The individuals enrolled in qualitative studies will be purposively selected from intervention
wards to address relevant research questions. Those sampled from the counterfactual wards
will allow us to investigate spillover of the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention.
Sample size
This study is powered to detect differences in the prevalence of exclusive toilet use between
study arms. Measuring exclusive use is problematic due to recall and desirability bias. As a
result, during our formative research phase, we asked individuals about their defecation place
the last time they needed to defecate during two rounds of data collection conducted 8 months
apart. We incorporated the correlation between these two measures in our sample size
calculation. We powered our study at 80% based on the prevalence of reported toilet use
during last defecation in peri urban Tamil Nadu (estimated at 64.4% in 2018) and assumed a 10-

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

percentage-point improvement as the minimum important effect. In order to detect such a
minimal effect in exclusive toilet use (given observed intra-cluster correlation of 11% and
correlation of last use with the one measured in the fall of 2017 of 47.5%), we estimated a
requirement of 76 clusters (38 clusters per arm). We require 30 individuals per cluster.
Assuming 10% loss to follow up, we engaged 34 individuals per cluster for a total of 2280
individuals. Since we collected household level toilet usage data, we have data for more
individuals beyond the actual respondent.

Study outcomes and measures
We will evaluate these outcomes at baseline and at endline, one-year after the intervention
implementation using verbal surveys, in both intervention and counterfactual clusters. We will
characterize sanitation facilities using standardized categorizations through direct observations.
Primary outcome
The primary outcome for this trial includes:
1. Proportion of households where all members (18+ years) exclusively use a toilet every
time they defecate. We will combine responses to several self-reported toilet use
behaviors to determine exclusive toilet use in the past two days. We will also observe
toilets to check for signs of use. (See S2)
Secondary outcomes
Secondary outcomes of interest include:
1. Presence and access to improved toilets will be assessed using standard questions. Spot
observations of toilets will be used to assess maintenance, functionality, and recent use
2. Mental wellbeing will be measured using the World Health Organization- Five WellBeing Index (WHO-5)
3. Diarrheal disease for all household members will be measured using the WHO definition
of three or more loose stools in a 24- hour period, with or without the presence of blood
4. Respiratory illness for all household members will be measured using reported cough
and/or difficulty breathing/shortness of breath according to the WHO’s Integrated
Management of Childhood illness (IMCI)
5. Intermediate behavioral antecedents such as empirical expectations (i.e., what other
people do), normative expectations (i.e., what other people think one should do) of
prevalence of toilet ownership, exclusive use and maintenance using tested indicators
(See S2)
Data collection
Randomly selected individuals were enrolled in the impact evaluation. They responded to a
baseline survey and will be approached to complete a one year follow up survey administered
by trained enumerators. The enumerators will be masked to the intervention assignment.
However, given the nature of the intervention, they might observe Nam Nalavazhvu
intervention products in the household during the follow up survey.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We will consider respondents lost to follow up if: 1) they refuse to participate in the follow up
survey, 2) if they have relocated elsewhere outside the intervention ward, 3) the field team is
unable to reach them despite three attempts during data collection.
CSNBD researchers will work with trainers to conduct a 10-day training session prior to each
survey round. The training sessions will be conducted in Tamil. Prior to the baseline survey, the
instrument was administered to respondents similar to the target group to ensure
comprehension. We incorporated feedback to clarify language, framing, answer choices and
administration of the survey. The survey data will be collected using personal handheld devices.
These electronic surveys were tested to address issues with data capture, skip patterns, and
validity checks for each item in a pilot study. Quality assurance steps will be taken to improve
data accuracy including regular field-level data checks and dual data capture of objective
measures from a subset of households by field supervisors. Researchers from CSNBD will also
visit the sites randomly to assess the situation pertaining to the survey. Weekly phone meetings
will be conducted with the data collection agency to ensure quality of data.
The implementation partner will collect routine monitoring data to capture information about
intervention fidelity and exposure. We will take steps to ensure that they do not involve
participants enrolled in the impact evaluation to reduce participant fatigue.
For process documentation, we will conduct three rounds of qualitative data collection as part
of the process documentation for this study. These will be at 3 months, 6 months and 1 year
after the start of the intervention and assess participant response, acceptability, and the beliefs
about the improved sanitation behavior among respondents in the intervention and
counterfactual groups. Trained qualitative researchers will conduct in-depth interviews (IDI)
and/or focus group discussions (FGD) with purposely selected respondents in intervention
clusters to assess their interaction and experience with the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention. They
will use semi-structured questionnaires, memos and note taking to record observations and
may record interviews as required. Verbal consent will be taken before every data collection
activity except observations made in public spaces.
Data management
All survey data will be transmitted through secured servers and stored in in password protected
folders in the Penn Box. To protect confidentiality, all subjects will be deidentified for analysis.
Data will only be accessible to the Penn faculty, staff, and data management personnel.
Statistical analyses
We will use intention to treat (ITT) analyses to assess the difference in specific outcomes
between study arms after exposure to one year of the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention. For most
of the outcomes, we will use a log-binomial regression model to assess prevalence ratios of
post-intervention sanitation-related outcomes across intervention groups. We will consider
adjusting for variables that were imbalanced between the groups at baseline in adjusted
models. We will also use generalized estimating equations (GEE) with robust standard errors to
account for the clustering of observations within each cluster (ward). We will use post-

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

estimation commands to estimate and report the average marginal effects. We will not adjust p
values based on multiple comparisons.
In additional analyses, we will use appropriate multivariate models to assess the impact of the
interventions on secondary outcomes. Both unadjusted and adjusted effect estimates will be
reported for all outcomes. Following the process evaluation findings, if fidelity or intervention
quality varied considerably in the trial, we will consider a per-protocol or other appropriate
analyses to assess the impact of the Nam Nalavazhvu interventions on our outcomes of
interest. The analyses will be conducted by the scientific team including statistical software
including R and Stata.
Ethics and dissemination
The ethics review board at the University of Pennsylvania (833854) and the Catalyst
Foundation, India reviewed and approved this research protocol. The trial is registered with
clinicaltrials.gov: NCT04269824. All amendments and protocol modifications will be updated
there. All enrolled study communities provided verbal consent to enroll in the study. Surveyed
individuals will provide written informed consent. This consent process was conducted in the
local language, Tamil. Participants will receive messages that may encourage them to improve
their sanitation conditions or practices. Our assessment is that the benefits to study
participation outweigh the minimal risks. Deidentified data will be used during analysis.
Research findings will be disseminated through presentations at conferences and submitted to
peer reviewed journals for open access. Our results will be shared with relevant local
stakeholders through community-based meetings in participating wards through presentations
made to the district and state level officials in Tamil Nadu.
Data monitoring, reporting harms, and auditing
The research team has text message groups and weekly calls with the implementation partner,
to discuss progress, issues from the field including adverse events so that prompt action can be
taken. No harm is anticipated to the intervention recipients in this study. There are no plans for
a data monitoring committee or audits for this trial.
Discussion
This study will evaluate the effectiveness of the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention, a demand-side,
descriptive norms- and network-centric intervention approach that aims to shifting empirical
expectations on targeted sanitation behaviors. Our behavior change communication approach
employs dynamic signaling (i.e., dissemination of descriptive information regarding others’
actual and/or intended improved sanitation practices), and reflects a strategy that is novel to
the sanitation sector, yet has been effective in changing a variety of behaviors, such as water
use, drinking behavior, and energy consumption 35–38. Evaluating the impact of such an
approach may have widespread implications for policy and practice for sanitation programming

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in India and beyond if the intervention proves effective in improving sanitation behaviors via
changing people’s empirical expectations. Our plan to also track normative expectations will
also allow us to determine whether an intervention focused on shifting of empirical
expectations has spillover effects on normative expectations.
Evidence from this study will address knowledge gaps regarding the application and
effectiveness of a “norms-diagnostic” approach in the design of behavior change strategies that
intervene upon the social determinants of collective sanitation behaviors. The intervention uses
outreach workers and social media users to deploy most of its messages. Understanding the
transmission of messages during household visits, peer learning sessions and text messages will
inform recommendations on the feasibility and effectiveness of using these platforms for
norms-centric interventions. Insights generated in this study may contribute to the tools
available to address descriptive norms for community-based interventions, generally.
Limitations of this CRT include the use of wards as clusters in peri-urban communities. Although
these are the smallest geographic operational units, some boundaries in specific districts were
redrawn following the start of the intervention, leading to concerns about spillovers across
buffer areas. Two critical country specific incidences are impacting the implementation of the
interventions. One is the highly contentious Citizens Amendment Act (CAA) passed in Dec 2019,
that led to nationwide protests in India. In our study it led to refusals by households in
predominantly Muslim wards, who resisted participating in any study that include survey-based
instruments. Secondly, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has led to considerable interruption in
the implementation of group-level intervention activities. These aspects are being assessed
through our process evaluation and will inform the interpretation of the results from this CRT.
Acknowledgement
We sincerely acknowledge the substantial insights and efforts of K. Jeyaganesh, Rajesh Kanna,
Johnson Thangaraj, Raja Rethinam and the experienced team implementing this study at
Swasti, Catalyst Management Services (CMS). New concepts, Delhi helped us design our sociobehavioral change communication materials following multiple rounds of field tests. We are
also grateful for the time of our outreach workers and the respondents who provided feedback
during the development of the intervention activities and messages.
Funding
This study is funded by the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation (Grant No: OPP1157257). The
funder did not have a role in the study design, data collection, management, analyses, or
content in any forthcoming publications based on the data collected in this study.
Availability of data and materials
Data will be available with the publication of the main outcomes paper from this trial at
https://osf.io/bkm9n/. Socio-behavior change communication materials will be shared as
supplementary materials in peer reviewed publications in open access journals.
Author contributions

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

CB is the principal investigator for this study. She has developed the social norms theory (SNT)
and the measurements that has driven the intervention design for this CRT. SA, MGD, AS, UD
and CB designed this study. CB, MGD, ET and SA contributed substantially to the design of the
multi-level behavior change intervention. SA, MGD, JK, UD and KC contributed to the testing
and implementation of the intervention. CB, SA, MGD, AS, UD, PM and JK contributed to the
development of data collection tools. AS, UD, SA, and KC supervised the data collection. SA
wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors reviewed and contributed to the final
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
None

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

WHO/UNICEF. WHO | Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and Hygiene. World Health
Organization; 2017. http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/jmp2017/en/. Accessed August 22, 2017.

2.

World Health Organisation. Wellbeing Measures in Primary Health Care/ The Depcare
Project. Rep a WHO Meet. 1998.

3.

WHO IMCI. Integrated Management of Childhood Illness (IMCI) Chart Booklet. Distance
Learn Course. 2014.

1.

Prüss-Ustün A, Bartram J, Clasen T, et al. Burden of disease from inadequate water,
sanitation and hygiene in low- and middle-income settings: a retrospective analysis of
data from 145 countries. Trop Med Int Heal. 2014;19(8):894-905. doi:10.1111/tmi.12329

2.

Caruso B, Clasen T, Yount K, Cooper H, Hadley C, Haardörfer R. Assessing Women’s
Negative Sanitation Experiences and Concerns: The Development of a Novel Sanitation
Insecurity Measure. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2017;14(7):755.
doi:10.3390/ijerph14070755

3.

Jung YT, Hum RJ, Lou W, Cheng YL. Effects of neighbourhood and household sanitation
conditions on diarrhea morbidity: Systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 2017.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0173808

4.

Government of India. Swachh Bharat Mission - Gramin, Ministry of Drinking Water and
Sanitation. Gov India. 2018.

5.

Raman VR, Muralidharan A. Closing the loop in India’s sanitation campaign for public
health gains. Lancet. 2019. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30547-1

6.

Routray P, Torondel B, Jenkins MW, Clasen T, Schmidt WP. Processes and challenges of
community mobilisation for latrine promotion under Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan in rural
Odisha, India. BMC Public Health. 2017. doi:10.1186/s12889-017-4382-9

7.

Coffey D, Spears D, Vyas S. Switching to sanitation: Understanding latrine adoption in a
representative panel of rural Indian households. Soc Sci Med. 2017;188:41-50.
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.07.001

8.

Barnard S, Routray P, Majorin F, et al. Impact of Indian Total Sanitation Campaign on
Latrine Coverage and Use: A Cross-Sectional Study in Orissa Three Years following
Programme Implementation. PLoS One. 2013;8(8). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0071438

9.

Chauhan, K., Schmidt, W., Aunger, R., Gopalan, B., Saxena, D., Yashobant, S.,
Patwardhan, V., Curtis V. The 5 Star Toilet Campaign: Improving Toilet Use in Rural
Gujarat. New Delhi; 2019.

10.

Friedrich M, Balasundaram T, Muralidharan A, Raman VR, Mosler HJ. Increasing latrine
use in rural Karnataka, India using the risks, attitudes, norms, abilities, and self-regulation

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

approach: A cluster-randomized controlled trial. Sci Total Environ. 2020.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.135366
11.

Caruso, Bethany A., Sclar GD, Routray P, et al. Impact of a Multi-Level Intervention,
Sundara Grama, on Latrine Use and Safe Disposal of Child Faeces in Rural Odisha, India.
New Delhi: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie); 2019.

12.

Grameen SB. SBM-G Phase-II launched.
https://sbmgramin.wordpress.com/2020/03/06/sbm-g-phase-ii-launched/. Published
2020.

13.

News18. Swachh Bharat 2.0: Next Phase of PM Narendra Modi’s Flagship Mission to be
Implemented by 2025.https://www.news18.com/news/india/swachh-bharat-2-0-nextphase-of-pm-narendra-modis-flagship-mission-to-be-implemented-by-20252507693.html. Published 2020.

14.

World Health Organization (WHO) & UNICEF. Progress on Drinking Water, Sanitation and
Hygiene: 2017 Update and SDG Baselines.; 2017.

15.

Osumanu IK, Kosoe EA, Ategeeng F. Determinants of Open Defecation in the Wa
Municipality of Ghana: Empirical Findings Highlighting Sociocultural and Economic
Dynamics among Households. J Environ Public Health. 2019. doi:10.1155/2019/3075840

16.

Harter M, Inauen J, Mosler HJ. How does Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS)
promote latrine construction, and can it be improved? A cluster-randomized controlled
trial in Ghana. Soc Sci Med. 2020. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112705

17.

Alemu F, Kumie A, Medhin G, Gasana J. The role of psychological factors in predicting
latrine ownership and consistent latrine use in rural Ethiopia: A cross-sectional study.
BMC Public Health. 2018. doi:10.1186/s12889-018-5143-0

18.

Mosler H joachim, Sonego IL. Improved latrine cleanliness through behaviour change and
changes in quality of latrine construction: a longitudinal intervention study in rural
Burundi. Int J Environ Health Res. 2017. doi:10.1080/09603123.2017.1373274

19.

Yogananth N, Bhatnagar T. Prevalence of open defecation among households with toilets
and associated factors in rural south India: An analytical cross-sectional study. Trans R
Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2018. doi:10.1093/trstmh/try064

20.

Alexander K, Alton C, Felsman C, et al. Ending Open Defecation in India: Insights on
Implementation and Behavior Change for Swachh Bharat Abhiyan.; 2016.

21.

Novotný J, Ficek F, Hill JKW, Kumar A. Social determinants of environmental health: A
case of sanitation in rural Jharkhand. Sci Total Environ. 2018.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.06.239

22.

Shakya HB, Christakis NA, Fowler JH. Association between social network communities
and health behavior: An observational sociocentric network study of latrine ownership in
rural india. Am J Public Health. 2014;104(5):930-937. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2013.301811

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

23.

Aunger R, Curtis V. Behaviour Centred Design: towards an applied science of behaviour
change. Health Psychol Rev. 2016;10(4):425-446. doi:10.1080/17437199.2016.1219673

24.

Mosler H-J. A systematic approach to behavior change interventions for the water and
sanitation sector in developing countries: a conceptual model, a review, and a guideline.
Int J Environ Health Res. 2012;22(5):431-449. doi:10.1080/09603123.2011.650156

25.

Kar K, Chambers R. Handbook on Community-Led Total Sanitation. Vol 44.; 2008.
http://www.communityledtotalsanitation.org/sites/communityledtotalsanitation.org/file
s/cltshandbook.pdf.

26.

Bicchieri C. Norms in the Wild8: How to Diagnose, Measure, and Change Social Norms.
Oxford University Press, 2016.

27.

Bicchieri C, Lindemans JW, Jiang T. A structured approach to a diagnostic of collective
practices. Front Psychol. 2014. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01418

28.

Bicchieri C, Ashraf S., et al. Social Networks and Norms: Sanitation in Bihar and Tamil
Nadu, India. Norms & Sanitation in India, Phase 2 Report. Philadelphia 2018.
https://pennsong.sas.upenn.edu/literature/

29.

Bicchieri C, Xiao E. Do the right thing: But only if others do so. J Behav Decis Mak. 2009.
doi:10.1002/bdm.621

30.

Tidwell JB, Chipungu J, Bosomprah S, Aunger R, Curtis V, Chilengi R. Effect of a behaviour
change intervention on the quality of peri-urban sanitation in Lusaka, Zambia: a
randomised controlled trial. Lancet Planet Heal. 2019. doi:10.1016/S25425196(19)30036-1

31.

Kulabako RN, Nalubega M, Wozei E, Thunvik R. Environmental health practices,
constraints and possible interventions in peri-urban settlements in developing countries A review of Kampala, Uganda. Int J Environ Health Res. 2010.
doi:10.1080/09603120903545745

32.

Okurut K, Kulabako RN, Chenoweth J, Charles K. Assessing demand for improved
sustainable sanitation in low-income informal settlements of urban areas: A critical
review. Int J Environ Health Res. 2015. doi:10.1080/09603123.2014.893570

33.

Bicchieri C, Dimant E. Nudging with care: the risks and benefits of social information.
Public Choice, 2019. doi:10.1007/s11127-019-00684-6

34.

Office of the Registrar General & Census Commissioner I. 2011 Census Data.
http://censusindia.gov.in/2011-Common/CensusData2011.html. Published 2011.
Accessed October 3, 2020.

35.

Allcott H. Social norms and energy conservation. J Public Econ. 2011.
doi:10.1016/j.jpubeco.2011.03.003

36.

Ayres I, Raseman S, Shih A. Evidence from Two Large Field Experiments that Peer
Comparison Feedback Can Reduce Residential Energy Usage. J Law, Econ Organ. 2013.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

doi:10.1093/jleo/ews020
37.

Ferraro PJ, Miranda JJ, Price MK. The persistence of treatment effects with norm-based
policy instruments: Evidence from a randomized environmental policy experiment. In:
American Economic Review. ; 2011. doi:10.1257/aer.101.3.318

38.

Neighbors C, Larimer ME, Lewis MA. Targeting misperceptions of descriptive drinking
norms: Efficacy of a computer-delivered personalized normative feedback intervention. J
Consult Clin Psychol. 2004. doi:10.1037/0022-006X.72.3.434

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Study sites in Karur and Pudukkottai districts of Tamil Nadu, India

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20140830; this version posted June 28, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig 2: Summary of overall study design, including the timeline for impact evaluation to assess
the effectiveness of the Nam Nalavazhvu intervention in Tamil Nadu, India

*

Timeline subject to change due to the COVID-19 related suspension in operations

20

