medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.01.20080556; this version posted October 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Is it safe to use a single ventilator for two or more patients?

Sebastián Ugarte Ubiergo MD1,4, Felipe Castillo Merino PT1,2 , Óscar Arellano-Pérez PT, MSc1,3
1 Adult Patients Critical Center, INDISA Clinic, Santiago, Chile.
2 Faculty of Physical Therapy, School of Kinesiology, Andrés Bello University, Santiago, Chile.
3 Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Kinesiology, Bernardo O’Higgins University, Santiago, Chile.
4 Faculty of Medicine, Andrés Bello University, Santiago, Chile.

Abstract
Mechanical ventilation is essential in the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic context. Considering the limited
availability of mechanical ventilators due to high costs increased by global demand, the use of a
single ventilator for two or more patients has been encouraged. An experimental model that
ventilates two test lungs with a single machine has been designed in order to measure possible
asymmetries during parallel circuit ventilation under different lung compliance conditions. This
paper reports a first assessment of the risks involved in ventilating two patients with a single
machine. Since some volumetric differences are not monitored by the ventilator itself, the main
risks involved are distension or alveolar collapse if used in actual patients that have different
thoracopulmonary mechanics.

Introduction
The SARS-CoV-2 pandemic has impacted health systems with an exponential increase in bed,
professional and intensive care system demands (1). Mechanical ventilation is essential in the case
of patients suffering from severe respiratory failure and require hospitalization in intensive care
units

(ICUs).

Considering

the

limited

availability

of

mechanical

ventilators

due

to

high

costs,

increased by global demand and based on experiences in Italy and Spain (2), sharing a single
mechanical ventilator with two or more patients with has been encouraged (3).

Currently,

several

Scientific

Societies

have

released

statements

(2)

warning

about

potential

dangers of this strategy. Their assessment is that ventilators might not be able to go beyond their
initial automatic tube compensation, and volumes delivered would go to lung segments with
increased compliance, PEEP could not be screened individually, pressure and volume monitoring
would display the average of both patients, and each patient's deterioration and/or recovery could
occur in different time frames, among several other limitations.

Since March 16

th

, Chile has entered phase 4 of the pandemic (5). In this scenario, an experimental

model has been designed to study ventilation on two test lungs with a single machine to measure
possible asymmetries during parallel circuit ventilation in the case of different lung compliance.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.01.20080556; this version posted October 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Method
A Puritan Bennett 840 (Covidien IIc, USA) mechanical ventilator was used, with two EasyLungTM
test lungs (Imtmedical, Switzerland), each holding a compliance of 25 ml/mbar and a maximum
volume of 1000 ml, 2 respirometer

s

(Wright Haloscale, Spire), 2 pressure gauges (VBM), and 2

Disposable Ventilator Breathing Circuit Corrugated Tubes. External elastic bands were used on test
lungs to increase elasticity. Ten measurements were taken on each condition; first with 2 lungs
without a restrictive component (CTL) and then with one lung with a restrictive component (ITL),
in volume and pressure-controlled modes. Tidal volume, maximum pressure and minute volume
were measured (Table 1). Analysis was carried out using student’s t-test to determine differences
between pressure-controlled and volume-controlled modes, and between the control test lung
(CTL) and interventional test lung (ITL). Significance level was greater than 0.0001.

Results
Ventilator automatic tube compensation (ATC) was performed to evaluate pressurization and
compliance of two parallel connected circuits. The test was successful.

Table 1 compares CTL and ITL results before and after the elastic band was placed

.

Table 1

Distensibility decrease on one of the test lungs (under identical basal conditions) ensued a smaller
volume delivery than the one its counterpart got in volume-controlled mode (p <0,0001) and
pressure-controlled mode (p <0,0001), while this difference was greater in pressure-controlled
mode

(Figure

1).

System

pressure

increased

on

both

circuits

in

volume-controlled

mode.

Maximum pressure difference between test lungs was not significant in either VC (p >0.9999) nor
PC (p: 0.1679)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.01.20080556; this version posted October 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1

Conclusions
The

ventilator

succeeded

at

automatic

tube

compensation

with

two

parallel

circuits.

Tidal

volumes, pressures and flows were initially similar in both modes. By adding a restrictive element
to one of the test lungs, we proved that volumes given to them were different, and that maximum
pressure increases in the volume-controlled mode. Volume difference showed to be greater in
pressure-controlled mode. This report is a first attempt to approach the risks of ventilating two
patients with a single machine. Since certain differences in volumes are not monitored by the
ventilator, there are risks of distension or alveolar collapse if a single machine is used in actual
patients with different thoracopulmonary mechanics (2).

References:
1.- Kallet R, Robinson L. Resources. SARS CoV-2, Guidance Document. AARC.
https://www.aarc.org/resources/. Accessed April 2, 2020.

2.- SCCM: Consensus Statement on Multiple Patients Per Ventilator. Society of Critical Care
Medicine (SCCM). http://www.sccm.org/Disaster/Joint-Statement-on-Multiple-Patients-PerVentilato. Published March 26, 2020. Accessed April 2, 2020.

3.- University of Vermont. PulmCrit - Splitting ventilators to provide titrated support to a large
group of patients. EMCrit Project. https://emcrit.org/pulmcrit/split-ventilators/. Published March
29, 2020. Accessed April 2, 2020.

4.- COVID-19 en España: la presión en las UCI, principal reto en un contexto de posible cambio de
tendencia en los contagios. Medscape. https://espanol.medscape.com/verarticulo/5905228.
Published March 30, 2020. Accessed April 2, 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.01.20080556; this version posted October 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5.- Coronavirus en Chile pasa a fase 4 y Presidente anuncia cierre de fronteras. Ministerio de Salud
– Gobierno de Chile. https://www.minsal.cl/coronavirus-en-chile-pasa-a-fase-4-y-presidenteanuncia-cierre-de-fronteras/. Published March 16, 2020. Accessed April 2, 2020.

