medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20145490; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Heterogeneity in SIR epidemics modeling:
superspreaders
Istvan Szapudi1,
Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii, 2680 Woodlawn Drive, Hawaii, 96822, USA

Deterministic epidemic models, such as the SusceptibleInfected-Recovered (SIR) model, are immensely useful even if
they lack the nuance and complexity of social contacts at the
heart of network science modeling. Here we present a simple
modification of the SIR equations to include the heterogeneity of
social connection networks. A typical power-law model of social
interactions from network science reproduces the observation
that individuals with a high number of contacts, “hubs” or “superspreaders”, can become the primary conduits for transmission. Conversely, once the tail of the distribution is saturated,
herd immunity sets in at a smaller overall recovered fraction
than in the analogous SIR model. The new dynamical equations suggest that cutting off the tail of the social connection
distribution, i.e., stopping superspreaders, is an efficient nonpharmaceutical intervention to slow the spread of a pandemic,
such as COVID-19.
COVID-19| epidemiology | SIR equations | disease dynamics | network science
| superspreaders
Correspondence: istvan@hawaii.edu

Network science inspired generalization of
the SIR equations

RA

Introduction

contact matrix: non-linearity is essential to superspreading.
Note that here we are focusing on structural superspreading
due to the average contact structure of the population as they
go about their daily lives. In the discussions, we will outline
how to model transient superspreading, i.e., rare individual
events that can dominate the case counts when the overall
numbers are comparable to the cut-off of the contact (degree)
distribution, and viral superspreading, from those (if they exist) who shed more virus than average.
The principal idea is that we replace the susceptible-infectedrecovered variables with a (binned) distribution in terms of
their contacts. In the next section, we derive the equations
governing the time development of these distributions; in section 3, we illustrate the dependence of the solutions of the
network science parameters; and in the final section, we summarize and discuss the results.

FT

1

D

According to recent results on the spread of COVID-19, a
small fraction of the population is responsible for most infections (1, 2). Clusters in care facilities, restaurants and bars,
workplaces, and music events (3), or even choir practice (4),
dance events (5) are a hallmark of superspreading (6).
The most wide-spread deterministic Kermack-McKendrick
equations (7), or SIR equations, are not designed to model superspreading. Superspreading is introduced as an additional
dispersion of the secondary infections (6) using a negative
binomial distribution, possibly in the context of random network theory (8), or modeled with stochastic Markov Chain
methods (9).
The simplest way to modify the SIR equations to include superspreaders is by adding a new class of susceptible individuals, P, superspreaders (10) to the equations. However, network science (11) suggests a more complex picture. If we
map individuals into vertices of a graph and their connections
into edges, their degree distribution, i.e., the number of social
connections of an individual, typically follows a power-law
distribution with a slope between 2 and 3. Recent analyses
COVID-19 data (12) support such power-law behavior that is
the hallmark of small-world phenomena of network science.
Our goal is to use network science insight to generalize the
SIR formalism. The result is a set of equations similar to
poly-SIR generalizations of the SIR formalism (13, 14), but
more specific to network science and does not assume a linear

Let us denote the number of social connections or contacts of
a person with k. If a person is represented as a vertex of a
graph, k would be the number of links of that vertex to other
persons, or the degree of that vertex. Note that in reality this
graph is changing every day: for instance, a person going to
a rock concert would have many contacts on a particular day.
We assume that over time, the contact distribution itself is
stationary at least over the fundamental timescales associated
with the disease. This is an approximation that will smear out
transient rare events and can be fixed only with Monte Carlo
modeling briefly discussed at the end.
The probability per day that a contact from an infected person
produces a new infection is β = 1/Tc , or the inverse of the average time in days that such connections will produce a new
infection. In the usual SIR type modeling, the time derivative
Ṡ = βI/N S, i.e., the infected fraction of the population I/N
times the S chances of infections with probability β per day
that an encounter results in a successful transmission. The
original interpretation of β incorporates social interactions,
while we split it off to do social contact distributions defined
next.
To model the social connection network without a Monte
Carlo representation of the actual social connection graph, we
introduce the quantities, Sk , Ik , Rk , the susceptible, infected,
and recovered number of the population with k social links.
The sum of the variables, Sk + Ik + Rk = Nk ∝ k −α typically from network science. 2 < α < 3 (“ultra small world”)

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
Szapudi

|

bioRχiv

|

July 2, 2020

|

1–5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20145490; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

is the most interesting and practical limit for social networks.
α < 2 is pathological, and α > 3 corresponds to random graph
(“small world”). Typical ultra small world social networks
contain large “hubs”, individuals with large number of connections. They are positioned in the tail of the distribution,
and they will correspond to superspreaders in an epidemiological network.
With the above definitions we will write the network science
inspired modification of the SIR equations as
Ṡk =
−pk Sk
˙
Ik = pk Sk − γIk
Ṙk =
γIk ,

βeff = β, i.e. our model is identical to the original SIR model.
As a sanity check, we verified that this is the case.

(1)
(2)
(3)

Fig. 1. The dots present a typical traditional SIR model run with β = 0.2, γ = 0.1
(R0 = 2), and one initial infection. The solid lines correspond to βeff,0 ' 0.7,
i.e R0 ' 7, k = 1...30, one infection for a superspreader in the k = 10 bin, and
α = 2.5 for the initial distribution. This model is our fiducial NSIR model and it is
displayed with dots for reference the set of epi curves that follow.

FT

To illustrate the flexibility and the qualitative behavior of the
new model, we choose a set of fiducial (reference) parameters
and plot solutions with respect to changing each parameter.
First, we select a traditional SIR model as a baseline: we
choose β = 0.2 and γ = 0.1, which corresponds to R0 = 2.
The typical behavior of this SIR model is shown on Figure 1
with dotted lines.
For the network inspired model, labeled NSIR, we choose
β = 0.07, γ = 0.1, a slope of the vertex degree distribution α = 2.5, the maximum number of connections (i.e. the
cut-off of the vertex degree distribution, the largest superspreader) kmax = 30. In this case initially βeff ' 0.7, or
R0 ' 7; this is much higher than the corresponding R0 = 2
in our baseline SIR model. As illustrated in Figure 1, even
with this seemingly extreme initial condition, the time development of the disease dynamics is a milder version of the
baseline SIR model. The peak infection rate is smaller, and a
similarly smaller recovered fraction leads to herd immunity.
This is a generic feature of models with significant superspreaders: since they are responsible for a large fraction of
infections, but also prone to get infected quickly, they eliminate themselves from the susceptible pool early on. Once
that happened, the transmission is no longer efficient. As we
will show later, (Figure 5), this process expresses itself as a
precipitous drop in Rt .
Next we demonstrate the behavior of the solutions in terms
of individual parameters. We focus on the parameters describing the social network properties, the novel feature of
our model. First, we take a look at the effect of inserting the
infection at a particular degree node. Figure 2 demonstrates,
the effect of introducing the infection at the highest or lowest
degree node is relatively minor: infecting a highest degree
individual (or hub) slightly speeds up the time-line, while infecting a low degree node slightly slows it down. Aside from

RA

where pk is the probability that a vertex with k links will be
infected, implicitly depending on Ik and β, while γ = 1/Tr
is the usual inverse recovery time in unit of 1/days. Note that
the sum of any variable over index k gives the corresponding
traditional SIR variable, and the sum of the equations correspond to an effective SIR equation with changing parameters.
The above equations will describe how an initial distribution
Sk responds to the disease dynamics. We estimate pk next.
It corresponds to the chance per day that a susceptible person
with k social links will get infected. It is equal to 1 − qk ,
where qk is the probability that the person in question does
not get infected during that day, i.e. (1 − βp)k , where p is the
probability that one random link carries an infection (here
we assume no correlation between infected links, a zeroth
order approximation). Finally, in the spirit of the original
SIR approximation, we approximate the probability p with
the ratio of the infected links to the total number of links.
Putting all these together
P


lIl k
l
.
(4)
pk = 1 − 1 − β P
l lNl

D

Note that we double counted both the infectious and total
number of links which cancels in the ratio. While this is
the simplest approximation for pk and it does not account
for topological details and degree correlations of the graph
representing social interactions. The above random, nonassociative network assumption captures many features of
network theory without a full graph Monte Carlo simulation.
The sum of these variables over k will obey an effective SIR
equation with
N X
βeff =
pk Sk ,
(5)
IS
k
P
with N = k Nk , etc. Initially, the effective R0 = βeff /γ,
i.e., it depends on the social dynamics through the underlying k dependence and the disease dynamics represented by
β, and γ. Therefore a given pandemic, like COVID-19, could
play out differently depending on the social interaction hierarchy of people.

Results
We implemented the above model as a python code. If only
the k = 1 terms are different from zero, then pk = βI/N , and
2

|

bioRχiv

Szapudi

|

Network science modified SIR equations

RA

FT

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20145490; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D

Fig. 2. The effect of infecting nodes with different degrees. The parameters are
the same as NSIR model of Figure 1, except the infection is inserted at the highest
degree (top), and the lowest degree (bottom) node. The fiducial model is plotted
with dots for reference.

a slight displacement of the peak, the effect is insignificant.
Most importantly, the herd immunity level is not influenced
by the transient behavior due to the insertion degree, therefore the conclusions that follow should be robust against that.
Next we examine the cut-off of the degree distribution, corresponding to the highest degree hubs or superspreaders present
in the population. While in the fiducial model we assumed at
most kmax = 30 connections, Figure 3 shows 11 (top) and
100 (bottom) connections. The higher the cut-off, the faster
the time development and the higher the peak infected rate
is. Conversely, cutting off the superspreaders flattens the
curve, as expected. The number of equations is three times
the highest degree node, for kmax = 11, 30, 100, respectively,
33, 90, 300 coupled differential equations were solved.
The slope of the degree distribution controls the relative contribution of the rare high degree nodes (hubs, superspreaders)
compared to the more usual low degree nodes. Our fiducial
parameter α = 2.5 is middle of the range, and Figure 3 values
close to the extremes in the interesting range from network
science: α = 2.1 (top), corresponding to a distribution with
a heavy tail, or many superspreaders, while α = 2.9 (botSzapudi

|

Network science modified SIR equations

Fig. 3. The effect of the highest degree nodes (the cut-off of the degree distribution).
The parameters are the same as NSIR model of Figure 1, except the highest degree
is 11 (top), and 100 (bottom). These two cases represent extreme, or moderate
superspreaders, respectively. The fiducial model is plotted with dots for reference.

tom) is approaching a random network (α ≥ 3). It is clear
that increasing the proportion of superspreaders increases the
severity of the disease time-line, as before.
As we have shown earlier, whether the infection is introduced
at a high degree or low degree nodes corresponds to transient
effects, and hardly influences the top line final results. To
elucidate the difference it makes in the early stage of the endemic, Figure 5 plots Rt for several cases: the fiducial SIR
model, our fiducial NSIR model, and two extremes, where
the infection was introduced at a hub (superspreader) node, or
a bottom (low social connection) node. Eventually, all three
NSIR models converge to the same SIR model asymptote. If
the infection starts with a hub, the early values of Rt , corresponding to an effective R0 , are extremely high and drop
quickly when the superspreaders eliminate themselves from
the susceptible pool. Conversely, if the infection starts at a
low degree node, the initial R0 is much lower, even rises initially as the infection spreads towards superspreaders. Therefore, if this is a realistic model of disease transmission, measurements of R0 are fairly sensitive to serendipitous transient
effects due to where exactly the infection was introduced.
bioRχiv

|

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20145490; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RA

FT

Fig. 5. The time development of Rt is plotted for the fiducial SIR (dots), fiducial
NSIR (dashes), and two extreme NSIR models where the infection is inserted into
a high degree node (top, blue), or a low degree node (bottom, red). Independent
of the insertion degree, each NSIR curve lingers around R ' 3. This is more
meaningful than the actual R0 that is sensitive to the insertion degree.

D

Fig. 4. The effect of of the slope of the degree distribution. The parameters are the
same as NSIR model of Figure 1, except α = 2.1 (top), and α = 2.9 (bottom). The
flatter distribution means more superspreaders/hubs, while the steeper distribution
corresponds to a case more similar to a random graph. The fiducial model is plotted
with dots for reference.

Finally, we show time development of each bin in the contact
distribution of the population in our fiducial NSIR model. On
Figure 6, the solid red lines from top to bottom correspond
to the degree distribution at a particular point in time from
low to high degree. For reference, the total SIR variables
are displayed with dots on this semi-log plot: the red dots
correspond to the sum of the red solid lines.
After transient effects, nodes with different degrees have similar development, perhaps high degree nodes, hubs or superspreaders, reaching their maxima slightly earlier. The one
outlying solid line corresponds to the transient behavior of
the node carrying the initial infection. After the first few
weeks (while the infected fraction is still fairly low), the transient behavior joins the trend carved out by the rest of the
curves. It took about two timescales of 1/γ to achieve such
statistical “thermalization” and erase the memory of where
the infection started.
4

|

bioRχiv

Fig. 6. The time development if individual infection bins in the fiducial NSIR model.
The dotted lines correspond to the summary of the fiducial model, while the red
solid lines correspond to the individual bins if the infected distribution, the highest
degree being the lowest point. The one red line with different transient behavior
than the rest corresponds to the node where the infection was inserted.

Summary and discussions
We have introduced a generalization of the SIR model, where
each variable is a distribution. This generalization is a specific case of a poly-SIR model that could describe a variety
of situations, e.g., (13, 14) used it to model the interactions of
different age groups with a constant contact matrix. We focus on social connection distributions motivated by network
science. The resulting equations are more non-linear than a
standard poly-SIR model with a fixed contact matrix.
There are a number of phenomenological parameters that influence the dynamics of the disease transmission. In our formulation, both parameters β and γ are describe average properties of the viral infection, unlike the traditional SIR model,
where β is influenced by the properties of the disease as well
as social interactions. We model social interactions through
Szapudi

|

Network science modified SIR equations

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.02.20145490; this version posted July 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the statistics and small number transients associated with the
transmission. Nevertheless, such Monte Carlo simulations
would still be less costly than a full network science Monte
Carlo model. Once the total numbers are high enough, the
multinomial distribution will narrow enough to produce results very similar to our equations 3. The above generalizations are left for future work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author thanks Lee Altenberg, Tom Blamey, Marguerite Butler, István Csabai,
and Deveraux Talagi for useful comments.

Bibliography

FT

1. Dillon Adam, Peng Wu, Jessica Wong, Eric Lau, Tim Tsang, Simon Cauchemez, Gabriel
Leung, and Benjamin Cowling. Clustering and superspreading potential of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infections in hong kong. May 2020. doi:
10.21203/rs.3.rs-29548/v1.
2. Anne Schuchat and. Public health response to the initiation and spread of pandemic COVID19 in the united states, february 24–april 21, 2020. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly
Report, 69(18):551–556, May 2020. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6918e2.
3. Yuki Furuse, Eiichiro Sando, Naho Tsuchiya, Reiko Miyahara, Ikkoh Yasuda, Yura K. Ko,
Mayuko Saito, Konosuke Morimoto, Takeaki Imamura, Yugo Shobugawa, Shohei Nagata,
Kazuaki Jindai, Tadatsugu Imamura, Tomimasa Sunagawa, Motoi Suzuki, Hiroshi Nishiura,
and Hitoshi Oshitani. Clusters of coronavirus disease in communities, japan, january–april
2020. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 26(9), September 2020. doi: 10.3201/eid2609.202272.
4. Lea Hamner, Polly Dubbel, Ian Capron, Andy Ross, Amber Jordan, Jaxon Lee, Joanne
Lynn, Amelia Ball, Simranjit Narwal, Sam Russell, Dale Patrick, and Howard Leibrand. High
SARS-CoV-2 attack rate following exposure at a choir practice — skagit county, washington,
march 2020. MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(19):606–610, May 2020.
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6919e6.
5. Sukbin Jang, Si Hyun Han, and Ji-Young Rhee. Cluster of coronavirus disease associated
with fitness dance classes, south korea. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 26(8), August 2020.
doi: 10.3201/eid2608.200633.
6. J. O. Lloyd-Smith, S. J. Schreiber, P. E. Kopp, and W. M. Getz. Superspreading and the
effect of individual variation on disease emergence. Nature, 438(7066):355–359, November
2005. doi: 10.1038/nature04153.
7. W. O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick. A contribution to the mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a
Mathematical and Physical Character, 115(772):700–721, August 1927. doi: 10.1098/rspa.
1927.0118.
8. Laurent Hébert-Dufresne, Benjamin M. Althouse, Samuel V. Scarpino, and Antoine Allard.
Beyond r0: Heterogeneity in secondary infections and probabilistic epidemic forecasting.
February 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.02.10.20021725.
9. Linda J.S. Allen. A primer on stochastic epidemic models: Formulation, numerical simulation, and analysis. Infectious Disease Modelling, 2(2):128–142, May 2017. doi:
10.1016/j.idm.2017.03.001.
10. Thembinkosi Mkhatshwa and Anna Mummert. Modeling super-spreading events for infectious diseases: Case study sars, 2010.
11. Albert-László Barabási and Réka Albert. Emergence of scaling in random networks. Science, 286(5439):509–512, October 1999. doi: 10.1126/science.286.5439.509.
12. Anna L. Ziff and Robert M. Ziff. Fractal kinetics of COVID-19 pandemic. February 2020.
doi: 10.1101/2020.02.16.20023820.
13. Seyed M. Moghadas, Affan Shoukat, Meagan C. Fitzpatrick, Chad R. Wells, Pratha Sah,
Abhishek Pandey, Jeffrey D. Sachs, Zheng Wang, Lauren A. Meyers, Burton H. Singer, and
Alison P. Galvani. Projecting hospital utilization during the COVID-19 outbreaks in the united
states. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(16):9122–9126, April 2020.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.2004064117.
14. Maria Chikina and Wesley Pegden. Modeling strict age-targeted mitigation strategies for
covid-19, 2020.
15. Shi Zhao, Qianyin Lin, Jinjun Ran, Salihu S. Musa, Guangpu Yang, Weiming Wang, Yijun
Lou, Daozhou Gao, Lin Yang, Daihai He, and Maggie H. Wang. Preliminary estimation of
the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in china, from 2019 to
2020: A data-driven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak. International Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 92:214–217, March 2020. doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.01.050.
16. Steven Sanche, Yen Ting Lin, Chonggang Xu, Ethan Romero-Severson, Nick Hengartner,
and Ruian Ke. High contagiousness and rapid spread of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2. Emerging Infectious Diseases, 26(7):1470–1477, July 2020. doi: 10.3201/
eid2607.200282.
17. S Flaxman, S Mishra, A Gandy, H Unwin, H Coupland, T Mellan, H Zhu, T Berah, J Eaton,
P Perez Guzman, N Schmit, L Cilloni, K Ainslie, M Baguelin, I Blake, A Boonyasiri, O Boyd,
L Cattarino, C Ciavarella, L Cooper, Z Cucunuba Perez, G Cuomo-Dannenburg, A Dighe,
A Djaafara, I Dorigatti, S Van Elsland, R Fitzjohn, H Fu, K Gaythorpe, L Geidelberg,
N Grassly, W Green, T Hallett, A Hamlet, W Hinsley, B Jeffrey, D Jorgensen, E Knock,
D Laydon, G Nedjati Gilani, P Nouvellet, K Parag, I Siveroni, H Thompson, R Verity, E Volz,
C Walters, H Wang, Y Wang, O Watson, P Winskill, X Xi, C Whittaker, P Walker, A Ghani,
C Donnelly, S Riley, L Okell, M Vollmer, N Ferguson, and S Bhatt. Report 13: Estimating
the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in
11 european countries. 2020. doi: 10.25561/77731.

D

RA

the social contact distribution motivated from network science. The universality of social networks (11) motivates the
assumptions of a power law degree distribution. We explore
how the slope, the cut-off, and the contact degree of the initial
infection drives the dynamics.
Our main result, consistent with expectations and results
from other methods, is that if supserspreaders, highly connected hub-nodes, are important for disease transmission, a
lower level of infection rate leads to herd immunity than otherwise. Superspreaders tend to infect each other quickly and
remove themselves from the susceptible pool earlier. Thus,
the initial effective R0 drops quicker than in the analogous
SIR model.
The steeper the degree distribution and the lower its cut-off,
the less important superspreaders become. Steepening the
distribution, i.e. moving people to lower connections than
normal, corresponds to social distancing or lock-down. Moving the cut-off to lower degrees, i.e., removing superspreaders appears to be an effective strategy to flatten the curve as
well. If parameters are fit from realistic data, our results could
inform non-pharmaceutical mitigation strategies during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
We found that the insertion of the infection at a highly or
poorly connected node results widely varying effective R0
values if interpreted in terms of the traditional SIR model.
We speculate that zoonotic viral transmission to humans is
likely at an average node (because there is more such nodes),
while transmission by or after travel is more likely through
hub nodes. This is qualitatively consistent with the initial
lower estimates of R0 ' 2 − 3 for COVID-19 (15) that was
revised up to R0 ' 4 − 6 (16, 17) after international spread.
Our work does not take into account the discrete transients of
disease transmission: a particular person (or the corresponding node) is either infected or not, there are no fractional infections. In the contrary, the solutions to SIR-like differential
equations have a scaling property: a new solution is obtained
by multiplying a solution with an arbitrary real number. This
is clearly not a good approximation for smaller communities
and stochastic effects are important in the early phases of an
endemic in larger communities. For instance, the first infection might die out or trigger a transient superspreader event,
ultimately leading to vastly different outcomes.
It would be relatively straightforward to modify our model to
include transients in a Monte Carlo fashion. Instead of ultiplying with the probability pk , we could draw the number of
infections from a multinomial distribution of Sk total numbers with pk infection probability, assuming each infection is
independent. Our differential equations then become a discrete difference equations: Ṡk → ∆Sk , and so forth. Each
solution corresponds to a Monte Carlo realization, and rare
events, corresponding to mass gatherings, for instance, could
now happen in a discrete fashion. If it is found that disease
transmission probability varies widely with individuals β itself could be a realization from a distribution. If that distribution has a long tail, this process would induce viral superspreading.
Several of the Monte Carlo simulations are needed to evaluate
Szapudi

|

Network science modified SIR equations

bioRχiv

|

5

