medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

WICID framework Version 1.0: Criteria and considerations to guide
evidence-informed decision-making on non-pharmacological
interventions targeting COVID-19
Jan M Stratil1,2, Maike Voss3, Laura Arnold4
1) Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology – IBE, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
2) Pettenkofer School of Public Health, Munich, Germany
3) German Institute for International and Security Affairs (SWP), Global Issues Division, Berlin, Germany
4) Academy of Public Health Services, Düsseldorf, Germany

Correspondence author: Jan M Stratil. Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry, and Epidemiology – IBE, LMU Munich,
Marchioninistr. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

Keywords: decision-making, priority setting, health technology assessment, guidelines, policy making,
public health, Covid-19
Manuscript word count: 4898; 2 tables, 2 figures;

1 Abstract
Introduction: Decision-making on matters of public health and health policy requires the balancing of
numerous, often conflicting factors. However, a broad societal discourse and a participatory decisionmaking process on the criteria underpinning the decision was often not feasible within the time constraints
imposed on by the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. While evidence-to-decision frameworks are not able or
intended to replace stakeholder participation, they can serve as a tool to approach relevancy and
comprehensiveness of the criteria considered.
Objective: To develop a decision-making framework adapted to the challenges of decision-making on
national and sub-national level implementation of non-pharmacological interventions (NPIs) measures to
contain the global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic.
Methods: We employed the “best-fit” framework synthesis technique and used the WHO-INTEGRATE
framework Version 1.0 as a starting point. In a first phase adapted the framework through brainstorming
exercises and application to exemplary case studies (e.g. school reopening). In a second phase we
conducted a content analysis of comprehensive strategy documents intended to guide policymakers on
the phasing out of applied lockdown measures in Germany. Based on factors and criteria identified in this
process, we adapted previous framework versions into the WICID (WHO-INTEGRATE COVID-19)
framework Version 1.0.
Results: Twelve comprehensive strategy documents were included in the content analysis. The revised
WICID framework consists of eleven criteria, supported by 48 aspects, the metacriterion quality of
evidence and embraces a complexity and systems-perspective. The criteria cover implications for the
health of individuals and populations due to and beyond COVID-19, infringement on liberties and
fundamental human rights, acceptability and equity considerations, societal, environmental, and economic
implications, as well as resource and feasibility considerations.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion: In a third phase, the proposed framework will be expanded through a comprehensive
document analysis focusing on key-stakeholder groups across the society. The WICID framework can be
a tool to support comprehensive evidence-informed decision-making processes.

2 Key-questions
What is already known?
Ad-hoc Decision-making on matters of public health and health policy such as non-pharmaceutical
interventions to contain the global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic, requires decision-makers to balance numerous
and often conflicting criteria. Insufficient consideration of relevant factors reduces acceptance and can
limit the effectiveness of the intervention.
What are the new findings?
Based on a content-analysis of comprehensive strategy documents, we newly developed WICID
framework provides of 11+1 criteria informed by 47 aspects which are intended to support decisionmakers in the balancing act of identifying and considering criteria of relevance.
What do the new findings imply?
The usage of the WICID evidence-to-decision framework can support decision-makers and expert
committees in making more balanced decision, even if not all voices of relevant stakeholders could be
included in the process due to time constraints imposed by the rapid progress of the pandemic.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3 Introduction
The response to the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic highlights the challenges of inherent evidence informed of
public health and health policy decision-making1-4. These include: decision-making under time constraints,
under uncertainty due to limited evidence, balancing numerous tradeoffs, and the challenge of ensuring
fair decision-making processes under such circumstances.
Due to exponential growth in the number of infections, the issue of timing is crucial in a pandemic. A delay
on the implementation of public health interventions (e.g. physical-distancing regulations) by days can
5
have grave consequences . Therefore, to receive timely evidence-informed guidance, many governmental
institutions set up expert committees to support public health and health policy decision makers6. One
challenge these expert groups faced is the qualitatively poor scientific evidence, with often questionable
transferability and applicability to the context of decision-making and the lack of reliable evidence7 8. Not
only due to the novelty of the pathogen, but also as assessing the effects of public health and health
policy which often do not arise directly from the intervention, but from the system reaction to the
9
introduction of the intervention within in it (e.g. school closures cause can lead to parents reducing
working hours, which can lead to shortages in staff in the health care sector, limiting its ability to provide
medical services and care).
However, even if strong scientific evidence was available, this in itself is insufficient to make sound
recommendations, as evidence-informed decision-making is a deeply value-laden and often politized
process10-12. Decision-makers must balance numerous and often conflicting normative and technical
13-15
. This leads to the question: which criteria
factors to come to a promising and acceptable decision
should be considered and how these should be weighed against each other?
The extent to which decisions are considered acceptable and legitimate depends on how the decisions
were made (procedural considerations). Key considerations include e.g. transparency, inclusion of
10 16-21
. Such approaches can increase
relevant stakeholders, and an appropriate composition of the panel
22-24
the acceptability and perceived legitimacy of a decision
even if – given varying and sometimes
contradictory interests – no consensus regarding the right selection and weighting of criteria can be
achieved22. According to the Accountability for Reasonableness (A4R) framework20, a key condition is
‘relevance’: the decision or recommendation must rest on evidence, reasons, and principles that all fairminded parties can agree to be relevant and must meet the diverse needs of affected stakeholders20.
Involvement of representatives of all relevant stakeholder groups to identifying reasons and principles for
10 16 25 26
. However, this ideal is often difficult if not
a given decision-making process is considered ideal
impossible to meet under the time constraints imposed by the rapid progression of the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic. While not intended nor able to replace stakeholder participation, Evidence-to-Decision (EtD)
27 28
. EtD frameworks, which tend to comprise criteria
frameworks are a way to support this balancing act
and procedural guidance, are intended to ensure that all relevant factors are considered and the
underlying rationale is made transparent29. When developed and applied well, these frameworks can help
identify and integrate the criteria of relevance, even if not all voices of all stakeholders could be heard.
One of these frameworks is the WHO-INTEGRATE framework version 1.030. It was developed in a
research project commissioned by the World Health Organization (WHO) for complex public health and
31
30
health system interventions . Based on a conceptual and normative foundation primarily based on WHO
32-39
, it was developed based on a
norms and values derived and public health ethics frameworks
40
30
comprehensive literature review of real-world decision criteria , an assessment of complexity features
as well as qualitative research across four continents41. As with most EtDs, the WHO-INTEGRATE
framework is generic framework. an requires adaption to the specific intervention and context.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4 Objective
The aim of this research project is to adapt the WHO-Integrate framework to support the development of
recommendations and decision-making for lifting restrictions through non-pharmacological interventions
(NPIs) to address the global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. For this, the framework addresses the national and
sub-national level and takes a plurality of viewpoints of affected stakeholders into account. The WICID
framework (WHO-INTEGRATE COVID-19 adaption) is intended to reflect decision-making challenges and
opportunities on matters of public health in relation to COVID-19 by embracing a complex systems
perspective. However, with the WICID framework, we aim to ensure that the tool is sufficiently generic to
be applicable to a wide range of NPIs, contexts, and decision topics.
Although procedural criteria, norms, principles, and processual considerations are crucial for achieving fair
processes, this research project focuses on the substantive decision-making criteria.

5 Methods
The development of the WICID framework was conducted in three phases, following an approach
analogous to the “best fit” framework synthesis and using an adapted version of the WHO-INTEGRATE
framework as a starting point42. An extended version of the methods used in this research project is
provided as supplement 1.
In phase I, we adapted the WHO-INTEGRATE framework through brainstorming exercises and applying it
to case studies, in order to develop an analytical, generic tool (a priori framework). This was done through
discussion within the research team, (ii) assessment of real-world decision-making criteria derived from an
40
comprehensive overview-of-reviews , and (iii) conducting a brainstorming exercise guided by the
application of the framework on two case studies (reopening high schools and reopening small businesses
such as book shops). This preliminary a priori framework was then imported into the software MAXQDA20
(verbi, Berlin), with the criteria and sub-criteria of the a priori framework being translated into codes of the
coding frame to be used in phase II.
Phase II, consisted of a content analysis of a purposive sample of comprehensive strategy papers on
lifting the lockdown measures in Germany (e.g. reopening schools, increased testing measures), which
were coded against the a priori framework developed in phase I following technique of "best fit" framework
42-44
. “Best fit” framework synthesis begins by creating a framework of a priori themes and coding
synthesis
data extracted from documents (in this case: the comprehensive strategy documents) against that
thematic or conceptual framework. A new framework is created by performing a thematic analysis on any
42
data that cannot be accommodated within the a priori framework .
We assumed, that selecting comprehensive strategy documents by expert commissions or expert groups
would provide a broad, multi-perspective set of recommendations (in contrast to e.g. scientific publications
or statements by individual groups, which do not to reflect a broad range of relevant perspectives in
conccluding). We defined these as documents (a) intended to provide a comprehensive strategy or
strategic suggestions for phasing out the lockdown measures (rather than providing information or pointing
out individual aspects), (b) not exclusively or primarily focused on mitigating the health relatedconsequences of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic but also including other societal, economic, or health
outcomes, (c) addressing various NPIs and their interplay, and (d) focusing on multiple considerations to
be reflected in this process. Position papers of stakeholder groups reacting or positioning themselves to a
document, measure, or event without providing comprehensive strategy guidance were excluded (n=8)
but will be considered in upcoming phase III, where the current version of the WICID framework will be

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

expanded (see 7.2). The eligibility criteria and the rationale for their selection are provided as a
supplement in the expanded methods section.
The search was conducted through multiple pathways: two researchers (JMS, LA) independently
conducted (1) grey literature searches in the search engine GoogleTM and (2) on the websites of major
newspaper outlets in Germany, (3) one researcher (JMS) searched the websites of the 16 German federal
states, the national government and selected national government ministries, (4) we submitted freedom of
information requests to the federal states’ governments, the national government, as well as selected
national government ministries, and (5) contacted a sample of experts involved in public health decisionmaking or expert groups to provide us with strategy documents. As the documents are considered grey
literature and mostly written in in German, we did not conduct a literature search in scientific data bases
for these types of documents at this point of time.
The coding process of the included strategy documents was conducted by two authors (JMS, LA).
Following the coding of one sample strategy documents to assess the need for adaption of the coding
frame, one author (JMS) used the Software MAXQDA 20 (VERBI GmbH, Berlin) to code all identified
strategy papers followed by a critical review by a second author (LA). The researcher applied the level 1
codes (referring to the criteria in the framework) and level 2 codes (referring to the aspects in the
framework) of the coding frame to passages in the strategy document making references to criteria,
considerations, or values covered within the codes. When the content of such a passage was perceived
as not adequately covered by the coding frame, new level 2 or level 1 codes were created. Unclear
passages were assigned the code TBD code for later review. The coding frame is provided as supplement
2.
After coding all selected strategy documents, two authors (JMS, LA) critically reflected on content
saturation and dimensions of the framework insufficiently covered within the strategy documents and it
was concluded that content saturation was reached.
Based on the coded passages, the researchers adapted the a priori framework by assessing the need to
newly create, adapt, merge, separate, or reword criteria (reflecting level 1 codes) and aspects (reflecting
level 2 codes).
In a final step, two researchers (JMS, LA) went through each of the coded passages to critically reflect on
whether the criteria, considerations, or values contained within these passages was adequately covered
within the newly adapted phase II framework.

6 Results
6.1 Development of preliminary adaption of the framework and a coding frame
(phase I)
Following the process outlined in the methods section, we developed in phase I a preliminary, adapted (a
priori) framework, which consisted of 8 criteria comprising 36 aspects and the metacriterion quality of
evidence (an criterion to be applied across the other substantive criteria). This framework is provided as
supplement 2. A preliminary version of this phase I framework as well as the exemplary case studies are
part of a strategy document developed by two of the authors, among other experts, for the federal ministry
of interior and the federal chancellery45.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6.2 Documents identified and included for analysis for phase II
We identified 12 comprehensive strategy papers in total. Four strategy papers, developed by expert
groups for federal states, the national government, or ministries of the national government and two
strategy documents developed by the corona expert commission of the federal state government of North
Rhine-Westphalia, were publicly available46. Two strategy documents were developed by an informal
expert group for the German Federal Ministry of the Interior, one of which was publicly available through a
press report the other was provided to us through the German Network Public Health COVID-19
45 47
.
(Kompetenznetz Public Health on COVID-19)
We identified eight additional comprehensive strategy documents, which were not directly commissioned
by governmental institutions. Four of which were published by the National Academy of Sciences
Leopoldina48-50, one by a political party in the federal city-state of Hamburg51, one by a research institute
52
53
commissioned by the political foundation Hans-Böckler-Stiftung , one by the Boston Consulting Group ,
and one developed by researchers from diverse institutions under the coordination of two researchers with
affiliation at the University of Wuerzburg and the IFO institut54.

6.3 The adapted WICID framework
The adapted WICID framework consists of 11 substantive decision-making criteria, containing 48
decision-making aspects, and the meta-criterion quality of evidence, to be applicable across all criteria
and aspects (outer circle, Figure 1; table 1 and 2). Depending on the measure, the criteria and aspects are
intended to be applied on and reflected for different population groups (center-most circle, figure 1).
Depending on the measure and type of decision-making process, the decision-makers are intended to
deliberate on the criteria and aspects taking one or multiple different perspectives (inner circle, figure 1).
Analogous to the WHO-INTEGRATE framework, it aims to accommodate different features of complexity:
depending on impact the measure is assumed to have on the system it is implemented in, direct (those
caused by the intervention) and indirect (those resulting from the system reactively changing due to the
intervention) effects should be taken into account, as well as local, regional, national and even global
implications. At the same time both, the immediate and the short, medium- and long-term implications
should be considered (figure 2). It is intended to guide the systematic reflection of the intervention in its
context.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: WICID Framework version 1.0
The color of the 11+1 criteria of the WICID refers so their grouping and relation to the criteria of the WHO-INTEGRATE framework
they are derived from. The center-most circle describes population groups onto which the criteria and aspects should be applied to.
The inner most circle describes the perspective the decision makers can take onto criteria and populations.

6.3.1 Criteria and aspects of the WICID framework
The eleven criteria in the WICID framework consist of: three criteria focused on the balance of health
benefits and harms: (I-III, in figure 1: light red), two criteria focus on the accordance with human rights
principles and socio-cultural acceptability (IV-V, beige), one criterion focuses on equity, equality, and nondiscrimination (VI, green), two criteria focus on the societal implications (VII-VIII, light yellow), and three
criteria focus on feasibility (IX-X, blue) and health systems considerations (XI, light blue). Table 1
describes the 11+1 criteria in detail; with table 2 containing the 48 associated aspects in their concise
formulation. Supplement 3 contains a more comprehensive version of the framework, providing more
details and examples to guide users of the framework. The supplementary 4 contains exemplary
passages from the coded strategy documents for criteria and aspects.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Criteria of the WICID framework and description of what the criteria are intended to cover
Criterion

Description of the criteria

I. implications for
the course of the
pandemic and its
impact on health

II. implications for
quality of life,
social well-being,
and mental health

Covers implications of the measures for the course of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic,
including the number of new infections, the resulting health-related consequences (e.g.
COVID-19 related mortality and morbidity), the implications for the capacity of the health
care system to treat COVID-19 patients, as exceeding this capacity is associated with a
pronounced increase in mortality. It furthermore covers the direct SARS-CoV-2 related
health risk of individuals affected by the measures (probability of infection and
consequences).
Covers the way the measures affect overall wellbeing and quality of life, which includes
the degree to which the capability to shape everyday life according to one's own wishes
and needs is affected (e.g. through restricting daily routines) or the experience of selfefficacy and of sense of coherence. It furthermore covers the social wellbeing of
individuals (e.g. the experience of loneliness) and the social cohesion of communities (e.g.
cohesion of families or non-family communities). The criterion furthermore captures the
implications for the mental health of individuals and populations (e.g. depression, anxiety
disorders), including risk-factors - such as the experience of stress or fear, ability to
practice coping mechanisms, receive support, and other adverse mental health
consequences (e.g. suicides).

III. implications for
the physical health,
health behavior,
health risks, and
health care beyond
COVID-19

Focuses on behavioral, environmental, and interpersonal risk factors for health (including
accidents and domestic violence) other than those directly related to COVID-19 (e.g.
physical activity) and their consequences for health. It furthermore covers the implications
of the measures for availability, accessibility, acceptability, and quality of medical and care
services and institutions for conditions other than COVID-19 (e.g. willingness to seek
emergency care in the case of myocardial infarctions).

IV. Proportionality
and accordance
with individual
autonomy and
fundamental rights

Covers whether the measure is in accordance with and how it – directly or indirectly –
affects autonomy, self-determination, individual liberties, and fundamental individuals’
rights (e.g. privacy and data protection implications of a contact tracing-app). It
furthermore covers the intrusiveness of the intervention (with e.g. providing information
being a measure with a low intrusiveness; and restricting choice one with a high
37
intrusiveness ). The aspect of proportionality addresses whether intrusiveness and
infringement of individual rights and liberties are proportionate to the expected benefit (or
expected avoidance of harm).

V. acceptance of
and willingness to
implement
measures

Focuses to the degree of acceptability of the measure and their consequences to the
general population and different affected population groups. This includes the personal
willingness to implement, adhere to, or enforce the measure (e.g. whether reopening
schools without any protective measures is acceptable to teachers with a high-risk profile
such as pre-existing health conditions). While acceptability is an end in itself, this criterion
is strongly linked to feasibility and assumed effectiveness.
Covers the implications of the measure for vulnerable population groups, whether and how
it affects stakeholder groups differently and thereby the risk for increasing or reducing
inequalities (e.g. men benefiting less from a measure in comparison with women,
exacerbating health inequities), considerations of equity (treating people differently
according their need to allow them the same capability of achieving an outcome),
considerations of equal treatment (e.g. not treating people differently without sufficient
justification), and implications for the risk of individuals or population groups to be
stigmatized or be discriminated against.

VI. equity, equality
and the fair
distribution of
benefits and
burdens

VII. societal and
environmental
implications and
considerations

Covers the implications for civil society, social life, and culture from an individual-level and
system-level perspective, and the implications for the functioning and cohesion of the
society. It furthermore covers the implications of the measures for social determinants of
health, including household income, social participation, and education. A further aspect

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

VIII. economic
implications and
consideration

IX. resource
requirements and
resource
implications
X. feasibility and
implementation
considerations

XI. interaction with
and implications
for the health
system

Quality of
evidence

covered is the implications for the ecosystems resulting from the measures.
Addresses the implications for the economy as a whole (population perspective/systems
perspective) and of stakeholders in their role as economic actors and their activities
(individual perspective. Including the implications of the measures for the work force (e.g.
closing of schools forcing parents to stay at home to take care of their children).
Covers the requirements of the measures for different resources in the context of the
availability of these resources as well as how the measure affect the availability and
quality of these resources (e.g. how many face masks would be required to provide every
teacher with a high-risk profile with one, are these masks available, and would this lead to
a shortage of masks for e.g. health service providers).
Covers the practical, technical, and political feasibility of implementing the measure as
well as the legal conformity. Other aspects address feasibility related characteristics of the
measures, such as the flexibility in extension, adjustment, or withdrawal of the measures
and the possibility of evaluating the implications of the measure and reacting adequately
to new information (e.g. ability to test those affected by the measure and conduct contacttracing if needed).
Addresses how the intervention will interact (synergistically or adversely) with other
measures to control and contain the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic and other not-directly
COVID-19 related components of the health system (within a broad understanding of
55
health system in accordance with the WHO ). For example, the combination of school
reopening and lifting travel bans on other countries in close proximity timewise can have
an interacting (negative) effect that could be different from each of these measures for
lifting the lockdown by themselves.
This metacriterion is intended to be applied across all criteria and aspects, e.g. taking the
quality of the evidence on health impacts alongside with its strength and direction into
account. This metacriterion reflects the confidence that the available evidence is
appropriate and adequate to support the decision or recommendation. Evidence is
interpreted in a broad sense, beyond an understanding focusing on quantitative evidence
of effectiveness derived from systematic reviews. Different forms of evidence can be used
and be the most appropriate type of evidence to inform on the criteria (e.g. an appropriate
form to assess the accordance with selected fundamental rights can be a legal
assessment). Decision-making under uncertainty – as is often the case in a pandemic –
often requires a decision based on stakeholder experience and judgement, when stronger
evidence is unavailable.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Concise version of the criteria and aspects of the WICID framework

criteria

aspect

I. implications for
the course of the
pandemic and its
impact on health

implications for the risk of infection and course of the pandemic
implications of the measure for COVID-19-related health consequences

II. implications for
quality of life,
social well-being,
and mental health

implications for the capacity of the health care system to treat (severe) COVID-19cases
implications for the capability to shape everyday life according to one's own wishes
and needs
implications for individual wellbeing and quality
implications of the measures for social wellbeing
implications for social cohesion of communities
implications for the experience of fear and insecurity
implications for stress, stressors, the feeling of being overwhelmed and overloaded
implications for mental health and its consequences

III. implications for
the physical health,
health behavior,
health risks, and
health care beyond
COVID-19

implications for health-related behavior
implications for the exposure to environments that affect health
implications for the risk of suffering accidents or being affected by violence
implications for medical emergency and standard care beyond COVID-19
implications for care and other health and social support services
Other health related implications beyond COVID-19

IV. Proportionality
and accordance
with individual
autonomy and
fundamental rights
V. acceptance of
and willingness to
implement
measures

implications for and accordance with individual liberties and fundamental rights
including autonomy and individual self-determination
extent of intrusiveness and proportionality regarding the expected benefit

VI. equity, equality
and the fair
distribution of
benefits and
burdens

implications for health, social and economic inequalities

Socio-cultural acceptability of the measures
implications for willingness to adhere to implement the measures

implications for affected social groups, in particular vulnerable and marginalized
populations
degree of fair distribution of benefits and burdens between population groups
accordance of the measures with the principle of equal treatment

VII. societal and
environmental
implications and
considerations

implications for the risk of stigmatization and discrimination
implications for actors and institutions of civil society, social life, and culture
implications for the civil society, social life, and culture
implications for social cohesion, solidarity, and the risk of social and political
division
implications for the economic situation of individuals and capability of social
participation
implications for education and psychosocial development
implications for other social determinants of health
implications for ecosystem, planetary boundaries, and environmental sustainability

VIII. economic
implications and
consideration

consequences of the measures for individual economic actors and their economic
activities
implications for the economy including resilience and ability to recover
implications for innovation and economic development opportunities

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

IX. resource
requirements and
resource
implications

X. feasibility and
implementation
considerations

implications of the measures on the retention and release of labor forces
financial costs, available financial resources, and budgetary implications for
different actors
requirements of, availability of, and implications for human resources
requirements of, availability of, and implications for protective equipment,
hygiene products and medical devices
requirements of, availability of, and implications for infrastructure to implement,
enforce and monitor measures
requirements of, availability of, and implications for further resources and
infrastructures
political feasibility and legal conformity
practical and technical feasibility
flexibility in implementation, extension, adjustment and withdrawal of measures
possibility of evaluation and adequate reaction to new information

XI. interaction with
and implications
for the health
system

interaction with other measures to control and contain the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
interaction with components of the health care system
implications for the capability and willingness to develop alternative, local solutions

Metacriterion: quality of evidence

6.3.2 Considering criteria for different populations
Depending on the measure and decision-making context, criteria and aspects within the framework should
be considered for the population as a whole, as well as for different population groups to assume relevant
implications adequately for these groups. For example, an intervention such as regulation forcing people
not to leave their houses can have adverse effects which disproportionate affect people affected by
insecure housing circumstances or school closures disproportionately placing a burden on working
mothers. The stakeholder groups to be considered will depend on the type of measure (e.g. closing
schools vs. closing nursing homes to the public). Building on the WHO-INTEGRATE framework and the
strategy documents, we suggest to consider the implications for (figure 2, center-most circle): (a) the
general population, (b) those intended to benefit from the intervention (e.g. young school children in the
case of school reopening), (c) those intended to implement the measures (e.g. teachers), and populations
with a high risk profile (senior citizens with preexisting conditions) and (f) other affected stakeholder
groups (e.g. employers). Within these population groups, further disaggregation based on relevant social
characteristics with an emphasis on vulnerable and marginalized populations should be conducted (e.g.
school children with a family with a low socio-economic status). These relevant characteristics are likely to
vary depending on context, although socioeconomic status, age, and gender are likely to be important
across context. The PROGRESS Plus framework can provide guidance on the identification of relevant
56
characteristics .

6.3.3 Employing multiply perspectives: The population, the individual and the
health system
Depending on the measure and decision-making process, decision-makers need to reflect on the different
criteria from different perspectives to inform their deliberations (inner ring in figure 1). For example, the
health implications of a measure on the SARS-CoV-2 related health risk (e.g. reopening of schools) can
be approached from a population perspective (looking at the implications of the intervention for the
population as a whole, which can take place on a local or community level, federal state level and/or
national level; e.g. incidence rate of infections and associated mortality rates), a systems perspective
(reflecting the intervention from the perspective of the health system, as well on a local, regional, and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

national level, e.g. taking the implications for the capacity of the health system and the availability of
o
resources into account), or the individual perspective (taking the perspective of an individual affected by
the population; e.g. the risk for individual teachers working in these schools).

6.3.4 Taking a complex systems perspective
The implications of the NPIs can reach far. Therefore, the WICID framework embraces a complexity
ity
perspective2: the measures are regarded as “events in a system”57, with the (intended and unintended)
ed)
effects resulting from the interaction of the measures’ components with each other and components of the
larger system. Within this perspective, disentangling the effects caused by the measure itself from the
interplay of context and measure can be challenging if not impossible to do9; posing challenges for
transferability and generalizability of evidence.
Analogous to the ripple effects caused by dropping an object in a pool of water, the effects initiated by the
introduction of the measure to the system can lead to a chain reaction that can be followed outwards
rds
incrementally (figure 2). The more profound the impact of the measure to the system, the further way the
effects of the measure throughout the system can be observed. For example, the shutdown of a few
ew
companies in a region for a short time can lead to locally felt adverse economic consequences. However
er,
a marginally more impactful event of closing the same companies for a marginally longer time and thereby
by
exceeding an economic threshold can lead to the insolvency of these companies, causing – depending on
the companies – a disruption of globalized production chains with economic consequences that can have
e
regional, national, and even global effects. Therefore, depending on how profound the impact of the
measure is assumed, decision makers need to consider whether the measure is likely to lead not only to
immediate and local, but also regional, national, or global consequences over the short, medium, and long
ng
term. When reflecting on the measures, a focus should not only be on the direct effects along the intended
ed
causal pathway, but should also anticipate implications caused across several degrees of indirectness
ss.
These different dimensions are not necessarily related: for example, direct and indirect health-related
ed,
societal, and economic implication occurring from immediate to long term could arise exclusively on a
local level (figure 2).

Figure 2: Complex system perspective on the implications caused by a measure being introduced into a
system. The intervention (grey circle on the left) is introduced as an “event” to a system. It directly effects other
components of the system (non-grey) circles on the right) which again interact with other components of the system,,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

causing a chain-reaction of the system reacting and adapting to the event; leading to the societal, economic, and
health-related consequences of the intervention.

7 Discussion
7.1

Summary of findings

We adapted the WHO-INTEGRATE framework to decision-making processes on non-pharmaceutical
interventions intended to suppress or mitigate the effects of the SARS-CoV 2 pandemic. We used brain
storming exercises and content analysis of comprehensive strategy papers on the phasing out the
implemented lockdown measures in Germany. The resulting WICID framework version 1.0 consists of
11+1 substantive decision-making criteria, containing 48 decision-making aspects. Depending on the
needs of the decision-making processes, these are intended to be applied by policymakers for and with
different affected stakeholder groups using a multi-perspective approach. In line with the underlying
complexity perspective, rather than only focusing on direct, immediate, and local effects of the measure,
the ripple effects caused by the introduction of the measure to a given system or policy field should be
followed to adequately consider the implications a measure might have.

7.2 Advancing the WICID framework version 1.0 in phase III
The current version of the WICID framework version 1.0 will be expanded in a third phase. The limited
diversity of expert groups established to inform policymakers on the handling of the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic has faced some criticism6. Our approach of adapting the WICID framework based on strategy
documents therefore comes with the risk that relevant criteria were overlooked due to the limited selection
of expert groups and the stakeholder groups (not) represented within them. The third phase of the
research project aims to address this issue by including the perspectives of various stakeholder groups
across the society and expanding the WICID framework version 1.0 with considerations not adequately
covered previously.
In phase III we will conduct a content analysis of key-documents representing the opinions and
perspectives of stakeholder representatives across the society (i.a. of affected populations, nongovernmental organizations, private sector) and using the results to validate and – where needed –
expand the framework version 1.0. Using a sample of NPIs with broad societal implication as a starting
point (closure/reopening of schools, closure/reopening of businesses, and “shelter-in-place” regulations),
we will include opinion pieces, position papers, or press statements aimed at informing political decisionmaking on these measures. A first set of stakeholder group clusters (e.g. social and welfare organizations)
58
will be selected based on an initial brainstorming phase and stakeholder mapping and expanded in an
iterative snowballing process. While it will be not feasible to cover all relevant organizations within a given
cluster, we will analyze of a heterogeneous sample which will be expanded in an iterative process based
on the assessment of saturation. While this approach is not able to capture all voices of affected
stakeholders, it allows for a broad and representation of societal values in decision-making across the.

7.3 Short guidance on how to apply the WICID Framework
While some evidence-to-decision (EtD) frameworks are tailored to specific decision-making processes
59
26
(e.g. on vaccination policies ) and provide a fixed set of “ready-to-use” decision-making criteria , others
are more generic and require some form of adaption. The WICID framework is intended to be adequately
generic to be applicable across a broad range of NPIs and decision-making contexts. While the 11+1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

criteria can be used as a “ready-to-use” evidence-to-decision framework, we believe the framework to be
most useful as a guide to systematically reflect on NPIs as well as their interdependencies and adapting
them based on the specific needs of the decision-making process, using the WICID framework as
guidance.
60 61

or systems map of the measure and the context is intended to
First, (I) a comprehensive logic model
be implemented in should be created, in order to describe possible implications. Next, (II) the WICID
framework should be used to expand on dimensions not adequately covered (e.g. by exploring the causal
pathways from different perspectives, assessing the implications for different affected population groups,
or using the criteria and aspects to assess its comprehensiveness). Informed by the logic model, (III) an
identification of relevant stakeholders should be conducted, ideally in the form of a comprehensive or
focused stakeholder mapping58. Next, (IVa) those involved in the decision-making process need to define
criteria which are assumed to be of relevance for deliberating on the measure. This can be done e.g. by
selecting individual aspects from within each criterion and adapting them to the context at hand. Using the
example of school reopening, this could include the risk of outbreaks, health implications for teachers, for
students, and for family members, the implications for the wellbeing of these groups, educational
implications etc. Given the complexity of the decisions at hand, it is likely not all factors of relevance can
be covered in depth. On the one hand, this reflects the reality of the decision-making process; on the other
hand, the rationale for the selection should always be provided. (IVb) The assumed importance of the
criteria should be rated (e.g. on a 1-5 scale from “less important” to “critical”). (V) Efforts should be made
to receive feedback on the expanded logic model and the selected criteria from key stakeholder groups
identified in the mapping. Repeated rounds of step I-IV are likely to produce the best results. Next (VI),
efforts should be made to acquire appropriate sources of evidence to inform on the selected criteria (e.g.
by commissioning research or inviting experts’ judgments). (VII) The retrieved evidence for each criterion
should be summarized and presented alongside the assessment the quality of the evidence and
transferability to the context at hand. The group of decision-makers are now asked (VIII) to engage in the
deliberation to balance the criteria against each other, taking their weight, direction, quality, and
transferability of the evidence into account. After all, the final judgment and the underlying rationale should
be made transparent and public.

7.4 Relation to public health ethics framework
Various public health ethics frameworks providing guidance on principles and values to consider in public
39 62-64
, some of which are more generall33 34
health and health policy decision-making have been published
37 65 66
, while others focused on public health emergencies and pandemics67-71. Building on these
72
foundations, institutions such as the German ethics council or the German Network Public Health
COVID-1973 74 have outlined relevant values and principles for decision-making in the current public health
crisis. These include the duty to provide care, health, non-discrimination, security, equity, individual liberty,
privacy, proportionality, protection of the public from harm, reciprocity, and solidarity, among others73.
The WICID framework was developed to be in line with these documents; primarily due to the underlying
WHO-INTEGRATE framework being developed with a foundation in WHO norms and values and key
30
public health ethics frameworks . The WICID framework aims to translate these principles and values into
criteria applicable for real-world decision making processes in the pandemic (e.g. by translating the
general moral considerations of producing benefits and avoiding, preventing, and removing harms33 into –
among others – the criteria I,II,III,VII, and VIII on the different positive and negatives social, economic, or
health-related effects a NPI might have for individuals and populations). Furthermore, the framework aims
to place criteria derived from these values and principles alongside other factors of relevance for realworld decision-making often not covered in depth in public health ethics frameworks, such as
considerations of feasibility or the wider implications for the (health) system. While some values and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

principles have a direct representation in the framework criteria (e.g. individual liberty, privacy, or
proportionality) others are introduced on the level of the perspectives or the populations the criteria should
be applied to (e.g. reciprocity being reflected in the consideration of those intended to implement the
interventions).

7.5 Need for fair and transparent processes
The WICID framework is in itself insufficient to achieve fair decision-making processes with results
considered acceptable and legitimate20 21. It is important that not only the final decision, but also the
underlying rationale, including the criteria and evidence, is made transparent. Other important values and
principles underlying fair decision-making processes include accountability, inclusiveness, openness and
73 74
. While a comprehensive approach of stakeholder
transparency, reasonableness, and responsiveness
engagement is likely not possible within a pandemic, efforts to including the voices of affected
stakeholders, for example through rapid reaction statements from stakeholder representation
organizations, can not only improve acceptability and legitimacy but also lead to better outcomes.
Especially, the needs of affected marginalized and vulnerable population groups without strong political
capital (e.g. people affected by homelessness) are at risk of being overlooked. Furthermore, special
attention needs to be placed to the composition of the stakeholder groups6. Documenting the process and
the decisions made and providing – to some extend – access to these documents to the public can
increase social acceptance for public health measures as well as lifting them. As the main focus within this
research project lay on substantive criteria of WICID the framework and does not comprise procedural
criteria, other procedural frameworks e.g. from the field of public health ethics can serve as guidance.

7.6

Strengths and Limitations

The WICID framework was developed by building on the WHO-INTEGRATE framework30 which was
developed as a principles-based approach to ensure a solid, comprehensive normative foundation. It is
also based on previous research such as the result of an overview of systematic reviews on public health
40
and health system decision-making criteria , and expanding this foundational framework through a broad
set of comprehensive strategy documents informing decision-making processes in Germany. Application
in other country contexts therefore need to be tested and the framework, if necessary, updated and
revised.
The WICID framework was developed using strategy documents intended to inform the German
government. While we believe the resulting WICID framework can prove useful and applicable to other
regions within and outside Europe, the need for adapting to the respective decision-making contexts is
necessary. Likely, the basis of the WHO-INTEGRATE framework, which was developed not only for the
global level at the WHO, but also to be applicable on national and sub-national levels throughout the
world, can cover factors not adequately captured in the German strategy documents.
The framework in its current version 1.0 was developed based primarily on comprehensive strategy
documents developed by expert groups. The composition and the intention of the expert groups is likely to
have influenced the criteria, consideration, values, and principles covered within them. While we believe
possible shortcomings and blind spots are in part compensated using the WHO-INTEGRATE framework
as a basis, there is a risk of relevant factors being missed. We aim to address this issue in phase III of this
research project.
Despite multiple approaches to identify the comprehensive strategy documents, we acknowledge the
possibility of having missed on individual statements. Furthermore, likely other relevant strategy

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

documents exist, but were not disclosed by the governments or leaked through to the public and therefore
are not captured in our analysis. An update of the searches will be conducted as part of phase III.
Another limitation is the distinction between comprehensive strategy documents and position papers by
affected stakeholder groups, which was not always a clear cut. However, we believe this only to be a
minor limitation, as all borderline documents were retained and will be included in the phase III of the
project.

8 Conclusion
The WICID framework represents a comprehensive COVID-19 focused EtD framework intended to guide
policy and public-health decision-makers on making decisions on NPIs. It is rooted in WHO norms and
values, criteria and considerations used to inform decision-making, and a complex systems perspective.
While adapted to COVID-19 related challenges, it is intended to be generic in a way to be applicable
across a broad range of decisions-making processes, contexts, and on a diverse set of measures. It can
be a useful tool for those involved in the difficult task of making decisions on NPIs by systematizing the
decision-making process, making the underlying rationale more transparent and contributing to the
relevance of the decision criteria.

Acknowledgements: We would like to thank Prof. Eva Rehfuess for her comments and support in the
development of the phase I framework. We furthermore would like to thank Prof. Rob Baltussen, Prof.
Georg Marckmann, Karin Geffert, Dr. Lisa Pfadenhauer, Dr. Kerstin Sell, and Prof. Hajo Zeeb for taking
the time to critically reviewing and commenting on the manuscript and framework, despite the time
constraints the current pandemic imposes on them.
Author’s contribution: JMS and LA conceived the study. JMS, EAR, MV and LA engaged in the activities
of phase I to develop the a priori framework. JMS and LA conducted the literature search for strategy
documents, with support from MV. JMS and LA conducted the coding and analysis of the strategy
documents and revised the a priori framework. JMS drafted the manuscript with support from LA and MV.
Funding: No external funding source was used to fund the project.
Competing interests: JMS is authors of the WHO-INTEGRATE framework. JMS and MV were part of an
expert group which developed strategy documents intended to inform the Covid-19 crisis taskforce of the
German government.
Patient consent Not required.
Ethics approval: The research will be undertaken in accordance with the declaration of Helsinki in their
respective current versions. As it is a document analysis, no review by an ethics committee was deemed
necessary.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9

References

1. Sanderson I. Intelligent Policy Making for a Complex World: Pragmatism, Evidence and Learning. Political Studies
2009;57(4):699-719. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9248.2009.00791.x
2. Petticrew M, Knai C, Thomas J, et al. Implications of a complexity perspective for systematic reviews and guideline
development in health decision making. BMJ Glob Health 2019;4(Suppl 1):e000899. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2018000899 [published Online First: 2019/02/19]
3. Rutter H, Savona N, Glonti K, et al. The need for a complex systems model of evidence for public health. The Lancet
2017;390(10112):2602-04. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(17)31267-9
4. Lancaster K, Rhodes T, Rosengarten M. Making evidence and policy in public health emergencies: lessons from COVID19 for adaptive evidence-making and intervention. Evidence & Policy: A Journal of Research, Debate and Practice
2020 doi: 10.1332/174426420X15913559981103
5. Pei S, Kandula S, Shaman J. Differential Effects of Intervention Timing on COVID-19 Spread in the United States.
medRxiv 2020:2020.05.15.20103655. doi: 10.1101/2020.05.15.20103655
6. Rajan D, Koch K, Rohrer K, et al. Governance of the Covid-19 response: a call for more inclusive and transparent
decision-making. BMJ Global Health 2020;5(5):e002655. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh-2020-002655
7. Ioannidis JP. A fiasco in the making? As the coronavirus pandemic takes hold, we are making decisions without reliable
data. STAT 2020
8. Ioannidis JPA. Coronavirus disease 2019: The harms of exaggerated information and non-evidence-based measures.
European Journal of Clinical Investigation 2020;50(4):e13222. doi: 10.1111/eci.13222
9. Rhodes T, Lancaster K. Evidence-making interventions in health: A conceptual framing. Social Science & Medicine
2019;238:112488. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112488
10. Baltussen R, Jansen MP, Mikkelsen E, et al. Priority Setting for Universal Health Coverage: We Need Evidence-Informed
Deliberative Processes, Not Just More Evidence on Cost-Effectiveness. International journal of health policy and
management 2016;5(11):615-18. doi: 10.15171/ijhpm.2016.83
11. Baltussen R, Mikkelsen E, Tromp N, et al. Balancing efficiency, equity and feasibility of HIV treatment in South Africa –
development of programmatic guidance. Cost Effectiveness and Resource Allocation 2013;11(1):26. doi:
10.1186/1478-7547-11-26
12. Kapiriri L, Lee N-M, Wallace LJ, et al. Beyond cost-effectiveness, morbidity and mortality: a comprehensive evaluation of
priority setting for HIV programming in Uganda. BMC public health 2019;19(1):359. doi: 10.1186/s12889-019-66908
13. Guindo LA, Wagner M, Baltussen R, et al. From efficacy to equity: Literature review of decision criteria for resource
allocation and healthcare decisionmaking. Cost Effectiveness and Resource Allocation 2012;10
14. Youngkong S, Kapiriri L, Baltussen R. Setting priorities for health interventions in developing countries: A review of
empirical studies. Tropical Medicine and International Health 2009;14:930-39.
15. UN UN. Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. A/RES/70/1. . New York: UN 2015.
16. Baltussen R, Jansen MPM, Bijlmakers L, et al. Value Assessment Frameworks for HTA Agencies: The Organization of
Evidence-Informed Deliberative Processes. Value in Health 2017;20(2):256-60. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2016.11.019
17. Daniels N. Accountability for reasonableness. . BMJ Global Health 2000;321(7272):1300-01. doi:
10.1136/bmj.321.7272.1300
18. Daniels N, Porteny T, Urritia J. Expanded HTA: Enhancing Fairness and Legitimacy. International journal of health policy
and management 2015;5(1):1-3. doi: 10.15171/ijhpm.2015.187 [published Online First: 2015/12/18]
19. Singer PA, Martin DK, Giacomini M, et al. Priority setting for new technologies in medicine: qualitative case study. Bmj
2000;321(7272):1316-8. doi: 10.1136/bmj.321.7272.1316 [published Online First: 2000/11/25]
20. Daniels N, Sabin J. The Ethics Of Accountability In Managed Care Reform. Health Affairs 1998;17(5):50-64. doi:
10.1377/hlthaff.17.5.50
21. Friedman A. Beyond accountability for reasonableness. Bioethics 2008;22(2):101-12. doi: 10.1111/j.14678519.2007.00605.x [published Online First: 2008/02/07]
22. Daniels N. Accountability for reasonableness. BMJ 2000;7272(321):1300-01.
23. Tyler TR. Psychological Perspectives on Legitimacy and Legitimation. Annual Review of Psychology 2005;57(1):375-400.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.57.102904.190038
24. Greenberg J, Folger R. Procedural Justice, Participation, and the Fair Process Effect in Groups and Organizations. In:
Paulus P, ed. In Basic Group Processes. New York: Springer 1983:235-56.
25. Saltelli A, Giampietro M. What is wrong with evidence based policy, and how can it be improved? Futures 2017;91:62-71.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2016.11.012
26. WHO WHO. WHO Handbook for Guideline Development 2nd edition ed. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health
Organization 2014.
27. Ham C. Priority setting in health care: learning from international experience. Health policy (Amsterdam, Netherlands)
1997;42(1):49-66. [published Online First: 1997/09/04]
28. Niessen LW, Bridges J, Lau BD, et al. ssessing the Impact of Economic Evidence on Policymakers in Health Care—A
Systematic Review. Methods Research Report (Prepared by the Johns Hopkins University Evidence-based
Practice Center under contract No. 290-2007-10061-I). AHRQ Publication No. 12(13)-EHC133-EF. Rockville:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 2012.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

29. Alonso-Coello P, Schünemann HJ, Moberg J, et al. GRADE Evidence to Decision (EtD) frameworks: a systematic and
transparent approach to making well informed healthcare choices. 1: Introduction. BMJ 2016;353:i2016.
30. Rehfuess EA, Stratil JM, Scheel IB, et al. The WHO-INTEGRATE evidence to decision framework version 1.0: integrating
WHO norms and values and a complexity perspective. BMJ Glob Health 2019;4(Suppl 1):e000844. doi:
10.1136/bmjgh-2018-000844 [published Online First: 2019/02/19]
31. Norris SL, Rehfuess EA, Smith H, et al. Complex health interventions in complex systems: improving the process and
methods for evidence-informed health decisions. BMJ Global Health 2019;4(Suppl 1):e000963. doi: 10.1136/bmjgh2018-000963
32. Assasi N, Schwartz L, Tarride JE, et al. Methodological guidance documents for evaluation of ethical considerations in
health technology assessment: a systematic review. Expert review of pharmacoeconomics & outcomes research
2014;14(2):203-20. doi: 10.1586/14737167.2014.894464 [published Online First: 2014/03/15]
33. Childress JF, Faden RR, Gaare RD, et al. Public health ethics: mapping the terrain. The Journal of law, medicine & ethics
: a journal of the American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics 2002;30(2):170-8. [published Online First:
2002/06/18]
34. Marckmann G, Schmidt H, Sofaer N, et al. Putting public health ethics into practice: a systematic framework. Frontiers in
public health 2015;3:23. doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2015.00023 [published Online First: 2015/02/24]
35. Tannahill A. Beyond evidence--to ethics: a decision-making framework for health promotion, public health and health
improvement. Health promotion international 2008;23(4):380-90. doi: 10.1093/heapro/dan032 [published Online
First: 2008/10/31]
36. Coughlin SS. Ethical issues in epidemiologic research and public health practice. Emerging themes in epidemiology
2006;3:16. doi: 10.1186/1742-7622-3-16 [published Online First: 2006/10/05]
37. Krebs K, Unwin J. Public health: ethical issues. London: Nuffield Council on Bioethics, 2007.
38. Liverani M, Hawkins B, Parkhurst JO. Political and institutional influences on the use of evidence in public health policy. A
systematic review. PloS one 2013;8(10):e77404-e04. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077404
39. ten Have M, de Beaufort ID, Mackenbach JP, et al. An overview of ethical frameworks in public health: can they be
supportive in the evaluation of programs to prevent overweight? BMC public health 2010;10:638. doi:
10.1186/1471-2458-10-638 [published Online First: 2010/10/26]
40. Stratil J, Baltussen R, Scheel I, et al. Development of the WHO-INTEGRATE evidence-to-decision framework: An
overview of systematic reviews of decision criteria for health decision-making. Cost Effectiveness and Resource
Allocation 2020;8(18)
41. Stratil J, Paudel D, Setty K, et al. The WHO-INTEGRATE framework as a tool for evidence-informed, deliberative
decision-making processes. A qualitative study exploring the views of those developing and using WHO guidelines.
International Journal for Health Policy and Management forthcoming
42. Carroll C, Booth A, Leaviss J, et al. “Best fit” framework synthesis: refining the method. BMC medical research
methodology 2013;13(1):37. doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-13-37
43. Carroll C, Booth A, Cooper K. A worked example of "best fit" framework synthesis: a systematic review of views
concerning the taking of some potential chemopreventive agents. BMC medical research methodology 2011;11:29.
doi: 10.1186/1471-2288-11-29 [published Online First: 2011/03/18]
44. Dixon-Woods M. Using framework-based synthesis for conducting reviews of qualitative studies. BMC medicine
2011;9:39. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-9-39 [published Online First: 2011/04/16]
45. Bude H, von Donat C, Feldner D, et al. Kreativität – Verantwortung – Transformation. Grundlegende
Voraussetzungen für die progressive Lockerung des COVID-‐19 Lockdown (17. April 2020)
2020
46. Expertenrat Corona der Landesregierung Nordrhein-Westfalen, Di fabio U, Grünewald S, et al. Weg in eine
verantwortungsvolle Normalität (11.04.2020). Expertenrat Corona der Landesregierung Nordrhein-Westfalen, :
Düsseldorf 2020.
47. Anonym. COVID-19-Eindämmung: Übergang von Verlangsamung zu Viruskontrollphase. Politische Handlungsfähigkeit
erlangen Erwartungshorizonte für Gesundheit, Gesellschaft und Wirtschaft schaffen (04.04.2020)
2020
48. Nationale Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina (Hrsg.). Erste Ad-hoc-Stellungnahme: Coronavirus-Pandemie in
Deutschland: Herausforderungen und Interventionsmöglichkeiten (21. März 2020) Halle (Saale): Nationale
Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina 2020.
49. Nationale Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina (Hrsg.). Zweite Ad-hoc-Stellungnahme: Coronavirus-Pandemie in
Deutschland: Coronavirus-Pandemie – Gesundheitsrelevante Maßnahmen (03. April 2020) Halle (Saale): Nationale
Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina 2020.
50. Nationale Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina (Hrsg.). Dritte Ad-hoc-Stellungnahme: Coronavirus-Pandemie in
Deutschland: Herausforderungen und Interventionsmöglichkeiten (21. März 2020) Halle (Saale): Nationale
Akademie der Wissenschaften Leopoldina 2020.
51. Bündnis 90 Die Grünen Hamburg (Ed.). Autorenpapier unter Federführung von Katharina Fegebank. Corona-Pandemie Voraussetzungen für eine Exit-Strategie in Hamburg. 09. April 2020. Hamburg: Bündnis 90 Die Grünen 2020.
52. Institut für Makroökonomie und Konjunkturforschung IE, S D, Herzog-Stein A, et al. Schneller Ausstieg oder bedachte
Lockerung? - Zur Zukunft von Kontaktbeschränkungen in der Covid-19-Krise. IMK Policy Brief Nr. 88 · April 2020.
Düsseldorf: Institut für Makroökonomie und Konjunkturforschung (IMK) der Hans-Böckler-Stiftung 2020.
53. Boston Consulting Group (Ed.), Türpitz A, Felden F, et al. BCG Perspektive zum Restart-Management in der CoronaKrise Munich: Boston Consulting Group (BCG) 2020.
54. Abele-Brehm A, Dreier H, Fuest C, et al. Die Bekämpfung der Coronavirus-Pandemie tragfähig gestalten. Empfehlungen
für eine flexible, risikoadaptierte Strategie. Koordination C Fuest und M Lohse. 2. Arpil 20202020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

55. WHO WHO. Everybody's business. Strengthening health systems to improve health outcomes : WHO's framework for
action. Geneva: WHO 2007.
56. O'Neill J, Tabish H, Welch V, et al. Applying an equity lens to interventions: using PROGRESS ensures consideration of
socially stratifying factors to illuminate inequities in health. J Clin Epidemiol 2014;67(1):56-64. doi:
10.1016/j.jclinepi.2013.08.005 [published Online First: 2013/11/06]
57. Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T. Theorising interventions as events in systems. American journal of community psychology
2009;43(3-4):267-76. doi: 10.1007/s10464-009-9229-9 [published Online First: 2009/04/25]
58. Bernstein SL, Weiss J, Curry L. Visualizing implementation: contextual and organizational support mapping of
stakeholders (COSMOS). Implementation Science Communications 2020;1(1):48. doi: 10.1186/s43058-020-000308
59. Piso B, Wild C. Decision support in vaccination policies. Vaccine 2009;27(43):5923-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.07.105
[published Online First: 2009/08/25]
60. Rehfuess EA, Booth A, Brereton L, et al. Towards a taxonomy of logic models in systematic reviews and health
technology assessments: A priori, staged, and iterative approaches. Research synthesis methods 2018;9(1):13-24.
doi: 10.1002/jrsm.1254 [published Online First: 2017/07/06]
61. Rohwer A, Pfadenhauer L, Burns J, et al. Series: Clinical Epidemiology in South Africa. Paper 3: Logic models help make
sense of complexity in systematic reviews and health technology assessments. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology
2017;83:37-47. doi: 10.1016/j.jclinepi.2016.06.012
62. Abbasi M, Majdzadeh R, Zali A, et al. The evolution of public health ethics frameworks: systematic review of moral values
and norms in public health policy. Medicine, health care, and philosophy 2018;21(3):387-402. doi: 10.1007/s11019017-9813-y [published Online First: 2017/11/11]
63. Petrini C. Theoretical models and operational frameworks in public health ethics. International journal of environmental
research and public health 2010;7(1):189-202. doi: 10.3390/ijerph7010189 [published Online First: 2010/03/03]
64. Lee LM. Public health ethics theory: review and path to convergence. The Journal of law, medicine & ethics : a journal of
the American Society of Law, Medicine & Ethics 2012;40(1):85-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-720X.2012.00648.x
[published Online First: 2012/03/31]
65. Baum N, Gollust S, Goold S, et al. Looking Ahead: Addressing Ethical Challenges in Public Health Practice. global health
law, ethics, and policy 2007;4(35):657-67.
66. Kass NE. An ethics framework for public health. American journal of public health 2001;91(11):1776-82. [published
Online First: 2001/10/31]
67. Thompson AK, Faith K, Gibson JL, et al. Pandemic influenza preparedness: an ethical framework to guide decisionmaking. BMC medical ethics 2006;7:E12. doi: 10.1186/1472-6939-7-12
68. Austin W. Ethics in a time of contagion: a relational perspective. The Canadian journal of nursing research = Revue
canadienne de recherche en sciences infirmieres 2008;40(4):10-24. [published Online First: 2009/02/04]
69. Gostin LO. Influenza pandemic preparedness: legal and ethical dimensions. The Hastings Center report 2004;34(5):10-1.
[published Online First: 2004/11/24]
70. Torda A. Ethical issues in pandemic planning. The Medical journal of Australia 2006;185(10 Suppl):S73-6. [published
Online First: 2006/11/23]
71. Schroder P, Brand H, Schroter M, et al. [Ethical discussion on criteria for policy makers in public health authorities for
preventative measures against a pandemic caused by a novel influenza A virus]. Gesundheitswesen
(Bundesverband der Arzte des Offentlichen Gesundheitsdienstes (Germany)) 2007;69(6):371-6. doi: 10.1055/s2007-981675 [published Online First: 2007/07/21]
72. Ethikrat. D. [Solidarity and responsibility in the Corona-Crisis. Ad Hoc recommendation]. Publication in German. Berlin:
Deutscher Ethikrat 2020.
73. Heilinger J, Thompson A, Wild V, et al. Public Health Ethics and Covid-19 - The ethical dimensions of public health
decision-making during a pandemic German Network Public Health COVID-19 2020.
74. Venkatapuram S, Heilinger J-C, Voss M, et al. Ethical principles for the Coronavirus Global Response: Ethical guidance
for the development of fast and equitable access to safe, quality, effective and affordable diagnostics, therapeutics
and vaccines against COVID-19. : German Network Public Health COVID-19 2020.
75. Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for
interviews and focus groups. International Journal for Quality in Health Care 2007;19(6):349-57. doi:
10.1093/intqhc/mzm042

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10 Annex
Supplements 1 – Expanded methods description
The development of the WICID framework was conducted in three phases, following an approach
analogous to the “best fit” framework synthesis and using an adapted version of the WHO-INTEGRATE
42
framework as a starting point . In phase I, we adapted the framework through brainstorming exercises
and applying it to case studies, in order to develop an analytical, generic tool (a priori framework). Phase
II, consisted of a content analysis of a purposive sample of comprehensive strategy papers on lifting the
lockdown measures in Germany (e.g. reopening schools, increased testing measures), which were coded
against the a priori framework and based on which the WICID framework version 1.0 was created. In a
next step (phase III), which is yet to be completed, we will advance the WICID framework version 1.0, by
integrating the perspectives of a diverse set of affected stakeholders across society. Phase III allows for
an assessment of the comprehensiveness of the framework criteria and the integration of factors
insufficiently covered in the expert-based strategy documents.

10.1 Phase 1: Development of a preliminary adaption of the framework and of a
coding frame
In phase I, we (i) discussed the WHO-INTEGRATE framework within the research team, (ii) assessed
40
real-world decision-making criteria derived from an comprehensive overview-of-reviews , and (iii)
conducted a brainstorming exercise guided by the application of the WHO INTEGRATE Framework
version 1.0 on two case studies (reopening high schools and reopening small businesses such as book
shops).
This preliminary a priori framework was then imported into the software MAXQDA20 (verbi, Berlin), with
the criteria and sub-criteria of the a priori framework being translated into codes of the coding frame to be
used in phase II. In this process, we added two additional codes: (1) “evidence” - to cover considerations
regarding information and evidence considered necessary of lacking in the decision-making process, and
(2) the code “TBD” (to be discussed), which was meant mark unclear passages for later review and
discussion by the research team.

10.2 Phase 2: Coding of strategy documents, best-fit framework synthesis, and
development of the WICID framework
We used the technique of "best fit" framework synthesis42-44, which offers a method to build on an existing
framework that is considered as relevant for the given circumstances, but potentially different in relevant
areas (such as the WHO-INTEGRATE framework for decision-making on COVID-19 related decisionmaking). “Best fit” framework synthesis begins by creating a framework of a priori themes and coding data
extracted from documents (in this case: the comprehensive strategy documents) against that thematic or
conceptual framework (see 8.2.1). A new framework is created by performing a thematic analysis on any
data that cannot be accommodated within the a priori framework. We used the adapted version of the
WHO-INTEGRATE framework created in phase I, and translated this into the coding frame we used coded
42
the strategy documents against (provided in as supplement 2) .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10.2.1 The strategy documents and the rationale behind their selection
We assumed, that selecting comprehensive strategy documents by expert commissions or expert groups
would provide a broad, multi-perspective set of recommendations (in contrast to e.g. scientific publications
or statements by individual groups, which do not claim nor intend to reflect multiple relevant perspectives
in concluding).
We defined these as documents (a) intended to provide a comprehensive strategy or strategic
suggestions for phasing out the lockdown measures (rather than providing information or pointing out
individual aspects), (b) not exclusively or primarily focused on mitigating the health related-consequences
of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic but also including other societal, economic, or health outcomes, (c)
addressing various NPIs and their interplay (e.g. not exclusively focusing on testing), and (d) focusing on
multiple considerations to be reflected in this process (i.e. not exclusively focused on health impact).
Position papers of stakeholder groups reacting or positioning themselves to a document, measure, or
event without providing comprehensive strategy guidance were excluded (n=8) but will be considered in
phase III.
While the main discourse on implementing lockdown measures in Germany was focused on suppressing
the spread of the outbreak and on averting a collapse of the health care system, the debate on the
controlled phasing out of the implemented lockdown measures was more nuanced: focusing on the
challenge to balance the implications of the measures e.g. on health, society, or the economy. Therefore,
we concentrated on strategy documents that focused on the latter.
To include strategy documents with impact on real world decision-making, we selected papers developed
by expert groups or task forces commissioned by German policymakers on two levels (federal and
national governments as well as ministries on these levels) . We expanded the sample to comprehensive
strategy documents on the exit from the lockdown measures developed by non-government affiliated
expert groups intended to inform political decision-making, but not directly commissioned by governmental
bodies.
In order to ensure that the strategy documents addressed a broad range of societal and economic
implications beyond the health sector, we focused on strategy documents which – directly or indirectly –
addressed one of the following NPIs: (a) closure and reopening of schools, (b) closure and reopening of
businesses, and (c) “shelter-in-place” regulations. We excluded strategy papers that were not or only
marginally concerned with these three NPIs. Strategy papers primarily concerned with hygiene measures
or the testing capacity were excluded as well.
Table S1 in the annex displays the inclusion and exclusion criteria for phase II. All identified borderline
cases were retained to be analyzed in phase III.
Table S1: Inclusion and exclusion criteria for the search of eligible documents for phase II
Inclusion criteria

Exclusion criteria

• The document addresses measures related to the
handling of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in Germany
• The document is intended to inform real-world policy
and public health decision-makers in Germany
• The document is intended to provide a
comprehensive strategy or strategic suggestions for
phasing out the lockdown measures
• The document addresses societal, economic, or
health considerations beyond health considerations
associated with SARS-CoV-2 (e.g. number of
infections)

• The document is not primarily targeted to inform
policy or public health decision makers
• The document does not provide a comprehensive
strategy to phase out the lockdown, but is rather a
reaction or positioning paper to an event, decision, or
measure or provides general statements on aspects
to consider (e.g. statement not to forget migrant
workers)
• The document is only or primarily concerned with
direct health consequences of COVID-19 and/or the
mitigation of these effects (e.g. the right number of
tests to be performed),

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

• The
document
focuses
addresses
multiple
considerations to be considered in this process (e.g.
not exclusively focused on health impact
considerations).
• The document addresses considerations for multiple
NPI or considerations of relevance for multiple NPIs
on a more abstract level
• Position papers of stakeholder groups reacting or
positioning themselves to a document, measure, or
event without providing comprehensive strategy
guidance are considered in phase III.
• To document was developed by an expert group or
task forces implemented by or commissioned to write
the document by the federal or national governments
as well as ministries of the German federal
Government
OR
by non-government affiliated expert groups intended
to guide public health and health policy decision
making on the federal or national level.
• The document addresses – directly or indirectly –
addressed one of the following NPIs: (a) closure and
reopening of schools, (b) closure and reopening of
businesses, and (c) “shelter-in-place” regulations.

•

•

•

•

without discussing broader considerations (e.g.
regarding societal implications, economic
implications, feasibility and resource considerations)
The document is exclusively focused on the
effectiveness of a measure (e.g. impact of school
closures on COVID-19 transmission), without taking
broader considerations (e.g. societal, economic,
feasibility, or ethical considerations) into account.
The document is providing general information on
COVID-19, the pandemic, or NPIs; not intended to
guide decision-making (e.g. what is allowed in a
federal state)
The document is a scientific study, guidance
documents and guidelines to inform patients or health
care providers on treatment and therapeutic
approaches of COVID-19 (e.g. guidelines on the
safety of ibuprofen)
The document is focused on health care system and
medical care planning without relation to the selected
NPIs (e.g. on triage-procedures, necessity of
intubation therapy, relation of intensive vs. palliative
treatment, number of ICU-beds necessary)

10.2.2 Identification and selection of strategy papers
The search was conducted through multiple approaches channels:
•

•

•

•

•

TM
Two researchers (JMS, LA) independently searched in the search engine Google with various
versions of keyword combinations of the terms and synonyms of “strategy” or “expert commission”
and “COVID-19” in German.
Two researchers (JMS, LA) independently searched the websites of major newspaper outlets in
Germany (including: Die Zeit, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Die Welt, Deutschlandfunk, Der
Spiegel) outlets using the website’s search engine with similar keywords
One researcher (JMS) searched the websites of the 16 German federal states, the national
government and selected national government ministries, focusing on the section of press
releases.
We contacted a sample of experts involved in public health decision-making or expert groups to
provide us with strategy documents; either directly or through the platform of the interdisciplinary
Kompetenznetz Public Health COVID-19 (Competence Network Public Health COVID-19,
www.public-health-covid19.de).
We posed freedom of information requests to the federal states’ governments, the national
government, as well as selected national government ministries to provide us with strategy
documents developed by expert groups, if available and publicly accessible.

As the documents are considered grey literature and mostly written in in German, we did not conduct a
literature search in scientific data bases for these types of documents at this point of time.

10.2.3 Coding of documents against the a priori framework
The coding process was conducted by two authors (JMS, LA; personal characteristics in line with the
COREQ-checklist75 are reported in table S2). First, one sample strategy document was coded by the two
authors to assess the need to adapt the preliminary coding frame and to develop a coding guidance
document, outlining when a specific code should be used and which text passages to code. The coding

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

frame (translated from German) is provided as a supplement (supplement 2). Based on this adapted
frame, one author (JMS) used the Software MAXQDA 20 (VERBI GmbH, Berlin) to code all identified
strategy papers. Afterwards, all coded documents were critically reviewed by a second author (LA) who
highlighted conflicts (passages where this reviewer perceived a code was missing, suggested not to code,
or to code differently). Conflicts were solved through discussion between the authors.
In the subsequent process, the researchers applied the level 1 codes (referring to the criteria in the
framework) and level 2 codes (referring to the aspects in the framework) of the coding frame to passages
in the strategy document making references to criteria, considerations, or values covered within the codes.
Level 2 codes (aspects) are meant to describe considerations (e.g. factors, values, norms) contained
within the level 1 codes (criteria) and support the user in the understanding, interpretation, and application
of the criteria. When the content of such a passage was perceived as not adequately covered by the
coding frame, new level 2 or level 1 codes were created. When the researchers identified passages
containing references to criteria, considerations, or values of relevance which were assumed to be
covered by a specific level 1 or level 2 code, but which seemed to expand on this or provide details or
nuances (e.g. a passage on the implications of an measure risking the insolvency of small enterprises
within the code economic implications), the researchers took note of these passages for later review.
Unclear passages were assigned the code TBD code for later review.
After coding all selected strategy documents, both authors critically reflected on content saturation and
dimensions of the framework insufficiently covered within the strategy documents. As most criteria of the
preliminary framework were adequately covered and due to an overlap of consideration across
documents, a content saturation was reached.
Table S2: g characteristics of researchers involved in the content analysis

JMS

LA

Credentials

MD, BSc (Geography)

Occupation

Research scientists and PhD
Student Epidemiology and
public health at LMU Munich

MSc (Epidemiology),
MA (Health Promotion),
BA (Social Work)
Advisor epidemiology and health
monitoring at the Academy of Public
Health Services in Düsseldorf

Gender

Male

Female

Experience and training

Has received training on
qualitative content research at
the University of Tübingen
(Germany);
Multiple completed research
projects employing qualitative
content analysis.

Has received training on qualitative
content research at the University of
Applied Science RavensburgWeingarten (Germany); Participation
and implementation of various
research projects with qualitative
content analysis.

10.2.4 Adapting the preliminary coding frame
Next, one researcher (JMS) conducted a thematic analysis of the passages assigned to the newly created
codes as well as those passages noted down for expanding on or providing nuance within existing codes.
A draft of an adapted phase II framework was created by reflecting on whether there was a need to adapt
the a priori framework to cover the content in the coded passages. This included whether: (a) criteria
(reflecting level 1 codes) should be created, (b) new aspects (reflecting level 2 codes) should be added to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the framework, (c) new or preexisting criteria or aspects should be merged or separated, or (e) moved to
another position within the framework, and (f) wording of the criteria or aspects needs to be adapted.
This newly developed draft of the adapted framework was critically reviewed by a second researcher (LA).
Afterwards, the results of steps (a-f) were critically discussed within the research team (JMS, LA) to solve
conflicts and revise the adapted phase II framework accordingly.
Afterwards, two researchers jointly reviewed all passages noted down for later review (code TBD) and
assessed the need to add criteria or aspects, as well as the need for revision, rewording or repositioning
within the framework.
In a final step, two researchers (JMS, LA) went through each of the coded passages to critically reflect on
whether the criteria, considerations, or values contained within these passages was adequately covered
within the newly adapted phase II framework.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplement 2: a priori framework adapted in phase I and coding frame
Table S3: a priori framework adapted in phase I and coding frame
The right column presents the preliminary adapted framework of the WHO-INTEGRATE framework, which was
developed in phase I. It was used as the a priori framework for the “best fit” framework synthesis of phase II and
translated into a coding frame (left two columns)
coding frame
(short title was used in maxqda20 due to
the word count restriction)
level 1 code
level 2 code
("criterion")
("aspect")

preliminary framework adapted in phase i
(a priori framework)

course of the sars-cov-2 pandemic

implications of the measure(s) on the course of the pandemic

criteria (bold) and aspects

new infections

• short, medium and long-term effects on the number of new infections with
sars-cov-2

people suffering from
COVID-19

• short, medium and long-term effects on number of people suffering from
COVID-19

severe disease
progressions

• short-, medium- and long-term effects on the number of severe disease
progressions

deaths caused by
COVID-19

• short, medium and long-term effects on the number of deaths caused by
COVID-19

capacity of the health
care system

• short, medium and long-term effects on the ratio of available capacity to
medical care (e.g. icu beds, staff) and COVID-19-related demand for these
resources

individual level COVID-19-related
health risk

implications of the measure(s) on the direct health risk (COVID-19
likelihood of illness and possible consequences) for individuals

direct health risk for
high-risk individuals

• effect of the measure(s) on the direct health risk (probability of illness &
consequences) of persons at risk

direct health risk for
general population

• implications of the measure(s) on the direct health risk (probability of illness &
consequences) of the general population

health effects (beyond COVID-19)

health effects of the measure(s) not directly caused by COVID-19

quality of life

• implications of the measure(s) on quality of life (both for risk groups and the
general population)

social well-being and
social coherence

• implications of the measure(s) on social well-being and social coherence
(loneliness, stigma; with regard to both risk groups and the general
population)

mental health and
consequences

• implications of the measure(s) on mental health and its (their) consequences
(e.g. depression, anxiety disorder, suicide; with regard to both risk groups and
the general population)

other health effects
beyond COVID-19

• health effects beyond COVID-19 and effects on the health system

health-related behavior

• implications of the measure(s) on health-related behaviour (physical activity,
nutrition, alcohol abuse, tobacco consumption, use of other drugs)

health- environment
(incl. violence)

• the implications of the measures on exposure to living environments and
environments that affect health (e.g. domestic violence, unhygienic conditions)

implications for health
care system (non
COVID-19 related)

• implications of the measure(s) on availability, accessibility, acceptability and
quality of emergency and mainstream health care (beyond COVID-19)

general and other
implications for
population health

• general and other effects of the measure(s) on public health (morbidity,
mortality, etc.) beyond the burden of disease from COVID-19

acceptability, individual rights and

acceptability of the measures and relation to individual liberty rights

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

liberties
autonomy, individual
freedoms, fundamental
rights

• implications of the measures on autonomy and the ability to exercise
individual freedom and fundamental rights

acceptability - those
implementing

• acceptability of the measures among the groups of persons responsible for
the implementation of the measures

acceptability beneficiaries

• acceptability of the measures among the groups of persons who are to benefit
from the measures

acceptability - general
population

• acceptability of the measures to other groups of people affected by the
measure, the general population and other stakeholder groups

equity, equality, distribution of
benefits and burdens

equity, equal opportunities and distribution of the health and social
burden of the measure(s)

distribution of benefits
& burdens - high risk
vs. low risk groups

• distribution and relationship of the health, social and economic implications of
the measure(s) between groups at lower COVID-19 risk (e.g. younger
workers) and groups at higher COVID-19 risk (e.g. older people with preexisting conditions)?

distribution of benefits
and burdens - high vs.
low ses [populations]

• distribution and relationship of the health, social and economic effects of the
measure(s) between socially and economically disadvantaged groups and
economically or socially better off parts of the population

equity and implications
for vulnerable
populations

• implications of the measure(s) on social, health and economic equality of
opportunity; in particular with regard to socially and economically
disadvantaged groups (e.g. single parents, persons below the poverty line,
persons in precarious employment)

potential for
discrimination

• potential for discrimination of population groups through (non-respect of) the
measure(s)

social, economic & environmental
implications

social, economic and environmental implications of the measure(s)

poverty, unemployment
and social participation

• implications of the measures on poverty, unemployment and social
participation

economic performance
and development

• effects of the measures on economic performance and development

(financial) means for
governments and
society

• the implications of the measures on the (financial) resources available to
governments and governmental institutions (e.g. tax revenue)

social life and culture

• the implications of the measures on social life and culture (including
availability, accessibility, participation, acceptability, quality)

education

• implications of the measures on education (e.g. availability, accessibility,
participation, acceptability, quality, educational opportunities)

natural environment

• implications of the measures on the natural environment

feasibility &
resources

feasibility/feasibility of the action(s) and availability of, need for and
implications on availability of financial, human and other resources
political and legal
feasibility

• political and legal feasibility of the measure(s)

financial costs and
benefits

• financial costs and benefits of the action(s)

resources - infrstructure
and other

• availability of, demand for and implications on availability of infrastructure
other resources and (e.g. premises)

resources - protective
equipment and hygiene
products

• availability of, need for and impact on availability of protective equipment and
hygiene products

resources - human
resources

• availability of, demand for and impact on availability of human resources (e.g.
professionals, teaching staff)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

interaction with health system

Evidence
TBD [to be
discussed]

interaction with other measures or components of the health care system*

interaction with COVID19 related measures

• positive (synergistic) or negative interaction with other COVID-19 containment
measure(s)

interaction with health
system (non COVID19)

• positive (synergistic) or negative interaction with other components of the
health care system* *(broad understanding of health care system, beyond
medical care)

capacity of health care
system (COVID-19)

• impact of the measure(s) on availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality
of emergency and mainstream health care (beyond COVID-19)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplement 3: WICID Framework – comprehensive Version 1.0
Table S4: Criteria and aspects within (comprehensive form).
criterion

Aspect

implications of the
measures for the
course of the SARSCoV-2 pandemic
and the health
consequences of
COVID-19

Implications of the measures for the number of new infections and the course of the pandemic; including the
currently existing risk of infection and the effects of the measures on COVID-19-related risk behavior (e.g.
compliance with individual protective measures)

Implications of the measure for COVID-19-related health consequences at population level (including number of
severe disease courses, long-term health impairments, and COVID-19-related deaths)
Impact of the measure on the relationship between the need and availability of resources of the health care system
for the medical care of severe COVID-19 cases (e.g. hospital capacities, respiratory care places) with regard to the
consequences of

overburdening the health care system (including pandemic development with the risk of reaching

the exposure limit, level of exposure limit and consequences of exceeding the exposure limit)
Implications of the measures for the

Restrictions
imposed on
individuals and
implications for

quality of life,
social well-being,
and mental health

direct health risk (probability of illness & consequences) of individuals

Restrictions imposed by the measures on individuals and the effects of the measures on the capability of shaping
life and everyday life according to one's own wishes and needs
Implications of the measures for the

quality of life, self-efficacy and sense of coherence

(including the experience of comprehensibility, controllability and meaningfulness)
Implications of the measures for the

social well-being of individuals

(e.g. with regard to social isolation, the experience of loneliness, the possibility of social interaction and exchange or
the experience of social embedding and one's own role in the social community)
Implications of the measures for

social cohesion of communities

(including partnerships, families, social communities)
Implications of the measures for the

experience of fear and insecurity

(e.g. fear of unemployment, existential fears, fear of infection, concern for relatives)
Implications of the measures for

stress, stressors, the feeling of being overwhelmed and overloaded (including the

effects on resilience factors and coping mechanisms)

Implications of the
measures for the
physical health
beyond the burden
of disease from
COVID-19

Implications of the measures for

mental health and its consequences (e.g. depression, anxiety disorder, suicides)

Implications of the measures for

health-related behavior (e.g. physical activity, nutrition, alcohol abuse, tobacco

consumption, use of other illicit drugs) and its consequences for health

availability, accessibility, acceptability, and quality of medical care in
emergency and standard care beyond COVID-19; including the health consequences resulting from the absence,
Implications of the measures for the

delay and poorer quality of medical treatment

availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality of care and other health
and social support services; including the consequences of any lack of care, delays and poorer quality
Implications of the measures for the

Implications of the measures for the

exposure to environments that affect health (e.g. exposure to unhygienic

conditions, air pollution)

risk of suffering accidents (including accidents or poisoning in the domestic
or being affected by violence (including domestic violence)

Implications of the measures for the
environment)

Proportionality,

Implications of the measures for and accordance of the measures with

and implications of

including privacy and informational self-determination

autonomy and individual self-determination;

the measures for

individual
autonomy,
liberties, and
fundamental rights

Implications of the measures for and consistency of the measures with the capability of exercising

individual

liberties and fundamental rights
(including e.g. freedom of assembly, freedom of occupation and property, freedom of movement and general
freedom of movement, freedom of religion)
Extent of

intrusiveness and proportionality with regard to the expected benefits (e.g. possibility to achieve similar

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

benefits with less intrusive measures or to reduce the number of people affected by them through greater
differentiation)

Acceptance of and
willingness to
implement the
measures
Implications for
equity, equality
and the fair
distribution of
benefits and
burdens

Acceptability of the measures (incl. acceptance of the expected balance of benefits and burdens and their
distribution for oneself and with regard to society)
Implications of the measures for the

comprehension of and willingness to implement, comply with, and enforce

the measures
Implications of the measures for

health, social and economic inequalities

economic implications of the measures for individual social groups, in particular vulnerable and
socially disadvantaged populations, including the effects on relief facilities and institutions
Health, social and

Degree to which benefits and burdens resulting from the measures (health, social, economic) are distributed fairly
between different actors and population groups; including those with high or low expected benefits and those with
high or negligible burdens from the measures

Accordance of the measures with the principle of equal treatment; in the sense of avoiding and reducing unjustified
unequal treatment

stigmatization; including the risk that
discrimination or are otherwise socially disadvantaged by the

Implications of the measures for the occurrence, spread and consequences of
persons, groups of persons or other actors face

measures (including their compliance and non-compliance)

Societal and
environmental
implications and
considerations

Implications of the measures for actors and institutions of civil society, social life, and culture (e.g. restriction of the
activities of associations, youth clubs, or place of worship etc. and the resulting consequences resulting from this for
the affected actors and institutions)

Implications of the measures for the civil society, social life and culture (including availability, accessibility,
participation, acceptability, quality of offers and activities) including the reversibility of the consequences
Implications of the of the measures for

social cohesion, solidarity and the risk of social and political division

the economic situation of individuals and the resulting effects on social
participation; both on the side of available income and assets (consequences of short-time work, unemployment,
Implications of the measure for

loss of savings and pension provision) and on the side of expenditures (additional expenditure and additional
financial burdens, e.g. through protective measures, mobility, etc.)

implications of the measures for

education and psychosocial development;

including aspects of availability, accessibility, acceptability and quality of educational opportunities, and
irreversibility caused by the lack thereof

implications of the measures of other
implications of the measures for the

social determinants of health

ecosystem and planetary boundaries and compatibility of the measures with

the principle of environmental sustainability

Economic
implications and
consideration

Consequences of the measures for individual companies, sectors of the economy and other economic actors and
their capability for economic activities (e.g. through restrictions on the economic activity itself, the interruption of
production chains, the availability of personnel, or sales opportunities at home and abroad) including the
reversibility of the consequences (e.g. avoidance of insolvencies)

Implications of the measure for the national and regional economy, its resilience, the risk of recession and the
possibility of recovery after the crisis (including planning security, willingness to invest, confidence in the future or
the risk of hostile takeovers)

implications of the measures for innovation and economic development opportunities
Implications of the measures on the retention and release of labor forces;
including the restriction or enabling of economic activity and its predictability

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Requirements of,
availability of, and
implications for the
availability and
quality of resources

Financial costs, available financial resources, and budgetary implications of the measure for different actors
Requirements of, availability of, and implications for availability and qualification of human resources
Requirements of, availability of, and implications for availability and quality of protective equipment, hygiene
products and medical devices needed for the medical care of COVID-19 patients
Requirements of, availability of, and implications for availability and quality of infrastructure (physical and
institutional) to implement, enforce and monitor measures
Requirements of, availability of, and implications for availability and quality of further infrastructures, technical
devices, and resources (e.g. logistics infrastructure, premises, technical equipment)

Feasibility
implications and
considerations

Political feasibility and legal conformity of the measures
Practical and technical feasibility of the measures (including the possibility of implementing and adhering to
protective measures)

Flexibility in implementation, extension, adjustment and withdrawal of measures
Possibility of evaluation & continuous monitoring of the implications of the measures, including the possibility to
react adequately to new information (e.g. possibility of contact tracing, etc.)
Interaction with
and implications
for components of
the health system

Interaction, collision & synergies of the measures with other measures to control and contain the SARS-CoV-2
pandemic
Interaction, collision & synergies of the measures with other measures or components of the health care system
without direct relation to control and containment of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic

Implications of the measures for the capability and willingness to develop alternative, local solutions and strategies
to handle the risk of SARS-CoV-2 (e.g. for the safe re-opening of restaurants)

Quality of Evidence

Table S5: Criteria and aspects of the WICID framework with exemplary codes from the trategy documents
criterion

aspect

Exemplary passage from the strategy documents

I. implications
for the course of
the pandemic
and its impact on
health

implications for the course of the
pandemic

Um der schnellen Ausbreitung der Corona-Pandemie entgegenzutreten, die Entwicklung des Infektionsgeschehens zu
verlangsamen und das Gesundheitssystem vor den Gefahren einer Überforderung zu schützen, sind von Bund und Ländern eine
Reihe tiefgreifender Maßnahen der Allgemeinprävention ergriffen worden, die drastische Auswirkungen auf das öffentliche Leben
in Deutschland haben und den Bürgerinnen und Bürgern schwerwiegende Einschränkungen abverlangen. (Grüne, p1)

implications of the measure for
COVID-19-related health
consequences at population
level

Wegen der hohen Ansteckungszahlen erhöhen sich die Mutationsmöglichkeiten des Virus. Studien und Berichte deuten an, dass
eine Infektion mit SARS-CoV-2 langfristige Nebenwirkungen und Langzeitfolgen nach sich ziehen kann (ein Phänomen, das
auch von der Spanischen Grippe und SARS bekannt ist) […] (Osterpapier, p9)

implications for the capacity of
the health care system to treat
(severe) COVID-19-cases

Ziel dieser Maßnahmen ist ein Abflachen der bisher steil ansteigenden Kurve der Infektionszahlen, die Vermeidung einer
Überlastung des Gesundheitssystems und damit eine Reduktion von schweren Erkrankungen und Todesfällen. (IFO, p2)

implications for the health risk of
COVID-19 for individuals

Ein weiteres unbedingt zu erreichendes Ziel – selbst bei einem Beibehalten des gegenwärtigen Shutdowns – ist ein
ausreichender Schutz von (COVID-19-) Risikogruppen wie Alten und Behinderten. (IFO, p26)

implications for the capability to
shape everyday life according
to one's own wishes and needs

Insgesamt ziehen drei Viertel der Bevölkerung die Bilanz, dass sich ihr Leben stark oder sogar sehr stark verändert hat. 71
Prozent empfinden diese Veränderungen als große Einschränkung. Speziell die weitgehende Kontaktbeschränkung empfinden
sogar 78 Prozent als gravierende Einschränkung, 72 Prozent fehlen die gewohnten Kontakte sehr. (NRW-1; p4)

implications for the quality of life,
self-efficacy, and sense of
coherence

Wenn eine Isolierung unausweichlich ist, muss mit dem erhöhten Risiko verringerten seelischen Wohlbefindens gerechnet
werden, das seinerseits Einfluss auf die körperliche und seelische Gesundheit ausübt. Aus diesem Grunde müssen gemeinsam
mit der betreffenden Person Strategien entwickelt werden, die zur Erhaltung ihrer Lebensqualität, Kompetenz und Teilhabe
beitragen. (Strategiepapiere Regierung\Öffnung des Lockdown Voraussetzungen 17Apr FINAL: p15)

II. implications for
quality of life,
social wellbeing, and
mental health

Die Krankheitswirkung von belastenden Ereignissen hängt wesentlich davon ab, ob ein Individuum sie als vorhersagbar und
kontrollierbar erlebt oder nicht. Entscheidend ist dabei die subjektive (daher „wahrgenommene“) Einschätzung. Alles, was
Menschen selbst aktiv tun können, steigert ihr Kontrollgefühl. […] (Leopoldina, p18)

implications of the measures for
social wellbeing

Der Shutdown hat massive Auswirkungen auf die Psyche und das soziale Leben aller Menschen. Derzeit erleben wir, dass viele
Menschen durchaus kreativ und altruistisch mit der Situation umgehen und dass das „physical distancing“ nicht zu einem „social
distancing“ führt. Manche erleben das Zurückgeworfensein auf sich selbst und die Familie sogar als wohltuend und als Chance
für eine Besinnung auf das, was ihnen wichtig ist. Es ist jedoch zu erwarten, dass die psychischen und sozialen Auswirkungen
des Shutdown umso negativer werden, je länger dieser Zustand anhält. Darüber hinaus sind bestimmte Gruppen besonders
belastet, z.B. Familien mit Kindern, Personen in beengten Wohnverhältnissen, Alleinlebende, Kranke und psychisch labile
Personen. (IFO, p13)

implications for social cohesion

Angesichts der derzeit geltenden Maßnahmen kommt Familien und anderen Formen von Partnerschaften und Gemeinschaften

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10.3 Supplement 4: Table with exemplary passages for the criteria and aspects of
the WICID framework

IV.
Proportionality
and accordance
with individual
autonomy and
fundamental
rights

V. acceptance of

eine zentrale Rolle zu. Sie verbleiben oft als einziger Ort, an dem dringliche Lebensvollzüge einschließlich Ernährung und
Konsum, Face-to-Face-Kommunikation und Geselligkeit, Kindererziehung, Bildung und Unterhaltung, aber auch
Spannungsabbau und das Austragen von Konflikten noch stattfinden. (Leopoldina, p19)

implications for the experience of
fear and insecurity

Allgemeine Konsequenzen von Kontakt- und Ausgangsbeschränkungen können negative Emotionen wie Ärger, Angst/Furcht
oder Einsamkeitsgefühle sein, die sich je nach Persönlichkeit unterschiedlich auswirken. (IFO, p13)

implications for stress, stressors,
the feeling of being
overwhelmed and overloaded

Gerade in Familien können Konsequenzen auch Stress und Überforderungserleben sein, wenn gleichzeitig zum Homeoffice z.B.
die Schulaufgaben der Kinder beaufsichtigt und kleine Kinder „bespielt“ werden müssen. Diese Erfahrungen können wiederum
Konflikte, Aggression und Gewalt befördern. (IFO, p13)

implications for mental health
and its consequences

Ängste und Einsamkeitsgefühle können zu Depressionen bis hin zu suizidalen Gedanken führen. (IFO, p13)

implications for health-related
behavior

Abhängigkeiten von Alkohol und Drogen können sich verstärken. (IFO, p13)

implications for medical
emergency and standard care
beyond COVID-19

Mit der Aussetzung zahlreicher wichtiger medizinischer Behandlungen, Vorsorgeuntersuchungen und Reha-Maßnahmen
entstehen unerwünschte gesundheitliche Folgewirkungen. (NRW, p3)

implications for care and other
health and social support
services

Da insbesondere ältere multimorbide Personen stationär behandlungsbedürftig werden,

implications for the exposure to
environments that affect health

Hinzu kommen die wegfallende Essensversorgung in Kitas und Schulen für Kinder aus armen Familien, Wohnungslosigkeit, eine
Zunahme häuslicher Gewalt und Kindeswohlgefährdung, die sehr unterschiedliche Beschulung zu Hause während des
Lockdowns und nicht zuletzt auch psychosoziale Folgewirkungen der wirtschaftlich extrem schwierigen Situation. (NRW-I; p3)

implications for the risk of
suffering accidents or being
affected by violence

Ziel eines Übergangs in eine neue Strategie ist das Verhindern potentieller Kollateralschäden besonders eines zu langen
Shutdown: Der Anstieg häuslicher Gewalt muss verhindert warden […]. (IFO, p29)

implications for and accordance
with autonomy and individual
self-determination

Eine Quarantäne (Isolierung) darf nicht einfach „verordnet“ werden. Vielmehr ist die betreffende Person über die gegebenen
Risiken ausführlich und sensibel zu ??
(Osterpapier, p15)

implications for and accordance
with individual liberties and
fundamental rights

In der Phase des Übergangs von der Eindämmung zur Viruskontrolle müssen die Grund- und Menschenrechte so weit wie
möglich garantiert werden. (Osterpapier, p14)

extent of intrusiveness and
proportionality regarding the
expected benefit

Ein Gebot für alle, in der Öffentlichkeit Masken zu tragen und (u.a.) die Hände zu desinfizieren, ist ein Eingriff in die individuellen
Freiheiten. Gemessen an den geltenden Maßnahmen, wie dem Verbot auf die Straße zu gehen, ist dieser aber weniger
eingriffsintensiv und wäre daher bei gleicher Wirksamkeit aus rechtlicher Sicht zwingend stärkeren Beschränkungen
vorzuziehen. (Osterpapier, p14)

acceptability of the measures

Für die Akzeptanz und Umsetzung getroffener Maßnahmen ist eine auf Selbstschutz und Solidarität basierende intrinsische
Motivation wichtiger als die Androhung von Sanktionen. Die Vermittlung eines realistischen Zeitplans und eines klaren

muss gewährleistet werden, dass die zeitige Weiterverlegung in Pflegeeinrichtungen oder benannte Krankenhäuser niedrigerer
Versorgungsstufe unter Wahrung hygienischer Maßgaben stattfinden kann, um die Zentren zuverlässig zu entlasten. (IFO, p19)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

III. implications
for the physical
health, health
behavior, health
risks, and health
care beyond
COVID-19

of communities

VI. equity,
equality and the
fair distribution
of benefits and
burdens

VII. societal and
environmental
implications and
considerations

Maßnahmenpakets zur schrittweisen Normalisierung erhöhen die Kontrollier- und Planbarkeit für alle. (Leopoldina, p11)

implications for willingness to
implement the measures

Voraussetzung für eine solche allmähliche Lockerung ist dabei, dass die Neuinfektionen sich auf niedrigem Niveau stabilisieren,
das Gesundheitssystem nicht überlastet wird, Infizierte zunehmend identifiziert werden und die Schutzmaßnahmen
(Hygienemaßnahmen, Mund-Nasen-Schutz, Distanzregeln) diszipliniert eingehalten werden. (Leopoldina, p13)

implications for health, social and
economic inequalities

Zu befürchten ist auch, dass die Krise die in Deutschland ohnehin stark ausgeprägte soziale Ungleichheit in Bezug auf Zugänge
zu Betreuung und Unterricht sowie in Bezug auf Lernleistungen und Bildungserfolge verstärkt. (Leopoldina, p22)

implications for affected social
groups, in particular vulnerable
and disadvantaged populations

Bei den psychischen Folgen und gravierenden Überlastungen müssen sozioökonomische Aspekte und der Mangel an sozialer
Einbettung dringend berücksichtigt werden. Zu den besonderen Risikogruppen gehören Alleinerziehende, Migrantinnen und
Migranten ohne Sprachkenntnisse, alleinlebende Ältere, psychisch Erkrankte, Pflegefälle und Arbeitslose. In ärmeren und eher
bildungsfernen Schichten fehlen tendenziell materielle, psychische und soziale Ressourcen. (Leopoldina, p19)

degree of fair distribution of
benefits and burdens between
population groups

Ältere und vorerkrankte Menschen gehören zur Hochrisikogruppe für eine COVID-19-Erkrankung. Zwar können auch junge und
gesunde Menschen durch eine Infektion schwer erkranken und versterben, aber die meisten halten sich nicht für hochgefährdet.
Der Eindruck, einen hohen persönlichen „Preis“ für die ältere Generation zu zahlen, kann die Bereitschaft, bei der zunehmenden
Alterung der Gesellschaft für die Älteren einzustehen, untergraben und das gesellschaftliche Miteinander destablisieren. (IFO,
p14)

accordance of the measures
with the principle of equal
treatment

Die bislang ergriffenen Maßnahmen sind überwiegend eher pauschal, undifferenziert und wenig unktgenau ausgefallen. So stellt
sich die Frage, ob die in diesem Papier vorgeschlagene Differenzierung nach Sektoren, Personen und Regionen womöglich eine
unzulässige Ungleichbehandlung und damit einen Verstoß gegen das Gleichheitsgebot des Art. 3 Abs. 1 Grundgesetz darstellt.
[…] Im Kern fordert das Gleichheitsgebot des Grundgesetzes, um eine traditionsreiche rechtliche Formel zu gebrauchen:
„Gleiches ist gleich, Ungleiches ist ungleich zu behandeln.“ Diese Maxime ist etwa der tiefere Grund für die Steuerprogression,
gemäß der der Steuersatz proportional zum Einkommen ansteigt. (IFO, p27)

implications for the risk of
stigmatization and
discrimination

Die großen Unterschiede zwischen Personen sind bei allen Empfehlungen zu berücksichtigen: Verallgemeinerungen über
Personengruppen sind ausdrücklich zu vermeiden; solche Verallgemeinerungen sind mit der Gefahr der Stereotypenbildung und
Diskriminierung verbunden. (Osterpapier, p15)

implications for actors and
institutions of civil society,
social life, and culture

DieAktivitäten derVereine– von den Sport- und Kulturvereinenüber Freundes- und Fördervereine bis zu den
Basisorganisationen des politischen und kirchlichen Lebens –sind größtenteils eingestellt.Große Bereiche der organisierten
Zivilgesellschaft existierenaktuell lediglich in digital geknüpften Netzwerken in geschrumpfter Form.Auch imHinblick auf die
Zukunft der Zivilgesellschaft spricht daher alles für die schrittweise Lockerung der aktuellen Maßnahmen – sobaldirgend
möglich.(Leopoldina, p18)

implications for the civil
society, social life, and culture

Die aktuellen Maßnahmen zur Verlangsamung der Ansteckungen führen jedoch gleichzeitig zu einer empfindlichen Schwächung
der Zivilgesellschaft. Deren Dynamik, die sich bürgerschaftlichem Engagement verdankt, Demokratie lebendigerhält und die
Gemeinwohlorientierung verstärkt,findet immer auch in der Öffentlichkeit statt. Das öffentliche Leben ist jedoch durch
diegeltenden Einschränkungen tiefgreifend gestört und weitgehend stillgestellt. […]Auch imHinblick auf die Zukunft der
Zivilgesellschaft spricht daher alles für die schrittweise Lockerung der aktuellen Maßnahmen – sobaldirgend möglich.
(Leopoldina, p18)

implications for social cohesion,
solidarity, and the risk of social
and political division

Schließlich können in solchen Situationen ideologische Radikalisierungen („die“ sind schuld) stattfinden und Gruppengrenzen
können sich verstärken. Zum Beispiel kann sich ein verschärfter Konflikt zwischen den Generationen herausbilden. Ältere und
vorerkrankte Menschen gehören zur Hochrisikogruppe für eine COVID-19-Erkrankung. Zwar können auch junge und gesunde
Menschen durch eine Infektion schwer erkranken und versterben, aber die meisten halten sich nicht für hochgefährdet. Der

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and willingness
to implement
measures

VIII. economic
implications and
consideration

IX. resource
requirements
and resource
implications

implications for the economic
situation of individuals and
capability of social participation

Vermögensverluste treffen breite Schichten, soweit sie Ersparnisse insbesondere für die Altersversorgung gebildet haben. Viele
Solo-Selbständige und kleine Familienunternehmen haben ihre Umsätze teilweise vollständig eingebüßt. Viele Betroffene haben
nur geringe Rücklagen. (Leopoldina, p24)

implications for education and
psychosocial development

Das Lernen zu Hause ist für viele Kinder, Schülerinnen und Schüler weniger effektiv als das Lernen in Schulen. Mit dem
„Shutdown“ werden drei wesentliche Funktionen der Schule außer Kraft gesetzt: a) die auf das Lernen bezogenen Strukturierung
des Alltags, b) der das Lernen unterstützende und die gesellschaftliche Teilhabe einübende soziale Austausch mit Gleichaltrigen
und Lehrkräften, c) die professionelle Rückmeldung auf Lernfortschritte. Die Krise führt somit insgesamt zu einem Rückgang der
Betreuungs-, Lehr- und Lernleistungen. (Leopoldina, p22)

implications for other social
determinants of health

Für obdachlose Menschen verschärft sich ihre Notlage durch die Schließung von Hilfseinrichtungen ohne dass adäquate
Alternativen zur Verfügung stünden. Es trifft diejenigen, die ohnehin zu den sozial Schwächsten gehören. Gleiches gilt für
Personen mit hohem Betreuungsbedarf, zum Beispiel für behinderte und chronisch kranke Menschen. Sie alle gehören nicht nur
zur medizinischen sondern auch zur psychosozialen Risikogruppe im Kontext von COVID-19. (IFO, p14)

implications for ecosystem,
planetary boundaries, and
environmental sustainability

Alle politischen Maßnahmen, die nicht der unmittelbaren Rettung von Unternehmen dienen, müssen sich auf nationaler wie
internationaler Ebene an dem Prinzip der Nachhaltigkeit orientieren. (Leopoldina, p26)

consequences of the measures
for individual economic actors
and their economic activities

Sektoren, in denen gut mit Homeoffice und digitalen Techniken gearbeitet werden kann, haben weniger Priorität als Sektoren, in
denen das nicht geht. (IFO, p5)

implications for the economy
including resilience and ability to
recover

Man kann davon ausgehen, dass die wirtschaftlichen Kosten in Form verlorener Wertschöpfung mit der Dauer des Shutdown
nicht nur linear steigen, sondern überproportional. Mit wachsender Dauer nehmen Insolvenzen und Stellenabbau zu, wodurch
die Erholung nach dem Ende des Shutdowns zunehmend belastet wird. Es liegen derzeit keine belastbaren Erkenntnisse über
eine kritische Shutdown-Dauer vor, bei der es zu einem sprunghaften Anstieg der Kosten kommt (z.B. Destabilisierung des
Finanzsystems) kommt. Mit wachsender Dauer steigt aber das Risiko solcher Kostensprünge. (IFO, 28)

implications for innovation and
economic development
opportunities

Alle politischen Maßnahmen, die nicht der unmittelbaren Rettung von Unternehmen dienen, müssen sich auf nationaler wie
internationaler Ebene an dem Prinzip der Nachhaltigkeit orientieren. […] Der Aufbau einer klimafreundlichen Wirtschaft und eine
konsequente Mobilitäts- und Landwirtschaftswende setzen wesentliche Impulse für Innovation und Wachstum. (Leopoldina, p25)

implications of the measures on
the retention and release of
labor forces

Umgekehrt würde eine Wiederöffnung dieser Einrichtungen positive Wirkungen hinsichtlich der psychischen und sozialen
Gesundheit von Kindern und Eltern sowie der Teilhabe von aktuellen in der Kinderbetreuung gebundenen Elternteilen an
Arbeitsleben und Wirtschaft erzielen. (Osterpapier, p12)

financial costs, available
financial resources, and
budgetary implications for
different actors

[…] wie schnell die Kontaktbeschränkungen aufgehoben werden sollten, folgt aus den [.] Überlegungen, dass die aktuellen
Beschränkungen ökonomisch zwar sehr teuer sind, aber die (langfristigen) Kosten einer zu frühzeitigen Aufhebung noch größer
wären. (IMK, p8)

requirements of, availability of,

Es bedarf im ambulanten wie auch im stationären Bereich grundsätzlich einer ausreichenden Anzahl an Gesundheits- und

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Eindruck, einen hohen persönlichen „Preis“ für die ältere Generation zu zahlen, kann die Bereitschaft, bei der zunehmenden
Alterung der Gesellschaft für die Älteren einzustehen, untergraben und das gesellschaftliche Miteinander destablisieren. (IFO,
p14)

XI. interaction
with and
implications for
the health
system

Pflegekräften; diese sind ebenfalls körperlich und psychisch zu schützen (Masken, Schutzkleidung, Testung, ggf. psychologische
Beratung und Unterstützung). (Osterpapier, p15)

requirements of, availability of,
and implications for protective
equipment, hygiene products
and medical devices

Ein obligatorisches Tragen von Gesichtsmasken wäre unter diesem Gesichtspunkt sinnvoll, muss aber auch Aspekte wie
Ressourcenknappheit (immer vor dem Hintergrund, dass genügend Gesichtsmasken für das Betreuungspersonal in Alten- und
Pflegeheime und in der häuslichen Pflege zur Verfügung stehen) […] berücksichtigen. (Osterpapier, p9)

requirements of, availability of,
and implications for
infrastructure to implement,
enforce and monitor measures

Voraussetzungen für die schrittweise Öffnung: Wenn das Gesundheitssystem mit dem Infektionsgeschehen absehbar nicht
überfordert ist und die entsprechenden Voraussetzungen zum besseren Monitoring der Krise geschaffen worden sind, kann die
Rückkehr in die Normalität auf den jeweiligen Feldern des gesellschaftlichen Lebens schrittweise forciert werden. (NRW-1, p6)

requirements of, availability of,
and implications for further
resources and infrastructures

Für den Bereich der Schulen und Kitas sollte – soweit möglich – durch Separation und Kohortierung bestimmter Gruppen
zumindest ein teilweiser Betrieb wieder aufgenommen werden […]. Soweit dem Wiederhochfahren der Schulen und
Kinderbetreuung mangelnde Infrastruktur (wie knappe sanitäre Einrichtungen, die die Separierung verhindern) im Wege stehen,
sollten schnell und unbürokratisch Provisorien geschaffen werden. (IMK, p10)

political feasibility and legal
conformity

Angewandt auf die Frage, ob Teile des Einzelhandels, wie z. B. Bücher-, Blumen oder Modegeschäfte, wieder geöffnet werden
können, zeigt sich ein komplexes aber generell positives Bild. […] Insbesondere ist auf die besonderen Bedürfnisse von
Personen mit hohem gesundheitlichem Risiko (z. B. gesonderte Einkaufszeiten für Personen mit Risikoprofil) und ausreichende
sozialrechtliche und den Arbeitsschutz betreffende Maßnahmen zum Schutz von im Einzelhandel tätigen Personen mit
besonderem Risikoprofil zu achten. (Osterpapier, p12)

practical and technical
feasibility

Wie gut lassen sich im jeweiligen Bereich Schutzmaßnahmen umsetzen? Können z.B. bei der Arbeit Abstände eingehalten
und/oder Schutzkleidung getragen werden? (NRW-1, p8)

flexibility in implementation,
extension, adjustment and
withdrawal of measures

Die von Expert*innen vorgeschlagene „risikoadaptierte Strategie“ erfordert weiterhin eine schlanke, maßgeschneiderte
Governance und maximale Flexibilität der handelnden Personen. Umstiegsszenarien (flexibles Reagieren auf erneuten Anstieg
des Infektionsgeschehens) müssen aus verschiedensten Blickwinkeln kontinuierlich auf ihre Umsetzbarkeit hin eingeschätzt
werden. (Gruene, p4)

possibility of evaluation and
adequate reaction to new
information

Voraussetzungen für die schrittweise Öffnung: Wenn das Gesundheitssystem mit dem Infektionsgeschehen absehbar nicht
überfordert ist und die entsprechenden Voraussetzungen zum besseren Monitoring der Krise geschaffen worden sind, kann die
Rückkehr in die Normalität auf den jeweiligen Feldern des gesellschaftlichen Lebens schrittweise forciert werden. (NRW-1, p6)

interaction with other measures
to control and contain the sarscov-2 pandemic

Insbesondere beim Tracking und dem Nachverfolgen von Infektionsketten sollte besonders die EU-Perspektive mitbedacht und
vorangetrieben werden. Wichtig ist hier, die nationalen Systeme kompatibel zueinander zu halten, um möglichst bald wieder den
möglichst ungehinderten Grenzverkehr von Arbeitskräften zu ermöglichen, ohne neue, unentdeckte Infektionsketten zu riskieren.
(IMK, p9)

interaction with components of
the health care system

Die Funktionsfähigkeit und Leistungsfähigkeit der öffentlichen Verwaltung muss uneingeschränkt sichergestellt sein, um
Verzögerungen zu vermeiden (z.B. in den Planungsbehörden, Grundbuchämtern, Umweltbehörden, KfZ-Zulassungsstellen).
Auch sollte die Verwaltung so weit wie möglich auf unbürokratische Verfahren setzen, um das wirtschaftliche Erstarken so
einfach wie möglich zu machen. (NRW-1, p11)

implications for the capability

Improvisieren und kreative Lösungen führen zu Mikro-Strategien, die lokal die Verbreitungsrate des Virus verringern können und
damit eine schrittweise Öffnung ermöglichen. Familien nähen sich eigene Gesichtsmasken. Das Kleingewerbe macht sich von

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

X. feasibility and
implementation
considerations

and implications for human
resources

sich aus Gedanken darüber, wie es unter den fortbestehenden Notwendigkeiten des Infektionsschutzes seine Tätigkeit
wiederaufnehmen kann. Betriebe bieten ihren Mitarbeiterinnen Covid-19 Tests an. Das Hotel- und Gaststättengewerbe
entwickelt ein Konzept für „Safe Spaces“, welche die Menschen wieder einladen, sich zu treffen und sich zu vergnügen.
Fitnessstudios und Sportstätten entwerfen Nutzungspläne, die Abstände und Dauer für die Nutzung der Einrichtungen regeln.
Private und öffentliche Verwaltungen machen Vorschläge für Wechsel von Home Office- und Präsenzphasen. Das verarbeitende
Gewerbe arbeitet an neuen Kombinationen von Herstellung, Auslieferung und Verkauf. (Osterpapier, p4)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.03.20145755; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and willingness to develop
alternative, local solutions

