medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Title Page
Scientific Title:
Use of Powered Air-Purifying Respirator(PAPR)

by healthcare workers for preventing highly infectious

viral diseases
-a systematic review of evidence

Corresponding Author

Dr Ana Licina
Mailing Address: 145 Studley Road Heidelberg Victoria 3084
Phone no : +61394963000
analicina@hotmail.com
Word count:

Total excluding summary and references:
5739
Abbreviated title:

Use of PAPR for preventing healthcare worker infection
Author and Contributor:
1.Dr Ana Licina

VMO Anaesthesia, Austin Health
MBChB FANZCA PGDipCU MCRM
analicina@hotmail.com
2.Dr Andrew Silvers

MBBS(Hons) FANZCA
VMO Anaesthesia, Monash Medical Centre, Adjunct Senior Lecturer, Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and
Health Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne Victoria
silversaj@me.com
3.Adjunct Clinical Associate Professor Rhonda L Stuart

MBBS FRACP PhD
Medical Director, Infection Prevention & Epidemiology, Monash Health
Rhonda.stuart@monash.org
Disclosure Statement:

Authors have no significant financial or non-financial disclosures to make
Keywords:

SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, Powered Air-Purifying Respirator, Respiratory Protection,
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Healthcare Worker

Abstract
Background

Healthcare workers (HCWs) are at particular risk during pandemics and epidemics of highly virulent
diseases with significant morbidity and case fatality rate. These diseases include Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronaviruses, SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2, Middle Eastern Respiratory
Syndrome (MERS) and Ebola. With the current (SARS-CoV-2) global pandemic, it is critical to delineate
appropriate contextual respiratory protection for HCWs. The aim of this systematic review was to
evaluate the effect of Powered Air Purifying Respirators (PAPR’s) as part of respiratory protection
versus another device (egN95/FFP2) on HCW infection rates and contamination.
Methods

Our primary outcomes included HCW infection rates with SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, Ebola or MERS
when utilizing PAPR. We included randomized controlled trials, non-randomized controlled trials, and
observational studies. We searched the following databases: MEDLINE, EMBASE, and Cochrane Library
(Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and CENTRAL). Two reviewers independently screened all
citations, full-text articles, and abstracted data. Due to clinical and methodological heterogeneity, we
did not conduct a meta-analysis. Where applicable, we constructed Evidence Profile (EP) tables for
each individual outcome. Confidence in cumulative evidence for each outcome was classified according
to the GRADE system.
Results

We identified 689 studies during literature searches. We included 10 full text studies. A narrative
synthesis was provided. Two on-field studies reported no difference in the rates of healthcare workers
performing airway procedures during care of critical patients with SARS-CoV-2. A single simulation
trial reported a lower level of cross-contamination of participants using PAPR compared to alternative
respiratory protection. There is moderate quality evidence that PAPR use is associated with greater
heat tolerance but lower scores for mobility and communication ability. We identified a trend toward
greater self-reported wearer comfort with PAPR technology in low quality observational simulation
studies.
Conclusion

Field observational studies do not indicate a difference in healthcare worker infection utilizing PAPR
devices versus other compliant respiratory equipment. Greater heat tolerance accompanied by lower
scores of mobility and audibility in PAPR were identified . Further pragmatic studies are needed in
order to delineate actual effectiveness and provider satisfaction with PAPR technology.
Please note: Protocol for this review was prospectively registered with the International Register of
Systematic Reviews identification number CRD42020184724.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Background

High infectivity combined with high case fatality rate during the COVID-19 pandemic have placed an
emphasis on healthcare worker (HCW) protection both from a personal as well as a societal
perspective. Several other outbreaks of virulent highly infectious diseases have occurred in recent
decades including the Ebola crisis in 2014-2016, Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus
(MERS-CoV) and Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS, due to SARS-CoV-1) epidemic (1) (2).
Teasing out the true infection risk in HCW group is difficult. This is due to the high rates of community
infection, HCW travel and under-reporting of non-HCW populations and the lack of phylogentic viral
analysis.. Personal protective equipment (PPE) and infection control guidelines from the WHO are
based on the assumption that the primary mechanism of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 is direct and
indirect droplet spread as well as fomite transmission (3). The WHO advises that airborne
transmission can occur, but only when aerosol-generating procedures (AGPs) are performed in
patients infected with SARS-CoV-2 (4). Aerosol Generating Procedures result in generation of small
aerosolized particles through disruption of surface tension of the alveolar lining (5). Aerosolized
particle clouds can travel up to 8 meters (6). A detailed, list of AGPs is provided in
(7). The
degree of airborne spread in the Coronavirus group is contentious (8, 9). Recently, stability of SARSCov-2 and SARS-Cov-1 was evaluated under different experimental conditions (10). SARS-CoV-2 and
SARS-CoV-1 remained viable in aerosols throughout the three hour duration of the experiment with a
reduction in infectious titer (10). However the clinical relevance of this experimental model has been
questioned (11). Establishing with certainty whether SARS-CoV-2 is infectious through airborne
transmission may be methodologically challenging.
Table 1

In this review, we consider the implication for HCWs of Ebola in addition to the coronaviruses. Ebola
virus can be transmitted by direct contact with blood, bodily fluids, or skin of Ebola patients or
individuals who have died of the disease. Development of Ebola disease results in a high case fatality
rate, as high as 50%. Recommendations for respiratory protective equipment are therefore
similar(12).
Table 1
List of Aerosol Generating Procedures (AGPs)
Abbreviations: BiPAP (Bilevel positive ventilation pressure), CPAP (Continuous positive airway
pressure);

Respiratory Aerosols

Open suctioning of airways
Sputum induction
Bronchsocopy and bronchoalveolar lavage

Blood or Tissue Fluid Aerosols

Surgical procedures in which high speed tissue
drills are used in the airway ( eg ear nose and
throat surgery, head and neck surgery)
Extensive dental procedures
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Endotracheal intubation and extubation
Face-mask ventilation
Non-invasive ventilation (e.g., BiPAP, CPAP)
Ventilation when the airway is not sealed
Tracheostomy
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Nasogastric tube insertion
Dental drilling procedures

Description of the Devices

Two major international testing and classification bodies of respiratory protection include the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and European Norms (EN). Airpurifying particulate respirators function by removing aerosols (droplets and solid particles) from the
air through the use of filters, cartridges or canisters. Air-purifying respirators fall into one of four
different classifications (
): 1. Filtering Facepiece Respirator (FFR), 2. Elastomeric Half facepiece
Respirator, 3. Elastomeric Full Facepiece Respirator, and 4. Powered Air-Purifying Respirator (PAPR).
The two major testing institutions (NIOSH and EN) employ different test protocols for evaluation of
air-purifying particulate respirators as well as having different nomenclatures (
). In the US,
respiratory filtration levels are determined according to Occupational Health and Safety
Administration (OSHA) standard 29 CFR 1910.134 “Respiratory Protection” (13). Meanwhile, the EN
requires 94 and 99% efficiencies for FFRs, class P2 (FFP2) and class P3 (FFP3), respectively (14). In
Europe respirators are tested against the relevant European Standard and are approved to the PPE
Directive 89/686/EEC or the replacement PPE Regulation (EU)2016/425 (15).
Table 2

Table 2

The assigned protection factor (APF) of a respirator denotes the level of protection that the respirator
is expected to provide to users who are properly fitted and trained. The APF is the ratio of pollutant
outside the device (environment) to that inside the device (inhaled component). For example, an APF
of 10
. Airborne level protection includes: helmets, covers, hoods; FFP3 or FFP2/N95 masks,
googles or face shields (if no helmets).
” means that a user could expect to inhale no more than one tenth of the airborne contaminant

present”

Table 2 Filtering Face Piece, Air-Purifying Respirator(APR) and Powered Air-Purifying Respirator

National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health

(PAPR) Classification according to NIOSH/EN (

(NIOSH) and European Norms (EN)

with stated Assigned Protection Factor (APF)

Respirator NIOSH
Nomenclature
type

EN
Nomenclature

Face
Filtering

FFP1
FFP2

Minimum
filtration
Capacity for
Particles >
0.3 microns
80%
94%

OSHA
APF

EN Standard APF

4 fold
10 fold
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Respirator N95
N99
P100
APR
Airpurifying -half facepiece
Respirator
(APR)
APR
Airpurifying -full facepiece
Respirator
(APR)
Powered PAPR Half
AirFacepiece
purifying
Respirator
(PAPR)
PAPR Full
Facepiece

APR
-half facepiece

95%
99%
99.97%
As per selected
filter;

10 fold
10 fold
10 fold
10

20 fold
20 fold
10

APR
-full facepiece

As per selected
filter;

10-50

10-50

PAPR Half
Facepiece

99.97%

50

50

PAPR Full
Facepiece

99.97%

1000

1000

PAPR
Helmet/Hood

PAPR
Helmet/Hood

99.97%

25-1000

25-1000

Loose fitting
Facepiece

Loose fitting
Facepiece

99.97%

25

25

FFP3

Explanation: Please note: “Minimum filtration capacity tends to be a unified

measure for any and all particles

whether biological or particulate.”

PAPRs can be described as respirators that protect the user by filtering out contaminants in the air and
use a battery-operated blower to provide the user with clean air through a tight-fitting respirator, a
loose-fitting hood, or a helmet. There is a wide heterogeneity of the available PAPR devices. Traditional
PAPRs used in healthcare settings have a full-face piece and loose-fitting hoods, attached to waist
mounted belt batteries. PAPRs use high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters and provide a higher
level of protection than disposable respirators. High-efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filters have a
similar filtration as P100 (i.e., they filter at least 99.97% of particles 0.3 μm in diameter and are oil
proof (9). PAPR’s are considered more protective in terms of the level of respiratory protection due to
the higher efficiency of their filtration pieces as well as the maintenance of outward positive pressure.
PAPRs are specified for high-hazard procedures because they can offer assigned APFs ranging from 25
to 1,000, which reduce the risk more than the protection factors provided by N95 respirators. The
improved protection is largely provided by the positive pressure in the head covering or facepiece
(
The hoods of PAPRs can provide splash protection and some degree of eye protection (14,
16). If HCWs are provided with sufficient comfortable and well-fitting respiratory protection, it is
likely that compliance with preventive programs will be increased (17).
Table 2).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

How the intervention might work

In the first instance, relevant individual institutions need to safeguard an HCW respiratory compliance
program. Appropriate choice of the level of respiratory protection needs to be made within this
program.
There is significant heterogeneity of international recommendations with regards to appropriate
respiratory protection for HCWs when performing AGPs in suspected or confirmed COVID-19 patients
is notable. European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) prevention and Centre for
Disease Control (CDC) USA recommend use of an least N95/FFP2 and higher level of protection (18)
(7); Public Health England recommends FFP3 level respiratory protection in addition to standard PPE
(19); The Communicable Disease Network Australia (CDNA) recommends FFP2/N95 mask; With
regards to the use of PAPR CDNA recommends that if a healthcare worker is required to remain in the
room for longer periods of time (greater than one hour), the use of PAPR may be considered for
additional comfort and visibility (20).
Table 3 , International recommendations of respiratory component of PPE for protection of HCWs
performing AGPs in suspected or conformed COVID-19 patients
Abbreviations: Face Filtering Piece (FFP), Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), Healthcare workers
(HCW), Aerosol Generated Procedures (AGP);

International Governing
Body/Institution

Face Filtering Piece (FFP)
(in addition to other PPE)

European Centre for Disease
(ECDC)
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC)
Public Health of England
The Communicable Disease
Network Australia (CDNA)

FFP2/FFP3

Powered Air-Purifying
Respirator
(PAPR)
(in addition to other PPE)
Use of PAPR not considered

At least N95

Use of PAPR not considered

FFP3
FFP/N95

Use of PAPR not considered
Consider the use of PAPR if
remaining in room with patient
with suspected/confirmed
COVID-19 positive patient
longer than one hour;

Why it is important to do this review

Evidence guided practice for the respiratory component of personal protective equipment is limited.
With the high rate of HCW infection during the SARS-COV-1 epidemic in Toronto, PAPR use became
embedded in respiratory protocols (21) (22). Limited information exists for use of one type of facial
protection (e.g. FFP3) over another (e.g. FFP2/N95). High filtration pieces appear to have a protective
advantage in laboratory settings (23). However, this does not translate to firm findings of greater
healthcare workers protection in field studies (24). Increased layers and technical challenges of
personal protective equipment can lead to increased complexity of patient care (25). During outbreaks
such as the current global pandemic, early recommendations are often based on precautionary
principles. It is uncertain what level of respiratory protection is required routinely for aerosol
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

generating procedures (AGP’s) in highly infectious viral diseases as evidenced by heterogenous
international recommendations. In 2005, Yassi et al identified recommended level of respiratory
protection as a critical gap in societal understanding of viral pandemic management (26). There are
known logistical advantages and disadvantages to PAPR technology (see
).
Table 4

We aim to summarize and critically appraise current evidence of the effectiveness of PAPR for
preventing nosocomial infection in health care staff exposed to respiratory/body fluids contaminated
with highly infectious viral diseases such as SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV-1, MERS and Ebola. In particular,
we will try and address current questions identified from the COVID-19 epidemic, that include to what
effect PAPR as part of respiratory protection versus another (e.g.N95/P2) has on HCW infection rates
and contamination.

Table 4 Logistical Advantages and Disadvantages of PAPR, adapted from Wong et al (27)

Advantages of PAPR

Disadvantages of PAPR

PAPRs use only HE filters, which have a greater
filtration efficiency against the smallest
pathogen particles compared to face filtering
respirators (FFRs);
PAPR systems have assigned protection factors
(APF) of at least 25;
Provides eye protection (hooded models only) ;

Challenges in verbal communication;

PAPRs with loose-fitting headgear can be worn
with a limited amount of facial hair;

Proper maintenance of PAPR requires
disinfection, cleaning, safe storage and battery
maintenance;
Inability to re-use disposable filters between
patients (need large supply of filters);
Risk of battery failure and inadvertent exposure
Requires decontamination after use;
More expensive than individual N95 respirator
(although achieve more wears per piece of
equipment with PAPR);
Requirement for education of significant
proportion of HCW workforce;

May limit visual field;
Inability to auscultate chest;

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Methods
Our findings have been reported according to the standards for the Preferred Reporting Items for
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (28). Protocol for this review was prospectively registered
with the International Register of Systematic Reviews identification number CRD42020184724.
Eligibility criteria
Types of studies

We included randomized controlled trials which compared different types of PAPR, whether reusable
or disposable, for prevention of HCW infection. We included observational studies, defined as studies
that follow HCWs over time and that compare the effect of PAPR. We included simulation studies of
PAPR technology or alternative respiratory equipment for donning and doffing procedures. In order to
maximize study capture, we have chosen a broad range of applicable methodological approaches.
Our full eligibility criteria are listed in
Table 5.

Types of participants

For simulation studies, we included any type of participants (volunteers or HCW) using PAPR or
alternative respiratory equipment as part of a protective PPE program. For field studies, we planned to
include any HCW exposed to body fluids from patients contaminated with Ebola, MERS, SARS-Cov-1 or
SARS-Cov-2.
Table 5 Review Eligibility Criteria

Study characteristic

Inclusion criteria

Types of participants Healthcare workers
Volunteers
InterventionPowered Air-Purifying
treatment
Respirator
(PAPR) studied separately or
within a Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE).
Comparator

Any other respiratory protective
equipment, FFP3/FFP2/N95 or
surgical masks.

Exclusion criteria

Hybrid PAPR
(hybrid PAPR are designed as both a
Self-contained breathing apparatus,
PAPR and a standard mask- their
design features may not reflect a true
PAPR device intended for healthcare
use)

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Outcomes

Study design

Study setting
Timing

-healthcare worker infection
rates utilizing PAPR technology
within a PPE program as
infection with SARS-Cov-2,
SARS-Cov-1, EBOLA or MERS;
-contamination of skin or
clothing measured with any type
of test material to visualize
contamination;
-compliance with guidance on
use of PAPR measured with e.g.
observation checklist;
-level of wearer comfort whilst
using the PAPR;
-objective and/or subjective
measures of work of breathing
during the use of PAPR;
-costs of resource use of PAPR
equipment;
-impact of structured training
programs on PAPR use;
Case reports
Randomized controlled trials
Surveys
Non-randomized studies
Observational studies (cohort
studies, case-control studies,
cross-sectional studies, case
series)
Inpatient care/Critical
Care/Intensive Care;
Perioperative processpreadmission, preoperative,
intraoperative and
postoperative setting

Studies incorporating long-term
(greater than three months)
postoperative rehabilitation

Types of interventions

We included studies that evaluated the effectiveness of any type of Purified Airflow Respirator (PAPR),
whether disposable or recyclable against suitable face respirators such as N95/FFP2 or any other
respiratory protection used. We excluded hybrid PAPR devices due to potential for confounding.
Types of outcome measures
Primary outcomes

We planned to include all eligible studies that have measured:
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

1. healthcare worker infection rates utilizing PAPR technology within a PPE program for infection
with SARS-Cov-2, SARS-Cov-1, EBOLA and MERS;
2. contamination of skin or clothing measured with any type of test material to visualize
contamination;
3. compliance with guidance on use of PAPR measured with e.g. observation checklist;

Secondary outcomes

We planned to include all eligible measures that have measured the following:
1. level of wearer comfort, visibility and audibility whilst using the PAPR over alternative
respiratory protection;
2. objective and/or subjective measures of work of breathing during the use of PAPR versus
alternative respiratory protective equipment;
3. costs of resource use including maintenance and cleaning of PAPR equipment;
4. impact of structured training programs on PAPR use over alternative training or no teaching;
Information sources and literature searches

We searched the following electronic databases: MEDLINE via Ovid SP; EMBASE via Ovid SP; and
Cochrane Library (Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and CENTRAL). In addition, we sought
information from grey literature through the following specific search engines: Google Scholar,
OpenGrey, and GreyNet (29-31). We developed a search strategy for Medline via Ovid (
)
and adapted it for other databases. We searched all databases from their inception to the present time.
We conducted the original search for studies in May 2020. Due to the dynamic nature of the current
pandemic, we repeated our searches in June 2020. We limited our search to English language studies.
We did this in order to facilitate the efficiency of the search, bearing in mind that language limitation is
unlikely to result in publication bias(32)
Appendix 1

Study Selection

Titles and abstracts of articles returned from initial searches were screened by two reviewer’s
and
based on the eligibility criteria outlined above. Full texts of potential eligible studies were
examined for suitability. References of all considered articles were hand-searched to identify any other
potentially eligible studies. Any disagreements were resolved by discussion. The results of the data
search were presented in a PRISMA flow diagram indicating the number of studies retrieved, screened
and excluded as per exclusion criteria
).
(AL)

(AS)

(see Figure 1

Data extraction, management, analysis and presentation

Data were extracted from each study including publication details, study characteristics, participant
characteristics, type of procedure, intervention and comparator characteristics, and outcomes. For
randomized controlled trials, one author
extracted the information on the methodological quality
of studies including random sequence generation, allocation concealment, blinding of participants and
personnel, blinding of outcome assessment, incomplete outcome data, selective outcome reporting,
and other bias (33). For non- randomized studies data were collected on all applicable elements other
than random sequence generation and allocation concealment.
(AL)

Risk of Bias in Individual Studies

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Risk of bias in randomized controlled studies was assessed using the Cochrane Risk of Bias tool (34).
We used the ROBINS-I (Risk of Bias in Non-randomized Studies of Interventions) tool to assess the risk
of bias in non-randomized studies (35). We rated each potential source of bias as high, low or unclear.
We considered blinding separately for different key outcomes where necessary. We used the risk of
bias assessment in individual studies to inform our assessment of study limitations across the body of
evidence.
Data Synthesis

We planned to systematically describe the data from each study. We planned to generate Evidence
Profile table across each predetermined primary and secondary outcome. We planned to pool data
from studies judged to be clinically homogeneous using Review Manager Web Software (36). Due to
the heterogeneity of data, quantitative synthesis was not possible.
Measures of treatment effect

Data ascertained were heterogenous both in terms of study design and interventions undertake. As
such, we were unable to estimate treatment effects. We described the included studies in the
table.
'Characteristics of included studies'

Confidence in cumulative evidence

Quality of evidence was classified according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment,
Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system into one of four categories: high, moderate, low, and
very low (37). Evidence based on randomized controlled trials was considered as high quality unless
confidence in the evidence was decreased due to study limitations, the inconsistency of results,
indirectness of evidence, imprecision, and reporting biases. Observational studies were considered low
quality; however, they were graded higher if the treatment effect observed was very large or if there
was evidence of a dose-response relationship (38, 39). We have presented Evidence Profile (EP) tables
in the Appendix section.

Results
Results of the search

Our search resulted in 690 references without duplicates for screening (
Title and abstract screening excluded further 499 studies. We screened the remainder of full text
studies. We attained further 18 full text studies through grey literature searches. We included 10 full
text studies.
Prisma diagram, Figure 1).

Included studies

We included ten eligible studies. Please see characteristics of included studies (
). Five of
these studies were simulation studies. Two of the studies were randomized controlled trials. A single
study was a randomized controlled trial in a simulation setting (40). A single study was an
observational case series of healthcare workers (airway proceduralist only) managing patients
Appendix 2

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

infected with SARS-CoV-2 in China at the start of 2020 (41). Two were observational studies wi
ith
control group cohorts (42) (43). One observational simulation study was a case series without a
control group (44).

Figure 1, PRISMA Flow Diagram

Characteristics of participants

In the simulation studies, researchers included 195 participants. Two of the observational simulation
studies were cross over studies and therefore control participants were also intervention partic
cipants
(43) (42, 45-48).
There were 153 participants in the randomized simulation studies. However, 24 of these acted as
a
doffing observers in Andonian et al study (49). There were 1920 on-field healthcare workers
performing intubations in two observational studies (41) (50).

Interventions and comparisons

We identified a large prospective observational cohort study of healthcare workers utilizing a ra
ange of
respiratory equipment including PAPR devices. The investigators reported that PAPRs (43.4%) were
used more commonly in the United States of America (USA) than the United Kingdom (UK). In th
he UK
participants more frequently used FFP3/N100 respirator masks (89.3%). The investigators did
d not

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

report a significant difference in the primary endpoint rates in these two countries as determined by
PPE use (50). We identified a single retrospective observational case series which retrospectively
assessed the rates of cross infection in airway proceduralists. In both groups, HCWs utilized droplet
precautions with either PAPR (n=50); goggles, FFP2/N95 mask with a face shield (n=22) or goggles,
FFP/N95 with a full hood without positive pressure (n=130) (41).
A single randomized controlled trial evaluated the effectiveness of training programs on
contamination of personal protective equipment incorporating PAPR (49). A single observational
study evaluated attitudes and practices towards a novel PAPR equipment (44). A single observational
study compared the effectiveness of different equipment including PAPR on donning and doffing (42).
A single observational study evaluated the effectiveness of different respiratory ensembles on
temperature of skin and eye dryness (43). A single simulation randomized prospective trial evaluated
the PAPR versus E-RCP (40). Three randomized simulation cross over trials evaluated the impact of
respiratory equipment including use of PAPR on self-reported wearer comfort measures (45, 47, 48)
(
).
Appendix 2

Characteristics of included studies

Outcomes

We identified a single prospective observational international multicenter cohort study (El-Boghdadly
2020) reporting the rates of assumed cross-infection with SARS-CoV-2 of healthcare personnel
managing the airway. We identified a single observational case series (Yao 2020) which assessed the
rates of cross infection in anesthesiologists. In both groups, HCWs utilized droplet precautions with
either PAPR (n=50); goggles, FFP2/N95 mask with a face shield (n=22) or goggles, FFP/N95 with a
full hood without positive pressure (n=130) (41). We identified no studies assessing the efficacy of
PAPR technology compared to alternative respirator/ facepiece during care for patients with SARSCov-1, Ebola or MERS;
We identified a single randomized cross-over trial (Zamora et al, 2006) which evaluated
contamination of skin or clothing measured with any type of test material to visualize contamination
(40); Identified study used fluorescein staining to measure contamination. 26% of participants were
contaminated in the PAPR group compared to 96% of contaminated participants in the E-RCP
(enhanced respiratory controlled protection) group. We identified a single observational study (42).
In a single study (Chughtai et al, 2018) which evaluating the risk of contamination with different PPE
and Respiratory Equipment, no participants using PAPR were contaminated. All participants using N95
were contaminated. We found no studies which assessed compliance with guidance on selection of
type and use of PPE measured with e.g. observation checklist. We found three observational studies
which evaluated the level of wearer comfort, visibility and audibility with using the PAPR over
alternative respiratory protection ( Chughtai et al, 2018, Chughtai et al 2020, Powell 2017) (42-44).
Three simulation cross-over randomized trials studied the use of PAPR versus APR, with the outcomes
of wearer comfort as measured by user rating of mobility, ease of communication, ease of breathing
and heat perception (38, 45, 47, 48). We identified no studies which evaluated costs of resource use
including maintenance and cleaning of equipment. We identified a single randomized trial which
evaluated the utility of training on donning and doffing of personal protective equipment including
PAPR (Andonian et al 2019) (49). Structured training using a PAPR decreased the likelihood of selfcontamination from 100% to 86%.
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Risk of Bias

We produced a Risk of Bias Summary and a Risk of Bias Graph for individual randomized and
observational studies (
)(
). For non-randomized studies (NRS), we identified a high
risk of bias across the confounding, selection bias and blinding of outcome assessment across objective
and subjective domains. For NRS studies, we identified unclear risk of bias across the blinding
performance bias and detection bias, objective outcomes. We used the risk of bias of individual studies
to inform our assessment of bias across outcomes. Randomized controlled studies had an unclear risk
of bias across a number of domains including allocation concealment, blinding of objective outcome
assessment and blinding of participants and personnel.
Figure 2

Figure 3

Data Synthesis

We summarized our findings in Evidence Profile
tables across pre-determined primary
and secondary outcomes using the GRADEpro software (51). We performed a narrative synthesis of
the data.
Data collected were not suitable for a meta-analysis due to inherent heterogeneity. There was no
difference in the primary endpoint of COVID-19 infection in respective observational studies in the
airway proceduralists utilizing PAPR versus other protective respiratory equipment (50). In the
prospective observational study, primary endpoint was defined as incidence of laboratory-confirmed
COVID-19 diagnosis or new symptoms requiring self-isolation or hospitalization after a tracheal
intubation episode. The overall incidence of the primary endpoint was 10.7% over a median follow-up
of 32 days. Most participants were diagnosed through reported symptomatic self-isolation 144 (8.4%).
The risk of the primary endpoint varied by country and was higher in females. The risk of COVID
outcome was not associated with respiratory protection program use or use of PAPR (50).
Investigators did not report the exact number of users protected by PAPR devices. Consequently, we
did not construct an EP table for this primary outcome. In the second observational study, there were
no airway proceduralists who were cross-infected in either cohort.The rate of healthcare worker
infection was significantly different in the two studies, 10.7% versus 0%. Contamination of skin or
clothing measured with any type of test material yielded lower risk of contamination in simulation
studies. Evidence base for this outcome was low (40, 42).
(Appendix 3)

There was moderate quality of evidence with regards to lower risk of heat build-up in users with PAPR
technology (47) (45). There was moderate quality of evidence that visibility was improved in PAPR in
comparison with APR (45). There was consistent moderate quality of evidence of decreased user
rating of mobility and audibility with the use of PAPR (45, 47, 48). In a single cohort observational
study all participants using N95 reported discomfort (42). Powell et al noted a lower temperature
measurement in subjects using PAPR (43). This did not translate to a self-reported greater level of
comfort in this study.
Participants in a randomized study rated the ease of breathing with the PAPR system significantly
better than with the APR (48).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2 Risk of Bias Summary

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3 Risk of Bias Graph

Discussion

Recently published field studies of HCWs managing patients with COVID-19 demonstrated equiv
valent
rates of healthcare provider infection in cohorts utilizing PAPR versus other appropriate respira
atory
protection. We identified a trend towards lower level of cross-contamination in participants using
PAPR technology compared to alternative respiratory protection in low quality simulation studi
ies. We
identified moderate quality of evidence towards improved healthcare worker comfort (heat tolerance
and visibility) with PAPR technology compared with alternative respirators. PAPR users scored
d the
technology lower with on mobility, dexterity, audibility and communication. We identified mod
derate
quality of evidence towards improved healthcare worker comfort (audibility and mobility) with
h APR
(airflow powered respirator) technology compared with PAPR.

There appears to be no reported difference in observed infection rates in participants utilizing PAPR
P
or other appropriate respiratory protection. Preferred use of PAPR for respiratory protection may
m
be
due to perceived logistical advantages by institutional policy makers. A prospective internation
nal
multicenter cohort study found no difference in infection rates between cohorts utilizing varied
d
respiratory protection (50). A series published recently found no airway proceduralist infection
ns in
the cohort utilizing PAPR versus a cohort equipped with more routine respiratory protection in
addition to usual PPE (41). This study was performed retrospectively in Wuhan during the outb
break of
SARS-CoV-2. (41). Differences in the airway proceduralist’s COVID outcomes appear distinct: 10
0.7 % in
the El-Boghdadly et al study versus 0% reported in Yao et al (50) (41). These findings may have
e been
confounded by a well-designed enhanced respiratory and contact protective system in the study
y with
no provider infections.

We observed a trend towards lower contamination rates in simulation studies in participants ut
tilizing
PAPR (42) (40). These observations are counterintuitive towards an assumption that due to
complexity of technology, cross-contamination during doffing with PAPR is more likely. Results of our

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

review demonstrate a trend towards lower HCW contamination rates and decreased doffing violations
whilst utilizing PAPR.
We found no studies which assessed compliance with donning or doffing protocols for equipment
utilizing PAPR.
In line with subjective reports that PAPR may be more effective in decreasing the effort needed to
maintain the work of breathing compared to a more conventional filtering face piece, we identified
moderate quality of evidence for this outcome (43) (7). We identified moderate quality of evidence
towards improved healthcare worker comfort with regards to heat tolerance and visibility with PAPR
technology. It is thought that through the positive air flow , PAPR’s eliminated the heat build up (52).
Decrease in audibility and communication difficulties can be anticipated due to increased weight of the
equipment and noise generated by positive airflow. In observational studies, we identified a trend
toward greater level of self-reported comfort amongst the PAPR wearers (42, 44). Powell et al noted a
lower temperature measurement in subjects using PAPR (43). Prior reports have outlined potential
for claustrophobia in healthcare providers with field use of PAPR (53). During the tuberculosis
outbreaks, use of PAPR’s had a low institutional uptake. This occurred due to a number of factors,
including concerns that doctors would appear frightening to their patients and that the motor’s hissing
noise would interfere with patient communication (54). Greater acceptance of PAPR by HCWS during
both the SARS-Cov-1 pandemic and Ebola may be influenced by HCW perception of relative risk. Khoo
et al published a survey illustrating that PAPR as opposed to N95 were more comfortable for HCWs
during an Ebola outbreak in Singapore (55).
We identified no studies exploring the costs of resource use of PAPR versus any other filtration pieces.
Costs of maintenance of PAPR equipment which require disinfection, cleaning, self-storage, battery
maintenance as well as a requirement for education of significant proportion of HCW workforce have
not been considered in evidence-based literature. These costs are juxtaposed against more wears per
piece of PAPR compared to disposable face-filtering pieces. PAPR use may be a resource utilization
prepared strategy for times of greater need for N95/FFP2. It has been noted that there have been
fewer equipment shortages for PAPR than N95 (56).
We identified a single simulation randomized controlled trial which demonstrated a trend towards
lower risk of contamination when PAPR use was incorporated with a teaching program . During the
SARS-CoV-1 outbreak recent training in infection control increased the likelihood of workers
adherence to recommended barrier precautions (57). Whilst the initial focus was on use of more
stringent respiratory PPE components, further studies found that SARS -CoV-1 transmission was not
supported if more standardized PPE was used. Critical system factors protecting the HCWs included
compliance with N95 mask application and ongoing use, as well as complementary respiratory
protection protocols (25).
Current reports of the choice of protective respiratory technology during the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic
are disparate. In a recently published experience of intubation and ventilation of critically ill patients
in Wuhan, Meng et al they illustrated use of a positive pressure ventilation system for
anaesthesiologists dealing with COVID-19 positive patients (58) . There have been three separate
descriptive reports from Singapore on routine use of PAPR in their protocols for anaesthesia in
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

suspected or confirmed Covid-19 patients (59) (60) (27). Recommendations from the Joint Task Force
of the Chinese Society of Anesthesiology and the Chinese Association of Anesthesiologists center on
N95 use for proceduralists. These recommendations do not specifically mention use of a PAPR device.
Although some authors make recommendations for the use of PAPR for critical care of Covid-19
patients, they acknowledge that there is no conclusive evidence to show that this advanced respiratory
technology decreases the likelihood of viral airborne transmission (61).
Utilization of PAPR with high filtration efficiency may represent an example of “precautionary
principle” wherein action taken to reduce risk is guided by logistical advantages of PAPR system. With
a higher APF factor than N95 masks, it is scientifically plausible that PAPR use may result in long term
lower HCW infection rates. There is however limited literature supporting PAPR use during
epidemics/pandemics of SARS-CoV-1, SARS-CoV-2, MERS and Ebola. Given the lack of demonstrable
efficacy, institutional decision makers may be applying a pragmatic choice to use PAPR on the basis of
precautionary principle.
Current PAPR certification standards have been developed primarily for industrial applications. There
is a need for respirator standards to better expand to suit the requirements of healthcare workers
(62). In terms of the laboratory research, industrial, radioactive or biological particles behave in a
similar manner with regards to a filtration standard. Quantification of the infectious dose with this
emerging viral disease has not occurred. Therefore, it remains a challenge to determine the optimum
respiratory protection under individual circumstances. Future developments include adjusting the
testing standards to activities to which the user (HCW) is engaged.
Our systematic review has been limited by a number of available studies graded as low evidence. A
recently published study by El-Boghdadly et al had only 28.8% of laboratory confirmed infections. The
remainder were diagnosed through self-isolation and hospitalization without confirmed laboratory
testing. (50). In additi in the absence of phylogenetic analysis it is not possible to conclude the source
of infection, be it patient contact or community acquired. Comparison of infection rates with HCWs not
wearing the PAPR technology may be biased by other PPE protection factors such as the utility of
system-related compliance measures (63). Despite the theoretical advantages of PAPR, there have to
date been no controlled clinical trials on the efficacy of this technology during the SARS-Cov-1, SARSCov-2, EBOLA or MERS pandemics in comparison with other high level respiratory protection(64). At
present, minimal infective dose for SARS-CoV-2 pathogen is unknown for any of the transmission
modes (65). Higher viral load shedding may be more readily associated with greater disease severity
(66). Whether a higher PAPR filtration factor translates to decreased infection rates of HCWs remains
to be elucidated. True randomized controlled studies may not be ethically feasible due to higher
filtration factor of PAPR. Pragmatic observational studies, as published recently in well-resourced
areas may be both more ethical and feasible (41). Most of the studies included have been performed
using simulation. Despite simulation being designed to simulate exposure to highly contagious
diseases, they are performed in a safe setting without true haste (46) . This may introduce systematic
bias to the studies themselves and the review. We graded the risk of bias in observational on-field
studies as high. This is due to a number of factors including the observational nature of SARS-CoV-2
infection rate assessment and potential for confounding due to attendant infection control processes.
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Conclusion
Equivalent rates of healthcare provider infection have been demonstrated in cohorts utilizing PAPR
versus other appropriate respiratory protection. There have been no field studies reporting the
effectiveness and utility of PAPR in protecting the healthcare workers from cross-infection due to
other highly virulent viral diseases including SARS-CoV-1, Ebola or MERS. Evidence base of low quality
indicates greater wearer protection in HCWs using PAPR compared to alternative respiratory devices,
from cross-contamination and during doffing in simulation studies. Provider satisfaction appears
higher with regards to thermal comfort, however lower in relation to audibility and visibility with
PAPR technology. Precautionary principles may be guiding the institutional risk management
strategies of HCW protection during epidemics and pandemics.
Closure of this knowledge gap with regards to optimal respiratory protection during pre-defined
highly virulent pandemics needs further prospectively collected field data.
Abbreviations
Healthcare worker (HCW), Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome (SARS), Personal protective equipment (PPE), World Health Organization
(WHO),
Powered Air-Purifying Respirator (PAPR).
Declarations
Author contribution

AL and AS contributed towards the design and conduct of the systematic
review, including research questions addressed; RLS contributed towards literature review and
analysis of information
Funding

None declared.
Availability of data and materials

Not applicable

Ethics approval and consent to participate

Not applicable

Consent for publication

Not applicable

Competing Interests
No external funding and no competing interests declared.
Appendices
Appendix 1- Search Strategy;
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Appendix 2- Characteristics of Included Studies;
Appendix 3-Evidence Profile Tables;
References:
1.

Kilmarx PH, Clarke KR, Dietz PM, Hamel MJ, Husain F, McFadden JD, et al. Ebola virus disease in health care workers--

Sierra Leone, 2014. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(49):1168-71.
2.

Ebola Health: WHO; 2020 [Available from: https://www.who.int/features/ebola/health-care-worker/en/.

3.

Cook TM. Personal protective equipment during the coronavirus disease (COVID) 2019 pandemic – a narrative review.

Anaesthesia. 2020;n/a(n/a).
4.

Coronavirus disease 2019- Situation report: Worl Health Organization;

[Available from:

https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/situation-reports/20200326-sitrep-66-covid-19.pdf.
5.

Wilson NM, Norton A, Young FP, Collins DW. Airborne transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2

to healthcare workers: a narrative review. Anaesthesia.n/a(n/a).
6.

Tomas ME, Kundrapu S, Thota P, Sunkesula VC, Cadnum JL, Mana TS, et al. Contamination of Health Care Personnel

During Removal of Personal Protective Equipment. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175(12):1904-10.
7.

Healthcare Infection and Prevention for COVID-19: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; [Available from:

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/infection-control-faq.html.
8.

Lewis D. Is the coronavirus airborne? Experts can't agree. Nature. 2020;580(7802):175.

9.

Wilson NM, Norton A, Young FP, Collins DW. Airborne transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2

to healthcare workers: a narrative review. Anaesthesia. 2020.
10.

van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, Holbrook MG, Gamble A, Williamson BN, et al. Aerosol and Surface Stability

of SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(16):1564-7.
11.

Stability and Viability of SARS-CoV-2. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(20):1962-6.

12.

Rewar S, Mirdha D. Transmission of Ebola Virus Disease: An Overview. Annals of Global Health. 2014;80(6):444-51.

13.

Occupational Safety and Health Standards: United States Department of Labour; [Standard Number 1910.134].

Available from: https://www.osha.gov/laws-regs/regulations/standardnumber/1910/1910.134.
14.

Rengasamy S, Eimer BC, Shaffer RE. Comparison of nanoparticle filtration performance of NIOSH-approved and CE-

marked particulate filtering facepiece respirators. Ann Occup Hyg. 2009;53(2):117-28.
15.

REGULATION (EU) 2016/425 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL 2016 [Available from:

https://ec.europa.eu/transparency/regexpert/index.cfm?do=groupDetail.groupDetailDoc&id=39204&no=1.
16.

Rengasamy A, Zhuang Z, Berryann R. Respiratory protection against bioaerosols: literature review and research needs.

Am J Infect Control. 2004;32(6):345-54.
17.

Verbeek JH, Rajamaki B, Ijaz S, Sauni R, Toomey E, Blackwood B, et al. Personal protective equipment for preventing

highly infectious diseases due to exposure to contaminated body fluids in healthcare staff. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;4:Cd011621.
18.

Infection prevention and control and preparedness for COVID-19 in healthcare settings European Centre for Disease

Control and Prevention: World Health Organisation; [updated 2020.
19.

Guidance COVID-19 personal protective equipment (PPE) 2020 [Available from:

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/wuhan-novel-coronavirus-infection-prevention-and-control/covid-19-personalprotective-equipment-ppe#ppe-guidance-by-healthcare-context.
20.

Communicable Diseases Network Australia- National Guidelines for Public Health Units Australia [Available from:

https://www1.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/cda-cdna-cdna.htm.
21.

Peng PWH, Ho P-L, Hota SS. Outbreak of a new coronavirus: what anaesthetists should know. British Journal of

Anaesthesia. 2020;124(5):497-501.
22.

Peng PW, Wong DT, Bevan D, Gardam M. Infection control and anesthesia: lessons learned from the Toronto SARS

outbreak. Can J Anaesth. 2003;50(10):989-97.
23.

Siegel JD, Rhinehart E, Jackson M, Chiarello L. 2007 Guideline for Isolation Precautions: Preventing Transmission of

Infectious Agents in Health Care Settings. Am J Infect Control. 2007;35(10 Suppl 2):S65-164.
24.

Smith JD, MacDougall CC, Johnstone J, Copes RA, Schwartz B, Garber GE. Effectiveness of N95 respirators versus surgical

masks in protecting health care workers from acute respiratory infection: a systematic review and meta-analysis. CMAJ.
2016;188(8):567-74.
25.

Nicolle L. SARS safety and science. Can J Anaesth. 2003;50(10):983-5, 5-8.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
26.
Yassi A, Moore D, Fitzgerald JM, Bigelow P, Hon C-Y, Bryce E, et al. Research gaps in protecting healthcare workers from
SARS and other respiratory pathogens: an interdisciplinary, multi-stakeholder, evidence-based approach. J Occup Environ Med.
2005;47(1):41-50.
27.

Wong J, Goh QY, Tan Z, Lie SA, Tay YC, Ng SY, et al. Preparing for a COVID-19 pandemic: a review of operating room

outbreak response measures in a large tertiary hospital in Singapore. Canadian journal of anaesthesia = Journal canadien
d'anesthesie. 2020:1-14.
28.

Swartz MK. The PRISMA statement: a guideline for systematic reviews and meta-analyses. J Pediatr Health Care.

2011;25(1):1-2.
29.

Haddaway NR, Collins AM, Coughlin D, Kirk S. The Role of Google Scholar in Evidence Reviews and Its Applicability to

Grey Literature Searching. PloS one. 2015;10(9):e0138237.
30.

Mahood Q, Van Eerd D, Irvin E. Searching for grey literature for systematic reviews: challenges and benefits. Research

synthesis methods. 2014;5(3):221-34.
31.

Paez A. Grey literature: An important resource in systematic reviews. J Evid Based Med. 2017.

32.

Moher D, Pham B, Lawson ML, Klassen TP. The inclusion of reports of randomised trials published in languages other

than English in systematic reviews. Health Technol Assess. 2003;7(41):1-90.
33.

Verhagen AP, de Vet HC, de Bie RA, Kessels AG, Boers M, Bouter LM, et al. The Delphi list: a criteria list for quality

assessment of randomized clinical trials for conducting systematic reviews developed by Delphi consensus. Journal of clinical
epidemiology. 1998;51(12):1235-41.
34.

Sterne JAC, Savovic J, Page MJ, Elbers RG, Blencowe NS, Boutron I, et al. RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias in

randomised trials. BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2019;366:l4898.
35.

Sterne JA, Hernán MA, Reeves BC, Savović J, Berkman ND, Viswanathan M, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of

bias in non-randomised studies of interventions. BMJ (Clinical research ed). 2016;355:i4919.
36.

Review Manager Web (RevMan Web): The Cochrane Collaboration, 2019;

[Available from: revman.cochrane.org.

37.

Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, Kunz R, Vist G, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction-GRADE evidence profiles

and summary of findings tables. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2011;64(4):383-94.
38.

Balshem H, Helfand M, Schunemann HJ, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Brozek J, et al. GRADE guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of

evidence. J Clin Epidemiol. 2011;64(4):401-6.
39.

Brozek JL, Akl EA, Compalati E, Kreis J, Terracciano L, Fiocchi A, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of

recommendations in clinical practice guidelines part 3 of 3. The GRADE approach to developing recommendations. Allergy.
2011;66(5):588-95.
40.

Zamora JE, Murdoch J, Simchison B, Day AG. Contamination: a comparison of 2 personal protective systems. CMAJ :

Canadian Medical Association journal = journal de l'Association medicale canadienne. 2006;175(3):249-54.
41.

Yao W, Wang T, Jiang B, Gao F, Wang L, Zheng H, et al. Emergency tracheal intubation in 202 patients with COVID-19 in

Wuhan, China: lessons learnt and international expert recommendations. British Journal of Anaesthesia.
42.

Chughtai AA, Chen X, Macintyre CR. Risk of self-contamination during doffing of personal protective equipment.

American journal of infection control. 2018;(no pagination).
43.

Powell JB, Kim JH, Roberge RJ. Powered air-purifying respirator use in healthcare: Effects on thermal sensations and

comfort. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2017;14(12):947-54.
44.

Chughtai AA, Seale H, Rawlinson WD, Kunasekaran M, Macintyre CR. Selection and Use of Respiratory Protection by

Healthcare Workers to Protect from Infectious Diseases in Hospital Settings. Ann Work Expo Health. 2020;64(4):368-77.
45.

Schumacher J, Arlidge J, Dudley D, Sicinski M, Ahmad I. The impact of respiratory protective equipment on difficult

airway management: a randomised, crossover, simulation study. Anaesthesia. 2020.
46.

Schumacher J, Arlidge J, Garnham F, Ahmad I. A randomised crossover simulation study comparing the impact of

chemical, biological, radiological or nuclear substance personal protection equipment on the performance of advanced life
support interventions. Anaesthesia. 2017;72(5):592-7.
47.

Schumacher J, Gray SA, Michel S, Alcock R, Brinker A. Respiratory protection during simulated emergency pediatric life

support: a randomized, controlled, crossover study. Prehospital and disaster medicine. 2013;28(1):33-8.
48.

Schumacher J, Gray SA, Weidelt L, Brinker A, Prior K, Stratling WM. Comparison of powered and conventional air-

purifying respirators during simulated resuscitation of casualties contaminated with hazardous substances. Emergency medicine
journal. 2009;26(7):501-5.
49.

Andonian J, Kazi S, Therkorn J, Benishek L, Billman C, Schiffhauer M, et al. Effect of an Intervention Package and

Teamwork Training to Prevent Healthcare Personnel Self-contamination During Personal Protective Equipment Doffing. Clinical
infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2019;69(Supplement_3):S248-S55.
50.

El-Boghdadly K, Wong DJN, Owen R, Neuman MD, Pocock S, Carlisle JB, et al. Risks to healthcare workers following

tracheal intubation of patients with COVID-19: a prospective international multicentre cohort study. Anaesthesia. 2020.
51.

GRADEpro GDT. GRADEpro Guideline Development Tool (Software). McMaster Universtiy, 2015: developed by Evidence

Prime, Inc.
52.

Martyny J, Glazer CS, Newman LS. Respiratory protection. N Engl J Med. 2002;347(11):824-30.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
53.
Szeinuk J, Beckett WS, Clark N, Hailoo WL. Medical evaluation for respirator use. American Journal of Industrial
Medicine. 2000;37(1):142-57.
54.

Nelson H. USA: objections to protective respirators. Lancet. 1992;340(8827):1088.

55.

Khoo KL, Leng PH, Ibrahim IB, Lim TK. The changing face of healthcare worker perceptions on powered air-purifying

respirators during the SARS outbreak. Respirology. 2005;10(1):107-10.
56.
Health.

Board on Health Sciences P, Institute of M. The National Academies Collection: Reports funded by National Institutes of
The Use and Effectiveness of Powered Air Purifying Respirators in Health Care: Workshop Summary. Washington (DC):

National Academies Press (US)
Copyright 2015 by the National Academy of Sciences. All rights reserved.; 2015.
57.

Shigayeva A, Green K, Raboud JM, Henry B, Simor AE, Vearncombe M, et al. Factors associated with critical-care

healthcare workers' adherence to recommended barrier precautions during the Toronto severe acute respiratory syndrome
outbreak. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2007;28(11):1275-83.
58.

Meng L, Qiu H, Wan L, Ai Y, Xue Z, Guo Q, et al. Intubation and Ventilation amid the COVID-19 Outbreak: Wuhan’s

Experience. Anesthesiology: The Journal of the American Society of Anesthesiologists. 2020.
59.

Ti LK, Ang LS, Foong TW, Ng BSW. What we do when a COVID-19 patient needs an operation: operating room

preparation and guidance. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia/Journal canadien d'anesthésie. 2020.
60.

Chen Q, Lim B, Ong S, Wong WY, Kong YC. Rapid ramp-up of powered air-purifying respirator (PAPR) training for

infection prevention and control during the COVID-19 pandemic. Br J Anaesth. 2020.
61.

Wax RS, Christian MD. Practical recommendations for critical care and anesthesiology teams caring for novel

coronavirus (2019-nCoV) patients. Canadian Journal of Anesthesia/Journal canadien d'anesthésie. 2020;67(5):568-76.
62.

The Use and Effectiveness of Powered Air Purifying Respirators in Health Care: Worshop Summary Washington (DC); :

National Academies Press (US); 2015 [Institute of Medicine:[BAsed on Health Sciences Policy;]. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK294217/.
63.

Ahmad I, Arora A, El-Boghdadly K. Embracing the robotic revolution into anaesthetic practice. Anaesthesia.

2020;75(7):848-51.
64.

MacIntyre CR, Chughtai AA. Facemasks for the prevention of infection in healthcare and community settings. Bmj.

2015;350:h694.
65.

Odor PM, Neun M, Bampoe S, Clark S, Heaton D, Hoogenboom EM, et al. Anaesthesia and COVID-19: infection control.

British Journal of Anaesthesia.
66.

Liu Y, Yan L-M, Wan L, Xiang T-X, Le A, Liu J-M, et al. Viral dynamics in mild and severe cases of COVID-19. The Lancet

Infectious Diseases.

22

Study

Virus
studied or
Simulation

Study
Design

Number of
Participants

Primary
Outcomes
-PAPR focused

Secondary
Outcomes
-PAPR
focused

Results

Andonian at

Simulation

Randomised

48

1.Effectiveness

2. Effectiveness of

-11/13 HCW contaminated at least one

al 2019

of

Controlled

(13 HCW in

of training on

training on

body site;

(1)

on PPE

Trial

training

intervention

contamination

contamination

-13/13 HCW contaminated at least one

doffing

group and 13

of a number of

using ultraviolet

body site;

including

HCW control

body sites

light and PLS

-median contamination score lower in

PAPR

group)

swabbing

the intervention group: 23.15 vs 64.45

Chughtai et al

Simulation

Observation

2020

by fit-testing

al

(2)

-others

p=0.004 (ultraviolet light);

randomised to

- median contamination score lower in

Doffing

the intervention group:72.4 vs144.8

Assistants

p=0.001 (PLS visualization);

20

1.Examine

2. Determine

-14/20 participants found PAPR easy to

attitudes and

acceptability of a

don;

and use of

practices

novel PAPR

-15/20 participants found PAPR easy to

PAPR

regarding PAPR

(CleanSpace2

tm

)

Level of
Evidenc
e

2

4

doff;
-14/20 participants found PAPR
comfortable to wear;

Chughtai et al

Simulation

Observation

30 PPE

1.Evaluate risk

2.Evaluate user

-4/24 participants contaminated using

2018

of doffing

al

sequences

of self-

level of comfort

N95;

(3)

protocols

tested, 6

contamination

Including

-0/6 participants contaminated using

including

including

using

breathability and

PAPR;

PAPR

PAPR

ultraviolet light

ease of breathing

-24/24 reported discomfort with N/95

(10

use;

participants)

-2/6 reported discomfort with PAPR

3

use;

El-Boghdadly

Field study

Observation

-1718

The primary

et al 2020

of SARS-

al

healthcare

endpoint was

was 10.7% over a median follow up of

(4)

CoV-2

-prospective

workers

the incidence of

32 days;

internationa

reported 5148

laboratory-

-risk of the primary endpoint varied by

l multicentre

tracheal

confirmed

country and gender, higher in females;

cohort study

intubation

COVID-19

episodes;

diagnosis or

-exact

new symptoms

protective

requiring self-

equipment

isolation or

N/A

-overall incidence of COVID outcomes

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Characteristics of Included Studies

hospitalization

not reported

after a tracheal

but included

intubation

N95/P2/P3/

episode.

PAPR
Powell et al

Simulation

Observation

60 total

1. Evaluate face

2. Evaluate wearer

-temperature of facial skin lower in 36

2017

assessment

al

assessments

and body

comfort through

PAPR compared to N95;

(5)

of

(12

thermal

assessment of eye

-tight fitting face piece PAPR increased

participant

participants)

sensations;

dryness;

eye dryness;

comfort

-12 N95;

-loose fitting PAPR did not increase eye

-12 tight fit

dryness;

PAPR;

-perception of

-24 loose

two groups;

PAPR;

-perception of work of

-12 hybrid

equivalent in the two groups;

3

comfort equivalent in

breathing was

PAPR;
(note hybrid
PAPR
excluded from
analysis)

Schumacher

Simulation

Randomised

42 total

1.Difference in

2. Wearer comfort

-The participating paramedics rated the

et al 2009

study of

cross-over

assessments

treatment

as measured by

ease of breathing with the PAPR system

(6)

impact of

simulation

(14

times in two

user rating of

significantly better than with the APR.

respiratory

study

paramedics)

resuscitation

-mobility

(p<0/05);

protective

-three types of

scenarios, with

-ease of

-The wearer comfort in respect of

equipment

respiratory

standard

communication/au

during

equipment:

equipment use

dibility

emergency

1.PAPR

serving as

-ease of breathing

life support

(positive

control

pressure)
2. Standard
APR ( negative
pressure)
3. Standard
surgical
protection
(control
group)

mobility and the ability to communicate
was similar in both respirator groups;

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

composition

Simulation

Randomised

48 total

1.Difference in

2.Wearer comfort

-Study subjects reported that

et al 2013

study of

cross-over

assessments

treatment

as measured by

communication (p=0.001) and mobility

(7)

impact of

simulation

(16

times in two

user rating of

(p=0.000) were significantly improved

respiratory

study

paramedics)

resuscitation

-mobility

in the APR group

protective

-three types of

scenarios, with

-noise/speech

equipment

respiratory

standard

intelligibility

-Study subjects reported that heat-

during

equipment:

equipment use

-heat

build-up was significantly less in the

emergency

1.PAPR

serving as

paediatric

(positive

control

support

pressure)

compared to PAPR;

2

PAPR-hood group (p=000);

2. Standard
APR ( negative
pressure)
3. Standard
surgical
protection
(control
group)

Schumacher

Simulation

Randomised

300 total

1.Difference in

2.Wearer comfort

The powered respirator ensemble

2020

study of

cross-over

assessments

Intubation

as measured by

scored significantly better in user rating

(8)

impact of

simulation

(25

times in

user rating of

for

respiratory

study

anaesthetists)

different

-mobility

-heat (p=0.002)

protective

-three types of

airway

-noise

-vision (p=0.008)

equipment

respiratory

scenarios

-heat

on airway

equipment:

-vision

The powered respirator ensemble

managemen

1.PAPR

-speech

scored significantly worse in user rating

t

(positive

intelligibility

for

pressure)

-noise (p=0.021)

2. Standard

-speech intelligibility (p=0.062)

APR ( negative
pressure)
3. Standard
surgical
protection
(control
group)
-Four different
intubation
drills

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Schumacher

Field study

Retrospectiv

1.outer layer

Analysis of two centre data by a

-zero transmission rates were noted in

2020

of SARS-

e

with full PAPR

panel of international experts where

both groups;

(9)

CoV-2

observation

n=50;

both groups wore an inner layer of

-larger series is needed to give greater

al case

2.1.outer layer

protection in addition to designated

confidence;

series of two

with goggles,

protective equipment;

-experts noted that outcome data, or

centres

FFP2/N95

A number of recommendations were

the association between level of PPE

with a face

made on the analysis of data and

and coronavirus transmission from the

shield n=22;

opinion on experts;

current epidemic are lacking;

3

2.2 outer layer
with goggles,
FFP/N95 with
a full hood
without
positive
pressure
n=130;
Zamora et al

Simulation

Prospective

50

1.Evaluate any

2.Donning non-

-13/50 any contamination PAPR group;

2006

assessment

randomised

participants

contamination,

compliance;

-48/50 any contamination E-RCP

(10)

of

controlled

(PAPR versus

size of

3.Doffing non-

group;

contaminati

cross over

E-RCP)

contamination

compliance;

-15/50 donning non-compliance PAPR;

on

study

area;

2

-2/50 donning non-compliance E-RCP;
-6/50 doffing non-compliance PAPR
-12/50 doffing non-compliance E-RCP;

Studies:

1.
Andonian J, Kazi S, Therkorn J, Benishek L, Billman C, Schiffhauer M, et al. Effect of an Intervention Package and Teamwork Training to
Prevent Healthcare Personnel Self-contamination During Personal Protective Equipment Doffing. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication
of the Infectious Diseases Society of America. 2019;69(Supplement_3):S248-S55.
2.
Chughtai AA, Seale H, Rawlinson WD, Kunasekaran M, Macintyre CR. Selection and Use of Respiratory Protection by Healthcare Workers to
Protect from Infectious Diseases in Hospital Settings. Ann Work Expo Health. 2020;64(4):368-77.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Yao et al

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

3.
Chughtai AA, Chen X, Macintyre CR. Risk of self-contamination during doffing of personal protective equipment. American journal of
infection control. 2018;(no pagination).
4.
El-Boghdadly K, Wong DJN, Owen R, Neuman MD, Pocock S, Carlisle JB, et al. Risks to healthcare workers following tracheal intubation of
patients with COVID-19: a prospective international multicentre cohort study. Anaesthesia. 2020.
5.
Powell JB, Kim JH, Roberge RJ. Powered air-purifying respirator use in healthcare: Effects on thermal sensations and comfort. J Occup
Environ Hyg. 2017;14(12):947-54.
6.
Schumacher J, Gray SA, Weidelt L, Brinker A, Prior K, Stratling WM. Comparison of powered and conventional air-purifying respirators
during simulated resuscitation of casualties contaminated with hazardous substances. Emergency medicine journal. 2009;26(7):501-5.
7.
Schumacher J, Gray SA, Michel S, Alcock R, Brinker A. Respiratory protection during simulated emergency pediatric life support: a
randomized, controlled, crossover study. Prehospital and disaster medicine. 2013;28(1):33-8.
8.
Schumacher J, Arlidge J, Dudley D, Sicinski M, Ahmad I. The impact of respiratory protective equipment on difficult airway management: a
randomised, crossover, simulation study. Anaesthesia. 2020.
9.
Yao W, Wang T, Jiang B, Gao F, Wang L, Zheng H, et al. Emergency tracheal intubation in 202 patients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China:
lessons learnt and international expert recommendations. British Journal of Anaesthesia.
10.
Zamora JE, Murdoch J, Simchison B, Day AG. Contamination: a comparison of 2 personal protective systems. CMAJ. 2006;175(3):249-54.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Primary Outcome: 2. Contamination of skin or clothing measured with any type of test material to
visualize contamination;
Question: PAPR compared to E-RCP for respiratory protection in healthcare workers dealing with patients infected with highly virulent viral diseases?
Setting: Aerosol Generating Procedures or Prolonged Contact with Infected Patients
Bibliography: Zamora 2006(1) Chughtai 2018 (2);
Certainty assessment
№ of
studies

Study design

№ of patients

Risk of
bias

Inconsistency

PAPR

E-RCP

Relative
(95% CI)

Absolute
(95% CI)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

13/50
(26.0%)

48/50
(96.0%)

RR 0.27
(0.17 to
0.43)

701
fewer
per
1,000
(from
797
fewer to
547
fewer)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

10/50
(20.0%)

48/50
(96.0%)

RR 0.21
(0.12 to
0.36)

758
fewer
per
1,000
(from
845
fewer to
614
fewer)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

50

50

-

mean
81.1
lower
(96.07
lower to
66.13
lower)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

15/50
(30.0%)

2/50 (4.0%)

RR 7.50
(1.81 to
31.10)

260
more
per
1,000
(from 32
more to
1,000
more)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

6/50 (12.0%)

12/50
(24.0%)

RR 0.50
(0.20 to
1.23)

120
fewer
per
1,000
(from
192
fewer to
55
more)

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

0/6 (0.0%)

4/24 (16.7%)

not
estimable

Indirectness Imprecision

Other
considerations

Effect
Certainty

Importance

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

Any contamination
1
Zamora
et al
2006

randomised
trials
(Zamora2006)

Contamination greater than 1 cm
1

randomised
trials
(Zamora2006)

Size of the contamination area
1

randomised
trials
(Zamora2006)

Donning non-compliance
1

randomised
trials
(Zamora2006)

Doffing non-compliance
1

randomised
trials
(Zamora2006)

Any contamination
1

observational
studies
(Chughtai2018)

CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio

⨁
VERY LOW

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Secondary Outcomes:
1. level of wearer comfort, visibility and audibility whilst using the PAPR over
alternative respiratory protection;
2. objective and/or subjective measures of work of breathing during the use
of PAPR versus alternative respiratory protective equipment;
Question: PAPR compared to other respiratory protection for infection control methods for level of wearer comfort
Question: What is the level of wearer comfort with PAPR
Setting: Aerosol Generating Procedures or Prolonged Contact with Infected Patients
Bibliography: Chughtai et al 2020 (3), Chughtai et al 2018 (2), Powell et al 2017, (4) Scumacher et al 2020, Scumacher et al 2013 , Schumacher et al 2009 (5-8)
Certainty assessment
№ of
studies

Study design

Risk of
bias

Inconsistency

№ of patients

Indirectness Imprecision

Other
considerations

PAPR

Effect

other
respiratory
protection

Relative
(95% CI)

Absolute
(95% CI)

-

Certainty

Importance

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

Comfort of donning PAPR
1
Chughtai et
al 2020

observational
studies

extremely
serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
reduce the
demonstrated
effect

14/20
(70.0%)

-

-

extremely
serious

serious

serious

serious

strong association
all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

15/20
(75.0%)

0.0%

not
estimable

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

8/30 (26.7%)

24/24
(100.0%)

not
estimable

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

Comfort of doffing PAPR
1
Chughtai et
al 2018

observational
studies

Level of reported wearer discomfort
2
Chughtai et
al 2020
Chughtai et
al 2018

observational
studies

extremely
serious

0.0%

Level of wearer comfort on a self reported scale
1
Powell et
2017

observational
studies

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

36

12

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁
VERY LOW

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

36

12

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁
VERY LOW

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

36

12

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁
VERY LOW

Self reported work of breathing
1
Powell et al
2017

observational
studies

Facial temperature as a surrogate measure of wearer comfort
1
Powell et al
2017

observational
studies

serious

serious

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .
Certainty assessment
№ of
studies

Study design

Risk of
bias

Inconsistency

№ of patients

Indirectness Imprecision

Other
considerations

Effect

PAPR

other
respiratory
protection

Relative
(95% CI)

Absolute
(95% CI)

Certainty

Self-reported perception of heat build up as a measure of wearer comfort
2
Schumacher
et al 2013
And
Schumacher
2020

randomised
trials

serious

not serious

not serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

116

232

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁⨁⨁
MODERATE

serious

not serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
reduce the
demonstrated
effect

100

200

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁⨁⨁
MODERATE

serious

not serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
reduce the
demonstrated
effect

130

260

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁⨁⨁
MODERATE

serious

Self-reported perception of visibility as a measure of wearer comfort
1
Schumacher
et al 2020

randomised
trials

serious

not serious

Self-reported perception of audibility/communication
3
Schumacher
al 2020
Schumacher
et al 2013
Schumacher
et al 2009

randomised
trials

serious

not serious

Self-reported perception of mobility as a measure of wearer comfort
2
Schumacher
et al 2013
Schumacher
et al 2009

randomised
trials

serious

not serious

serious

not serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

30

60

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁⨁⨁
MODERATE

serious

not serious

serious

not serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was
observed

14

28

-

0
(0 to 0 )

⨁⨁⨁
MODERATE

Self reported work of breathing
1
Schumacher
et al 2009

randomised
trials

CI: Confidence interval

Importance

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Secondary Outcome: 4. impact of structured training programs on PAPR use over alternative training or
no teaching;
Question: Should structured training in PPE( including PAPR) compared to no structured training be implemented for Healthcare workers?
Setting: Perioperative patient care
Bibliography: Andonian 2019 (9)
Certainty assessment
№ of
studies

Study
design

Risk of
bias

Inconsistency Indirectness

№ of patients

Imprecision

Other
considerations

Effect

structured
training in
PPE(
including
PAPR)

no structured
training

Relative
(95% CI)

11/13
(84.6%)

13/13
(100.0%)

not estimable

Absolute
(95% CI)

Certainty

Importance

⨁
VERY LOW

IMPORTANT

Number of Healthworkers contaminating at least one body surface with fluorescein
1
Andonian
et al
2019

randomised
trials

serious

serious

serious

serious

all plausible
residual
confounding would
suggest spurious
effect, while no
effect was observed

CI: Confidence interval; RR: Risk ratio

1.
Zamora JE, Murdoch J, Simchison B, Day AG. Contamination: a comparison of 2 personal protective
systems. CMAJ. 2006;175(3):249-54.
2.
Chughtai AA, Chen X, Macintyre CR. Risk of self-contamination during doffing of personal protective
equipment. American journal of infection control. 2018;(no pagination).
3.
Chughtai AA, Seale H, Rawlinson WD, Kunasekaran M, Macintyre CR. Selection and Use of
Respiratory Protection by Healthcare Workers to Protect from Infectious Diseases in Hospital Settings. Ann
Work Expo Health. 2020;64(4):368-77.
4.
Powell JB, Kim JH, Roberge RJ. Powered air-purifying respirator use in healthcare: Effects on thermal
sensations and comfort. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2017;14(12):947-54.
5.
Laboratory performance evaluation of N95 filtering facepiece respirators, 1996. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep. 1998;47(48):1045-9.
6.
Schumacher J, Arlidge J, Dudley D, Sicinski M, Ahmad I. The impact of respiratory protective
equipment on difficult airway management: a randomised, crossover, simulation study. Anaesthesia. 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

7.
Schumacher J, Gray SA, Michel S, Alcock R, Brinker A. Respiratory protection during simulated
emergency pediatric life support: a randomized, controlled, crossover study. Prehospital and disaster medicine.
2013;28(1):338.
8.
Schumacher J, Gray SA, Weidelt L, Brinker A, Prior K, Stratling WM. Comparison of powered and
conventional air-purifying respirators during simulated resuscitation of casualties contaminated with hazardous
substances. Emergency medicine journal. 2009;26(7):5015.
9.
Andonian J, Kazi S, Therkorn J, Benishek L, Billman C, Schiffhauer M, et al. Effect of an Intervention
Package and Teamwork Training to Prevent Healthcare Personnel Self-contamination During Personal
Protective Equipment Doffing. Clinical infectious diseases : an official publication of the Infectious Diseases
Society of America. 2019;69(Supplement_3):S248-S55.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153288; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Database: Ovid MEDLINE(R) ALL <1946 to May 12, 2020>
Search Strategy:
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------1 Respiratory Insufficiency/ or Pneumonia, Viral/ or Lung Diseases/ or Respiratory Protective Devices/ or Pressure
Ulcer/ or Continuous Positive Airway Pressure/ or Humans/ or respiratory devices.mp. or Coronavirus Infections/
2 Masks/ or masks.mp.
3 1 or 2
4 E-RCP.mp.
5 exp Respiratory Protective Devices/ or filtering face piece.mp. or exp Masks/
6 N-95.mp.
7 FFP2.mp.
8 FFP3.mp.
9 air-purifying respirator.mp. or Respiratory Protective Devices/
10 powered air-purifying respirator.mp.
11 3 or 4 or 5 or 6 or 7 or 8 or 9 or 10
12 exp Health Personnel/
13 nurse.tw.
14 dentist.tw.
15 medical worker.tw.
16 ambulance.tw.
17 physio.tw.
18 physician.tw.
19 transport.tw.
20 12 or 13 or 14 or 15 or 16 or 17 or 18 or 19
21 11 and 21
22 Ebolavirus/ or Hemorrhagic Fevers, Viral/ or Hemorrhagic Fever, Ebola/ or ebola.mp.
23 Disease Transmission, Infectious/ or disease transmission.mp. or Communicable Diseases/
24 SARS Virus/ or Betacoronavirus/ or Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome/
25 Coronavirus Infections/ or Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome/ or SARS Virus/ or Pneumonia, Viral/ or
Betacoronavirus/
26 SARS Virus/ or Pneumonia, Viral/ or Coronavirus Infections/ or SARS-CoV-2.mp. or Betacoronavirus/
27 MERS.mp. or Middle East Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus/ or Coronavirus/
28 Coronavirus Infections/ or Pneumonia, Viral/ or human-to- human transmission.mp.
29 22 or 23 or 24 or 25 or 26 or 27 or 28
30 20 and 29

