medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Calming the Cytokine Storm - Splenic Ultrasound for Treating Inflammatory
Disorders and Potentially COVID-19
Authors
Rachel S. Graham1, Daniel P. Zachs2, Victoria Cotero3, Catherine D’Agostino4, Despoina
Ntiloudi5, Claire R.W. Kaiser2, John Graf3, Kirk Wallace3, Thomas R. Coleman5, Jeffrey Ashe3,
John Pellerito4, Kevin J. Tracey5, Bryce Binstadt6, Sangeeta S. Chavan4, Stavros Zanos4,
Christopher Puleo3, Erik Peterson7¶, and Hubert H. Lim1,2¶
Affiliations
1
Department of Otolaryngology - Head & Neck Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
MN, 55455, USA.
2
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, 55455,
USA.
3
General Electric Research, 1 Research Circle, Niskayuna, NY, 12309, USA.
4
Department of Radiology, North Shore University Hospital, 300 Community Drive, Manhasset,
NY, 11030, USA.
5
Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research, 350 Community Drive, Manhasset, NY, 11030 USA.
6
Center for Immunology and Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
55455, MN, USA
7
Department of Medicine, Division of Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases, University of
Minnesota, 420 Delaware Street SE, MMC 108, Minneapolis, MN, 55455, USA
¶
These authors equally contributed as senior authors
Abstract
Hyperinflammation and uncontrolled cytokine release, which can be seen in severe cases of
COVID-19, require therapy to reduce the innate immune response without hindering necessary
adaptive immune mechanisms. Here, we show results from the first in-human trials using noninvasive ultrasound stimulation of the spleen to reduce cytokine release in the context of both an
acute response in healthy subjects and a chronic inflammatory condition in rheumatoid arthritis
patients. Splenic ultrasound results in a reduction in TNF serum levels, as well as IL-1β and IL-8
transcript levels in monocytes. There is also a down regulation of pathways involved in TNF and
IL-6 production, and IFNγ- and NFκB-regulated genes. Many of these cytokines or pathways are
upregulated in COVID-19 patients. There is also a reduction in chemokine transcript levels and
other components of the chemotactic response, suggesting that reduction of cellular migration
may contribute to the therapeutic effects of ultrasound. There is no inhibition of the adaptive
immune response with ultrasound treatment relating to antibody production. This is consistent
with a pre-clinical animal model where enhanced antibody production was achieved with splenic
ultrasound. Therefore, this new splenic ultrasound approach has the potential to treat acute and
chronic hyper-inflammatory diseases, as it lowers cytokine levels without disrupting the normal
adaptive immune response. Portable ultrasound technologies are currently being developed and
translated to the clinic to treat various inflammatory disorders, with more recent efforts directed
towards combatting the hyperinflammation or ‘cytokine storm’ in COVID-19 patients.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Cytokines release by cells of the innate immune system drive inflammation (1, 2). Inflammatory
reactions are typical in response to microbial or viral infection but can lead to health problems or
life-threatening conditions if there is a persistent hyperactive innate immune response, involving
cytokine toxicity and tissue damage (2, 3). A recent and devastating example is the
hyperinflammation caused by the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19, disease associated with
SARS-CoV-2 viral infection). It is estimated that 17% of COVID-19 cases experience a ‘cytokine
storm’ that leads to severe or fatal respiratory disease, known as acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) (4-6). In addition to other acute conditions, such as sepsis and acute kidney
injury (7, 8), hyperinflammation is an issue that occurs across multiple chronic inflammatory
systemic diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and irritable bowel syndrome (9, 10). The
current pharmacologic approaches to treating hyperinflammation are associated with multiple side
effects and high costs.
Over the past 20 years, researchers within the field of bioelectronic medicine have investigated an
unconventional approach for treating inflammation through the use of vagus nerve stimulation (1113). Electrical stimulation of the vagus nerve activates the splenic nerve and cells within the spleen,
leading to activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway (14, 15). This pathway depends
on splenic nerve release of norepinephrine that activates acetyltransferase -expressing T
lymphocytes, which in turn modulates innate immune cells to decrease systemic levels of key proinflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6, IL-15 and TNF (16, 17). Furthermore, electrical vagus nerve
stimulation has been shown in mice and humans to provide therapeutic anti-inflammatory effects
for chronic inflammatory diseases (e.g., RA and irritable bowel syndrome) and for acute
inflammation (e.g., sepsis, renal ischemia, trauma/hemorrhagic shock, and acute lung injury
following trauma/hemorrhagic shock; (16, 18-21).
Direct vagus nerve stimulation requires invasive implantation procedures. Several groups have
pursued non-invasive ultrasound stimulation of the spleen as a safer, non-surgical approach for
modulating the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. Since the vagus nerve projects to the brain
and multiple organs throughout the body (22), targeting neurons or cells specifically within the
spleen can reduce unintended activation or side effects. There has been a recent surge of research
which demonstrates the ability to activate or modulate cells with ultrasound energy (23-28) There
are several studies in rodents showing the ability to modulate the splenic nerve or immune cells
within the spleen with ultrasound, to reduce inflammation and cytokine levels (29-33). One of the
initial reports was in a mouse model of reperfusion injury and kidney inflammation, where
ultrasound stimulation of the spleen significantly reduced kidney damage (29, 34). Recently, our
research groups discovered that specific parameters of ultrasound stimulation of the spleen can
drive significant anti-inflammatory effects in rodent models of both chronic inflammation
(inflammatory arthritis) and acute inflammation (sepsis) (31, 32), which was shown to be mediated
through a similar cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway accessed through vagus nerve
stimulation. Ultrasound is a potentially impactful clinical solution to inflammation as it can be
applied non-invasively to the body with a wearable device and with energy parameters already
shown to be safe for the human body based on numerous ultrasound imaging applications (35, 36).
Here, we show the first in-human results of pro-inflammatory cytokine reduction with noninvasive ultrasound stimulation of the spleen. In healthy individuals, a single three-minute
administration of splenic ultrasound stimulation significantly inhibits whole blood TNF production
upon ex vivo exposure to endotoxin compared to sham controls. In RA patients, we observed that

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

daily splenic ultrasound stimulation results in reduction of blood-borne transcripts encoding for
pro-inflammatory markers IL-1β, IL-8, and NFκB, as well as suppresses pathways involved in IL6 and TNF production. Ultrasound also reduces pathways involved with monocyte migration,
contributing to its anti-inflammatory effect. From a safety perspective, circulating immune cell
composition does not change with ultrasound treatment, and ultrasound does not inhibit the
adaptive immune response in humans. Our additional pre-clinical animal data further demonstrates
that in addition to dampening cytokine output and circulating monocyte invasiveness, prophylactic
ultrasound activation of the splenic neuroimmune pathway results in enhanced antibody response
upon exposure to an inflammatory antigen. Thus, activation of the splenic neuroimmune pathway
may provide a low risk therapeutic approach for a broad range of health conditions, due to its
pleotropic nature and physiological role in suppressing specific cytokines involved in innate
immunity while enhancing the transition to and maintenance of the adaptive immune response (18,
37, 38). Together, these data suggest great potential for splenic ultrasound as a low-risk clinical
therapy for a range of acute or chronic inflammatory diseases without requiring surgery or intake
of artificial substances with possible side effects.
Considering that many of the same pro-inflammatory molecules suppressed by ultrasound are
implicated as molecular drivers in COVID-19 patients with severe disease, ultrasound also has
potential as a non-invasive therapy to combat this pandemic. Drug based suppression of these
cytokines for tissue protection comes with the risk of inhibiting viral clearance or increasing
susceptibility to bacterial co-infections (39, 40). Non-invasive ultrasound activation of the splenic
neuroimmune pathway may provide an alternative method to combat the cytokine storm without
compromising the adaptive immune response in COVID-19 patients, ultimately reducing the high
mortality and morbidity rates confronting this worldwide pandemic that currently has limited
treatment options.
Results
Non-invasive Splenic Ultrasound Reduces TNF in Humans
To investigate how non-invasive ultrasound stimulation of the spleen affects cytokine levels
directly in human subjects, healthy participants were recruited into a study designed to investigate
effect of different ultrasound parameters and locations of stimulation in the spleen on various
immune and metabolic responses during acute stimulation (feasibility study described at
clinicaltrials.gov: NCT03548116). Due to the urgency of identifying potential treatment options
for COVID-19 patients, data pertaining specifically to ultrasound stimulation of the hilum of the
spleen with the most effective intensity parameter in the study (corresponding to one cohort from
the study) are presented in this paper.
Participants received pulsed ultrasound stimulation of the spleen for three minutes (2.2 MHz, 1 Hz
pulse repetition frequency, 290.4 mW/cm2 ISPTA) using the GE LOGIQ E9 ultrasound system with
the C1-6 probe. An ultrasonographer first identified and targeted the hilum of the spleen, then
delivered the pulsed ultrasound stimulus using a modified elastography software setting in the
system. Sham stimulation control subjects underwent the same procedure as the stimulated group,
including transducer placement and movement of the ultrasound probe to the proper splenic
location trajectory, but with no ultrasound energy being transmitted to the spleen from the
transducer. Since healthy subjects have low serum TNF levels, we revealed changes in
inflammatory status using whole blood challenged with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) ex vivo. This ex

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

vivo cytokine production assay has been previously used to verify splenic neuroimmune activation
using implanted vagus nerve stimulators and is a well-established method for non-invasively
assessing activation of neuroimmune pathways (18, 41-43). A reduction in LPS-induced TNF
production in blood sampled from ultrasound stimulated subjects was tested at multiple LPS
concentrations (Fig. 1A) and significant reduction is observed when comparing the ultrasound
stimulated group to the non-stimulated controls (Fig. 1B; p-value = 0.006 using Wilcoxon unpaired
rank-sum test) at the optimal LPS concentration (1 ng/mL; Fig.1A). These data are consistent with
earlier reports using implanted nerve stimulators or pharmaceutical activators of the splenic
pathway (18, 42). They are also consistent with the magnitude of TNF reduction using similar
ultrasound stimulation parameters in a previous study activating the neuroimmune pathway in a
rodent model of endotoxemia (31). Further supporting the human results, we also demonstrated
that splenic ultrasound stimulation in a rodent model achieves a reduction across a number of proinflammatory cytokines beyond TNF, including IL-6, IFNγ, IL-1β, IL-1α, and IL-12 in splenic
lysates (Fig. S1), which is consistent with previous reports using implanted vagus nerve stimulators
(18, 44).
Figure 1. Non-invasive
ultrasound stimulation
of the spleen reduces
TNF production in
human subjects. A)
Whole blood from all
subjects and samples
was incubated with LPS
at
multiple
concentrations.
TNF
response after LPS
incubation is shown for
one
ultrasound
stimulated subject from
samples collected before
(0 hours baseline) and
after (2 hours post
stimulation) ultrasound
application. The optimal
dose of LPS for
measuring the immunomodulatory response to ultrasound was found to be at 1 ng/mL, and this is used for comparing
the TNF response between the ultrasound stimulated versus control groups. B) Ultrasound stimulation of the spleen
decreases whole-blood LPS-induced TNF release, where blood was obtained from 18 healthy human subjects prior to
and then two hours following splenic ultrasound application (stimulated: n=9, control: n=9). The data shown were
taken from the 1 ng/ml LPS concentration for each dose response curve for all subjects and samples. p-value was
computed using the unpaired Wilcoxon rank-sum test.

Pro-inflammatory Cytokines and Signaling Pathways are Downregulated in Circulating
Monocytes with Ultrasound Treatment
Previous animal research demonstrated that ultrasound can significantly reduce inflammation and
improve clinical measures in a chronic inflammatory arthritis model (32). Expanding upon the
findings in healthy human subjects in the previous section, we initiated a controlled, randomized
clinical trial of splenic ultrasound treatment in RA patients (clinical study described at
clinicaltrials.gov: NCT03690466). Participants received ultrasound stimulation to the spleen with
the goal of lowering the over-active inflammatory response that occurs during RA flare-ups. Up
to 20 RA patients are to be recruited into the study (enrollment is ongoing). Due to the urgency of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

identifying treatment options for this COVID-19 pandemic, data from single-cell RNA sequencing
(scRNA-seq) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) that has been collected thus far in
five ultrasound-treated patients have been analyzed ahead of completion of the study for inclusion
into this paper. PBMCs were isolated from whole blood taken from each research participant
before ultrasound treatment (day 0, pre-stimulation) and after two weeks of daily 30-minute
sessions of ultrasound to the spleen (day 14, post-stimulation). From these 10 samples (subjects =
5, timepoints = 2), a total of 53,343 PBMCs were successfully sequenced from single cells (Table
S1). In silico analysis identified 13 cell-types based on gene expression patterns of standardly used
marker genes (Fig. S2). Participants received stimulation with a 1 MHz transducer (1.2 W/cm2;
SoundCare Plus, Roscoe Medical) that was moved continuously across a 5-inch by 5-inch square,
centered on the spleen, as identified by an ultrasonographer. Further details on the clinical study
design is presented in the Materials and Methods section.
We aimed to identify molecular changes that occur with splenic ultrasound in humans to better
understand how this ultrasound treatment can drive an anti-inflammatory response. We observed
reduced monocyte expression of key pro-inflammatory cytokine genes encoding for IL-1β and IL8 from all five subjects post-stimulation compared with pre-stimulation (Fig. 2A, p-values given
for transcripts showing significance of p<0.05). Although this result was determined by analyzing
all monocytes, reduction of these two markers appears primarily in CD14+ monocytes as this is
the cell type showing predominant expression of those genes (Fig. 2B). The same analysis in CD8+
T cells show a decrease in transcripts that encode for IFNγ (Fig. 2A). The changes in transcript
level of these cytokines can only be detected when comparing within the same cell type before and
after treatment, within the cell that expresses the cytokine (Fig. S2). Consistent with known
expression patterns of IL1B and CXCL8 transcripts (encoding for IL-1β and IL-8), we see that
these transcripts are only suppressed in the monocytes where they are primarily detected. Likewise,
IFNG transcripts (encoding for IFNγ) are detected and found to be reduced in CD8+ T cells (Fig.
S2). In our dataset, other cytokines like TNF and IL-6 did not show a significant change in
monocytes; however, IL-6 transcripts were detected in only 66 of the 53,343 cells. Therefore, we
cannot definitively conclude if there is or is not a change in transcript levels encoding IL-6 with
ultrasound treatment.
Since monocytes play a critical role in the innate immune system and the inflammatory response,
we further focused our analyses on transcriptional changes that occur in circulating monocytes
after ultrasound treatment. Differential expression analysis of all monocytes across the five
subjects, pre- and post-ultrasound stimulation, shows 938 differentially expressed genes (pvalue<0.05) with 841 of those genes being down-regulated. These results reveal an overall shift in
reduction of gene transcripts in monocytes with ultrasound treatment. Additionally, this reduction
in transcript levels did not appear as a result of sequencing differences, as we observe no obvious
difference in the number of cells sequenced, the number of sequencing reads, or number of average
genes detected per cell between monocytes taken from day 0 as compared to day 14 (Table S1,
‘CD14 Mono’ and ‘CD16 Mono’). Although these gene transcripts are defined as differentially
expressed when comparing monocytes from all subjects (Fig. 2A), we also observe that for most
genes, this down-regulation is consistent across subjects (Fig. 2C; columns represent cell-type
averages for CD14+ and CD16+ cells for each subject that are similar across columns for many of
the genes).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure
2.
Splenic
ultrasound
treatment
reduces cytokines and
downstream pathways
in-vivo in RA patients.
A) Single cell RNA
sequencing of PBMCs
from
RA
patient
receiving 14 days of 30minute daily ultrasound
stimulation
of
the
spleen. Samples were
collected pre- (day 0)
and
post-stimulation
(day
14)
with
ultrasound. Dot plot
shows percent of CD14+
and CD16+ monocytes
(top) or CD8+ T cells
(bottom) that express the
transcript (labeled on the
left) represented by size,
and scaled expression
level represented by
color
(obtained
by
subtracting the mean and
dividing by the standard
deviation). Key proinflammatory cytokines
are
shown
with
unadjusted
p-values
labeled
for
those
transcripts significantly
downregulated (p-value
<0.05).
B)
UMAP
showing
top
two
dimensions (principal
components)
contributing
to
variability within the
dataset.
UMAP
diagrams
showing
CD14+ and CD16+
monocytes represented
by orange and green
dots, respectively. IL-1β
and CXCL8 expression
on day 0 and day 14 are also mapped on these UMAP diagrams. C) Heatmap displaying the average relative expression
(for all cells in specified group) of downregulated transcripts (genes listed on the right, p-value <0.05). Color denotes
relative expression for post-ultrasound levels compared to (divided by) pre-ultrasound levels for each subject
(represented by columns, n = 5, participant A-E shown left to right) in CD14+ cells or CD16+ cells. Genes encoding
for cytokine receptors, components of the JAK/STAT pathway, MAP kinases, and transcription factor (TF) are
grouped and labeled on the left of the plot.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

These results are quite consistent given the high variability or inhomogeneity in age, sex, physical
characteristics, disease properties and past treatments across subjects (participants A-E in Table
S2 correspond to columns 1-5 in Fig. 2C, respectively). Within these down-regulated genes in
monocytes, we also observe that many cytokine receptors, such as those for TNF, IL-6, IL-17, IL13, and IFNγ were reduced with ultrasound treatment (Fig. 2C). Furthermore, components of
signaling pathways downstream of these cytokines are also down regulated, including components
of the JAK/STAT pathway, MAP kinases, and pro-inflammatory transcription factor NFκB (Fig.
2C). Together, these findings demonstrate a consistent and robust reduction in transcripts encoding
key pro-inflammatory cytokines and cellular signaling molecules downstream of their receptors
after 14 days of daily splenic ultrasound treatment across all five subjects.
Suppression of Multiple Pathways that Contribute to the Pro-inflammatory Response
Cytokines trigger multiple cellular pathways, which then contribute to systemic inflammation. Our
transcriptomic data reveal that many genes known to be regulated by IFNγ and NFκB are
subsequently
downregulated
with
ultrasound
treatment,
further promoting a cascade of
suppression across multiple proinflammatory pathways with
ultrasound treatment (Fig. 3A).
We sought to determine if the
840 down-regulated genes in
monocytes showed statistical
enrichment for functional Gene
Ontology (GO)terms associated
Figure 3. Reduction of proinflammatory pathway components in
monocytes with ultrasound treatment.
A) Volcano plot showing all detected
genes in monocytes, highlighting
differentially expressed genes (p-value
<0.05) and labeled IFNγ-regulated
genes that are down regulated, as well
as NFκB-regulated genes that are down
regulated as characterized by KEGG
pathway gene lists. B) Gene ontology
(GO) analysis using Bioconductor
package
‘topGO’,
determining
functional GO terms significantly
enriched within downregulated genes in
monocytes. Enriched GO terms
associated with cytokine production are
shown, where bars represent number of
significant genes in a list relative to
number of genes that would be expected
by chance, and with number of genes
contributing to each GO term
represented by the shade of blue. pvalues for each term shown is from
Fisher exact test.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

with inflammation. The GO system of classification assigns genes (for differentially expressed
gene list) into bins based on their functional characteristics. Gene sets can then be analyzed for
GO terms that are statistically over-represented among that set, allowing for a better understanding
of which biological processes (e.g., inflammation) may be changed with treatment. Out of the top
statistically enriched GO terms for the down-regulated genes, we observe many that contribute to
pro-inflammatory cellular processes. Genes suppressed by ultrasound show enrichment of GO
terms including “inflammatory response” (p-value = 1.50 Ε-5, Table S3), “cytokine-mediated
signaling pathway,” and “cellular response to cytokine stimulus” (p-values = 9.7 E-5 and 6.7E-6,
Fig. 3B). We also observe enriched GO terms associated with positive regulation of TNF, IL-6,
and IL-8 among the down-regulated genes, suggesting that inducing signals for TNF or IL-6 are
also suppressed, despite the absences of significant change in TNF or IL-6 transcript levels (Fig.
3B). These GO term results show that many gene transcripts encoding for cellular inflammatory
functions go down after ultrasound treatment.

Down-regulation of Components Involved in Monocyte Migration

Figure 4. Ultrasound results in
downregulation of cellular
migration components in
CD14+
monocytes.
A)
Heatmap
displaying
the
average relative expression
(for all cells in specified group)
of significantly downregulated
transcripts (genes listed on the
right) for post-ultrasound
compared to (divided by) preultrasound levels for each
subject
(represented
by
columns, n = 5) in CD14+
cells.
Genes
encoding
components
involved
in
monocyte chemotaxis and cell
migration are grouped and
labeled to the left. B) Enriched
GO
terms
within
downregulated
genes
in
CD14+ cells are shown, where
bars represent the number of
significant genes in the list
relative to the number of genes
that would be expected by
chance, and with the number of
genes contributing to each term
represented by the shade of
blue.. p-value for each term
shown is based on Fisher exact
test.

Within circulating monocytes, we observe ultrasound-treatment associated GO term enrichment
of cellular components associated with IL-8 functionality (Fig. 3B), as well as a robust reduction
in IL-8 across subjects (Fig. 4A, columns represent subject cell type averages). IL-8 is a chemokine
(chemotactic factor), which stimulates neutrophil movement towards inflammatory sites.
Therefore, we further assessed if ultrasound influences other signaling molecules involved with
cellular migration (e.g., to sites of inflammation). GO term analysis of down-regulated genes in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

CD14+ monocytes show enrichment of “positive regulation of cell migration” among the top 15
significantly enriched GO terms. Other GO terms, such as “lamellipodium assembly” (facilitates
cell mobility), “ephrin receptor signaling” (promotes cell adhesion), and “actin nucleation”
(involved with cell locomotion), all suggest that ultrasound treatment induces down regulation of
genes involved with cell migration (Fig. 4B). Furthermore, genes that more specifically contribute
to “monocyte chemotaxis” are down-regulated post-ultrasound stimulation in CD14+ monocytes
and many of these genes are consistently reduced across all five subjects (Fig. 4A), even with quite
variable or inhomogeneous patient characteristics (Table S2).
Immune Cell Repertoire
Unchanged with Moderate
Degree of Suppression
We sought to determine how
ultrasound
affects
the
circulating immune cell
repertoire. In comparing the
transcriptional profiles (based
on principal component
analysis
and
UMAP
dimensional reduction) of all
circulating peripheral blood
mononuclear cells pre- and
post-ultrasound stimulation,
Figure 5. Ultrasound provides a
moderate effect on the immune
system. A) UMAP showing top two
dimensions (principal components)
contributing to variability within the
dataset. All cells are shown,
consisting of 53,343 cells from 10
samples (subjects = 5, timepoints =
2) with cell type and timepoint
represented by color showing
transcriptional
signatures
and
relative number of cells is consistent
between timepoints. B) Box plot
showing median percent of each cell
type (subjects, n =5) captured before
ultrasound stimulation (day 0,
orange, open squares) and after
ultrasound stimulation (day 14, blue,
open triangles) with filled in circles
representing outliers. No statistical
difference was detected using a
paired Wilcoxon ranked-sum test
(Table S4). C) Percent down
regulation range is shown after 14
days of ultrasound stimulation for
each gene (represented by dots) in
each functional category described
previously.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

we observe remarkable consistency (Fig. 5A). Also, the calculated relative percent of each celltype for each subject is displayed, and based on a paired Wilcoxon rank sum test for pre- and poststimulation for each cell type, we observe no significant difference in the relative proportions of
percent contribution of any of the 13 cell types (Fig. 5B, statistics shown in Table S4).
Additionally, when comparing the number of cells sequenced for each cell type per participant
there is no significant difference between timepoints (i.e. no technical bias, Table S4).
We also determined what degree of suppression occurred after ultrasound stimulation for genes
involved in inflammation (genes shown in Fig. 2C, 3A and 4A). Most genes show a ~5-15%
reduction in transcript levels, suggesting a moderate degree of suppression, with IL-8 and genes
involved in cell migration showing the highest degree of suppression (>15%, Fig. 5C). These
findings suggest that spleen-targeted ultrasound can potentially provide a way to blunt the elevated
release of circulating cytokines and chemokines in inflammatory disorders or viral infections,
without disrupting the overall immune cell repertoire.
B Cells Retain Antibody Production Abilities
One concern in treating acute hyperinflammation is that the therapy may suppress the adaptive
immune response, and the ability of the immune system to provide pathogen clearance and/or
protection from co-infection with a second pathogen. Therefore, we assessed whether non-invasive
splenic ultrasound treatment suppresses the adaptive immune response or more specifically
antibody production. Our transcriptomic data do not suggest a suppression of the adaptive immune
response. In fact, we observe that among genes upregulated in B cells, there is an enrichment for
GO terms associated with “B cell activation” (Fig. 6A). Genes associated with this GO term
include transcripts that encode for IgA, IgG, and IgM antibodies. Interestingly, these gene
transcripts are upregulated in some of the ultrasound-treated subjects (Fig. 6B), though with greater
variability in results across subjects than was observed for suppression of cytokines and
chemokines in monocytes. For example, we observe that for average transcript levels across B
cells, transcripts encoding IgG are only upregulated in 2 or 3 subjects (IGHG2 and IGHG4,
respectively) out of the 5 subjects. Regardless of the variability across subjects, these data support
that ultrasound treatment does not generally inhibit B cell activation and antibody production
across patients, and can even potentially enhance antibody production; thus, ultrasound is not
expected to compromise the adaptive immune response.
To further investigate the effects of splenic ultrasound stimulation on adaptive immune response
and antibody production, as well as the variability we observed across human subjects for
transcript levels that encode for IgA, IgG, and IgM antibodies, we performed additional
experiments using prophylactic ultrasound stimulation (i.e., ultrasound stimulation prior to antigen
exposure) in a rodent model of endotoxemia (31). We observe that splenic ultrasound stimulation
prior to endotoxin exposure (three minutes daily, once a day for 3 days followed by LPS injection
on the fourth day) results in a significant increase in IgM and IgG antibody production 24 hours
after LPS exposure compared to sham and/or non-LPS controls (p-values listed in Fig. 6C
description). Furthermore, this enhanced antibody output is dependent on the presence of the
toxin/antigen, as there is no observed ultrasound effect on antibody production in the absence of
LPS exposure. The increase in antibody transcript levels we observed in some of the human
subjects, and not in the others, may be attributed to those participants also having encountered an
antigen, such as a cold or other infection that was not identified during the study. This explanation
is further supported by a recent report demonstrating that brain-spleen neural pathways are capable

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

of modulating splenic plasma cells differentiation upon presentation of novel T Cell dependent
antigens (45).
Figure 6. Ultrasound
treatment does not
reduce
adaptive
immune response. A)
Enriched GO terms
within
upregulated
genes in all B cells are
shown, where bars
represent number of
significant genes in list
relative to number of
genes that would be
expected by chance,
and with number of
genes contributing to
each term represented
by red hue. p-value for
each term shown is
based on Fisher exact
test.
B)
Heatmap
displaying genes that
contribute to the GO
term
“positive
regulation of B cell
activation” within B
cells. Each column
represents
relative
average expression per
subject
for
prestimulation (left 5
columns) and poststimulation (right 5 columns) for each gene (labeled to the right). C) A rodent model of endotoxemia was used to
further characterize the effects of splenic ultrasound stimulation on antibody production (further details of experiments
are provided in Materials and Methods section). Box plot showing median levels of IgM (left) or IgG (right)
concentrations in serum (open circles represent individual animals) for naïve animals (no LPS + sham), animals
exposed to splenic ultrasound stimulation with no endotoxin (no LPS + ultrasound), animals exposed to the endotoxin
but receiving sham stimulation (LPS + sham), and animals receiving both LPS exposure and splenic ultrasound
stimulation (LPS + ultrasound). Animals receiving LPS + ultrasound showed significant increases in antibody
production when compared to each of the other groups using an unpaired Wilcoxon ranked-sum test for IgM (no LPS
+ sham, p = 0.00145; no LPS + ultrasound, p = 0.00155; LPS + sham, p =0.01757) and for IgG (no LPS + sham, p
=0.02930; no LPS + ultrasound, p = 0.00404; LPS + sham, p =0.04298). No other comparisons using this test showed
significance, p < 0.05.

Discussion
By presenting the first in-human data from two independent studies using different devices and
protocols, we have consistently demonstrated that non-invasive ultrasound stimulation of the
spleen drives anti-inflammatory effects in the context of both an acute response in healthy subjects
and a chronic inflammatory condition. In RA patients after two weeks of daily 30-minute
ultrasound treatment to the spleen, there was a reduction in cytokine IL-1β and chemokine IL-8 in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

circulating monocytes (Fig. 2). In healthy subjects, we also observed a significant reduction in
TNF levels produced by ex vivo LPS-stimulated whole blood, in individuals stimulated with 3
minutes of pulsed ultrasound (Fig. 1B).
In addition to the reduction of cytokines, we observed a reduction in activation of multiple
signaling pathways in circulating monocytes with ultrasound treatment. Cytokines signal by
binding to cell surface receptors to set off a cascade of intracellular events. Important cytokines in
the context of RA include TNF, IL-6, and IL-1β; their downstream intracellular pathways and
necessary signaling molecules include cytokine receptors, components of the JAK/STAT pathway,
MAP kinases and NFκB (46, 47). Many of the transcripts that encode for these critical components
are downregulated with ultrasound treatment in RA patients (Fig. 2B). This finding suggests that
in addition to cytokines and their immediate receptors, there is broad suppression of cellular proinflammatory pathways.
Down regulation of these various pro-inflammatory transcripts in RA patients occurs in the context
of chronic inflammation. However, these same pathways are also involved in acute inflammatory
responses (47). Genes induced by LPS-stimulated human monocytes include TNF, IL-1, IL-6, and
IL-8 (48). NFκB and associated pathways are also upregulated, and NFκB is activated via
phosphorylation during LPS exposure, allowing for a rapid induction of genes so the system can
respond in an acute inflammatory setting. These same cellular components are downregulated with
ultrasound treatment in our RA patients, suggesting that non-invasive splenic ultrasound could be
used clinically to suppress acute inflammation as well.
The discovery that splenic ultrasound can reduce or calm an overactive innate immune response
in humans is quite timely. Many of the same key inflammatory cytokines that are reduced with
ultrasound stimulation are elevated in COVID-19 patients. Recent studies have revealed that
COVID-19 patients consistently produce high levels of IL-1β, IL-8, IL-6, and TNF, which strongly
suggests dysregulation in the innate immune response (34-37). More specifically, SARS-CoV-2
infected individuals exhibit significantly higher expression levels of IL-1β and IL-6 transcripts in
circulating monocytes, as well as IFNγ in CD8+ T cells, shown through PBMC single-cell RNA
sequencing of COVID-19 patients (38). Single cell RNA sequencing has further shown that
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from patients with severe COVID-19 disease have higher levels of
IL-8, IL-6 and IL-1β compared to patients with only moderate disease (49). These molecules are
key components of the COVID-19 cytokine storm that function in acute lung injury to recruit
neutrophils to alveoli, inducing lung tissue damage (39). Recently, SARS-CoV-2 infection in
children has been associated with a novel multisystem inflammatory disease (MIS-C) resembling
toxic shock syndrome or atypical Kawasaki disease (50). Kawasaki disease also presents with
elevated transcripts levels of genes encoding for IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-17 (51); and along with
ARDS, is likely to be a condition caused by the COVID-19-induced cytokine storm (52). Clinical
therapies that can suppress these pro-inflammatory cytokines and reduce migration of circulating
immune cells to the lungs may be capable of treating patients with moderate to severe cases of
COVID-19 to calm the cytokine storm and prevent morbidity and mortality (Fig. 7A).
Ultrasound has the potential to prevent or improve severe symptoms associated with the cytokine
storm in COVID-19 patients. In addition to demonstrating the ability to reduce key proinflammatory cytokines and signaling pathways involved with a hyperactive innate immune
response, splenic ultrasound also reduces IL-8 and many components associated with cell
migration, specifically monocyte migration (Fig. 4). These findings are consistent with previous
animal studies showing that activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway suppresses

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

monocyte migration
in mice (46). Taken
together,
one
proposed mechanism
of
action
for
ultrasound treatment
is that ultrasound
modulates circulating
immune cells initially
within the spleen via
activation of the
cholinergic
antiinflammatory
pathway,
which
suppresses
proinflammatory
cytokines
and
signaling pathways,
as well as inhibiting
cellular
migration,
such that there is
reduced inflammation
at the target site (e.g.,
at joints in RA or
alveoli for COVID19;
Fig.
7A).
Furthermore, data in
humans and preclinical animal data
show an increase in
Figure 7. Non-invasive splenic ultrasound treatment for ameliorating immune
antibody production
hyperactivity for COVID-19. A) Schematic of the proposed mechanism of splenic
with
splenic
ultrasound treatment’s effect on circulating immune cells. Splenic ultrasound reduces
IL-1β, IL-8, TNF and likely monocyte migration to areas of inflammation (data
ultrasound.
These
supporting this model shown here, solid arrow). This treatment approach could help
results demonstrate
combat key elevated cytokines in alveoli and/or cellular migration to lungs in the
an
advantageous
context of COVID-19 (dashed arrow). B) A new wearable phased-array ultrasound
feature of splenic
device developed by SecondWave Systems (Minneapolis, Minnesota) designed
ultrasound compared
specifically for splenic stimulation to treat COVID-19 patients. C) The SecondWave
device is positioned over the ribs area and ultrasound energy is steered and focused to
to
pharmaceutical
target the spleen for daily treatment (e.g., 10 minutes of stimulation per session).
options
for
immunosuppression,
such as TNF, IL-6, or IL-1 blocking biologics (39, 40), in that cytokine suppression does not inhibit
other functions of the adaptive immune system, such as B cell activity or antibody production.
Indeed, splenic ultrasound may enhance the adaptive immune system through the recently
discovered brain-spleen neuroimmune pathway that enhances differentiation of antibodyproducing splenic plasma cells (SPPCs) upon antigen activation (45).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

One limitation of the presented results in the context of COVID-19 or a cytokine storm is that
ultrasound stimulation of the spleen may not generate anti-inflammatory effects sufficient to
suppress a severe infectious inflammatory response. The anti-inflammatory effects in this paper in
response to splenic ultrasound were demonstrated acutely (single 3-minute stimulation) in healthy
human subjects or to a moderate extent in RA patients. The question remains whether the antiinflammatory effects observed in healthy subjects or in patients with a chronic inflammation
disorder, such as RA, will translate to patients harboring a systemic viral infection, as observed for
COVID-19. This question will be answered through a clinical trial that is currently being set up at
the University of Minnesota together with GE Research to test this ultrasound approach in COVID19 patients funded by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA; Department of
Defense).
One key asset of the upcoming COVID-19 study is that GE’s cart-based ultrasound system (GE
LOGIQ E10) with enhanced targeting capabilities will be used on patients. In the ongoing RA
study at the University of Minnesota, a commercially available ultrasound device (SoundCare
Plus) was used on patients that did not have targeting capabilities tailored for the spleen. At the
onset of that RA study, SoundCare Plus was one of few devices that was already FDA regulated
for various stimulation applications; thus, this unit was selected for the RA study. The GE LOGIQ
E10 device can be used to better target and stimulate specific locations of the spleen, which the
GE team has already demonstrated with strong anti-inflammatory effects in healthy human
subjects (Fig. 1B). Previous animal studies have also demonstrated that stronger anti-inflammatory
effects are possible with better focusing of stimulation within the spleen or longer periods on a
given target (31, 32). Furthermore, sufficient activation of the cholinergic anti-inflammatory
pathway has been shown to combat acute and deadly cytokine storm conditions in sepsis animal
models, and the magnitude of cytokine suppression provided by ultrasound is consistent with the
protection provided by implant-based or pharmaceutical methods in these studies (31, 53, 54).
In parallel with the DARPA-funded study, both GE and a start-up company, SecondWave
Systems, are developing wearable or portable ultrasound systems for neuromodulation (Fig. 7B)
that can be positioned over the rib to steer and focus ultrasound energy to different locations of the
spleen or other organ targets (Fig. 7C). Both GE and SecondWave are currently organizing clinical
studies at multiples sites worldwide to assess the safety and feasibility of their therapeutic
ultrasound devices. Success with these initial clinical studies will propel further development and
scale-up efforts for splenic ultrasound technologies to meet the large-scale demand for COVID19, as well as open up opportunities to treat future viral infections and other inflammatory disorders
in combination with or in lieu of biologics.
Materials and Methods
Splenic ultrasound in healthy subjects: Design of clinical study
For the splenic ultrasound study involving healthy human subjects (clinicaltrials.gov:
NCT03548116), we provide the data from the two cohorts most relevant to the planned DARPA
sponsored COVID study: the sham control cohort (i.e., no ultrasound, with only mechanical
pressure over the spleen) and a splenic ultrasound stimulation cohort (i.e., 290.4 mW/cm2 ISPTA or
1.4 mechanical index (MI) using the shear wave elastography setting on GE LOGIQ E9) that
insonified a single site (i.e., the splenic hilum; as identified by a trained ultrasonographer
performing the stimulation). The trial was carried out in accordance with International Conference

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

on Harmonisation Good Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and the United States Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part
56, and 21 CFR Part 812). The protocol, informed consent form, recruitment materials, and all
participant materials were submitted and approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
Northwell Health.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria. To be eligible to participate in the study, an individual must have
met the following criteria: aged between 18 and 45 years, be without physical disability or
conditions that may make them incapable of undergoing the study procedures or otherwise place
them at greater harm, be without significant past medical or surgical histories that would render
them at a greater risk of harm, be considered English proficient due to the study requirement to
follow verbal commands during the ultrasound session, be considered active as assessed by type
of activity (e.g., walking or running) and number of hours a week performing the various activities,
be able to attend all study visits at approximately the same time of day, be able to comprehend the
study goals and procedures, and able to provide informed consent for participation. See Table S5
for subject characteristics used in the cytokine analysis shown in Fig. 1.
Study timeline. Subjects underwent a screening visit 1 to 11 days prior to baseline visit to assess
eligibility to participate in the study. Eligible individuals that agreed to participate and provided
written informed consent then underwent a physical and neurological examination. Women of
childbearing potential were asked to provide a urine sample for pregnancy testing, and
approximately 21 mL of blood was drawn. On the first protocol visit (day 0), participants again
underwent a physical and neurological examination, and medical history review. A baseline blood
draw was then collected for cytokine and blood chemistry analysis (~35 mL). The blood draw was
performed under sterile conditions using standard venipuncture techniques. Individuals then
underwent the ultrasound procedure based on random assignment to one of 7 groups, including
the two groups reported herein (i.e., the sham control group, and a stimulated group that received
100% power stimulus applied at a single splenic target location). For ultrasound stimulus delivery,
individuals were asked to lie in the right lateral recumbent position with their arms above their
heads to expose the splenic region of the abdomen. After ultrasound gel was applied to the region,
the ultrasound probe was placed on the participant’s abdomen. This procedure was performed for
both the sham control group (n=9) and ultrasound stimulated group (n=9). Note that one subject
from each group was excluded, in which 10 subjects were initially recruited to the study for each
group (see Table S5).
Stimulation paradigm. In the ultrasound stimulated cohort, the subject had the dimensions of their
spleen assessed (using the B mode imaging setting on the GE LOGIQ E9), and the probe (C1-6)
was positioned over the splenic hilum. Stimulation was performed using a modified elastography
setting on the LOGIQ E9 operated in two modes: an imaging/targeting mode with short ultrasound
pulses (on the order of 1 microsecond) and relatively low acoustic power levels (on the order of
10 mW/cm2), and a stimulation mode (from the clinical shear wave elastography setting) using
longer ultrasound pulses (on the order of 1 ms) and higher acoustic power levels (290.4 mW/cm2).
Stimulation was performed in twelve 15-second long epochs separated by 15 seconds each, and a
total stimulation duration of 3 minutes. The 15 second epochs were performed during breath holds,
during which an ultrasonographer was holding the probe in position above the spleen. Before each
stimulation period, the ultrasonographer checked the location of the probe using the imaging mode
to ensure that all stimulation pulses were on target. The focal landmark used for targeting and
stimulation was the hilum of the spleen in the group included in the presented analysis. For the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

sham control group, the movements and probe contact for the ultrasound procedure were
performed by the ultrasonographer, and the total duration of the procedure remained the same as
the stimulated group, except that no ultrasound power was applied (i.e., ultrasound output via the
probe was turned off). A post-ultrasound blood draw was again performed, and the 2-hour blood
draw time-point data is reported herein.
Blood analysis procedures. Prior to the ex vivo cytokine test, the LPS was sonicated for 30 minutes.
A 10 mL blood tube (heparin; green cap) was brought into a tissue culture/sterile room and blood
was transferred to a 50 mL conical tube. A blinded researcher then diluted the LPS to the test
concentrations in 15 pre-labeled tubes containing replicates of the different concentrations of LPS
used for blood exposure (dilutions were made to achieve 0, 0.1, 1, and 10 ng/mL of LPS when
mixed with blood). Upon mixing the LPS with blood, the final tubes were capped and placed on a
rocker within an incubator and the samples were kept at 37 degrees Celsius for 4 hours during
incubation. After the incubation, the samples were removed from the incubator, centrifuged at
6000 RPM for 5 minutes, and the plasma supernatant was transferred (via pipette) for storage
(frozen prior to analysis). TNF analysis was performed in triplicate from each sample using DuoSet
ELISA kit (R&D Systems), as per manufacturer’s instructions.
Splenic ultrasound in RA patients: Design of clinical study
This clinical study is a controlled, randomized, double-blinded trial of short-term (14 days)
treatment and is listed at clinicaltrials.gov (NCT03690466) for which a portion of the results are
presented in this paper. The study is still ongoing, but the RNAseq data obtained thus far in five
ultrasound stimulated patients is presented in this paper for its relevance in revealing the use of
splenic ultrasound for potentially treating COVID-19 patients. The protocol, informed consent
form, recruitment materials, and all participant materials were submitted and approved by the
University of Minnesota’s Institutional Review Board (IRB) and monitored by CTSI in accordance
with its institutionally approved monitoring plan. The overall objective of the clinical trial is to
demonstrate safety and efficacy of spleen ultrasound stimulation in the treatment of RA in 20
participants. For this ongoing study, 17 participants have been recruited, consented, and enrolled
with all 17 patients completing the full study. The 17th participant completed the study, however
the last ‘in-clinic’ visit was performed using clinician video conferencing due to the COVID-19
pandemic, while in-person blood sample collection was still able to be performed. Further details
for this study can be found on clincialtrials.gov and will be presented in a future publication with
complete outcome analyses. The description below only includes relevant methods and RNAseq
analyses presented specifically in this paper.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria. To be eligible to participate in the study, an individual must have
met the following criteria: 18 years of age or older, carried a diagnosis of seropositive (rheumatoid
factor- or cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody-positive) rheumatoid arthritis (RA), and exhibited
symptoms or signs of inadequate disease control (either modified HAQ score >0.3 or DAS-28CRP >3.2). Exclusion criteria included active bacterial or viral infection, pregnancy, malignancy,
or inability to provide daily self-care. The patient medical history and characteristics for each of
the five subjects presented in this paper is provided in Table S2.
Study timeline. Participants were assessed during in-clinic visits on days 0 (before treatment
began), 3, 7, 10, 14, and 21. Minor flexibility was allowed for scheduling clinic visits outside of
holidays for special circumstances. On the first visit, the spleen was imaged by an ultrasonographer
and the center of the spleen trajectory was marked on the participant’s skin. Participants were

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

instructed on how to self-administer ultrasound treatment to the spleen. The procedure involved
sweeping the ultrasound wand continuously across a 5-inch by 5-inch square centered on the
spleen mark placed by the ultrasonographer and ensuring full contact was made with the skin
during the daily 30 minute stimulation period. Researchers were able to visually confirm that daily
treatments were administered through daily online video sessions with the patients. These video
sessions took place at about the same time each day for the 14-day treatment period. With each inclinic visit, participants received a joint examination, peripheral joint ultrasound, and blood draw,
as well as completing several physical evaluations and questionnaires. Full study details including
analysis of all patients and assessments will be presented in a future publication.
Treatment. After an in-clinic training session on Day 0, transcutaneous ultrasound was
administered to the spleen for 30 minutes daily for 2 weeks (14 days total) via a portable device
(1.2 W/cm2; SoundCare Plus, Roscoe Medical) in the patient’s home. The patients were
randomized (1:1) to a treatment group or a control (sham) group, in which the latter received the
exact same evaluations and stimulation paradigm as the treatment group, except that the device
did not deliver any energy from the ultrasound transducer. RA patients and clinical assessors were
blinded as to which patients received ultrasound or sham treatment.
RNA-sequencing and statistical analyses. 4mL of blood was collected in a green top LiHep tube
from each ultrasound stimulated participant (n=5) on day 0 (before the first splenic ultrasound
stimulation was administered) and on day 14 (after the final treatment session). The samples were
processed the same day as collection. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from
whole blood using density gradient centrifugation via SepMate tubes (Stemcell Technologies) and
following manufacturer’s instructions. PBMCs were then gently frozen and stored at -80 ºC as per
10X Genomics demonstrated protocols GC000039. Following this protocol, once all samples had
been collected and frozen, samples were thawed quickly in 20% FBS in PBS, resuspended in 10%
FBS, and strained before proceeding to 10X genomics single cell protocol. Samples were
sequenced using UMI-based approach from10X Genomics, as previously described (32) and
mapped to the human genome.
Transcriptomic analysis was performed using R statistical software, and primary filtering and
normalization of each sample was done using Seurat package as previously described (32, 55, 56).
Samples included two timepoints from five subjects and these individual samples were merged for
cell type assignment and differential expression analysis. Cell types were assigned using standard
marker genes (see Fig. S2) as previously described (57). Differential expression was determined
between timepoints for all cells in each cell type using a negative binomial generalized linear
model. GO term analysis was performed using the org.Hs.eg.db and topGO packages. GO term
enrichment was assessed using the ‘elim’ algorithm with a Fisher exact test cutoff of 0.01, in which
the top 40 significant GO terms in monocytes are shown in Table S3 (58).
Pre-clinical tests in LPS/endotoxin rodent model
Pre-clinical tests in rodents were performed as previously described (31). Experiments were
performed under protocols approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of GE
Research. Briefly, a VIVID E9 (GE) ultrasound system was used to perform an ultrasound scan
and locate the spleen. A HIFU transducer and system was then positioned on the target area, and
a separate ultrasound scan performed using a smaller probe (3S, GE) that was placed within the
opening of the HIFU transducer was used to verify alignment of the ultrasound beam with the
spleen. Adult Sprague-Dawley rats that were 8-12 weeks old (250-300 g; Charles River Labs) were

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

housed at 25 degrees Celsius on a 12-h light/dark cycle and acclimatized for 1 week, with handling
before experiments to minimize the potential confounding measures due to stress response. Water
and regular rodent chow were available ad libitum. LPS (0111:B4, Sigma Aldrich) was used to
produce a significant state of inflammation in the naïve adult rodents. LPS was administered to
animals in the amount of 10 mg/kg, which corresponds to a LD75 dose via intraperitoneal
injection.
Treatment. For ultrasound stimulation, animals were anesthetized with 2-4% isoflurane, and the
animals were laid on a water circulating warming pad to prevent hyperthermia during the
procedures. The region designated for ultrasound stimulation was shaved with a disposable razor
and animal clippers prior to stimulation. Ultrasound was applied to the designated area above the
spleen using the probe and system described and calibrated from a previous study (31). An
ultrasound stimulus using the previously found optimal stimulation parameters (1.1 MHz, 0.5 ms
pulse repetition frequency, 136.36 microsecond pulse length, 568 mW/cm2 ISPTA) was then applied
for 2 minutes, and LPS was immediately injected post-stimulation. Animals were allowed to
incubate under anesthesia for one hour, and after incubation the animal was euthanized, and tissue
and blood samples were collected. For experiments testing antibody production, an ultrasound
stimulus was applied daily (in the morning) for three days prior to LPS injection. On the fourth
day, following the three consecutive treatment days, LPS (10mg/kg) was injected intraperitoneally.
The animals were then incubated for 60 minutes in accordance with previous studies, and tissue
and blood were harvested for analysis of cytokines and antibody production.
Tissue collection. An incision was made starting at the base of the peritoneal cavity extending up
and through to the pleural cavity. The spleen was rapidly removed and homogenized in a solution
of phosphate-buffered saline, containing phosphatase (0.2-mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 5µg/mL aprotinin, 1-mM benzamidine, 1-mM sodium orthovanadate, and 2-µM cantharidin) and
protease (1-µL to 20 mg of tissue as per Roche Diagnostics) inhibitors. A targeted final
concentration of 0.2-g tissue per mL PBS solution was applied in all samples. After collection of
the whole blood, we allowed the blood to clot undisturbed at room temperature for 15–30 minutes.
Samples were centrifuged at 1,000–2,000x g for 10 minutes in a refrigerated centrifuge with the
resulting supernatant being collected for antibody testing. Samples were then stored at −80 °C until
analysis. Splenic tissue lysate was analyzed for cytokine concentrations using ELISA kits for
quantifying TNF alpha (Abcam, Ab100785), IFN gamma (Abcam, Ab239425), IL-13 (Abcam,
Ab100766), IL-12 (LSBio, LS-F34357), IL-10 (Abcam, Ab100765), IL-2 (Abcam, Ab221834),
IL-1 beta (Abcam, Ab100768), IL-1 alpha (Abcam, Ab113350), IL-6 (Abcam, Ab234570) and IL4 (Abcam, Ab100771) as per manufacturer’s instructions for tissue samples. Serum was tested
using ELISA kits for quantifying antibody production including IgG (Abcam, Ab189578), and
IgM (Abcam, Ab215085) as per manufacturer’s instructions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

References:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

T. S. Xiao, Innate immunity and inflammation. Cell Mol Immunol 14, 1-3 (2017).
K. Newton, V. M. Dixit, Signaling in innate immunity and inflammation. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol
4, (2012).
S. Koyama, K. J. Ishii, C. Coban, S. Akira, Innate immune response to viral infection. Cytokine 43, 336341 (2008).
S. S. Chavan, V. A. Pavlov, K. J. Tracey, Mechanisms and Therapeutic Relevance of Neuro-immune
Communication. Immunity 46, 927-942 (2017).
X. Li, X. Ma, Acute respiratory failure in COVID-19: is it "typical" ARDS? Crit Care 24, 198 (2020).
N. Chen et al., Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. Lancet 395, 507-513 (2020).
M. Bosmann, P. A. Ward, The inflammatory response in sepsis. Trends Immunol 34, 129-136 (2013).
G. R. Kinsey, L. Li, M. D. Okusa, Inflammation in acute kidney injury. Nephron Exp Nephrol 109, e102107 (2008).
D. Aletaha et al., 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis classification criteria: an American College of
Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheum 62, 25692581 (2010).
P. Enck et al., Irritable bowel syndrome. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2, 16014 (2016).
P. S. Olofsson, K. J. Tracey, Bioelectronic medicine: technology targeting molecular mechanisms for
therapy. J Intern Med 282, 3-4 (2017).
K. Birmingham et al., Bioelectronic medicines: a research roadmap. Nat Rev Drug Discov 13, 399-400
(2014).
K. J. Tracey, The inflammatory reflex. Nature 420, 853-859 (2002).
U. Andersson, K. J. Tracey, Neural reflexes in inflammation and immunity. J Exp Med 209, 1057-1068
(2012).
V. A. Pavlov, S. S. Chavan, K. J. Tracey, Molecular and Functional Neuroscience in Immunity. Annu Rev
Immunol 36, 783-812 (2018).
T. Inoue et al., Vagus nerve stimulation mediates protection from kidney ischemia-reperfusion injury
through alpha7nAChR+ splenocytes. J Clin Invest 126, 1939-1952 (2016).
M. Rosas-Ballina et al., Splenic nerve is required for cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway control of TNF
in endotoxemia. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 11008-11013 (2008).
F. A. Koopman et al., Vagus nerve stimulation inhibits cytokine production and attenuates disease severity
in rheumatoid arthritis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113, 8284-8289 (2016).
L. V. Borovikova et al., Vagus nerve stimulation attenuates the systemic inflammatory response to
endotoxin. Nature 405, 458-462 (2000).
L. G. Reys et al., Uncovering the neuroenteric-pulmonary axis: vagal nerve stimulation prevents acute lung
injury following hemorrhagic shock. Life Sci 92, 783-792 (2013).
Y. Lai et al., Vagus nerve stimulation protects against acute liver injury induced by renal ischemia
reperfusion via antioxidant stress and anti-inflammation. Biomed Pharmacother 117, 109062 (2019).
N. Thompson, S. Mastitskaya, D. Holder, Avoiding off-target effects in electrical stimulation of the
cervical vagus nerve: Neuroanatomical tracing techniques to study fascicular anatomy of the vagus nerve. J
Neurosci Methods 325, 108325 (2019).
D. P. Darrow, P. O'Brien, T. J. Richner, T. I. Netoff, E. S. Ebbini, Reversible neuroinhibition by focused
ultrasound is mediated by a thermal mechanism. Brain Stimul 12, 1439-1447 (2019).
N. Wattiez et al., Transcranial ultrasonic stimulation modulates single-neuron discharge in macaques
performing an antisaccade task. Brain Stimul 10, 1024-1031 (2017).
J. Kubanek et al., Remote, brain region–specific control of choice behavior with ultrasonic waves. Science
Advances 6, eaaz4193 (2020).
P. P. Lele, Effects of focused ultrasonic radiation on peripheral nerve, with observations on local heating.
Experimental Neurology 8, 47 - 83 (1963).
H. Guo et al., Ultrasound Produces Extensive Brain Activation via a Cochlear Pathway. Neuron 99, 866
(2018).
S. J. Ilham et al., single-unit recordings reveal increased peripheral nerve conduction velocity by focused
pulsed ultrasound. Biomed Phys Eng Express 4, (2018).
J. C. Gigliotti et al., Ultrasound Modulates the Splenic Neuroimmune Axis in Attenuating AKI. J Am Soc
Nephrol 26, 2470-2481 (2015).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

V. Cotero et al., Peripheral Focused Ultrasound Stimulation (pFUS): New Competitor in Pharmaceutical
Markets? SLAS Technol 24, 448-452 (2019).
V. Cotero et al., Noninvasive sub-organ ultrasound stimulation for targeted neuromodulation. Nat Commun
10, 952 (2019).
D. P. Zachs et al., Noninvasive ultrasound stimulation of the spleen to treat inflammatory arthritis. Nat
Commun 10, 951 (2019).
N. S. Nunes et al., Therapeutic ultrasound attenuates DSS-induced colitis through the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway. EBioMedicine 45, 495-510 (2019).
J. C. Gigliotti et al., Ultrasound prevents renal ischemia-reperfusion injury by stimulating the splenic
cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway. J Am Soc Nephrol 24, 1451-1460 (2013).
C. Pasquinelli, L. G. Hanson, H. R. Siebner, H. J. Lee, A. Thielscher, Safety of transcranial focused
ultrasound stimulation: A systematic review of the state of knowledge from both human and animal studies.
Brain Stimul 12, 1367-1380 (2019).
M. M. Doyley, K. J. Parker, Elastography: general principles and clincial applications. Ultrasound Clin 9,
1-11 (2014).
K. Whalley, Brain-spleen link tunes immunity. Nat Rev Immunol, (2020).
J. Dalli, R. A. Colas, H. Arnardottir, C. N. Serhan, Vagal Regulation of Group 3 Innate Lymphoid Cells
and the Immunoresolvent PCTR1 Controls Infection Resolution. Immunity 46, 92-105 (2017).
M. Fernandez-Ruiz, J. M. Aguado, Risk of infection associated with anti-TNF-alpha therapy. Expert Rev
Anti Infect Ther 16, 939-956 (2018).
V. R. Lang et al., Risk of infections in rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with tocilizumab. Rheumatology
(Oxford) 51, 852-857 (2012).
R. Torres-Rosas et al., Dopamine mediates vagal modulation of the immune system by electroacupuncture.
Nat Med 20, 291-295 (2014).
A. Bruchfeld et al., Whole blood cytokine attenuation by cholinergic agonists ex vivo and relationship to
vagus nerve activity in rheumatoid arthritis. J Intern Med 268, 94-101 (2010).
X. Wittebole et al., Nicotine exposure alters in vivo human responses to endotoxin. Clin Exp Immunol 147,
28-34 (2007).
K. J. Tracey, Physiology and immunology of the cholinergic antiinflammatory pathway. J Clin Invest 117,
289-296 (2007).
X. Zhang et al., Brain control of humoral immune responses amenable to behavioural modulation. Nature
581, 204-208 (2020).
M. Noack, P. Miossec, Selected cytokine pathways in rheumatoid arthritis. Semin Immunopathol 39, 365383 (2017).
C. A. Feghali, T. M. Wright, Cytokines in acute and chronic inflammation. Front Biosci 2, d12-26 (1997).
M. Guha, N. Mackman, LPS induction of gene expression in human monocytes. Cell Signal 13, 85-94
(2001).
M. Liao et al., Single-cell landscape of bronchoalveolar immune cells in patients with COVID-19. Nat
Med, (2020).
Z. Belhadjer et al., Acute heart failure in multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) in the
context of global SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Circulation, (2020).
S. Menikou, P. R. Langford, M. Levin, Kawasaki Disease: The Role of Immune Complexes Revisited.
Front Immunol 10, 1156 (2019).
A. Alunno, F. Carubbi, J. Rodriguez-Carrio, Storm, typhoon, cyclone or hurricane in patients with COVID19? Beware of the same storm that has a different origin. RMD Open 6, (2020).
A. Kanashiro et al., Therapeutic potential and limitations of cholinergic anti-inflammatory pathway in
sepsis. Pharmacol Res 117, 1-8 (2017).
H. Wang et al., Cholinergic agonists inhibit HMGB1 release and improve survival in experimental sepsis.
Nat Med 10, 1216-1221 (2004).
A. Butler, P. Hoffman, P. Smibert, E. Papalexi, R. Satija, Integrating single-cell transcriptomic data across
different conditions, technologies, and species. Nat Biotechnol 36, 411-420 (2018).
T. Stuart et al., Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-1902 e1821 (2019).
H. M. Kang et al., Multiplexed droplet single-cell RNA-sequencing using natural genetic variation. Nat
Biotechnol 36, 89-94 (2018).
A. Alexa, J. Rahnenfuhrer, T. Lengauer, Improved scoring of functional groups from gene expression data
by decorrelating GO graph structure. Bioinformatics 22, 1600-1607 (2006).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments: We thank all study participants. We are grateful for the assistance of
individuals at the University of Minnesota Genomics Center, especially Jerry Daniel and Emma
Stanley. Additionally, we would like to thank Stuart Sealfon and Frederique Ruf-zamojski for
their assistance and advice processing PBMC samples for single cell sequencing. This work was
supported by the United States Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Electrical Prescriptions (ElectRx) Program under the guidance of Eric Van Gieson and Gretchen
Knaack at DARPA. The views, opinions and/or findings expressed are those of the authors and
should not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies of the Department of
Defense or the U.S. Government.
Funding: Listed authors from GE Research, Feinstein Institutes for Medical Research and North
Shore University Hospital have received research funding from GE to investigate the effects of
splenic ultrasound stimulation in healthy subjects. Listed authors from the University of
Minnesota received funding from DARPA ElectRx Program (N660011824018).
Author Contributions: For research associated with splenic ultrasound in healthy participants
and in rodents: K.W., J.A., C.P., S.S.C., T.R.C., J.P., K.J.T., S.Z. contributed to study design and
setup; V.C., J.G., C.D’A., D.N., J.P. performed data collection and analysis; and C.P., V.C., T.C.
contributed to data interpretation and writing. For research associated with splenic ultrasound of
rheumatoid arthritis patients: R.S.G., D.P.Z., C.R.W.K., B.A.B., E.P., H.H.L. contributed to
study design and setup; R.S.G., D.P.Z., C.R.W.K., E.P. performed data collection and analysis;
R.S.G. performed data collection and bioinformatic analysis of single cell transcriptomic data;
and R.S.G., D.P.Z., B.A.B., E.P., H.H.L contributed to data interpretation and writing. R.S.G.,
H.H.L. contributed to the first draft of the manuscript. All authors contributed to and approved
the final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests: K.W., J.G., J.A., V.C., C.P. are employees of GE and declare that GE has
filed U.S. and international patent applications describing methods, devices, and systems for
precision organ-based ultrasound neuromodulation. R.S.G., D.P.Z., C.R.W.K., H.H.L are
affiliated with University of Minnesota and declare that they have filed U.S. and international
patent applications describing methods, devices, and systems for peripheral nerve and end-organ
modulation. Feinstein authors have received research funding from GE to investigate the effects
of splenic ultrasound in healthy subjects. Dr. Hubert Lim holds equity in, and serves as Chief
Scientific Officer of, SecondWave Systems, which is developing wearable ultrasound
stimulation technologies for end-organ and neural modulation. Mr. Daniel Zachs holds equity in,
and is an employee of, SecondWave Systems. These interests for Dr. Lim and Mr. Zachs have
been reviewed and managed by the University of Minnesota in accordance with its Conflict of
Interest policies. All other authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Data and Materials availability:
Data associated with this study are presented in this paper or supplemental document. The RNAseq data presented in this paper have been deposited in the Gene Expression Omnibus database
as GSExxxxxx. Other data or methods such as that used for bioinformatic analyses or
visualization are available upon reasonable request.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary
Figure S1. Modulation of Cytokines with Splenic Ultrasound in Rats
Figure S2. Cellular Transcriptional Signatures
Table S1. Single Cell RNA-seq: Number of Cells, Reads, and Genes
Table S2. Splenic Ultrasound in RA Patients: Subject Features
Table S3. Top 40 Enriched GO Terms for Downregulated Genes in Monocytes
Table S4. Cell Type Counts Per Participant and Statistics
Table S5. Splenic Ultrasound in Healthy Participants: Subject Features

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Concentration in Rodent Splenic Lysate (ng/mL)

Fig. S1
2000

1500

Treatment

1000

sham
ultrasound

500

0
IFNγ**

IL-10

IL-12**

IL-13

IL-1α**

IL-1β**

IL-2

IL-4

IL-6*

TNFα**

Figure S1. Modulation of Cytokines with Splenic Ultrasound in Rats. Splenic ultrasound was applied to rats for 2 minutes, daily for 3 days prior to
the day of intraperitoneal LPS injection. Boxplot shows cytokine levels in splenic lysates from animals 1 hour post LPS injection receiving
ultrasound or sham stimulation. Sham treated animals are shown with orange boxes with open squares representing individual data points,
ultrasound stimulated animals shown with blue boxes and open triangles representing individual datapoints, solid black dots represent outliers.
Cytokines that show a significant reduction with ultrasound are labeled with one asterisk based on a one-sided unpaired Wilcoxon rank-sum test
(p<0.05; expecting a reduction in cytokines). Cytokines with two asterisks correspond to a p<0.005. Significant reduction is observed in IFNγ,
IL-12, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-6, TNF.

Cytokine

IFNγ
IL-10
IL-12
IL-13
IL-1α
IL-1β
IL-2
IL-4
IL-6
TNF

one-sided
unpaired
# stim samples
Wilcoxon rank
sum p-value

# sham
samples
7
10
7
7
7
11
7
7
12
18

8
9
9
8
7
9
7
8
12
16

0.004662
0.999500
0.000508
1.000000
0.000291
0.000002
0.875200
0.884100
0.034160
0.000001

Fig. S2
A

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Subject 1 - Day 0
UMAP Dimension 2

Subject 1 - Day 14
Subject 2 - Day 0
Subject 2 - Day 14
Subject 3 - Day 0
Subject 3 - Day 14
Subject 4 - Day 0
Subject 4 - Day 14
Subject 5 - Day 0
Subject 5 - Day 14

UMAP Dimension 1

B
CXCL8
expression

IFNG
expression

IL1B
expression

C
B Activ ated
pDC
DC

Percent Expressed

NK

0
25
50
75

Identity

MK
Er yth
CD16 Mono

Av erage Expression

B

2

CD8 T

1

CD14 Mono

0

T Activ ated

−1

CD4 Memor y T

CD
CR 3D
E
HS M
PH
SE 1
GI LL
M
CA AP
CY 5
B
GN P
L
NK Y
G
CC 7
L
CD 5
M 8A
S4
A
M CD 1
IR 79
15 A
5H
N G
FC ME
GR 1
3
VM A
O
CC 1
HL S1 L2
0
A− 0
DQ A9
GP A1
R1
8
PP 3
GN BP
G1
HB 1
A
TS H 2
P A BB
N1
IL 3
3R
A
CD
59

CD4 Naiv e T

Features

Figure S2. Cellular Transcriptional Signatures. Single cell RNA sequencing results on peripheral blood mononuclear
cells. Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) dimensionality reduction was used on principal
component analysis which determines which gene sets contribute the most variability among the dataset.
A. UMAP plot of cells from each subject and timepoint to show transcriptional similarities between subjects
and timepoints. B. UMAP plot shows cells expressing IFNG, CXCL8 and IL1B transcripts, and their expression patterns within
particular cell types match with which cell types show statistical differential expression for those transcripts.
C. Dotplot showing the expression (color) and percent of cells expressing (dot size) each gene transcript (x-axis)
for each cell type (y-axis). The genes listed on the x-axis are commonly used marker genes which help determine
and assign cell types to groups of cells from an unbiased principal component analysis.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table S1

celltype
B Activated day 0
B Activated day 14
B day 0
B day 14
CD14 Mono day 0
CD14 Mono day 14
CD16 Mono day 0
CD16 Mono day 14
CD4 Memory T day 0
CD4 Memory T day 14
CD4 Naive T day 0
CD4 Naive T day 14
CD8 T day 0
CD8 T day 14
DC day 0
DC day 14
Eryth day 0
Eryth day 14
MK day 0
MK day 14
NK day 0
NK day 14
pDC day 0
pDC day 14
T Activated day 0
T Activated day 14
Total

# of cells total counts average counts/cell
average genes/cell
20
1.57E+05
7.85E+03
2171
24
1.53E+05
6.38E+03
1815
2485
8.87E+06
3.57E+03
1134
1835
6.88E+06
3.75E+03
1151
3465
1.69E+07
4.87E+03
1878
2150
9.77E+06
4.54E+03
1743
434
2.77E+06
6.37E+03
2184
324
1.97E+06
6.08E+03
2073
8568
2.60E+07
3.03E+03
955
4063
1.16E+07
2.86E+03
914
7206
2.55E+07
3.55E+03
1154
3629
1.17E+07
3.21E+03
1080
5764
1.63E+07
2.83E+03
1095
2505
7.78E+06
3.11E+03
1178
138
1.19E+06
8.62E+03
2403
102
8.41E+05
8.24E+03
2365
388
1.19E+06
3.06E+03
875
356
1.34E+06
3.77E+03
993
288
7.48E+05
2.60E+03
1027
130
3.40E+05
2.62E+03
1063
78
4.30E+05
5.51E+03
1956
192
1.14E+06
5.93E+03
1991
49
2.85E+05
5.82E+03
2080
74
3.94E+05
5.32E+03
1921
5545
1.46E+07
2.63E+03
1162
3531
9.02E+06
2.55E+03
1144
53343
1.78E+08

Table S1. Single Cell RNA-seq: Number of Cells, Reads, and Genes. Table showing the number of cells for
each cell type, which were determined by gene signatures (see Fig. S2C), and also showing number of
reads (counts) and average number of genes for each cell type. We observe that all that all cells have a
relatively consistent read depth for the sequencing reaction performed.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table S2

Medical History and RA
Features (at time of first
visit)
Visit 1 Date
Age
Sex
Ethnic Group (as indicated in
medical records)
Height (inches)
Weight (lbs)
Body Mass Index
Date of RA diagnosis
Time since RA diagnosis

Participant A

Participant B

Participant C

Participant D

Participant E

4/18/2019
68
Female

5/23/2019
57
Female

8/29/2019
89
Male

12/2/2019
42
Female

American

American

American

Hmong

60
180
35.2
3/4/2019
1 month

65
139
23.1
6/1/2014
4 years

67
170
26.6
8/20/2019
1 week

56
118
26.5
1/1/2013
6 years

12/2/2019
41
Female
"Patient chose not to
answer"
65
256
43.3
12/6/2013
5 years

Prescription medicine for RA
immune modulation which
participants continued taking
during study

Prednisone

None

None

Hydroxychloroquine

Orencia, methotrexate

Prescription medicine for
pain taken during study

None

Hydrocodone

None

None

None

Non-prescription pain
medicine taken during study

Acetaminophen

None

Ibuprofen, Aspirin

Acetaminophen, Naproxen

Naproxen

Table S2. Splenic Ultrasound in RA Patients: Subject Features. Table showing key information for each
participant, including age, sex, race, and medications the participants continued taking during the study. For
figures in this publication where gene expression averages are shown per participant, participants are also
shown as columns corresponding to A to E in this table.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table S3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

GO.ID
GO:0043312
GO:0000381
GO:2001243
GO:0030183
GO:0045727
GO:0016032
GO:0000122
GO:0017148
GO:0045944
GO:0042535
GO:0045410
GO:0006954
GO:1903204
GO:0090316
GO:0045766
GO:0001774
GO:0019221
GO:0071345
GO:0045429
GO:0002755
GO:1902532
GO:0045416
GO:0043488
GO:0031663
GO:0010803
GO:0006915
GO:0008360
GO:0035666
GO:0071260
GO:0048255
GO:0039535
GO:0035690
GO:0045588
GO:0000186
GO:0032922
GO:2001235
GO:0046777
GO:0002902
GO:0071456
GO:0030890

Term
neutrophil degranulation
regulation of alternative mRNA splicing,...
negative regulation of intrinsic apoptot...
B cell differentiation
positive regulation of translation
viral process
negative regulation of transcription by ...
negative regulation of translation
positive regulation of transcription by ...
positive regulation of tumor necrosis fa...
positive regulation of interleukin-6 bio...
inflammatory response
negative regulation of oxidative stress-...
positive regulation of intracellular pro...
positive regulation of angiogenesis
microglial cell activation
cytokine-mediated signaling pathway
cellular response to cytokine stimulus
positive regulation of nitric oxide bios...
MyD88-dependent toll-like receptor signa...
negative regulation of intracellular sig...
positive regulation of interleukin-8 bio...
regulation of mRNA stability
lipopolysaccharide-mediated signaling pa...
regulation of tumor necrosis factor-medi...
apoptotic process
regulation of cell shape
TRIF-dependent toll-like receptor signal...
cellular response to mechanical stimulus
mRNA stabilization
regulation of RIG-I signaling pathway
cellular response to drug
positive regulation of gamma-delta T cel...
activation of MAPKK activity
circadian regulation of gene expression
positive regulation of apoptotic signali...
protein autophosphorylation
regulation of B cell apoptotic process
cellular response to hypoxia
positive regulation of B cell proliferat...

Annotated

452
58
87
107
116
783
693
124
947
19
15
575
18
166
134
39
678
953
35
35
442
10
166
53
53
1625
134
29
72
37
16
336
3
47
56
162
210
17
181
39

Significant Expected Rank in classicFisher
classicFisher classicKS elimKS
77
24.48
1
8.00E-19
0.958
0.958
17
3.14
2
6.00E-09
0.847
0.847
20
4.71
3
2.80E-08
0.768
0.768
24
5.8
4
5.30E-08
0.986
0.986
22
6.28
5
2.20E-07
0.817
0.817
80
42.41
6
8.30E-07
0.497
0.497
68
37.54
7
1.20E-06
0.982
0.982
26
6.72
8
2.10E-06
0.747
0.747
87
51.3
9
2.70E-06
0.864
0.864
8
1.03
10
3.20E-06
0.929
0.929
7
0.81
11
5.80E-06
0.93
0.93
68
31.15
12
1.50E-05
0.146
0.146
7
0.98
13
2.50E-05
0.553
0.553
26
8.99
14
3.20E-05
0.788
0.788
20
7.26
15
3.40E-05
1
1
12
2.11
16
4.50E-05
0.972
0.972
75
36.73
17
5.10E-05
0.351
0.927
114
51.62
18
7.00E-05
0.127
0.492
9
1.9
19
7.60E-05
0.97
0.97
9
1.9
20
7.60E-05
0.497
0.497
61
23.94
21
7.70E-05
0.832
0.832
5
0.54
22
9.20E-05
0.924
0.924
31
8.99
23
9.30E-05
0.486
0.486
11
2.87
24
0.0001
0.987
0.987
11
2.87
25
0.0001
1
1
171
88.02
26
0.0001
0.811
0.811
19
7.26
27
0.00011
0.731
0.731
8
1.57
28
0.00011
0.982
0.982
13
3.9
29
0.00011
0.859
0.859
9
2
30
0.00012
0.085
0.085
6
0.87
31
0.00012
0.934
0.934
38
18.2
32
0.00013
0.944
0.944
3
0.16
33
0.00016
0.998
0.998
10
2.55
34
0.00017
0.998
0.998
11
3.03
35
0.00017
0.861
0.861
21
8.78
36
0.00018
0.52
0.52
25
11.38
37
0.00018
0.68
0.68
6
0.92
38
0.00018
0.51
0.51
25
9.8
39
0.00019
0.909
0.909
9
2.11
40
0.00019
0.859
0.859

direction
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down
down

sig_exp
3.145425
5.414013
4.246285
4.137931
3.503185
1.886348
1.811401
3.869048
1.695906
7.76699
8.641975
2.182986
7.142857
2.892102
2.754821
5.687204
2.041928
2.208446
4.736842
4.736842
2.548037
9.259259
3.448276
3.832753
3.832753
1.94274
2.61708
5.095541
3.333333
4.5
6.896552
2.087912
18.75
3.921569
3.630363
2.3918
2.196837
6.521739
2.55102
4.265403

Table S3. Top 40 Enriched GO Terms for Downregulated Genes in Monocytes. Table displaying enriched GO terms for
genes downregulated with ultrasound treatment. Also shown are the number of genes out of the human genome that
are annotated with that GO term, number of genes from the list of significantly downregulated genes with ultrasound,
and the number of genes that would be expected by random chance. Column labeled ‘classicFisher’ shows p-values from
the Fisher’s exact test and ‘sig_exp’ is the number of genes found to be significant in our gene list (decreased with
ultrasound in monocytes) compared to the number that might be expected by chance.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table S4

Participant
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Timepoint
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0

# of Cells
Cell Type
Sequenced
B
182
B
6
B
639
B
790
B
868
B
12
B
43
B
251
B
568
B
961
B Activated
1
B Activated
3
B Activated
7
B Activated
3
B Activated
6
B Activated
2
B Activated
10
B Activated
4
B Activated
8
CD14 Mono
758
CD14 Mono
507
CD14 Mono
879
CD14 Mono
471
CD14 Mono
850
CD14 Mono
124
CD14 Mono
229
CD14 Mono
397
CD14 Mono
549
CD14 Mono
851
CD16 Mono
61
CD16 Mono
129
CD16 Mono
159
CD16 Mono
53
CD16 Mono
32
CD16 Mono
12
CD16 Mono
58
CD16 Mono
165
CD16 Mono
25
CD16 Mono
64
CD4 Memory
1087
CD4 Memory
1814
CD4 Memory
1865
CD4 Memory
2808
CD4 Memory
994
45
CD4 Memory
CD4 Memory
915
CD4 Memory
778
CD4 Memory
1422
903
CD4 Memory
CD4 Naive T
1245
CD4 Naive T
1260
CD4 Naive T
1686
CD4 Naive T
1788
CD4 Naive T
1227
48
CD4 Naive T
CD4 Naive T
609
CD4 Naive T
887
CD4 Naive T
842
1243
CD4 Naive T
CD8 T
459
CD8 T
542
CD8 T
3107
CD8 T
1193
CD8 T
463

paired
Wilcoxon p‐
value
comparing # Total # Cells
of cells
Sequenced
sequenced in Sample Percent
4074
4.467
5501
0.109
10930
5.846
8527
9.265
5396
16.086
278
4.317
3021
1.423
4634
5.416
5605
10.134
0.3125
5377
17.872
4074
0.025
5501
0.055
10930
0.064
8527
0.035
5396
0.111
3021
0.066
4634
0.216
5605
0.071
0.3893
5377
0.149
4074
18.606
5501
9.217
10930
8.042
8527
5.524
5396
15.752
278
44.604
3021
7.58
4634
8.567
5605
9.795
0.3125
5377
15.827
4074
1.497
5501
2.345
10930
1.455
8527
0.622
5396
0.593
278
4.317
3021
1.92
4634
3.561
5605
0.446
0.4375
5377
1.19
4074
26.681
5501
32.976
10930
17.063
8527
32.931
5396
18.421
278
16.187
3021
30.288
4634
16.789
5605
25.37
0.0625
5377
16.794
4074
30.56
5501
22.905
10930
15.425
8527
20.969
5396
22.739
278
17.266
3021
20.159
4634
19.141
5605
15.022
0.125
5377
23.117
4074
11.267
5501
9.853
10930
28.426
8527
13.991
5396
8.58

paired
Wilcoxon p‐
value
comparing %
of cells

0.3125

0.06349

0.3125

0.3125

0.0625

0.4375

Participant
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.

Timepoint
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 0
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14
Day 14

Cell Type
# of Cells
CD8 T
15
CD8 T
287
CD8 T
967
CD8 T
846
CD8 T
390
DC
15
DC
45
DC
19
DC
15
DC
44
DC
3
DC
15
DC
11
DC
12
DC
61
Eryth
8
Eryth
3
Eryth
12
Eryth
238
Eryth
127
Eryth
1
Eryth
3
Eryth
15
Eryth
261
Eryth
76
MK
34
MK
5
MK
129
MK
95
MK
25
MK
1
MK
11
MK
50
MK
59
MK
9
NK
16
NK
18
NK
18
NK
16
NK
10
NK
1
NK
20
NK
126
NK
31
NK
14
pDC
2
pDC
14
pDC
7
pDC
6
pDC
20
pDC
3
pDC
29
pDC
9
pDC
12
pDC
21
T Activated
206
T Activated
1155
T Activated
2403
T Activated
1051
T Activated
730
T Activated
13
T Activated
800
T Activated
968
T Activated
974
T Activated
776

0.0625

0.4375

0.8551

0.125

0.343

0.05791

0.125

paired
Wilcoxon p‐
value
comparing #
of cells
sequenced Percent
278
5.396
3021
9.5
4634
20.868
5605
15.094
5377
7.253
4074
0.368
5501
0.818
10930
0.174
8527
0.176
5396
0.815
278
1.079
3021
0.497
4634
0.237
5605
0.214
5377
1.134
4074
0.196
5501
0.055
10930
0.11
8527
2.791
5396
2.354
278
0.36
3021
0.099
4634
0.324
5605
4.657
5377
1.413
4074
0.835
5501
0.091
10930
1.18
8527
1.114
5396
0.463
278
0.36
3021
0.364
4634
1.079
5605
1.053
5377
0.167
4074
0.393
5501
0.327
10930
0.165
8527
0.188
5396
0.185
278
0.36
3021
0.662
4634
2.719
5605
0.553
5377
0.26
4074
0.049
5501
0.254
10930
0.064
8527
0.07
5396
0.371
278
1.079
3021
0.96
4634
0.194
5605
0.214
5377
0.391
4074
5.056
5501
20.996
10930
21.985
8527
12.326
5396
13.529
278
4.676
3021
26.481
4634
20.889
5605
17.377
5377
14.432

paired
Wilcoxon p‐
value
comparing %
of cells

0.1875

0.4375

0.4375

0.3125

0.125

0.0625

0.4375

Table S4. Cell Type Counts Per Participant and Statistics. Table displaying the number of cells
sequenced and percent (# cells in cell type / # cells sequenced in that sample x 100) for each sample
(defined as a participant and timepoint) per cell type. No significant difference is seen in the number
of cell sequenced per cell type or percent within each cell type comparing pre- and post ultrasound
stimulation with a paired Wilcoxon rank sum test that was used to determine p-values.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.14.20153528; this version posted July 17, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table S5

Subject
Group
Age
Gender

1
Stimulated
35
Female

Race

Asian
Not Hispanic
or Latino
177
64
20.4

Ethnicity
Height (cm)
Weight (kg)
Body Mass Index (kg/m2)

2
Stimulated
39
Female

3
Stimulated
29
Male

More Than One
Race
Asian
Not Hispanic Not Hispanic or
or Latino
Latino
165
188
58.5
94.6
21.5
26.8

4
Stimulated
39
Female

Other
Hispanic or
Latino
159
69.8
27.6

5
Stimulated
44
Female
Black or
African
American
Not Hispanic
or Latino
164
64.5
24

6
Stimulated
30
Female

7
Stimulated
28
Male

8
Stimulated
35
Female

9
Stimulated
32
Female

10
Stimulated
42
Female

More Than
One Race
Hispanic or
Latino
168
67
23.7

Other
Not Hispanic
or Latino
195
79.1
20.8

Other
Hispanic or
Latino
160
55.8
21.8

White or
Caucasian
Hispanic or
Latino
156
58.7
24.1

White or
Caucasian
Not Hispanic
or Latino
168
70
24.8

Multi Vitamin Multi Vitamin Multi Vitamin

Medicines & Supplements

Gestational Mitral Value
diabetes in
Prolapse,
prior 3 years. Current - No
Resolved after treatment
delivery.
needed

Hemophagocytic
Lymphohistiocytosis 14
years ago
Conditions

Exclusion Reason

Excluded :
incorrect
imaging
protocol
applied

Subject
Group
Age
Gender

11
Control
22
Female

Race
Ethnicity
Height (cm)
Weight (kg)
Body Mass Index (kg/m2)

White or
Caucasian
Not Hispanic
or Latino
162
73.9
28.2

Medicines & Supplements

Conditions

Exclusion Reason

Acid Reflux

12
Control
27
Male

13
Control
32
Female

14
Control
18
Male

15
Control
36
Male

16
Control
33
Female

17
Control
27
Female

Black or African
American
Asian
Asian
Asian
Asian
Asian
Not Hispanic Not Hispanic or Not Hispanic Not Hispanic Not Hispanic Not Hispanic
or Latino
Latino
or Latino
or Latino
or Latino
or Latino
176
173
183
176
161
155
72
72.9
72.3
80.9
58.2
61.1
23.2
24.4
21.6
26.1
22.5
25.4
Vitamin D,
Multi Vitamin,
EOD 5000 IU,
Multi Vitamin
Fish Oil
Promote
Health
Jaundice at 7
years of age,
resolved

18
Control
40
Male

19
Control
28
Male

20
Control
28
Male

Asian
Not Hispanic
or Latino
166
67
24.3

Asian
Not Hispanic
or Latino
172.25
81.5
27.5

Other
Hispanic or
Latino
180
75.4
23.3

Pantoperazole
20 mg daily, Multi Vitamin
acid reflux

Excluded :
glucose <50
mg/dL at
baseline

Table S6. Splenic Ultrasound in Healthy Participants: Subject Features. Characteristics and demographic data of 20
enrolled subjects for study of biological effects of ultrasound of the spleen. Ten subjects received full-powered
ultrasound treatment at the spleen hilum and another ten subjects were sham controls with the ultrasound device
turned off. One of the subjects from the stimulated group was excluded due the selection of the wrong ultrasound
imaging protocol by the clinician. One of the subjects from the control group was excluded because their baseline
glucose measurement was <50 mg/dL that is considered hypoglycemic.

