medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Critical Mobility, a practical criterion and early indicator for
regional COVID-19 resurgence
Marcus O. Freitaga, Johannes Schmudea, Carlo Siebenschuha,
Gustavo Stolovitzkya, Hendrik F. Hamanna, and Siyuan Lua,*
a

IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598, USA

Abstract
The sharp reduction of human mobility in March 2020, as observed by anonymized cellphone data, has played an important role
in thwarting a runaway COVID-19 pandemic. As the world is reopening, the risks of new flare-ups are rising. We report a datadriven approach, grounded in strong correlation between mobility and growth in COVID-19 cases two weeks later, to establish a
spatial-temporal model of “critical mobility” maps that separate relatively safe mobility levels from dangerous ones. The
normalized difference between the current and critical mobility has predictive power for case trajectories during the “opening-up”
phases. For instance, actual mobility has risen above critical mobility in many southern US counties by the end of May,
foreshadowing the latest virus resurgence. Encouragingly, critical mobility has been rising throughout the USA, likely due to face
mask-wearing and social distancing measures. However, critical mobility is still well below pre-COVID mobility levels in most of
the country suggesting continued mobility-reduction is still necessary.

Keyword: COVID-19; mobility; epidemiology; spatial-temporal

Introduction
Cell phone positioning data is becoming increasingly important in the fight against COVID-19.1 For example,
despite some ethical considerations 2 tracking apps are starting to emerge that inform individuals where and when they
had been in close contact with an infected person so that they can self-isolate and prevent further spread of the virus3,4
Anonymized and aggregated cellphone-tracking based mobility data5-7, on the other hand, is well suited for modeling
the course of a COVID-19 outbreak.8,9 It has been shown that mobility is a leading factor explaining the variance in
the observed transmissibility across different countries and that the mobility reduction patterns are strongly correlated
with decreasing new cases during the “shutdown” in the US.10,11. In what follows, mobility, shall be defined as the
county or state-level median of the maximum distance traveled by individuals during a day. It can be used to inform a
spatially and temporally resolved COVID-19 analysis.
Here we report on the simple yet powerful concept of “critical mobility”
which estimates the level of human
mobility that a local society can engage in without triggering another COVID-19 flare-up. The derivation of critical
mobility starts from measuring the association of daily new case numbers with lagged human mobility data. As both
datasets are typically noisy, particularly at a local (county or below) level, a mixed-effect spatial-temporal model is
employed to obtain local critical mobility maps with predictive power.
There exists a clear analogy between the critical mobility indicator and an effective reproductive number R of the
virus equal to 1. While short-term fluctuations above the critical mobility value are acceptable, sustained mobility
above the critical value will likely lead to a new outbreak in the future. Comparisons to typical pre-COVID mobility
levels show where mobility needs to remain subdued until a vaccine is found. Due to the lag between human mobility
and growth in cases, a simple calculation of the normalized difference of ( −
)/( +
) serves as a practical
indicator of future growth in cases, serving as a concrete criterion that allows for valuable time to draw up corrective
measures.

* Corresponding author. Tel: +1-914-945-1809
E-mail address: lus@us.ibm.com

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
In the IBM PAIRS geospatial big-data and analytics platform,12,13 we have curated COVID-19 data along with a
multitude of diverse data layers such as satellite images, weather history and forecasts, NO2 pollution concentrations,
population density, etc., in order to facilitate scalable and integrated data exploration and model development through
a uniform interface. In this work, we focus on two datasets, COVID-19 cases and human mobility data6, that contain
intriguing relationships that we exploited to further our understanding about the spatial-temporal dynamics of this
disease in the context of the United States of America at the county level. Insights gained here should be applicable
worldwide and to other emerging diseases that require nonpharmaceutical intervention.
For this study, COVID-19 daily new case data, as available from Johns Hopkins University14,15 on the state and
county level, is pre-processed by filtering outliers. We then apply an N-day rolling mean, with a multiple of 7 to get
rid of strong weekly signals associated with periodic weekday/weekend behavior,

=

,
(

(1)

)

is the number of new cases on day in jurisdiction . The choice of depends on the volatility of the
where
COVID-19 data, and we have found = 14 to yield the best results for modeling on the county level as below. (The
results are almost identical when using = 7 though). Figure 1(a) shows the 14-day rolling mean of new cases on the
state-level. The growth rate in daily new cases is the natural log of the ratio of the smoothed new case counts over
the previous day’s counts:

ln

= ln( ) − ln(

).

(2)

Taking the fraction above introduces significant additional noise that we smooth out by applying filtering to the
daily growth data as well. (We typically use the same N=14 here as above). Therefore, the growth rate becomes
(

=

)

(

)

=

(

)

(

)

,

(3)

As shown in Fig. 1b for Florida and NY. The growth rate can be positive or negative and may be influenced by
human mobility, social distancing, mutation of the virus, vaccinations, population immunity, and many others. Note
( )
that the growth rate can be translated into daily percentage growth = 100 ( − 1) or doubling time =
.
Aggregated and anonymized mobility data from Descartes Labs 6 measures the median of the maximum distance
(measured in km) traveled by individuals per day within a county or state by cell-phone tracking. Mobility also shows
clear periodical weekday/weekend patterns and is affected by weather. However, to avoid introducing further
dependencies for our model, we simply apply the N-day rolling mean for the mobility data
as with the above
COVID-19 case data,

=

(4)
(

State-level data for

is shown in Figure 1c using

= 14.

2

)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1: Strong correlation between (log) mobility and growth in COVID-19 cases 19 days later. (All plots are shown for 14-day rolling means
as explained in the text). (a) Temporal dependence of daily new COVID-19 cases for selected US states. (b) Growth in COVID-19 cases during
the same timeframe. (c) Temporal dependence of the anonymized cellphone mobility data (measured in km]). (Descartes Lab’s median of the
maximum-distance mobility) during the same timeframe. (d) Lagged correlation between log-mobility and growth in cases (averaged US statelevel correlations) during the abrupt shutdown phase in March/April. (e) Example of the relationship between 19 days lagged log-mobility and
growth in cases during March/April for Florida with fit. The critical mobility during this shut-down phase is 10 . = 1.4 km.

We can intuitively understand that greater mobility increases the number of encounters between individuals and
thus increases the risk of COVID-19 transmission from one person to another, so there should exist some dependence
between mobility and COVID-19 case data. However, the lag between infection, appearance of symptoms and
registration of the infection as a new COVID-19 case can be weeks and varies significantly from case to case. Given
the presumably high number of unreported cases and the stochastic nature of the data it may take 2 or more steps in
the chain of infections for the impact of mobility to become apparent in COVID-19 case data.
The USA shut down quite extensively at the end of March 2020. This abrupt drop in mobility imprints a
recognizable change in the trajectory of COVID-19 case counts.10,11 Indeed, on the state-level during March and April
2020, we find a high average Pearson correlation of 0.86 (or 0.95) between log-mobility and the growth in cases 13
(or 19) days later when applying rolling windows of size = 7 (or 14) days, as shown in Fig. 1d. When looking at
individual state-level data we find that the lags vary by ±5 (±4) days from state to state. We are using log ( ) rather
than mobility m here and in the following because increases of mobility by a factor are more meaningful than increases
by a fixed amount when comparing different counties, for which typical mobilities may differ by an order of
magnitude.
There is also a well-defined negative correlation in Fig. 1d for growth in cases about 17 days prior to the response
in mobility, albeit with a magnitude less than half as strong as the positive correlation described above. So, we are in
effect dealing with a feedback loop system where mobility induces future changes in growth in cases, while growth in
cases induces future changes in mobility. The natural resonance periodicity associated with this feedback loop is on
the order of 13+17+13+17=60 days, since only one of the two peaks is a negative correlation, and two reversals are
required for a full round-trip. Damping will tend to increase this periodicity further. A similar lagged correlation plot
using fatalities rather than cases (not shown) shows the anticorrelation happening near a delay of 0 days, meaning
mobility responds almost instantaneously to a growth in fatalities.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

From here on out, we focus on the 14-day rolling averages and the strongest peak with correlation 0.95 at a lag of
19 days as shown in Fig. 1d. We fit the relationship growth in cases ( ) 19 days delayed vs. log ( ) on the state
level, as shown for example in the state of Florida in Fig. 1e. Significant features of these fits are the slope, which
reveals how much more growth in cases to expect for each additional unit of log ( ), and importantly the x-axis
intercept, which corresponds to the critical point of the ln( ) function, where the new cases counts reach a stationary
point, and the derivative (the growth in cases ) is zero.
or “sustainable mobility threshold” as the mobility where subsequent
Therefore, we define a “critical mobility”
growth in cases 19 days later is zero (Fig. 1e). The importance of this critical point cannot be stressed enough. Growth
of zero corresponds in epidemiological terms to the effective reproductive number being = 1, which means one
infected person infects one other person on average. Under this scenario, caseloads stay constant over time. Mobilities
that stay above the critical mobility lead to positive future growth and if not mitigated will lead to a runaway pandemic.
Sustained mobility values below the critical mobility on the other hand are safer since even imported cases will
eventually fizzle out at these low mobility levels. In March/April 2020 mobility in Florida fell from an initial 8 km to
below 1 km (Fig. 1e). The critical mobility during this time was 1.4 km, so mobility was low enough to reduce cases
at the end of April.
Table 1 summarizes all the state-level fits such as the one in Fig. 1e. The state-level slopes vary by ±50% (std) from
the mean, indicating that it is difficult to assign a universal growth rate to future cases for a given mobility level. The
advantage of focusing on the critical point is that it allows us to reduce the dimensionality of the problem. We are no
longer asking about how much growth to expect in the future under different mobility scenarios. Instead, we are
primarily interested in the mobility level at which future daily cases stay constant.

Slope
R

count
51
51

mean
0.253
0.926

std
0.133
0.084

min
0.071
0.557

25%
0.155
0.922

50%
0.199
0.949

Table 1: Summary statistics of all the state-level fits (using 14 day rolling mean): Growth in Cases [
] (as in Fig. 1e).
[ log

75%
0.341
0.972

max
0.581
0.995

] vs. 19 day lagged log mobility

During the shutdown period, the mobility changes were fast and large so that mobility became almost the sole driver
of changes in COVID-19 growth. During that time, it was possible to extract critical mobility values for almost every
state from fits to the COVID-19 growth vs. lagged mobility data. The situation is much more complex during recovery
and within finer-grained jurisdictions, such as counties. Thus, on the county level, we instead use a model informed
by covariates, to smooth and fill in a sparse sampled critical mobility landscape as follows.
We regard each county’s COVID-19 and lagged mobility timeseries as an ongoing “experiment”, where the days
where COVID-19 growth goes from positive to negative or from negative to positive (Fig. 2b) effectively estimates
the critical mobility in that county (by sampling from the corresponding lagged mobility values) (Fig. 2a). These days
can occur at a local maximum in daily COVID-19 new cases or at a local minimum. On a technical note: Due to the
uncertainty of the averaged lag (estimated at ±4 days from the state-level correlations) we sample 9 different values of
the critical mobility at lags from 15 to 23 instead of just one at 19 days lag and assign them to 9 successive dates. In
rare cases, when there are two or more zero-crossings of the growth rate curve within 9 days, we may have multiple
samples assigned to the same date (with different “lag” property). Except for the visualizations in Figs. 2c and 2d, we
don’t average these but instead simply present the model training below multiple rows (samples) for the same
timestamp. Sampling the data this way also reduces the sparsity of the spatial-temporal samples a bit and helps
reducing day-to-day variations in modeled critical mobility.
Resulting spatial slices through the (sparse) measured critical mobility landscape are shown in Figures 2c and 2d
for two representative timestamps, one during the shutdown and one during the re-opening phases of the COVID-19
pandemic in the USA. Below, we fit these measurements by a single spatial-temporal global model. This effectively
removes outliers and helps reducing biases inherent to individually sampled data points, such as when a county is in
the middle of changing testing regimes and reports biased COVID-19 growth rates. Importantly, this also allows every
county’s modeled critical mobility to be informed by other counties’ experiences in similar situations.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2: (a) Complete mobility timeseries and sampled critical mobility for a few selected counties. (b) Timeseries (shifted by -19 lag days) of
the growth in COVID-19 cases for the same counties. Timestamps are sampled where growth goes from positive to negative or from negative to
positive as described in the text. (c, d) Sampled critical mobility values for counties across the United States at two different timestamps. (c) April
10, 2020, and (d) June 07, 2020. On different days different counties’ critical mobilities are sampled. Most striking are differences between rural /
urban counties as well as a general increase in critical mobility from March 26 to June 07.

Results and Discussion
Several characteristics are already apparent in the measured critical mobility maps. Most obvious is the strong
dependence on population density. As expected, areas in densely populated east and west-coast corridors have much
lower critical mobility than rural areas in the middle of the country. In addition, rural areas close to major population
centers are more impacted than rural areas far away from any major cities. This may indicate that spread of COVID19 cases to neighboring counties plays an important role as well. Lastly, the general trend between April and June is
visible throughout as an overall increase in critical mobility. It is likely that additional measures such as social
distancing, face masks, avoidance of crowded indoor spaces, etc. all contribute to this positive trend in critical mobility.
In order to fill in missing areas and to smooth the volatile sampled critical mobility values, we fit a mixed model to
the logarithm of the measured critical mobility data

log (

) ~ log ( ) + ln( ) + log ( ) + + log ( ) + + (1|

which is informed by:
(1) Local population density

=

/

(2) COVID-19 new cases (rolling mean)

, where

is the population and

(5)

the area of county j

for county j on day n.

(3) COVID-19 cumulative cases per capita (rolling mean):
total of daily new cases normalized by county population
(4) Non-local COVID-19 contagion

)

=∑

=

for county j up to day n (running

).
simulating the spread of transmissions

from county i to county j with
and
the respective COVID-19 case numbers on day n,
and
the
mobilities,
the population of county i, and ℎ the haversine distance between county centroids. The
difference of the logs here is quite analogous to the difference in logs defining the growth in cases over time

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(eq. 2). So, in a way this term can be interpreted as the growth in cases across space due to excursions into
other counties. Note that we are not modeling any drift here, such as vacationers from New York staying for
an entire season in Florida. That would require much more detailed travel data. The present term assumes
returning home every night.
(5) A demographic feature capturing the county’s population age ratio between the 60-64 year old cohort

_

and the 20-24 cohort
:
=
_
_ /
_
(6) Temporal trend (t): days elapsed since January 1, 2020.
(7) A temporal random effect intercept (1 |
), which allows capturing deviations from a linear temporal
trend, caused for example by abrupt changes in human behavior that affect COVID-19 effective reproductive
number R or testing availability.
Fitted critical mobility maps for two exemplary dates using this model are shown in Figures 3a and 3b. Note that
we purposely keep the degrees of freedom of this model very low so that overfitting is avoided, and county-level
critical mobility levels become well-informed by other counties’ experiences. This also enables the model to be easily
reproduced as it only depends on three public datasets – county-level mobility6, daily new case numbers14,15, and
population age distribution 16. We do allow for a daily random intercept (1 |
) to account for overall (USA-wide)
changes in behavior over time, but after much experimentation, we do not allow for a county-level intercept, since our
attempts to do so clearly lead to overfitting. State-level random intercepts were also problematic since they interfered
with the spreading term. Parameters such as the cumulative case density in a county or the age ratio term may capture
some of the county to county variability between similarly rural or similarly urban areas by for example increasing
modeled critical mobility in areas with a previous outbreak that “taught” the local population how to avoid being
infected through (partial) disease immunity and behavioral changes.

Figure 3: Modeled critical mobility for counties across the United States. (a) Map of mc on April 10, 2020, and (b) Map of mc on June 07, 2020.
(c) Temporal dependence of log10(mc) for selected counties. (d) Grouped training RMSE (by date) showing the temporal evolution of the critical
mobility model training error. One model encompassing all available counties and timestamps (with overall training RMSE of 0.35) is used in
order to fit and smooth the volatile county-level data as described in the text.

Figure 3c shows the temporal behavior of the fitted (model-smoothed) critical mobility for a few selected counties.
The critical mobility bottomed out in April in most counties and has generally risen since then. Throughout June and
July, the heavily impacted counties in New York State have seen their critical mobility keep on rising (albeit from
very low levels), while counties in the South and Southwest have not been able to increase their critical mobilities
further during that time. The overall training RMSE (root mean square error) of the fit to log ( ) is 0.35, implying
that critical mobility values are associated with uncertainties around a factor of ½ to 2. As Figure 3d shows, the errors
have trended down recently compared to the volatile first couple of weeks in March/April.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We consult the weights of the standardized fitting parameters in eq. (5) to gain further insights:
= 0.27,
=
−0.22,
= −0.14,
= −0.05,
= 0.02,
= −0.0003. By far the most important fitting parameters are the
temporal trend ( ) ( = 0.27), number of COVID-19 cases ( ) ( = −0.22) and the population density ( ) ( =
−0.14) within a county. Next we study each of these factors.
Apart from the first week, at the end of March when the COVID-19 outbreak in the USA was starting in earnest,
the explicitly temporal mixed effect associated with t and (1|date) for the modeled critical mobility has been
consistently upward (Fig. 4a). Note that this excludes indirect effects through varying case numbers. The linear trend
implies an improvement of almost 2% per day in terms of critical mobility but considering the random effect’s
contribution one can argue that most of the increase happened at the end of April and since then the actual trend has
been up by only 1% per day. Nevertheless, it’s still a continuous improvement and we attribute it to human factors
such as awareness of the COVID-19 dangers, facemask wearing habits, social distancing, avoidance of crowds
especially indoors, that all reduce transmissions and increase critical mobility. The very first week is probably heavily
biased due to delayed reporting of initial cases when COVID-19 testing was just getting up to speed.

Figure 4: Insights from the model fitting parameters. (a) Contribution of explicitly temporal effects on critical mobility. Fixed-effect feature
“trend” (blue) and trend combined with random effect “date” (orange). (b) Population density dependence of the fitted critical mobility for all
counties on two dates (4/10/2020 and 6/7/2020). The black dots show the model fit using the mean of the remaining variables conditioned on the
population density, time, and date. (Black lines are a guide to the eye). (c) The logarithm of daily new cases for four selected New York State
counties. (d) Spreading terms for the same four selected New York State counties.

Daily COVID-19 cases have substantial contribution to the reduction in critical mobility, most likely because
testing, contact-tracing, and quarantining are only effective at low enough case numbers. At medium to high COVID19 case numbers the system for prevention gets overwhelmed, thus requiring further reduction of mobility to keep the
virus in check. This is what seems to be happening since June 2020 in the southern and southwestern USA, e.g. in Fig.
3c for Los Angeles, CA, and Travis County, TX (where the city of Austin is located).
Next, we consider the population density dependence (Fig. 4b). It is intuitively clear that high population density
promotes the transmission of the virus and thus decreases critical mobility, while at the other extreme, rural areas
should be able to safely sustain higher mobility levels. In Fig. 4b we plot the population density dependence of the
fitted critical mobility for all counties at two dates. Indeed, rural counties are more than an order of magnitude ahead
of the most urban ones in terms of critical mobility. Note however that typical mobility levels need to be higher in
rural areas because everything (work, shopping, etc.) is more space out.
While community spread within the same county explains most of the critical mobility data and model fit, COVID19 spread between counties plays a small but persistent role not only during the shutdown phase (where COVID-19

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cases were distributed very non-uniformly), but even during the recovery phase (where COVID-19 cases are more
likely found in cities than the surrounding countryside). This can nicely be seen in the example of four New York State
counties that border each other and become successively more rural (Fig. 4c and 4d). The first significant cluster of
COVID-19 cases in New York State was detected in Westchester County in early March 2020. Together with New
York City this formed the epicenter of the COVID-19 outbreak in New York State. It took about a week for each
domino in this chain of counties to fall and begin its own COVID-19 community spread. In Eq.5 we model the spread
between counties using a spreading term s that includes the weighted difference of the logs of daily new case counts
between pairwise counties. Fig. 4d shows what happens prior to each of the counties starting their own outbreak: The
pressure from neighboring counties in terms of the spreading term rises until the own case counts shoot up at which
point the sign of the spreading term may invert and the county becomes a net exporter of transmissions. As of July,
the more rural counties furthest away from New York City have seen their cases reduce significantly, but at the same
time, the pressure from the urban areas nearby is rising again, limiting further critical mobility improvements. The
model weight for the spreading term s is much lower than the weight assigned to the daily cases term c that is sensitive
to a county’s own case count. However, in counties bordering urban areas, it may nonetheless dominate during times
where the local case count is low.
The remaining fitting parameters turn out to be less important, but they might gain in importance the longer the
outbreak lasts. The demographic feature (the ratio of the population in different age cohorts)
=
has
_ /
_
a sign consistent with older people being more careful than younger adults. The cumulative case density feature r is
intended to capture possible effects of herd immunity in counties with the highest prior infections, but as of July, it
gets almost zero weight. We tried to give the model a feature of recovered population as well but that did not do any
better. Some of the immunity effects may be captured by the linear USA-wide trend modeled by t. It will be interesting
to see when local immunity effects start to play a constructive role in increasing critical mobility.

Figure 5: Comparison of modeled critical mobility with maximum (pre-COVID) mobility and observed mobility. a) and (b) Ratio of maximum
(pre-COVID) mobility to modeled critical mobility for 2020-04-10 and 2020-06-20, respectively. (Note the different color scales.) (c) Counties
highlighted in orange that have managed to push up their critical mobility (as of 6/10/2020) far enough so that their pre-COVID mobility level is
sustainable. (d) Normalized Difference Mobility Index (NDMI) as defined in the text. The outlook has darkened by 6/7/2020 especially in the
densely populated areas in southern California, Arizona, Texas, Florida, and the interior South.

Critical mobility when compared to local maximum mobilities (which are usually observed pre-COVID), can show
us quite effectively where and when local societies must remain very vigilant (Figs. 5a-b), and where they have already
pushed up critical mobility enough to be on a sustainable path even without mobility reductions (Fig. 5c). Comparing
Figs. 5a and 5b we can see the country-wide overall improvement, especially in the North-East, but we also see that
the southern metro areas can still only afford 20% of their pre-COVID mobilities on 06/20/2020 (Fig. 5b). Note that
these observations are well outside the uncertainties associated with the modeled critical mobility shown in Figure 3d.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The predictive capability of the concept of critical mobility becomes evident by comparing current mobility with
critical mobility
. Current mobility above the critical mobility is expected to lead to future growth in COVID-19
cases while current mobility below critical mobility is expected to be sustainable. Both differencing and taking a
fraction suffer when mobility values are very large or small respectively. We suggest a normalized difference mobility
index (NDMI),

=

,

(6)

which ranges from –1 to 1, to be used as an indicator for the “danger level” a local society is engaging in, in the face
of a COVID-19 situation.
Figure 5d shows the NDMI on 06/07/2020. Some of the South and South-West counties in CA, AZ, TX, and FL
clearly were on an unsustainable path in early June (NMDI far greater than 0). Note that even though the critical
mobility itself has been rising quite nicely during this time (see Fig. 2), the actual mobility levels have risen much
faster. Northern states, that were more traumatized by the COVID-19 pandemic they experienced in April, tended to
have NDMI near or less than zero.
To estimate how predictive our NDMI indicator is, we train the model until a cutoff day (May 31) and use the June
01 NDMI to infer the direction of COVID-19 growth during the following 38 days (2 times the lag time). The results
are shown in Figure 6. The normalized histograms in Figure 6b show the range of outcomes one can expect for either
NDMI<20% or NDMI>20%. (Note that NDMI>20% is equivalent to > 1.5 ). The two peaks are nicely separated.
Here we only considered counties where the daily new case numbers on the cutoff date are above 5 per county. For
counties with lower case numbers, the prediction error increases. The accuracy of predictions using the ±20% cutoff
is 0.71 and the F1 score is 0.79. For completeness, we also report an accuracy of 0.61 and F1 score of 0.69 when
predicting without the ±20% cutoff .
While mobility was the main driver containing COVID-19 during the US shutdown11, it has been an open question
whether mobility does still hold any predictive power on COVID-19 trajectories during the recovery time. Here we
can clearly see that mobility, when compared to modeled critical mobility is still effective during June/July in
identifying counties that are in danger of a COVID-19 resurgence. In addition, the critical mobility analysis can
identify the subset of counties that may sustainably return to pre-COVID mobility levels.

Figure 6: Training up to May 31, 2020, testing during subsequent 38 days. (a) Scatter plot showing the accumulated (06/01/2020 to 07/18/2020)
subsequent growth in cases vs. NDMI on 06/01/2020 for counties in the USA. (b) Histograms showing the subsequent growth in cases for 2
different NDMI ranges: NDMI<20% and NDMI>20%.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Summary and Conclusions
The effective reproductive number of any virus largely determines its potency to spread within and between
populations. For many contagious viral diseases such as the flu, is initially very high, and the virus spreads rapidly
until a certain percentage of the population is immune. The recovered population thus acts as the limiting factor, and
once a herd immunity threshold is reached, falls below 1, and the local outbreak fizzles out. In the case of the SARSCoV-2 virus, an estimated herd-immunity threshold of around 60-70% 17,18 and the CDC current best estimate of
Infection Fatality Rate around 0.65% 19 would mean 1.2 Million excess deaths in the USA alone, clearly not an
acceptable outcome.
On the other hand, the 2020 COVID-19 outbreak has shown us that mobility restrictions during a shutdown are
able to bring down case numbers, while the reopening of society may be associated with a renewed uptick in COVID19 cases. In between these two regimes lies a region, where a “critical mobility” plays the role of the “herd immunity
threshold” of less deadly diseases. The analogy ends there however, since the recovered fraction of the population is
a monotonic function, whereas voluntary or mandatory mobility reductions may revert quickly, which leads to a
renewed uptick of the effective reproductive number above 1. This balancing act results in spatial-temporal dynamics
of COVID-19 flare-ups that are very different from those of the flu, which are usually well described using SIR
(susceptible – infected – recovered) type of models. 20,21
To estimate critical mobility, we rely on a subset of counties/timestamps where growth in COVID-19 crosses zero
to sample their lagged steady-state (critical) mobility. This measured critical mobility is then fitted using population
density, COVID-19 cumulative case density and daily case numbers, a feature capturing the spread of the virus from
county to county, a demographic feature presenting the population age distribution, a temporal trend, and temporal
random effects to get daily smoothed versions of the critical mobility map that filters out the inherent volatility of
individual counties’ survey data. These maps when compared to pre-COVID times show powerfully where human
mobility needs to stay low or alternatively, where more needs to be done to increase critical mobility. Due to socioeconomic adverse effects of restricted mobility, it is imperative that we increase critical mobility in these places by
instituting additional efforts to prevent transmissions, be it through social distancing, wearing face masks, avoiding
indoor spaces, or rigorous testing, contact tracing, and quarantining. Otherwise, it is likely that we will see recurring
cycles of shutdowns and re-openings.
The normalized difference mobility index ( −
)/( +
) reported timely within each county can be a
valuable piece of information for decision making. It is a leading indicator (of at least 2 weeks) when compared to the
signal from the growth in daily cases and by 4 weeks when compared to growth in daily deaths, affording us valuable
time to act. An action plan could potentially be implemented using feedback loop (PID controller) theory that tries to
minimize economic costs.
The model, as discussed here, depends only on three data sources: A single indicator of mobility, case numbers,
and population statistics. Subsequently, it should come as no surprise that the model has a number of clear limitations.
The most obvious of these might be the temporal dependence of the fit. Critical mobility essentially captures human
behavior in relation to the current state of the pandemic in a given region. Thus, a model should be able to accommodate
continuously changing human behavior during the course of the pandemic. However, the temporal dependence of
equation 5 consists only of a linear contribution, a nation-wide random effect, and the local and remote COVID-19
numbers. As reported above, attempts to allow local changes in behavior at different times via state-wide or countywide random effects led to overfitting. As did an independent approach to model critical mobility in a temporal rolling
window. Turning from temporal to spatial limitations, the metric used when calculating spatial contributions does not
take any major transport or travel routes into account, yet only spatial proximity. One can argue that this is a reasonable
simplification while air travel remains limited, but this definition will have to be revisited when that is no longer the
case. Finally, mobility can be defined in a number of different ways. One can imagine behavior detrimental to efforts
to contain the spread of COVID-19 that will lead to very small mobility scores in terms of the metric used in this
analysis.
In light of these limitations it is worth emphasizing that the key contribution of this paper is not so much the specific
model, but rather the definition of critical mobility as an early indicator as well as demonstration that this indicator
can be modeled in a data driven approach. Importantly, the work presented here is a model for early stages of an
epidemic, where a new virus requires a non-pharmaceutical intervention, until a vaccine is available or a substantial
fraction of the population becomes immune.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.30.20163790; this version posted July 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.
Oliver N, Letouzé E, Sterly H, et al. Mobile phone data and COVID-19: Missing an opportunity? arXiv
preprint arXiv:200312347 2020.
2.
Parker MJ, Fraser C, Abeler-Dörner L, Bonsall D. Ethics of instantaneous contact tracing using mobile phone
apps in the control of the COVID-19 pandemic. Journal of Medical Ethics 2020.
3.
Cho H, Ippolito D, Yu YW. Contact tracing mobile apps for COVID-19: Privacy considerations and related
trade-offs. arXiv preprint arXiv:200311511 2020.
4.
Ahmed N, Michelin RA, Xue W, et al. A Survey of COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:200610306 2020.
5.
Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports google.com/covid19/mobility/.
6.
Descartes Labs mobility https://www.descarteslabs.com/mobility/.
7.
Apple Mobility Trends https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility.
8.
Buckee CO, Balsari S, Chan J, et al. Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science (New
York, NY) 2020; 368(6487): 145.
9.
Kogan NE, Clemente L, Liautaud P, et al. An Early Warning Approach to Monitor COVID-19 Activity with
Multiple Digital Traces in Near Real-Time. arXiv preprint arXiv:200700756 2020.
10.
Nouvellet P, Bhatia S, Cori A, et al. Report 26: Reduction in mobility and COVID-19 transmission.
11.
Badr HS, Du H, Marshall M, Dong E, Squire MM, Gardner LM. Association between mobility patterns and
COVID-19 transmission in the USA: a mathematical modelling study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases 2020.
12.
Lu S, Shao X, Freitag M, et al. IBM PAIRS curated big data service for accelerated geospatial data analytics
and discovery. 2016 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data); 2016: IEEE; 2016. p. 2672-5.
13.
Klein LJ, Marianno FJ, Albrecht CM, et al. PAIRS: A scalable geo-spatial data analytics platform. 2015
IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data); 2015: IEEE; 2015. p. 1290-8.
14.
Johns Hopkins University Covid-19 data https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/.
15.
Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The Lancet
infectious diseases 2020; 20(5): 533-4.
16.
U.S. Census Bureau, Annual County Resident Population Estimates by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin:
April 1, 2010 to July 1, 2019 (CC-EST2019-ALLDATA)
https://www2.census.gov/programssurveys/popest/datasets/2010-2019/counties/asrh/cc-est2019-alldata.csv. 2019.
17.
Marco-Franco JE, Guadalajara-Olmeda N, González-de Julián S, Vivas-Consuelo D. COVID-19 Healthcare
Planning: Predicting Mortality and the Role of the Herd Immunity Barrier in the General Population. Sustainability
2020; 12(13): 5228.
18.
Randolph HE, Barreiro LB. Herd Immunity: Understanding COVID-19. Immunity 2020; 52(5): 737-41.
19.
CDC
COVID-19
Pandemic
Planning
Scenarios.
Updated
July
10,
2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios-h.pdf.
20.
Anderson RM, Anderson B, May RM. Infectious diseases of humans: dynamics and control: Oxford
university press; 1992.
21.
Coburn BJ, Wagner BG, Blower S. Modeling influenza epidemics and pandemics: insights into the future of
swine flu (H1N1). BMC medicine 2009; 7(1): 1-8.

11

