medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Expanding COVID-19 symptom screening to retail, restaurants, and schools by preserving
privacy using relaxed digital signatures

Brandon Jew​1​, Alexis Korb​2​, Paul Lou​2​, Jeffrey N. Chiang​3​, Ulzee An​2​,
Amit Sahai​2,4​, Eran Halperin​2,3,5,6,7​, Eleazar Eskin​2,3,5*

1​

Bioinformatics Interdepartmental Program, UCLA

2​

Department of Computer Science, UCLA

3​

Department of Computational Medicine, UCLA

4​

Center for Encrypted Functionalities, UCLA

5​

Department of Human Genetics, UCLA

6​

Department of Anesthesiology, UCLA

7​

Institute for Precision Health, UCLA

*Corresponding Author: ​eeskin@cs.ucla.edu

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract

Symptom screening is a widely deployed strategy to mitigate the COVID-19 pandemic
and many public health authorities are mandating its use by employers for all employees in the
workplace. While symptom screening has the benefit of reducing the number of infected
individuals in the workplace, it raises some inherently difficult privacy issues as a traditional
approach requires the employer to collect symptom data from each employee which is essentially
medical information. In this paper, we describe a system to implement Cryptographic
Anonymous Symptom Screening (CASS) which allows for individuals to perform COVID
symptom screening anonymously while avoiding the privacy issues of traditional approaches. In
the system, individuals report their symptoms without any identifying information and are issued
a completion certificate. This certificate contains a cryptographic code which certifies that the
certificate was obtained from the screener after reporting no symptoms. The codes can be
verified using a cryptographic algorithm which is publicly available. A standard cryptography
approach to implement such a system would be to use digital signatures. Unfortunately, standard
digital signatures have some limitations for this application in that the signatures are often
hundreds of characters long and if the signature contains the name of the individual, then there is
also a risk of compromising privacy. In our approach, we develop and utilize a relaxed digital
signature scheme to provide 16 character long codes and handle names using equivalence classes
which helps preserve privacy. Both of these extensions technically compromise the security but
in a way that is negligible for this application. Our system can either serve the function of
standard symptom screening system approaches for employees, but can also extend symptom
screening to non-employees such as visitors or customers. In this case, the system can be utilized

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in retail, restaurants and schools to ensure that everyone in the physical space, including
employees, customers, visitors and students have performed symptom screening.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction

As we start the process of reopening the economy and our society, critical infrastructure
is being put into place to help manage the pandemic to suppress infection rates. This includes the
widespread availability of testing, infrastructure for contact tracing, and symptom screening.
Many public health authorities are mandating employers to implement workplace symptom
screening. Symptom data has been widely collected to measure the state of the pandemic through
surveys ​(Menni et al. 2020; Segal et al. 2020; Timmers et al. 2020; Drew et al., n.d.)​ and analysis
of this data combined with studies that collect symptoms in conjunction with diagnostic testing
estimate that 60% of COVID-19 positive individuals have symptoms characteristic of infection
(Nishiura et al. 2020; Mizumoto et al. 2020; Day 2020)​.
These efforts have reinforced the need for systematic screening based on symptoms
which can identify over half of COVID-19 infections. Such screening is used to help
self-identify individuals with symptoms to reduce the number of individuals with infection in a
workplace. Each day before reporting to a workplace, employees complete an online survey
which asks for symptom information. Employees who are symptom free receive a certificate that
can be used to gain entry to the workplace. Employees who report symptoms are prevented from
coming to the workplace and prioritized for testing. These types of surveys are commonly
performed by health care employers for their workers ​(Zhang et al. 2020; Lan et al. 2020;
Tostmann et al. 2020; Yombi et al. 2020)​. For example, UCLA Health implemented such a
system for its health care workers in early April. Other health systems have similar procedures
and these efforts have been shown to identify individuals who are infected protecting other
workers and patients. UCLA implemented a similar system for its campus in late April.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Symptom screening is also considered a strategy to reduce risk when traveling ​(Gostic et al.
2020)​.
There are some inherent logistical, privacy and legal-related challenges to implementing
workplace symptom screening ​(Kitchin 2020)​. When an employer deploys a symptom screening
system, the employer is collecting and storing medical information on the employees. There are
also complex legal and privacy issues related to who can access that information and what
happens if the information is accessed inappropriately. In addition, employees are not the only
individuals in a workplace. Customers, visitors and other individuals may also be carriers of
infection, yet not subject to symptom screening. However, how to address logistical, privacy and
legal-related challenges for non-employees are potentially even more challenging. Despite these
challenges, symptom screening does have a clear positive effect on reducing infection rates.
We propose a technological solution to the privacy issues in performing workplace
symptom screening, Cryptographic Anonymous Symptom Screening (CASS). In our solution,
participants will use a third party symptom screener anonymously. They provide symptom
information to the third party hosted system but not any identifying information. If they are
symptom free, they are issued a symptom free completion certificate that provides evidence that
they took the screener and reported that they are symptom free and also records a specific hour
of the day that the screener was taken. As no identifying information is collected by the screener,
the certificate contains no identifying information. We refer to this type of certificate as an
anonymous completion certificate. The certificate can then be shared with the employer in order
to gain access to the workplace. The certificate contains a type of “digital signature” issued by
the screener which certifies that the individual completed the survey and reported no symptoms.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The digital signature can be verified as valid by the employer. Digital signatures are a widely
utilized cryptographic technique ​(Rivest, Shamir, and Adleman 1978)​ with many applications
including public-key infrastructures (PKI) in the form of TLS/SSL. Since it is virtually
impossible to forge a valid digital signature, by verifying the signature, an employer can confirm
that an individual reported as symptom free to the third party screener.
Unfortunately, standard digital signatures have some limitations for this application in
that the signatures are often hundreds of characters long. Such a long signature is not practical to
use on a daily symptom free certificate. Some individuals will print their certificates so that the
digital signatures will need to be entered manually into a verification system. Other individuals
would want their signature embedded in a URL. In our approach, we present a novel relaxed
digital signature scheme to provide 16 character long codes. The tradeoff is that while standard
digital signatures can encode an exact timestamp, our codes can only encode a specific hour of
the day. However, for our application, this tradeoff is completely acceptable since we are
interested in knowing whether or not an individual is symptom free in the last 24 hours and do
not need the exact time. Our cryptographic algorithm still makes it impossible to guess a valid
code, similar to standard digital signatures, which prevents circumventing taking the survey.
Everyone who completes the screener in a specific hour and reports no symptoms will
receive the same completion code on their certificates. Even if the employer is able to obtain
access to the third party symptom screener (which they can not) they would not be able to
distinguish between the many individuals who share the same code. While it is possible for
someone to complete the screener and then share their anonymous certificate with someone else
to avoid taking the screener, we feel that this is acceptable because this gives confidence to the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

participants that their privacy is protected. In practice, it is much easier for an individual to fill
out the symptom survey than to obtain someone else’s anonymous certificate.
In some environments, the concern about sharing anonymous certificates is unacceptable
and they would prefer certificates with identifying information on the certificate. Our system can
also issue symptom free completion certificates with an individual’s name or other identifier on
the certificate. This is also possible with standard digital signatures as it is standard to include a
name in the signature which can be validated. If the name is changed on the certificate then the
signature will no longer match and can easily be identified as invalid. Unfortunately, using
standard digital signatures then undermines the privacy protection of the system as the third party
screener will need to know the name of an individual filling out the survey to create the digital
signature. To preserve privacy in our approach, we extend standard digital signatures to use
name equivalence classes which are groupings of names. All certificates issued during a specific
hour with names within an equivalence class will have the same code. The third party screener
does not obtain the actual name of the individual but only the class and if there are many people
taking the survey each hour, there will be many individuals in each class so privacy will be
preserved. If an individual tries to change the name on a certificate, it will only still be valid if
the two names are in the same class, but with the large number of classes, this is unlikely to be
practical and has a negligible effect on security.
We note that because CASS preserves privacy, CASS has the potential to have additional
applications beyond employee symptom screening. For example, retail stores or restaurants can
use such a system for symptom screening their customers. Schools can use such a system for
parents to report the symptoms of their children before bringing them to school.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

At UCLA, we implemented CASS and have made the system available to the
community. In our implementation, the symptom free completion certificates are designed so
that they can be displayed on a mobile device and they change color over time. A completion
certificate is blue when the symptom survey was taken in the last 24 hours. It turns yellow
between 24 hours and one week and turns red after one week.

CASS System Overview

We describe our system by first contrasting to traditional symptom screening. In
traditional symptom screening, there are two relevant entities. We refer to the individual who is
screening themselves as the user. We refer to the organization that is requesting that the
screening is being performed as “the organization” which is often an employer, but could also be
a university or other entity that wants to make their location safer. The organization implements
a screening system which is usually a software that they install which collects user symptom
information and if a user is symptom free, they are issued certificates that clears them to be able
to enter the workplace. The organization maintains the database of user symptom information
which creates some legal and privacy challenges.
Our approach, Cryptographic anonymous symptom screening (CASS), allows for
symptom screening without compromising privacy which is enabled by extending digital
signatures in two ways. In CASS, there is a third relevant entity which is a third party screener
that hosts the screening system and a fourth entity which is the verification system. Users report
their symptoms to the third party screener and if the user reports that they are symptom free, they
receive a symptom free certificate providing evidence that they completed the screener and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

reported no symptoms. Users can show this to their organization and the organization can verify
the authenticity of the certificate using the verification system. In order to preserve privacy, a
few conditions must hold. First, the user only shares symptom information with the screener, but
not any identifying information. If the user is symptom free, the user receives a symptom free
completion certificate which can be shared with the organization. Second, other than obtaining
the certificate directly from the user, the organization does not receive any symptom information
about the user. Third, the organization can not access the symptom data of the users.
For the system to be effective, the organization needs to have some guarantee that if a
user has possession of a symptom free certificate, the user entered symptom free data into the
screener and obtained a certificate. We use a novel relaxed digital signature scheme for this
application. The certificates issued by the screener contain code which is effectively a digital
signature so that they can be verified as authentic by the organization using the verification
system. Unlike traditional digital signatures, our codes are only 16 characters long.

Figure 1. Examples of anonymous symptom free certificates.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We implemented CASS at UCLA and provide both a third party screener and a
verification system to support anonymous and named certificates. In our implementation of the
system at UCLA, the verification system visualizes the code as a certificate taking advantage of
the fact that the code encodes the time the symptom screening was performed. On the certificate,
the code is both written and encoded in a QR code. A code can be verified to be authentic using
the verification system. Similar to digital signatures, because of the cryptographic algorithm, it is
extremely difficult to obtain a valid code without getting it from the system. In our
implementation, the color of the certificate shows how recent the screening was performed. Blue
signifies within 24 hours, yellow signifies within a week and red is older than one week. On the
certificate is also the time that the screening was performed. The certificate is designed to be
displayed on a mobile phone but can also be printed out. Using a mobile device, the QR code on
a certificate can be scanned to verify that it is valid. Examples of anonymous certificates are
shown in Figure 1.
An issue with anonymous certificates is that it is possible that a user can obtain a
certificate from someone else without taking the screener and for some organizations this is a
problem. Our implementation also supports named certificates where a name or other identifier is
displayed on the certificate. Similar to a digital signature, the code on a named certificate
corresponds both to the time the symptoms were reported and is tied to the name or identifier on
the certificate. If the name is changed, then the certificate will no longer be valid. Named
certificates present an additional privacy challenge in that the symptom screener must know the
name to issue the right code. We address this issue by instead of using the name or identifier, we

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

group names into equivalence classes which we call name variants. Each name or identifier is
assigned a name variant which is a number between 1 and 10,000. The issued code matches the
specific number. If someone modifies the name or identifier on the certificate, the number
corresponding to the name will have a 99.99% chance of being different from the number of the
original name which will make the certificate invalid. This prevents individuals from sharing
symptom free certificates and ensures that they themselves completed the screening, further
increasing the security of the system. To preserve privacy, the screener only obtains the
information of the name variant or which number a specific name or identifier corresponds to
and not the actual name or identifier which is all that is necessary to issue the correct code. If
there are many individuals who are using the system, there will be many using it in each hour
with identifiers that map to the same name variant which will provide privacy. The verification
system takes as input the code and the name and will verify that the code matches the name. The
verification system displays the name on the certificate if it's valid. An example of a named
certificate is shown in Figure 2 and can also be validated using the QR code.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Example of named symptom free certificate.

We note that any organization can implement their own validation system which can
integrate into their own internal systems. If an organization implements their own validation
system, then the names or identifiers on the certificates would only be shared internally.

CASS Cryptographic System

Standard Digital Signatures
One key property that CASS aims to achieve is a separation between the organization and
the third party screener that receives symptom information from users. Namely, the organization
wants to have reasonable confidence that each employee has completed the screener, but should
not be privy to the private health information that is revealed by the employee to the screener. In
order to do this, we need a way for the screener to provide a certificate to the user that a survey

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

has been completed, that the organization can check without needing to contact the screener.
Cryptography offers a well-known solution to this problem, namely, digital signatures.
Digital signatures are defined by a signing and a verification algorithm. In the classic
scenario, there are two parties--a signer, Sam, and a verifier, Vivian. Sam wants to send Vivian a
message AND wants to guarantee the authenticity of his message where authenticity means
guaranteeing the message indeed originated from Sam and was not tampered with in transit. Sam
guarantees authenticity by producing a digital signature on the message that only he could
reasonably produce. In our scenario, Sam has a public and private key pair. Sam runs the signing
algorithm on said data or message with his private key to produce a digital signature for that
piece of data or message. He then sends the signature along with the message to Vivian. Since
Sam’s public key is accessible to anyone, if Vivian receives the purported message and signature
from Sam, Vivian can run a verification algorithm that takes as input the message, Sam’s digital
signature, and Sam’s public key. If the message from Sam is untampered and was signed with
Sam’s private key, then the verification algorithm will approve the message as Sam’s. A secure
digital signature scheme guarantees that with high probability, no reasonably computationally
powerful malicious individual can forge a signature on some message when the malicious
individual has no access to the private key of the individual they impersonate.
In our setting, the survey system generates a public-private key pair. Then, digital
signatures can be signed on a completion code by the survey system when an individual
completes the survey. The organization can then verify that the completion code was indeed
signed by the survey system. A secure digital signature scheme guarantees that no reasonably
computationally powerful malicious individual can forge a signature on a completion code.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

However, as we now discuss, because usability is of paramount importance to CASS, we
cannot use digital signatures as they exist today. State-of-the-art digital signature schemes
require certificates to be of size at least 154 bits, which if expressed in hexadecimal, would be 39
symbols long ​(Boneh, Lynn, and Shacham 2004)​. Because users must present certificates to their
organizations daily, allowing them to be embedded in URLs or even having them printed on
paper makes them more practical and more likely to be used. Since the public health benefits of
such a system directly depend on how compliant employees are and this it is critical that these
certificates be as short as possible. In particular, we impose on ourselves a limit of at most 16
hexadecimal characters, so that even if a user must type in this certificate by hand, it would be
similar to typing a credit card number (16 decimal digits). To accomplish this, we take an
alternative route, which achieves a moderate level of security, as detailed below, while still
allowing for very short certificates.

Relaxed Digital Signatures
We provide moderate cryptographic security to encourage participants to take the survey.
Since taking the survey is simple to do, we only provide security appropriate to the difficulty of
behaving honestly. Though we could have used digital signatures or stronger security notions,
doing so would have increased the size of the completion code, the runtime, and the complexity
of the system. We believe that our simplicity, usability, and efficiency versus security tradeoff is
appropriate since the survey takes only a few minutes to complete.
The CASS completion code generator is a software that is hosted by the third party
screener. To generate completion codes, CASS first generates a secret random string r of length

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

16 bytes. Let K be the number of name variants supported by the system. A value N ∊ [0, K-1] is
calculated from a user’s name by computing the SHA-256 hash and reducing this value modulo
K. For an anonymous name code, the value N is set to 0. Given N, and at day D and hour T that
the survey is completed, CASS computes the following value A, called a “raw code”, by
computing the SHA-256 hash of these values concatenated:

A = SHA-256(0, r, T, D, N)

The output of SHA-256 is a string of hexadecimal values. The actual completion code, B,
given to the user will be prefixes of the raw code. Namely, B is the first 16 characters of A. Thus,
each code will look something like this: 3239c5bd01d861b6.
Without knowing r, the probability of successfully guessing a valid receipt is roughly
2​4*16​ to 1, or less than one in 64 trillion. Furthermore, every day, CASS also chooses, for each
hour and each name code, a random integer salt between 0 and 10,000 inclusive. It then
computes the following verification code, C, by prepending the salt and hashing B:

C = SHA-256(salt, B)

Note that only 24*K values of verification codes (one for every name code) must be
computed each day by CASS. There is a public website that will hold all the verification codes
computed each day, which will be made public at the start of each day.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The CASS completion code validator is a software that can be executed on a website, or
using desktop software. Every day, the software will obtain the list of all verification codes from
the public website. When an organization receives a potential code from a user, they can enter
the receipt into the software. Given this receipt, E, the software will compute potential
verification codes, F, by hashing with each possible salt value:

For i = 1 to 10,000:
F = SHA-256(i, E)
If F in verification codes, return T, D, N.
Return error.

Each potential verification code is checked against the verification codes for each hour
stored in the software. If the potential verification code matches, the software returns the day,
hour, and name variant for which the code matched. If the potential code does not match any of
the verification codes, then an error is displayed, and the offending code is displayed as being
invalid.

Threat Model
We again emphasize that we do not guarantee computational security against forging or
cheating behavior. Our scheme makes a reasonable tradeoff for usability compared to digital
signatures. Nevertheless, the CASS completion code offers some computational deterrence to a
would-be forger or survey completion cheater.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Consider the following security analysis on the completion codes. Suppose an adversary
wanted to gain a valid completion code without taking the survey. Using only the public
verification codes, it is computationally infeasible to generate a valid completion code for a
chosen name, day, and time stamp. If we model SHA-256 as a random function, then the
probability of an adversary generating such a completion code is less than 2​-77​. In particular, this
probability is computed by observing that an adversary would have to guess the random 16-byte
string (probability of 2​-64​) and a salt value ranging in the interval of integers between 0 and
10,000 (probability of 2​-13​). In other words, the expected number of guesses a user would have to
make is 2​77​.
Adversaries may have friends who have completed the survey and are willing to share
their completion codes with the adversary. In the variant where we do not include the
individual’s name, then there is nothing to stop the adversary from using one of their friend’s
codes. However, in the named variant, then if we model SHA-256 as a random function, the
probability that the code of any given friend is also usable by the adversary is less than 1/K,
where K is the specfiable number of name classes/variants being used. In particular, in this
implementation, K = 10,000. We note that a friend could take the survey under the adversary’s
name, but think that the incentive for this is low.
The completion codes cannot leak any information about the survey takers apart from the
hour in which they took the survey and their name (if we use the named variant of the
completion code). This is because the completion code is computed independently of all other
personal information.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion

We present an approach for COVID-19 symptom screening which preserves privacy
enabled by cryptography. In our approach, users provide their symptom information to a third
party screener and if they report no symptoms, they are issued a symptom free certificate. We
developed a novel relaxed digital signature scheme to provide a code on the certificate to certify
its authenticity. The scheme enables codes that are much shorter than standard digital signatures
to increase the usability which will increase the compliance by users resulting in a greater
positive effect on public health.
Employee symptom screening in the workplace is being mandated by many public health
authorities to increase the safety of the workplace and help control infections. Privacy issues
complicate the deployment of symptom screening even for employees. However, employees are
not the only individuals in the workplace and for non-employees, the privacy issues are even
more substantial. Since our approach does preserve privacy, our system can be easily extended to
all individuals who are present in a workplace.
Since our approach preserves privacy, it can be used in many more scenarios where
privacy issues are even more sensitive. One example is that our approach can provide symptom
screening for retail customers or restaurant patrons. For this to be enabled, a sign outside the
business would ask customers to go to the screener website to obtain their certificate which they
can show upon entry. Another example is that the approach be used to symptom screen children
at both daycares and schools. In this application, parents would fill out the symptom screener on
behalf of their child and then show the certificate to the school or daycare when they drop their
child off. These types of applications are substantially facilitated using an anonymous symptom

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

screener as enabled by our technology.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements

Research of A.K., P.L., and A.S. supported in part from DARPA SAFEWARE and SIEVE
awards, NTT Research, NSF Frontier Award 1413955, BSF grant 2012378, a Xerox Faculty
Research Award, a Google Faculty Research Award, an equipment grant from Intel, and an
Okawa Foundation Research Grant. This material is based upon work supported by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency through Award HR00112020024 and the ARL under
Contract W911NF-15-C- 0205. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
the official policy or position of the Department of Defense, the National Science Foundation,
NTT Research, or the U.S. Government. B.J. was supported by the National Science Foundation
Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE-1650604.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
Boneh, Dan, Ben Lynn, and Hovav Shacham. 2004. “Short Signatures from the Weil Pairing.”
Journal of Cryptology​. https://doi.org/​10.1007/s00145-004-0314-9​.
Day, Michael. 2020. “Covid-19: Four Fifths of Cases Are Asymptomatic, China Figures
Indicate.” ​BMJ ​369 (April): m1375.
Drew, David A., Long H. Nguyen, Claire J. Steves, Jonathan Wolf, Tim D. Spector, Andrew T.
Chan, and COPE Consortium. n.d. “Rapid Implementation of Mobile Technology for
Real-Time Epidemiology of COVID-19.” https://doi.org/​10.1101/2020.04.02.20051334​.
Gostic, Katelyn, Ana Cr Gomez, Riley O. Mummah, Adam J. Kucharski, and James O.
Lloyd-Smith. 2020. “Estimated Effectiveness of Symptom and Risk Screening to Prevent
the Spread of COVID-19.” ​eLife​ 9 (February). https://doi.org/​10.7554/eLife.55570​.
Kitchin, Rob. 2020. “Civil Liberties or Public Health, or Civil Liberties and Public Health?
Using Surveillance Technologies to Tackle the Spread of COVID-19.” ​Space and Polity,​
June, 1–20.
Lan, Fan-Yun, Robert Filler, Soni Mathew, Jane Buley, Eirini Iliaki, Lou Ann Bruno-Murtha,
Rebecca Osgood, Costas A. Christophi, Alejandro Fernandez-Montero, and Stefanos N.
Kales. 2020. “COVID-19 Symptoms Predictive of Healthcare Workers’ SARS-CoV-2 PCR
Results.” A
​ vailable at SSRN 3586670.​
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3586670​.
Menni, Cristina, Ana M. Valdes, Maxim B. Freidin, Carole H. Sudre, Long H. Nguyen, David A.
Drew, Sajaysurya Ganesh, et al. 2020. “Real-Time Tracking of Self-Reported Symptoms to
Predict Potential COVID-19.” ​Nature Medicine​, May.
https://doi.org/​10.1038/s41591-020-0916-2​.
Mizumoto, Kenji, Katsushi Kagaya, Alexander Zarebski, and Gerardo Chowell. 2020.
“Estimating the Asymptomatic Proportion of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Cases
on Board the Diamond Princess Cruise Ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.” ​Euro Surveillance:
Bulletin Europeen Sur Les Maladies Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease
Bulletin​ 25 (10). https://doi.org/​10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180​.
Nishiura, Hiroshi, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Takeshi Miyama, Ayako Suzuki, Sung-Mok Jung,
Katsuma Hayashi, Ryo Kinoshita, et al. 2020. “Estimation of the Asymptomatic Ratio of
Novel Coronavirus Infections (COVID-19).” ​International Journal of Infectious Diseases:
IJID: Official Publication of the International Society for Infectious Diseases​ 94 (May):
154–55.
Rivest, R. L., A. Shamir, and L. Adleman. 1978. “A Method for Obtaining Digital Signatures
and Public-Key Cryptosystems.” https://doi.org/​10.21236/ada606588​.
Segal, Eran, Feng Zhang, Xihong Lin, Gary King, Ophir Shalem, Smadar Shilo, William E.
Allen, et al. 2020. “Building an International Consortium for Tracking Coronavirus Health
Status.” N
​ ature Medicine​, June. https://doi.org/​10.1038/s41591-020-0929-x​.
Timmers, Thomas, Loes Janssen, Joep Stohr, J. L. Murk, and M. A. H. Berrevoets. 2020. “Using
eHealth to Support COVID-19 Education, Self-Assessment, and Symptom Monitoring in the
Netherlands: Observational Study.” ​JMIR mHealth and uHealth​ 8 (6): e19822.
Tostmann, Alma, John Bradley, Teun Bousema, Wing-Kee Yiek, Minke Holwerda, Chantal
Bleeker-Rovers, Jaap Ten Oever, et al. 2020. “Strong Associations and Moderate Predictive
Value of Early Symptoms for SARS-CoV-2 Test Positivity among Healthcare Workers, the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20169839; this version posted September 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Netherlands, March 2020.” ​Euro Surveillance: Bulletin Europeen Sur Les Maladies
Transmissibles = European Communicable Disease Bulletin​ 25 (16).
https://doi.org/​10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.16.2000508​.
Yombi, Jean Cyr, Julien De Greef, Anne-Sophie Marsin, Anne Simon, Hector
Rodriguez-Villalobos, Andrea Penaloza, and Leila Belkhir. 2020. “Symptom-Based
Screening for COVID-19 in Health Care Workers: The Importance of Fever.” ​The Journal
of Hospital Infection​, May. https://doi.org/​10.1016/j.jhin.2020.05.028​.
Zhang, Haipeng, Dimitar Dimitrov, Lynn Simpson, Balaji Singh, Nina Plaks, Stephen Penney, Jo
Charles, et al. 2020. “A Web-Based, Mobile Responsive Application to Screen Healthcare
Workers for COVID Symptoms: Descriptive Study.” ​medRxiv​.
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069211v1.abstract​.

