medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

METHODOLOGY

A Versatile Web App for Identifying the Drivers
of COVID-19 Epidemics
Wayne M Getz1,2,3*† , Richard Salter3,4† , Ludovica Luisa Vissat1 and Nir Horvitz1
*

Correspondence:
wgetz@berkeley.edu
1
Department of Environmental
Science, Policy and Management,
University of California, CA
94708-3114 Berkeley, USA
Full list of author information is
available at the end of the article
†
Co-first authors

Abstract
Background: No versatile web app exists that allows epidemiologists and
managers around the world to comprehensively analyze the impacts of COVID-19
mitigation. The NMB-DASA web app presented here fills this gap.
Methods: Our web app uses a model that explicitly identifies susceptible,
contact, latent, asymptomatic, symptomatic and recovered classes of individuals,
and a parallel set of response classes, subject to lower pathogen-contact rates.
The user inputs a CSV file of incidence and, if of interest, mortality rate data. A
default set of parameters is available that can be overwritten through input or
online entry, and a user-selected subset of these can be fitted to the model using
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). Model fitting and forecasting intervals
are specifiable and changes to parameters allow counterfactual and forecasting
scenarios. Confidence or credible intervals can be generated using stochastic
simulations, based on MLE values, or on an inputted CSV file containing Markov
chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) estimates of one or more parameters.
Findings: We illustrate the use of our web app in extracting social distancing,
social relaxation, surveillance or virulence switching functions (i.e., time varying
drivers) from the incidence and mortality rates of COVID-19 epidemics in Israel,
South Africa, and England. The Israeli outbreak exhibits four distinct phases:
initial outbreak, social distancing, social relaxation, and a second wave mitigation
phase. An MCMC projection of this latter phase suggests the Israeli epidemic will
continue to produce into late November an average of around 1500 new case per
day, unless the population practices social distancing measures at least 5-fold
below the level in August, which itself is 4-fold below the level at the start of July.
Our analysis of the relatively late South African outbreak that became the world’s
fifth largest COVID-19 epidemic in July revealed that the decline through late
July and early August was characterised by a social distancing driver operating at
more than twice the per-capita applicable-disease-class (pc-adc) rate of the social
relaxation driver. Our analysis of the relatively early English outbreak, identified a
more than 2-fold improvement in surveillance over the course of the epidemic. It
also identified a pc-adc social distancing rate in early August that, though nearly
four times the pc-adc social relaxation rate, appeared to barely contain a second
wave that would breakout if social distancing was further relaxed.
Interpretation: Our web app provides policy makers and health officers who
have no epidemiological modelling or computer coding expertise with an
invaluable tool for assessing the impacts of different outbreak mitigation policies
and measures. To facilitate its use, mouse over instructions, user guides and
training videos are available at the website.
Keywords: Numerus Model Builder; SARS-CoV-2; Israel; South Africa; England;
SEIR models; Social distancing

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 2 of 23

Introduction
The COVID-19 outbreak that in February, 2020, threatened to overwhelm the
healthcare system of Wuhan, China, was brought under control in early March
through a combination of social distancing, contact tracing and quarantine measures
[1, 2, 3, 4]. Since then, these measures have been used by municipalities, counties,
states and countries around the world to bring COVID-19 outbreaks under full or
partial control. Many of outbreaks have subsequently experienced prominent second
waves, as control measures—which we refer to as drivers—have been prematurely
relaxed.
As of late August, 2020, the pandemic state of COVID-19 was closing in on twenty
five million recorded cases, and over 800,000 recorded deaths. In the US itself, the
number of recorded cases was around 6 million and approaching 200,000 recorded
deaths. Though the management of outbreaks has been impressive in some countries, in many others healthcare officials and civic leaders at various administrative
levels have been in dire need of quantitative tools to help formulate and implement
policies designed to flatten and ultimately extinguish state, provincial, and country
level epidemics. Currently, policy assessment tools exist only in the hands of computational epidemiologists and modelling and data analysis groups. These individuals
and groups are insufficient to meet the policy development and assessment needs of
most communities around the world. Without easy entry, versatile, policy evaluation tools, governors, mayors, and other civic leaders responsible for implementing
healthcare policy are flying blind when making critical decisions whether or not to
open schools or various business sectors representing different levels of SARS-CoV-2
transmission risk.
Here we present an easy entry, user-friendly analytical tool: the COVID-19 NMBDASA (Numerus Model Builder Data and Simulation Analysis) web app. It can be
used to address questions regarding the impact of social distancing, social relaxation,
changes in surveillance, implementation of contact tracing with quarantining, patient isolation, and vaccination (when widely available) on incidence and mortality
rates. NMB-DASA does not require the user to have a mathematical or epidemiological modelling background or an understanding of the computational procedures
needed to carry out deterministic and stochastic simulations for model parameter
estimation or epidemic forecasting. It only requires users to provide a comma separated values file (CSV: a standard used by all common spreadsheet applications
and data management programs) that contains the incidence and mortality time
series of the particular outbreak to be analysed, to read this paper, and to undergo
less then an hour of training using videos supplied for this purpose at the website. The user is also able to load a set of generic default parameters that come
with our COVID-19 NMB-DASA, or modify these by either entering new values or
manipulating sliders on web pages. We also illustrate, using data from the Israeli,
South African, and English COVID-19 epidemics, how the NMB-DASA web app
can be used to: i) forensically analyze the dynamic aspects of outbreaks by identifying implicit drivers (Viz., surveillance levels, social distancing and relaxation,
quarantining, improvement in therapeutics, rolling out vaccination programs); and,
ii) evaluate or forecast the impacts of changes to these drivers.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 3 of 23

Methods
Model
The epidemiological simulation and forecasting engine of our website is based on
a modified SEIR (Susceptible, Exposed, Infectious, Recovered) formulation called
SCLAIV (Fig. 1), which expands disease class E into a contact class C and latent
class L. Individuals in C, having made contact with SARS-CoV-2, can either thwart
potential infection (e.g., through physical barriers or operation of the innate immune
system) and return to S or succumb and moving onto L. SCLAIV also adds an
asymptomatic infectious class A to the general infectious component of an SEIR
process, which is known to be important component of SARS-CoV-2 transmission
[5, 6, 7, 8]. Individuals in A are assumed to be less infectious than in the class I [9]
and can either move to I or directly to the acquired immunity (i.e., akin to naturally
“vaccinated”) class V. A SCLAIV+D formulation also explicitly separates out the
removed class R in the SEIR process into V and the class D of individuals that have
died.

Figure 1 A flow diagram of the SCLAIV+D+response model with its 8 flow parameters

identified by Roman numbers 1-8 plus an asymptomatic infection parameter 9. The 8
drivers identified by lower case Roman letters a-h are either zero (apart from surveillance),
a positive constant or have the form of a switching function, as described in the text. We
have generalized the disease-induced natural mortality flow rate 8 from being a constant
to include the possibility of driving (h) the rate down to account for improvements over
time in treatment and therapeutics.

SEIR and SCLAIV+D formulations need to be augmented to include the epidemiological driving process used to “flatten incidence and mortality curves” during outbreaks, if models are used to assess the impacts of healthcare policies on epidemics.
The structure and equation details of our full SCLAIV+D+response model are provided in Appendix A of the Supplementary Material (SM). Details of our discrete

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 4 of 23

time deterministic and stochastic implementations of our SCLAIV+D+response
model, at the computational core of our web app, can be found in Appendix B (SM).
This implementation includes 8 response drivers (Fig. 1), each of which can either
be specified as a constant or time varying rate—the latter, specifically, as a five parameter switching function (Appendix A.3; Fig. A.2. SM). These driving rates are
responsible for transferring individuals among basic SCLAIV and SCLAIV-response
classes (Fig. 1). Specifically, they are a social distancing rate (transfers individuals
from S to Sr ), which involves a possible dynamic change in a contact rate reduction
parameter, a social relaxation rate (transfers individuals from Sr to S), a quarantine
rate linked to contact tracing (transfers individuals from C, L and A to Cr , Lr , and
Ar respectively), case isolation (transfers individuals from I to Ir ) and vaccination
rates (transfers individuals from pre-infectious classes to Vr ; see Fig. 1), the level
of surveillance (i.e., proportion of cases detected) implemented to monitor the state
of the outbreak, and the impacts of treatment on disease-induced mortality rates
(the latter is also referred to as the virulence).
Parameters and data
Many, but not all, of the basic epidemiological parameters used to model COVID-19
and other infectious disease outbreaks can be obtained independently from data on
the case histories individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 [16, 17, 3, 10], while others
can be estimated by fitting models to incidence, mortality and other types of data.
Those estimated prior to model fitting (Table 1) are likely to include the latent,
asymptomatic, recovery (i.e., from classes A, Ar , I and Ir to V), and immune periods
(the latter can only be estimated from future data, depending on the mean period of
acquired immunity that will be realised over time), because these are more directly
observable from clinical studies than, for example, contact rates and transmission
probabilities associated with particular types of contact events. We also note that
many parameters are correlated because they act together to produce particular
types of observable phenomena, such as growth rates or changes in incidence or
mortality levels from one point in time to the next. Thus, for example, contact rates,
probability of pathogen transmission per contact, and average infectious period
length are linked when it comes to generating the more directly estimable quantity
called R0 [18], which is the average number of individuals an infected individual can
expect to infect at the initial stage of an outbreak. So, if a value for the infectious
period is selected a priori to be higher than it really should be, fitting a contact
rate parameter value to the incidence time series using, say, maximum likelihood
estimation (MLE) will yield a concomitantly lower value for this rate than if the a
priori infectious period had been lower.
In Table 1 a default set of point estimates of parameter values are listed for
modelling the initial phase of a non-specific COVID-19 outbreak (also see Fig. 2).
These values are used to derive probabilities of disease progression events at the
individual level, scaled up to the population level using multinomial distributions
(stochastic simulations) or proportions of individuals undergoing disease class transitions (deterministic simulations) (see Appendix B of SM). Further, these values
can be overridden when values more appropriate to a specific region are available,
or values can be selected according to their likelihoods from a distribution of values

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 5 of 23

Table 1 Default point estimates of parameters for fitting and simulating a basic COVID-19 SCLAIV
outbreak on [0, test ]). Also see Fig. 2
Parameter
Transmission
Contact rate§
Nominal/effective pop size
Asymptomatic reduction
Surveillance
Isolation/treatment
Contact rate reduction
Progression
Thwart period
Succumb period§
Latent Period
Asymptomatic period
Symptomatic/recovery period
Immune period
Disease-induced mort.
Initial Values
Initial Susceptible
Initial Contact

Symbol(math† )

Value

Source/Comment

κ
N0 = Neff
ε
δsur
δiso
δcon

estimated
105 − 107
0.1
0.5
0.35
0.1

incidence data∗
varies¶
unknown: see [10]
unknown∗∗
varies∗††
varies∗‡

πthw
πsuc
πlat
πasy
πrec
πimm
α

1
estimated
4† † days
5† † days
7‡ days
1000 days
estimated

normalised
incidence data∗
[7, 11, 10]
[7, 11, 10]
[10]
unknownk
mortality data

S0
C0

Initial Latent

L0

Initial Asymptomatic
Initial Symptomatic
Initial Immune

A0
I0
V0 = 0

S0 = Neff − C0 − L0 − A0 − I0 − V0
estimated
incidence data∗


πasy
GI0
requires G+
 πrec 
πlat πasy
2
G I0
requires G+
2
πrec
estimated
incidence data∗
SARS-CoV-2 immunologically naı̈ve pop.

§ See Eq. B.3 in Appendix B of SM for relationship to SEIR model parameter β
equivalant symbols used by the web app are κ = kappa, πthw =P thw, I0 =I 0, etc., as will be
made clear throughout the text
∗ Best values estimated using likelihood optimisation, ranges estimated using Bayesian MCMC
methods [12, 13, 14]
¶ Depends on relative outbreak size (e.g., < 10% of total pop.) for reliable forecasts
∗†† Varies. This default value implies individuals will be isolated within three days of entering the
symptomatic class
∗‡ Varies. This rate assumes that sheltering-in-place reduces contact rates by 90%
∗∗ Values fitted to the initial conditions will inversely scale with this value
† Sources are highly variable, so we selected integer-valued ball park estimates
‡ Value early into epidemic since it depends on hospitalisation/isolation protocols
k If sufficiently large, its influence on the initial stage of the outbreak is negligible
+ Requires G which, unlike R , is a rate of increase over the recovery rather than the “serial” interval
0
[15, 1]
† The

when available from a suitable source (e.g., from an MCMC procedure, as discussed
in Appendix C, SM). Of course, incidence and mortality time series data, as well
as response driver parameters, will be region specific and depend on policies implemented to help control local outbreaks.
The disease induced mortality rate can also be obtained directly from epidemiological data and the average mortality rate over any period of time can be estimated
from the number cases observed and the ultimate fate of those cases: recovery or
death. During the course of an outbreak, in the context of COVID-19, however,
the time between an individual being infected with SARS-CoV-2 and a definitive
outcome can be several weeks. So this time lag has to be taken into account when
estimating mortality [10]. Further, during the course of an outbreak, provided the
healthcare system is not overwhelmed, we might expect mortality rates to drop as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 6 of 23

Figure 2 Incidence and Mortality time series are loaded by selecting a CSV file (see the

Choose File window on the left). These data along with Epidemic Parameters and
Epidemic Drivers values can be loaded separately or default values (shown here) can be
loaded, modified, and then saved for use later as a single .dat file. The Fitting
interval value is inserted by the user and the Data size value is automatically
computed from the length of Incidence and Mortality time series. Once all the
parameter values have been set, the Opt Page button on the right can be selected to take
the user to the NMB-DASA optimisation page. A forecasting simulation Finish time can
be inserted or selected later on the Forecast Page. The yellow Enable Instructional
Popups window can be checked to activate mouse-over popups, as illustrated here for the
Contact Rate reduction factor.

hospitals learn how to take care of the more serious cases admitted for treatment
and care.
Parameters that are difficult to explicitly identify from case-history data include
the absolute contact rates as a function of behaviour (social distancing or not)
and the probability of transmission as a function of the proximity, duration, and
background environmental conditions (e.g., humidity, temperature, air movement,
fomite characteristics [19] during contact). Also difficult to obtain is the state of the
population at the time that the first few cases are detected. The first cases are the
first group of individuals identified in disease class I at the nominal start of modelling
an outbreak, which for convenience we denote as time t = 0. Of course, we anchor
this point to some suitable calendar day to facilitate interpretation of results. The
number of individuals assigned the value I(0) depends on the level of surveillance
at time t. In a well-developed health care system, depending on the proportion of
asymptomatic carriers and the severity of the disease, more than half the cases may
easily go undetected during the first few weeks of an outbreak, though surveillance
should improve during the course of the outbreak. In a poorly-developed healthcare
system, the proportion of cases detected during the initial stage of an outbreak may
be considerably lower.
Of course, only symptomatic cases will initially be detected: asymptomatic cases
will require the implementation of some sort of testing regimen. Thus, at the start
of an epidemic, the numbers of individuals in disease classes C (C(0)), L (L(0))
and A (A(0)) are unknown and, thus, need to be estimated. The latter two can
be expressed in terms of the estimated value I(0) if the initial growth rate of the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 7 of 23

epidemic can be reasonably guessed at from past experience with similar epidemics,
in which case L(0) and A(0) may computed from the estimate of I(0) (see Appendix
B.2, SM) rather than having to be estimated as well. The value of C(0), however,
also needs to be estimate since its relationship to I(0) depends on various other
parameters, such as the thwart and succumb periods. Since these two periods are
complementary rates out of the same disease class C, and (as a first cut) the net
rate through C is more critical to estimate than the size of C itself, we can fix the
thwart period at 1. In this case, the fit of the contact rate and succumb periods will
then scale relative to the thwart period. The sensitivity of results to this first-cut
assumption can later be tested or relaxed, as deemed appropriate.
The initial value V (0) for the number of individuals assumed to be immune to
infection by SARS-CoV-2 at the start of the outbreak can be set to be 0, since this
virus is thought to be novel for humans. Of course, it may emerge that some cross
immunity exists for individuals that have previously been exposed to SARS-CoV1 or other corona viruses [20]. In this case, initial immunity data can be used to
estimate a value for V (0) or we can think of the population at risk, as discussed
below, to be some appropriate fraction of its true size. In this case, a slightly higher
estimate of the true contact rate will emerge from fitting the model to incidence
data because contact rates are inversely proportional to the population size N (t)
(see Eqns. A.17 in SM).
Initially, two of the drivers—surveillance and patient isolation rates—can be set
at positive constant values, based on a crude expectation of the current level of efficiency of the healthcare infrastructure. For a developed country, we may want to set
initial surveillance levels at, say, 0.5 (50%) and hospitalisation levels at, say, 0.35, or
some other values that are more reflective of the severity or mildness of the disease.
For countries with poor health infrastructure, or diseases milder than COVID-19,
values of 0.1 for both these levels may be more suitable. These guesses can be
changed later, as the forensic analysis of the structure of the outbreak proceeds,
and the sensitivity of projected outcomes to these initial guesses are evaluated.
Another parameter that remains somewhat uncertain at the start of an outbreak
is the size N of the population at risk. In an isolated, spatially homogeneous population (e.g., an island where all individuals randomly encounter others from different
parts of the island—that is, the population is well mixed at, say, a weekly scale), N
should be the size of the population. In large metropolitan areas where the boundaries separating the relatively well-mixed portion of the population compared to
outlying areas, we may want to set the value of N to some nominal/effective value
Neff that is, say, 1 million or even 10 million when the population size justifies this
choice. Initially the actual choice is not critical, because the outbreak dynamics in
standard SEIR models, including SCLAIV, is insensitive to the value of Neff [21].
As the outbreak progresses and the total number of infections approaches, say 10%
of Neff , then our choice for this value becomes significant. The reason is that Neff
determines how rapidly the exponential phase of the initial outbreak begins to lose
steam as the decreasing proportion of susceptible individuals in the population begins to play a role in cresting the incidence curve. Thus for epidemics in which the
total number of infections exceeds 10%, it may be useful to estimate the “effective
population size” Neff when fitting the model output to incidence data [21].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 8 of 23

Fitting the model

Figure 3 An incomplete view (upper left corner) of the optimisation page of the

NMB-DASA web app. The leftmost (purple) panel is where variables to be included in the
optimisation are checked. The next (pin) panel to its right is where the details of the
optimisation procedure are entered: in this case the Fit Range is 31 and
Wt:Incidence/Deaths is zero, implying that only the incidence curve is being fit. In this
pink panel we see the MLE took 267 iterations to converge, and the absolute
log-likelihood error (369 after truncating beyond the decimal point; see Eq. C.2, SM) is
provided in the Error window. The incidence and mortality time series and simulated
solutions over the interval [0,35] are plotted in top part of the white panel. Below these
are MLE and input values of the basic SCLAIV parameters used in the simulation, apart
from the mortality rate (i.e., virulence: for this fit has been set to 0.001) that on a larger
view of the Opt Page appears just to right of the Patient Isolation window. All
switching functions are set to the Constant mode (red rather than green switch values),
with indicated values in this case provided rather than fitted.

NMB-DASA uses a maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) method to fit selected
parameters to the incidence and simultaneously or separately to the mortality data
by selecting a value for Wt:Incidence/Deaths, as discussed below (also see Fig. 3).
It also provides for parameter values obtained from Bayesian Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods [13, 22] generated elsewhere to be used in forecasting
simulations (See Section C.3, SM). We plan to include MCMC directly in future
versions of NMB-DASA
The following is an outline of the process we used to undertake a forensic analysis
of the Israeli incidence and mortality rate data and, in part, the South African and
English incidence and mortality rate data. In all cases, we fitted our model to a
7-day lagged moving average of the incidence data because of an obvious seven-day
oscillation in new cases reported around the world [23] and, also, newly identified
cases are likely associated with individuals actually transferring to the I class some
days prior to this reporting event.
A step-wise procedure for running and fitting the SCLAIV model (also see the
videos provided at the website) is:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 9 of 23

1

Load Data. Load the incidence and mortality data using a CSV (comma separated values) file in which the first row is an incidence data time series and
the second row is a mortality time series of the same length as the first. Load
the default set of epidemic and driver parameters. If any of the default parameters require modification, these can be overwritten by directly entering data
into the appropriate window and then saved by selecting the SAVE SETTINGS
button for direct loading next time around.

2

Fit Initial Outbreak Phase. Fit those basic SCLAIV epidemic parameters that
cannot be independently estimated by checking them off on the optimisation
page (purple panel in Fig. 3), setting Wt:incidence/deaths to 1, Fit Range
to some desired value, such as 14 or 30, and then pressing the Opt button (pink
panel in Fig. 3). These parameters are likely to be the contact rate kappa, the
succumb period P suc, the initial value C 0 for the contact class, and the initial
value I 0 for the symptomatic infectious class. Note, as discussed above, the
ratio P suc/P thw is more salient than either parameter on its own, so we have
normalised P thw=1. After running an optimisation, the MLE values obtained
can be saved using the SAVE SETTINGS button. If desired, an MLE value for
the mortality rate can be obtained by unchecking all the variables use in
the previous fitting, checking vir const, resetting Wt:incidence/deaths=0
and then pressing the Opt button again. We note that fitting incidence and
mortality are not entirely independent processes, but they are nearly so while
the proportion dying is just a few percent and the proportion of susceptibles
remains greater than 90%. By selecting Wt:incidence/deaths in between
0 and 1 we can fit both simultaneously, but are then faced with obtaining
different solutions for different values of the Wt:incidence/deaths setting on
(0, 1).

3

Fit Social Distancing Phase. When using the model to project the outbreak
pattern beyond the initial fit phase, a point will likely be reached where the
simulated incidence time series is growing much more rapidly than the empirical time series. If the reverse occurs, then the Fit Initial Outbreak Phase step
described above should be repeated using a shorter Fit Range value. The reason for this over estimation is either because the effects of social distancing are
beginning to take affect, or the effective population size is considerably smaller
than initially anticipated. If the latter case is suspected then Neff should be
increased, or it can be replaced by an Neff parameter whose size is estimated
as part of the MLE process, as discussed in [21]. At this point, one can proceed
by unchecking all variables fitted in the Fit Initial outbreak Phase optimisation procedure, and then checking all the social relaxation driver variables to
carry out a new MLE fitting procedure with the Fit Range parameter now
set beyond its Fit Initial Outbreak Phase by several weeks, using the data as
a rough guide to where the end of the social distancing phase appears to be
occurring because incidence is beginning to decline less steeply or even rise
(e.g., see Fig. 4).

4

Fit Social Relaxation Phase. The model can now be used to project the outbreak pattern beyond the Fit Social Distancing Phase. If the outbreak has
been successfully quelled then the fitting task is complete. In many cases,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 10 of 23

however, the outbreak may either not be dampened sufficiently fast (as in the
case of the COVID-19 in England, see Section 3.3 for details) or may even
exhibit a second growth phase that is stronger than the first (Fig. 4). In either
case, the MLE values obtained in the Fit Initial Outbreak Phase and Fit Social
Distancing Phase can be saved and a third round of MLE fitting executed. In
this case we may choose to check only the social distancing driver parameters
and optimise over a Fit Range that goes several weeks beyond the Fit Social
Distancing Phase. Other approaches can be taken, discussed in the different
case studies below.
5

Scenario Projection and Counterfactual Assessments. We have considerable
freedom to run counter-factuals and forecasts (see Appendix C.2, SM), depending on what values we give to the Fitting Interval and Finish Timing
for simulation variables (Fig. 2). Forecasting using MCMC parameter estimates can also be undertaken (see Appendix C.3, SM), as illustrated in the
Israel COVID-19 case study. The forecasting page of the web app is designed
to permit the flexibility of working with two data sets and two time windows: the first is to simulate the model in deterministic mode on an interval
[0, tfit ] and second to allow one (in deterministic mode) or repeated runs (in
stochastic mode) on the interval [tfit , tfin ]. The latter can be either executed
by incorporating demographic stochasticity alone, or it can include a file of
parameter values obtained from an MCMC fit of the model to data.

Figure 4 The daily incidence (new cases) time series (points connected by light brown

lines) is plotted here from March 1, 2020 to August, 18, 2020. The blue curve is a 7-day
lagged moving average plotted to August 12 (which averages over data up to August 18:
deaths on August 12, for example can only be identified and recorded as caused by
COVID-19 on or after the actual day of death). The different phases of the outbreak,
approximately indicated by broken range bars, are: 1. Initial outbreak phase, 2. Social
distancing phase, 3. Social relaxation phase, 4. Second wave mitigation phase.

Illustrative Studies
The Israeli, South African, and English COVID-19 studies presented here are of
limited scope. Deeper studies typically involve teams of individuals including those
familiar with any idiosyncrasies of the data. Thus our examples are meant to be
purely illustrative of how NMB-DASA can be used rather than comprehensive analyses of the epidemics considered.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 11 of 23

COVID-19 in Israel

Figure 5 A. MLE of the basic SCLAIV parameters fitted to the first 14 days (March 1 to

14) of Israeli incidence data only (Wt:Incidence/Deaths=0). B. MLE values obtained
from this fit. Note, the mortality simulation does not rise to a single individual since no
COVID-19 deaths were recorded in Israel during the first two weeks of March. Compare
this fit with the same fitting procedure applied to the whole of March, as depicted in
Fig. 3, where we see a rising daily death total in the second half of March.

The first COVID-19 infections in Israel occurred in late February [24, 25]. A steady
stream of cases only began to be recorded starting around March 1. On March 9,
a 14-day home isolation was imposed on all individuals arriving from abroad. A
national state of emergency was declared in the Israel on March 19 with the first
recorded COVID-19 death of an Israeli citizen occurring on March 20 [24, 25].
A plot of the COVID-19 incidence data from March 1 to August 18 (7-day lagged
moving average to August 12) in Israel reveals a rising initial outbreak phase in
March, followed by a steady drop during a social distancing phase to an average
of fewer than 20 new cases per day during the second and third weeks of May
(Fig. 4). During the last week of May, incidence began to rise steadily again during
a social relaxation phase. A second wave mitigation phase set in around mid-July,
as the second wave was flattened in response to measures used to try and bring the
epidemic under control [26].
We begin by first using MLE to fit our basic free set of SCLAIV parameters (i.e.,
values for the contact rate kappa, succumb period P suc, and initial number of
individuals in classes C (C 0) and I (I 0), which were not set a priori from literature
data—see Table 1) to the first two weeks of the initial outbreak data in March 2020.
The fit was tight, as shown in Fig. 5 along with the four MLE values (Fig. 5
obtained from the optimisation procedure and other relevant SCLAIV parameters
used in model. A subsequent fit to the first month of data indicated that the effects
of social distancing were already retarding the outbreak in the second half of March
(Fig. 3), yielding a new set of four MLE values applicable to fitting the model over

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 12 of 23

the first 31 days. This 31-day fit, however, was quite poor, so we decided to added a
social distancing component to MLE fitting of the initial outbreak phase (Fig. 6A).

Figure 6 A & B.. An MLE fit of the basic SCLAIV model & 4 social distancing

parameters (SocDist steep fixed at 3) to the first 31 days of incidence data. C. & D.
An extension of the fit in A obtained by accepting the MLE parameters listed in A & B
but fitting 4 social relaxation parameters ( SocRel steep fixed at 3) to the first 100.
Note the value SocRel init=0 in D was not fixed, but represents a boundary constraint
in the MLE solution.

We thus added a social distancing switching function to our MLE fit of incidence
over the first 31 days to obtain Fig. 6A, which includes simulation of the model out
to day 100. This simulation indicates that the 31-day MLE continues to fit incidence
well to around day 80, but then fails to fit to day 100. To correct this, we could either:
i.) fix the 8 MLE parameters obtained in our 31-day fit (kappa, I 0, C 0, P suc
in panel Fig. 6A and SocDist on, SocDist init, SocDist fnl, SocDist switch
in panel Fig. 6B), but now check the 4 social relaxation parameters SocRel on,
SocRel init, SocRel fnl, SocRel switch in panel Fig. 6D to obtain a new 4
parameter MLE fit over the first 100 days; or ii) we could simultaneously fit all 12
parameters to the first 100 days. We followed the former case to obtained the fit
illustrated in Fig. 6C and the 4 new MLE parameter values provided in Fig. 6D.
Again we note that SocRel init=0 is part of a solution induced by the constraint
SocRel init≥ 0.
We also decided to see how well our MLE procedure would perform when fitting
all 12 parameters simultaneously, but we did this in the context of all 135 days
of incidence data. The result of this MLE undertaking is illustrated in Fig. 7A.
In both of the above fits to the first 100 and then 135 incidence data points, we
set the disease-induced mortality rate to 0.001 (i.e., Vir init=0.001). The fits of
the mortality rate time series thereby obtained, appear reasonable for the initial
phase of the outbreak, but fail beyond the third week of April (e.g., see middle

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 13 of 23

graph in Fig. 7). We thus decided to fit a switching curve to the mortality data,
by fixing all the values used to obtain the MLE fit depicted in Fig. 7A, setting
Wt:Incidence/Deaths to 1, and allowing the parameters Vir init, Vir fnl, and
Vir switch to vary in an MLE fit of the model to the mortality data. The resulting
MLE fit is depicted in Fig. 7B. We note that the values for Vir onset and Vir steep
were a priori set at 0 and 1 respectively, since disease-induced mortality is always
in effect. The remaining MLE parameter values for the virulence switching curve
are listed in Fig. 7B. Again we note that the MLE value Vir fnl=1 represents a
boundary solution. A plot of the three switching functions associated with the fits
depicted in Fig. 7 are provided in Fig. 8.

Figure 7 A. Simultaneous MLE of 4 SCLAIV, 4 social-distancing and 4 social-relaxation

parameters to the first 135 incidence time series points (i.e. Wt:Incidence/Deaths=0).
B. A better fit of the mortality data alone can be obtained by accepting the MLE values
in A, setting Wt:Incidence/Deaths=1 and obtaining ML fit for the 3 virulence
parameters (we fixed Vir on=0 and Vir steep=1) to the first 135 mortality time series
points. Note that Vir fnl=0 is a boundary constraint solution.

Phase 4 of the Israeli COVID-19 outbreak, starting around early to mid-July,
exhibited considerably more oscillations in daily incidence and less directionality in
growth (phases 1 and 3) or decline (phase 2) associated with it (Fig. 4) than the
first three phases. Thus we speculate that phase 4 represents a mixture of different
intensities of social distancing and social relaxation at different times in different
parts of Israel, as various categories of workers and groups of individuals change
behaviour in response to social policies and individuals’ perceptions of risk. Thus,
we decided to accept the MLE parameters up to day 125 (July 4), as fitted to the
first 135 days of incidence and mortality data (Fig. 6) and to carryout MCMC fits
of the incidence data from day 128 to 166 (as shown in Fig. 9) with respect to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 14 of 23

Figure 8 Plots of the social-distancing switching (applied only to class Sr ),
social-relaxation switching (applied only to class S), and the disease-induced natural
mortality switching (applied only classes I and Ir ) functions obtained from MLE fits of the
relevant parameters to the first 100 days of data (see Fig. 7) are shown over the interval
March 1 to August 18. The onset values for these three switching functions are days 4
(March 5), 74 (May 14), and 0 (March 1) respectively. The switching points (half way
between initial and final values, although the switching time can precede the onset time,
as discussed in Section A.3 and caption to Fig. A.2, SM) are on days 6 (March 7), 38
(April 8) and 4 (March 3) respectively. The range of initial to final values are indicated by
the values that scale the vertical axes of the three curves in question.

Figure 9 A partial view of the Forecasting page show the Number of Runs to be

performed, The number of Days for the total simulations, the Forecast Onset day and
the MCMC box checked with the first four rows of MCMC input data shown. The first part
of the model projections of incidence and mortality per unit time are in red in the two left
most graphics panels, along with the data plotted in blue. The green curves beyond the
red are single stochastic simulations (since the Deter Stoc switch is flipped to the Stoc).
The two right side panels represent the mean plus/minus 2 standard deviations generated
from 100 runs using the MCMC data and stochastic projection mode. The number of runs
made is specified in the Number of Runs window.

constant social distancing and relaxation rates, as described in Appendix C.3 (SM).
More precisely, we carried out an MCMC fit of SocDist const and SocRel const

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 15 of 23

(cf. bottom row of sliders in Fig. 3) on the incidence data interval [125,166], with
all other parameters fixed at the values associated with the fits depicted in Fig. 7.
The distribution of the parameters obtained from these MCMC fits are provided in
Appendix C (SM). The actual forecasts are illustrated in Fig. 9. The plotted standard deviations are based on 100 runs. The mean values SocDist const=0.1316
and SocRel const=0.00487 obtained from the MCMC procedure respectively represent 103% and 27% of the values of the social-distancing and social-relaxation
switching functions on day t = 125 (Fig. 8), which are: SocDist(125)=0.127 and
SocRel(125)=0.018. The MCMC estimates of these two constants are highly correlated (the cross correlation is 0.984; Appendix C.3, SM). Thus, essentially, it appears
that a four-fold reduction in the social-distancing levels at the beginning of July
have confined incidence to the relatively high levels of 1100 to 1700 cases per day
throughout September to November. It will require an additional 5-fold reduction
in the social distancing level of early July to bring the epidemic down the point
where the number of new cases per day September to November is below 200 (see
Fig. D.2 in Appendix D, SOM, for deterministic projects that verify these ballpark
figures).
COVID-19 in South Africa
The first case of COVID-19 was recorded in South Africa on March 5. A week
later only 1 of the 17 recorded cases appeared to involve a local transmission event
(VOA News, March 12, 2020): most new cases during the first three weeks of March
2019 were associated with individuals returning from trips to Europe. The local
outbreak only started to pick up the last week of March. This local importation
effect is evident in the new cases plotted in Fig 10A (see region around the last
week of March). Thus we decided to only start fitting the incidence data from Apri
1 onwards. As with the Israeli study, we fitted our model to a 7-day lagged moving
averages (Fig 10A and B), rather than the raw data themselves.
Using the step-wise approach described in Section 2.3 and illustrated more fully in
the Israeli case study, we conducted a four basic SCLAIV parameter MLE fit of the
incidence data from April 1 to June 30 (91 points) and projected 4 weeks beyond this
to provide convincing visual evidence (Fig. 10C) that social distancing had started
to play a key role in flattening the incidence curve some weeks before. We thus
conducted a 4-SCLAIV plus 4 social-distancing parameters MLE fit of the first 130
incidence data points, obtaining the relatively poor fit depicted in (Fig. 10D). This
fit dramatically improved when 3 surveillance parameters were added to the MLE
optimisation (Fig. 10E). An additional improvement was obtained when including 4
social-relaxation parameters in the MLE optimisation (Fig. 10F). Although Fig. 10E
looks like a better fit than Fig. 10F it is not in terms of MLE (the errors associated
the fits depicted in Figs. 10E and F respectively are 15643 and 5453: see Figs. D.4
& D.5 in SOM) because poorer fits in the early stages, when cases are few, are
penalised more than poor fits in the later stages when cases are many. The reason
for this is that the value of log-likelihood function (Eq. C.2 in Appendix C, SOM) is
dependent on proportional rather than absolute deviations because computations
are based on the Poisson probability of particular values arising. Also, although
social relaxation switches on earlier than social distancing, this early onset has no
effect until individuals begin to accumulate in the social distancing class Sr .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 16 of 23

Figure 10 A. The incidence (daily new cases; blue) data time series and a 7-day lagged

moving average (brown) plotted for new cases of COVID-19 in South Africa from March 6
to Aug 8 (raw data to Aug 14), 2020. B. As in A but plots for daily COVID-19 deaths
rather than incidence. C. Maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) fits (red plot) of the 4
basic SCLAIV parameters (i.e., kappa, P suc, I 0, C 0) to the 7-day lagged moving
average incidence time series (blue) from April 1 to June 30 (91 points). D.-F. As in C
but fitting over the interval April 1 to August 8 and, in addition to 4 basic SCLAIV
parameters, progressively including: D. 4 social distancing switching function parameters
(SocDist steep fixed at 3); E. 3 surveillance switching function parameters (onset time,
Surveil on, fixed at 0; Surveil steep, fixed at 2); and, F. 4 social relaxation switching
function parameters (SocRel steep fixed at 3). G. A combined MLE fit of the incidence
(G1.) and daily mortality (G2.) time series from April 1 to Aug 8 of the 4 basic SCLAIV
parameters plus social distancing, surveillance, social relaxation and switching function
parameters, with the MLE forms of these latter four functions presented in plots G3. See
Fig. D.6 in Appendix D, SM, for switching parameter values. Incidence and mortality data
source: Our World in Data.

COVID-19 in England
The first two confirmed cases of COVID-19 in England were identified on January
29 in the city of York (Metro News, April 19, 2020). During the month of March
another 56 cases in England were recorded (UK Government Sources). Our analysis
starts at this point in fitting our model to the 7-day lagged moving average of new
case in England, starting on March 1 and ending on April 30 (Fig. 11C, D & E) or
August 10 (Fig. 11F & G).
Our first fit of our model to COVID-19 incidence in England over the period March
1 to April 30 involved MLEs of the 4-SCLAIV plus 4 social-distancing switching
function parameters. This reasonably fit was notably improved (the absolute loglikelhood error value dropping from 3360 to 1812) by adding 3 surveillance switching
function parameters (Fig. 11D). Further improvement was obtained (log-likelhood
error value now dropping to 831) by adding 4 social-relaxation switching function parameters to the MLE fit. This 15-parameter MLE fit was then extended

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 17 of 23

Figure 11 A. The incidence (daily new cases; blue) data time series and a 7-day lagged

moving average (brown) plotted for new cases of COVID-19 in England from Feb 19 to
Aug 10 (raw data to Aug 16), 2020. B. As in A but plots for daily COVID-19 deaths
rather than incidence. C. Maximum-likelihood estimation (MLE) fits (red plot) of the 4
basic SCLAIV parameters (i.e., kappa, P suc, I 0, C 0) to the 7-day lagged moving
average incidence time series (blue) from March 1 to April 30 (first 60 points). D. & E.
As in C but in addition to 4 basic SCLAIV parameters, progressively including: D. 4
social distancing and 3 surveillance switching function parameters (SocDist steep,
Surveil steep, and Surveil on fixed at 3, 2, and 0 respectively) and E. 4 social
relaxation switching function parameters (SocRel steep fixed at 3). F. As in E, but now
fitting over the full 163 incidence points. F. G. A combined MLE fit of the incidence
(G1.) and daily mortality (G2.) time series from April 1 to Aug 10 of the 4 basic
SCLAIV parameters plus social distancing, surveillance, social relaxation and switching
function parameters, with the MLE forms of these latter four functions presented in plots
G3. See Fig. D.11 in Appendix D, SM, for switching parameter values. Data source: UK
Government Sources.

to the full 163 point time series (i.e., up to August 10) to obtain the fit depicted
in Fig. 11F (for more details on Figs. 11C-F see Figures D.7-10, SM). Rather than
accepting this fit to incidence, we carried out simultaneous fit of incidence and mortality with the inclusion of the virulence switching function parameters and setting
Wt:Incidence/Deaths=0.5. Specifically, we added 3 virulence switching parameters to the 15 used to fit the incidence alone in Fig. 11F to obtain the fit to incidence
depicted in Fig. 11G1 and the fit to mortality depicted in Fig. 11G2. The forms
of the switching curves obtained from this MLE fit are provided in Fig. 11G3 (see
Fig. D.10, SM, for more details and parameter values).
The switching functions depicted in Fig. 11G3 suggest the following. First, surveillance started out around 0.3, but rapidly doubled during the first month (March)
to the asymptotic value of 0.6. Social distancing appears to only have started in
earnest around the end of March raising four-fold in value through April and May.
Social relaxation also started in March (the actual rate has no effect until individ-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 18 of 23

uals start to accumulate in the risk reduction class Sr through the action of social
distancing), rising steadily in through May, June and July as a partial counter to
the effects of the social distancing process. This social relaxation counter to social
distancing remained below a quarter of the per-capita social distancing level (percapita S for social distancing, per-capita Sr for social relaxation) through most of
this time, which allowed social distancing to dominate and keep the epidemic decline going throughout all of May and June. In July, however, the effect of social
relaxation reversed this trend, and it remains to be seen which will dominate from
mid August onwards as social behaviour adapts over time.

Discussion
The three epidemics that we examined represents a range that includes: one of the
most serious epidemics worldwide, which in late August appeared to be well passed
its peak (South Africa); one of the most severe epidemics in Europe that now has
been brought under control, but could well breakout again if vigilance is lost (England); and a relatively large outbreak for a smaller country that exhibited a second
wave considerably more severe than first, and that is now heading into a phase
where the epidemic could well fester for the rest of 2020 (Israel). In all of these,
our analyses uncovered putative periods of time when different driving forces were
dominating: periods when social distancing provided the necessary driving force to
flatten and even reverse the exponential growth phase, followed by periods when
relaxation of social distancing threatened or allowed a second wave, an including periods of change in surveillance or treatment efficacy. Although statistical modelling
is required to link values for these drivers to various activities, their quantification
in the context of specific cases allows relative assessments to be made for each of
those cases. Thus, we are able to make statements such as: the Israeli epidemic will
continue to produce an average of around 1500 new case per day throughout August
to November, unless the efficacy of social distancing measures rise to at least 3/4
of where they were throughout March.
Most current models used to study COVID-19 epidemics do not have the kinds of
structures in place to facilitate analyses of the spectrum of drivers considered here.
Further, web apps available for aiding such analyses are rather limited. The most
flexible of these is the COVID-19 Simulator, developed by a consortium that includes
the Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Georgia Tech, and
Boston Medical Center. The COVID-19 Simulator provides “... a tool designed to
help policymakers decide how to respond to the novel coronavirus.” The tool can be
used to explore the impact of social-distancing interventions by selecting one of four
intensity levels applied at a selected time. The simulator does not allow the user
to upload his or her own data and limits analyses to US National and State levels.
Other web sites, such as IDM’s (Institute of Diseas Modeling) EMOD or Covasim,
or the platform EpiModel require users to have some coding or epidemiological
modelling experience.
Strengths of the NMB-DASA web app are that it allows users to input their own
data, fit model parameters to data using maximum-likelihood methods, and undertake scenario and forecasting studies with the ability to manipulate an array (8 in
total; see Fig. 1) of policy-relevant drivers. Additionally, the South African, English

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 19 of 23

and Israeli COVID-19 case studies provide clear exemplars on how the NMB-DASA
Web App can be used to identify which drivers dominate during different phases of
an epidemic. If other healthcare and social media infrastructural data (i.e., beyond
incidence and mortality rate time series) can be used to independently specify or
estimate surveillance [27, 28], social distancing and relaxation [29], quarantining [4]
and treatment advances, then further analyses can be undertaken to verify results.
In particular, proportions of individuals in the immune class predicted by our model
can be tested if appropriately collected serology data are available [30].
Although our exemplar indicates that NMB-DASA can be used to perform analyses of disease outbreaks caused by directly transmissible pathogens for which incidence data alone are available, much deeper analyses can be undertaken. First,
spatial structure can be taken into account [21, 31, 32, 33]. Second, links between
model output and data may be sought that pertain to individual and societal factors influencing transmission. This can be done by making statistical links between
model parameters putative factors [34, 35]. This would require the dynamic analyses of the types demonstrated here augmented with statistical models that linked
dynamic measures (such as new cases growth rates over initial and later phases of
the outbreak) to key factors of interest.
Critics of our SCLAIV+D+response approach to modeling COVID-19 could say
that: 1.) our model has too many parameters for fits to be credible; 2.) the focus is
on point estimates to obtain fits of the model to incidence and mortality data, since
MCMC fits are currently external to the app; 3.) many of these point estimates are
either not well known or possibly not accurate; or, 4.) the results we obtain have
not been adequately validated or even their robustness confirmed using sensitivity
analysis [36] or other assessment techniques.
In addressing these criticisms, we note Einstein’s dictum that “Everything should
be made as simple as possible, but not simpler” speaks to two ideas: the idea
of Occam’s razor that the most simple of all formulations needed to capture a
particular process should be used; and the idea that if a model is too simple it
omits a key process altogether. SEIR models themselves conform to Occam’s razor in
ignoring heterogeneities in the relative succeptibility and infectivity of individuals,
and in invoking the assumption of a well-mixed population that obviates the need
for considerations of spatial structure. Heterogeneity in infectivity is of importance
when considering the questions of, say, the role of superspreaders [37], susceptibility
and morbidity with regard to age [38], or policies related to particular subgroups
in the population, such as opening schools [39]. Spatial structure is important,
for example, when considering the impact of restricting travel [40] on managing
COVID-19 epidemics. Just as with any SEIR model, the web app can be used to
focus on subgroups or spatial structure, although assumptions about links between
these groups and the population at large will need to be made.
Second, since the purpose of our web app is to provide a tool for shedding light
on the aggregated effects of several different behavioural and mitigating drivers as
they ramp up or down over time, we need to include all drivers of interest in the
context of making the model adequate to address the questions at hand [41]. In
addition, we cannot identify when these drivers may be ramping up or down if
we do not characterise them as switching functions. This requires a proliferation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 20 of 23

of parameters, but these parameters are not all involved in fitting the model at
various stages of the outbreak. This is the reason for trying to fit the basic SCLAIV
parameters that cannot be independently obtained to the initial outbreak phase
and then identifying other phases where the parameters of particular drivers can be
estimated. It is also why it is useful (though not necessary) to be able to fit changes
in virulence to the mortality data alone once fits to the incidence data have taken
place.
Third, not all parameters need to be accurately known (though the more accurate
the better), if some are to be specified and others fitted to the data. For example,
the initial phases of an epidemic are characterised by its growth rate per unit serial
interval time. This characterising value is represented by the quantity R0 , which
we defined in the introduction as the average number of individuals an infected
individual can expect to infect at the initial stage of an outbreak. Depending on the
complexity of the model, estimation of R0 involves contact rates and infectiousness
(force of infection), periods of time spent in disease classes, and even disease-induced
mortality rates [42]. Thus, if one of these parameters is not accurately known, our experience has been [33] that the estimation process will compensate by adjusting the
values of other parameters involved in the computation of R0 . This compensatory
process can be seen quite clearly in the context of the MCMC forecast undertaken
for the fourth phase of the Israel outbreak, where we see that that correlation between the social distancing and social relaxation constants being estimated exceeds
98% (Fig. C.2, Appendix C, SM). Additionally, the question of when and where
to carry out Bayesian MCMC rather than MLE model fitting of parameters is one
that requires a much more extensive discussion than can be undertaken here. We
will skirt around this by saying that MCMC is really important when it comes to
using forecasts to mitigate risk—that is, when it is important to have a sense of
how bad things might get. Maximum likelihood estimation, however, is much easier
and faster to implement and, because of its relative simplicity, may be more useful
when trying to identify different phases of an outbreak and making comparative
assessments on the efficacy of implementing particular mitigating drivers.
Fourth, we agree that sensitivity analyses are useful for evaluating the robustness of results and should be undertaken in studies that probe more deeply than
presented here. Additionally, our SCLAIV model provides a number of auxiliary
predictions, such as the proportion of individuals that are immune (i.e., the value
of the variable V (t)/N (t) as it changes over time) that can be evaluated against
serological data obtained through a statistically valid sampling method [43]. Deeper
in-country studies, involving local experts and a wide array of auxiliary data (i.e.,
beyond incidence and mortality rate time series) can thus also be used to either
further support or refute results obtained.
In summary, we believe our website is based on a model that is both relevant
and appropriate [44] for carrying out the types of forensic analyses on social and
mitigating drivers of epidemics illustrated in our three COVID-19 case studies and,
thereby, provides another tool in the epidemiologist tool box for managing outbreaks. COVID-19 itself is not an anomaly, but one event in series of expected
future events that have a past history in SARS, MERS, Ebola, not to mention
avian influenza and other highly contagious emerging infectious diseases of zoonotic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 21 of 23

origin [45, 46, 47]. Our current experience with COVID-19 will help facilitate our
response to these future outbreaks and potential pandemics. The availability of
computational tools, such as NMB-DASA, will enable policy makers and healthcare administrators to be caught less flat-footed at the start of the next outbreak
than has been the case for the COVID-19 pandemic.
Competing interests
WMG and RS are two of three owners of Numerus Inc., which is responsible for developing and maintaining the
Numerus Model Builder software platform. .
Author’s contributions
Wayne M. Getz, conceived the study, formulated the model and wrote the manuscript. Richard Salter developed the
web site and the Numerus Modeling Builder software platform. Richard Salter and Ludovica Luisa Vissat were
responsible for the MCMC simulations and the material on this in the SM. Nir Horvitz scrapped data from the web.
All authors read and edited the final version of the paper.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by NSF Grant 2032264.
Author details
1
Department of Environmental Science, Policy and Management, University of California, CA 94708-3114 Berkeley,
USA. 2 School of Mathematical Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 4000 Durban, South Africa. 3 Numerus,
Inc., 850 Iron Point Rd., CA 95630 Folsom, USA. 4 Computer Science Department, Oberlin College, OH 44074
Oberlin, USA.
References
1. Zhang, J., Litvinova, M., Liang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, W., Zhao, S., Wu, Q., Merler, S., Viboud, C., Vespignani,
A., et al.: Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the covid-19 outbreak in china. Science (2020)
2. Wilder-Smith, A., Freedman, D.O.: Isolation, quarantine, social distancing and community containment: pivotal
role for old-style public health measures in the novel coronavirus (2019-ncov) outbreak. Journal of travel
medicine 27(2), 020 (2020)
3. Bi, Q., Wu, Y., Mei, S., Ye, C., Zou, X., Zhang, Z., Liu, X., Wei, L., Truelove, S.A., Zhang, T., et al.:
Epidemiology and transmission of covid-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in shenzhen, china: a
retrospective cohort study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases (2020)
4. Tang, B., Xia, F., Tang, S., Bragazzi, N.L., Li, Q., Sun, X., Liang, J., Xiao, Y., Wu, J.: The effectiveness of
quarantine and isolation determine the trend of the covid-19 epidemics in the final phase of the current
outbreak in china. International Journal of Infectious Diseases (2020)
5. Park, S.W., Cornforth, D.M., Dushoff, J., Weitz, J.S.: The time scale of asymptomatic transmission affects
estimates of epidemic potential in the covid-19 outbreak. Epidemics, 100392 (2020)
6. Furukawa, N.W., Brooks, J.T., Sobel, J.: Evidence supporting transmission of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 while presymptomatic or asymptomatic. Emerging infectious diseases 26(7) (2020)
7. Ferguson, N., Laydon, D., Nedjati Gilani, G., Imai, N., Ainslie, K., Baguelin, M., Bhatia, S., Boonyasiri, A.,
Cucunuba Perez, Z., Cuomo-Dannenburg, G., et al.: Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
(npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare demand. Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine (2020)
8. Li, R., Pei, S., Chen, B., Song, Y., Zhang, T., Yang, W., Shaman, J.: Substantial undocumented infection
facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (sars-cov-2). Science 368(6490), 489–493 (2020)
9. Eikenberry, S.E., Mancuso, M., Iboi, E., Phan, T., Eikenberry, K., Kuang, Y., Kostelich, E., Gumel, A.B.: To
mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential for face mask use by the general public to curtail the covid-19
pandemic. Infectious Disease Modelling (2020)
10. Bar-On, Y.M., Sender, R., Flamholz, A.I., Phillips, R., Milo, R.: A quantitative compendium of covid-19
epidemiology. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.01283 (2020)
11. Tian, H., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Wu, C.-H., Chen, B., Kraemer, M.U., Li, B., Cai, J., Xu, B., Yang, Q., et al.: An
investigation of transmission control measures during the first 50 days of the covid-19 epidemic in china.
Science 368(6491), 638–642 (2020)
12. McKinley, T.J., Ross, J.V., Deardon, R., Cook, A.R.: Simulation-based bayesian inference for epidemic models.
Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 71, 434–447 (2014)
13. Hamra, G., MacLehose, R., Richardson, D.: Markov chain monte carlo: an introduction for epidemiologists.
International journal of epidemiology 42(2), 627–634 (2013)
14. Dehning, J., Zierenberg, J., Spitzner, F.P., Wibral, M., Neto, J.P., Wilczek, M., Priesemann, V.: Inferring
change points in the spread of covid-19 reveals the effectiveness of interventions. Science (2020)
15. Kissler, S.M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y.H., Lipsitch, M.: Projecting the transmission dynamics of
sars-cov-2 through the postpandemic period. Science 368(6493), 860–868 (2020)
16. Lauer, S.A., Grantz, K.H., Bi, Q., Jones, F.K., Zheng, Q., Meredith, H.R., Azman, A.S., Reich, N.G., Lessler,
J.: The incubation period of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) from publicly reported confirmed cases:
estimation and application. Annals of internal medicine 172(9), 577–582 (2020)
17. Linton, N.M., Kobayashi, T., Yang, Y., Hayashi, K., Akhmetzhanov, A.R., Jung, S.-m., Yuan, B., Kinoshita, R.,
Nishiura, H.: Incubation period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections
with right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available case data. Journal of clinical medicine 9(2), 538
(2020)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 22 of 23

18. Hethcote, H.W.: The basic epidemiology models: models, expressions for r0, parameter estimation, and
applications. In: Mathematical Understanding of Infectious Disease Dynamics, pp. 1–61. World Scientific, ???
(2009)
19. Van den Driessche, P., Watmough, J.: Reproduction numbers and sub-threshold endemic equilibria for
compartmental models of disease transmission. Mathematical biosciences 180(1), 29–48 (2002)
20. Sette, A., Crotty, S.: Pre-existing immunity to sars-cov-2: the knowns and unknowns. Nature Reviews
Immunology, 1–2 (2020)
21. Getz, W.M., Salter, R., Muellerklein, O., Yoon, H.S., Tallam, K.: Modeling epidemics: A primer and numerus
model builder implementation. Epidemics 25, 9–19 (2018)
22. Roberts, G.O., Rosenthal, J.S., et al.: General state space markov chains and mcmc algorithms. Probability
Surveys 1, 20–71 (2004)
23. Ricon-Becker, I., Tarrasch, R., Blinder, P., Ben-Eliyahu, S.: A seven-day cycle in covid-19 infection and mortality
rates: Are inter-generational social interactions on the weekends killing susceptible people? medRxiv (2020)
24. Rossman, H., Keshet, A., Shilo, S., Gavrieli, A., Bauman, T., Cohen, O., Shelly, E., Balicer, R., Geiger, B., Dor,
Y., et al.: A framework for identifying regional outbreak and spread of covid-19 from one-minute
population-wide surveys. Nature Medicine 26(5), 634–638 (2020)
25. Last, M.: The first wave of covid-19 in israel-initial analysis of publicly available data. medRxiv (2020)
26. Bodas, M., Peleg, K.: Self-isolation compliance in the covid-19 era influenced by compensation: Findings from a
recent survey in israel: Public attitudes toward the covid-19 outbreak and self-isolation: a cross sectional study
of the adult population of israel. Health Affairs 39(6), 936–941 (2020)
27. Yue, M., Clapham, H.E., Cook, A.R.: Estimating the size of a covid-19 epidemic from surveillance systems.
Epidemiology 31(4), 567–569 (2020)
28. Silverman, J.D., Hupert, N., Washburne, A.D.: Using influenza surveillance networks to estimate state-specific
prevalence of sars-cov-2 in the united states. Science translational medicine 12(554) (2020)
29. Yasaka, T.M., Lehrich, B.M., Sahyouni, R.: Peer-to-peer contact tracing: development of a privacy-preserving
smartphone app. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 8(4), 18936 (2020)
30. Bastos, M.L., Tavaziva, G., Abidi, S.K., Campbell, J.R., Haraoui, L.-P., Johnston, J.C., Lan, Z., Law, S.,
MacLean, E., Trajman, A., et al.: Diagnostic accuracy of serological tests for covid-19: systematic review and
meta-analysis. bmj 370 (2020)
31. Huang, R., Liu, M., Ding, Y.: Spatial-temporal distribution of covid-19 in china and its prediction: A
data-driven modeling analysis. The Journal of Infection in Developing Countries 14(03), 246–253 (2020)
32. Kramer, A.M., Pulliam, J.T., Alexander, L.W., Park, A.W., Rohani, P., Drake, J.M.: Spatial spread of the west
africa ebola epidemic. Open Science 3(8), 160294 (2016)
33. Getz, W.M., Salter, R., Mgbara, W.: Adequacy of seir models when epidemics have spatial structure: Ebola in
sierra leone. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 374(1775), 20180282 (2019)
34. Williamson, E.J., Walker, A.J., Bhaskaran, K., Bacon, S., Bates, C., Morton, C.E., Curtis, H.J., Mehrkar, A.,
Evans, D., Inglesby, P., et al.: Opensafely: factors associated with covid-19 death in 17 million patients. Nature,
1–11 (2020)
35. Lakshmi Priyadarsini, S., Suresh, M.: Factors influencing the epidemiological characteristics of pandemic covid
19: A tism approach. International Journal of Healthcare Management 13(2), 89–98 (2020)
36. Saltelli, A., Tarantola, S., Campolongo, F., Ratto, M.: Sensitivity Analysis in Practice: a Guide to Assessing
Scientific Models vol. 1. Wiley Online Library, ??? (2004)
37. Lloyd-Smith, J.O., Schreiber, S.J., Kopp, P.E., Getz, W.M.: Superspreading and the effect of individual
variation on disease emergence. Nature 438(7066), 355 (2005)
38. Dowd, J.B., Andriano, L., Brazel, D.M., Rotondi, V., Block, P., Ding, X., Liu, Y., Mills, M.C.: Demographic
science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of covid-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117(18), 9696–9698 (2020)
39. Viner, R.M., Russell, S.J., Croker, H., Packer, J., Ward, J., Stansfield, C., Mytton, O., Bonell, C., Booy, R.:
School closure and management practices during coronavirus outbreaks including covid-19: a rapid systematic
review. The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health (2020)
40. Chinazzi, M., Davis, J.T., Ajelli, M., Gioannini, C., Litvinova, M., Merler, S., y Piontti, A.P., Mu, K., Rossi, L.,
Sun, K., et al.: The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (covid-19)
outbreak. Science 368(6489), 395–400 (2020)
41. Getz, W.M., Marshall, C.R., Carlson, C.J., Giuggioli, L., Ryan, S.J., Romañach, S.S., Boettiger, C.,
Chamberlain, S.D., Larsen, L., D’Odorico, P., et al.: Making ecological models adequate. Ecology letters 21(2),
153–166 (2018)
42. Heesterbeek, J.A.P.: A brief history of r 0 and a recipe for its calculation. Acta biotheoretica 50(3), 189–204
(2002)
43. Pollán, M., Pérez-Gómez, B., Pastor-Barriuso, R., Oteo, J., Hernán, M.A., Pérez-Olmeda, M., Sanmartı́n, J.L.,
Fernández-Garcı́a, A., Cruz, I., de Larrea, N.F., et al.: Prevalence of sars-cov-2 in spain (ene-covid): a
nationwide, population-based seroepidemiological study. The Lancet (2020)
44. Larsen, L.G., Eppinga, M.B., Passalacqua, P., Getz, W.M., Rose, K.A., Liang, M.: Appropriate complexity
landscape modeling. Earth-science reviews 160, 111–130 (2016)
45. Jones, K.E., Patel, N.G., Levy, M.A., Storeygard, A., Balk, D., Gittleman, J.L., Daszak, P.: Global trends in
emerging infectious diseases. Nature 451(7181), 990–993 (2008)
46. Evans, T.S., Shi, Z., Boots, M., Liu, W., Olival, K.J., Xiao, X., Vandewoude, S., Brown, H., Chen, J.-L.,
Civitello, D.J., et al.: Synergistic china–us ecological research is essential for global emerging infectious disease
preparedness. EcoHealth, 1–14 (2020)
47. Reperant, L.A., Osterhaus, A.D.: Aids, avian flu, sars, mers, ebola, zika. . . what next? Vaccine 35(35),
4470–4474 (2017)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.06.20155804; this version posted August 31, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
Getz et al.

Page 23 of 23

Figures
Tables
Additional Files
Supplementary Material
A supplementary file is provided containing: Appendix A, details of a continuous-time version of our SCLAIV
model; Appendix B, our discrete-time implementation of this model; Appendix C, parameter estimation and
simulation procedures, including details of our MCMC computation; and Appendix D, additional case-study
figures.
Training Videos
Three training videos are available with links provided by selecting the instructional material button at the
NMB-DASA Home page. Direct links to these videos are: Training video 1, Introduction to the Numerus Data and
Simulation Analyses (DASA) Website for Covid-19; Training video 2, Parameter Estimation Through Model Fitting;
Traning video 3, Deterministic and Stochastic Forecasting

