medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 Severity Index:
A predictive score for hospitalized patients
Iván Huespe 1,
​ 2​, Indalecio Carboni Bisso​1​, Nicolas Alejandro Gemelli 1​​ , Sergio Terrasa 1​​ ,
Sabrina Di Stefano​1​, Valeria Burgos 2​​ , Jorge Sinner​1​, Marcelo Risk 2​​ , Eduardo San Román​1​,
Marcos Las Heras 1​
1​

2

Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires
Institute of translational medicine and biomedical engineering, Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, IUHI,

CONICET

ABSTRACT
Introduction: Pandemics pose a major challenge for public health preparedness, requiring a
coordinated international response and the development of solid containment plans. An early
and accurate identification of high-risk patients in the course of the actual COVID-19
pandemic is vital for planning and for making proper use of available resources.
Objective: The purpose of this study was to identify the key variables to create a predictive
model that could be used effectively for triage.
Methods: A narrative literature review of 651 articles was conducted to assess clinical,
laboratory and imaging findings of COVID-19 confirmed cases. After screening, 10 articles
met the inclusion criteria and a list of suggested variables was gathered. A modified Delphi
process analysis was performed to consult experts in order to generate a final list of
variables for the creation of the predictive model.
Results​: The modified Delphi process analysis identified 44 predictive variables that were

used for building a severity prediction score, the ​COVID-19 Severity Index​.

Conclusion​: Specifically designed for current COVID-19 pandemic, ​COVID-19 Severity Index
could be used as a relia​ble tool for strategic planning, organization and administration of
resources by easily identifying hospitalized patients with higher risk of transfer to Intensive
Care Unit (ICU).

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

INTRODUCTION
Infectious disease outbreaks constitute a serious problem to global health with a major
impact on countries’ economies, its healthcare systems and resources. The spread of
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) known as COVID-19, has
already gone into pandemic proportions registering, at the moment of this study, a total of 20
million confirmed cases, 736.000 deaths and 13 million recovered patients across 215
countries in a short elapse of time. The way in which outbreaks affect countries depends on
multiple factors and its impact ​is difficult to foresee. However, the numbers of infe​cted
people and casualties are evidence that despite the attempts to plan in advance, the global
healthcare systems remain unprepared​1​.
The intensity of staffing needed and the sophisticated training required for the care of
patients with viral infections during pandemics result in the fact that a relatively small number
of patients could easily overwhelm healthcare systems.
An accurate identification of variables related to worse outcome is key for triaging and
adapting intensity of the care that each patient requires. The previous would allow an
effective strategic planning and a better administration of human and material resources.
Moreover, the need for a sensitive and predictive model is mandatory to avoid a delayed
recognition of ​severely ill p​atients or even those at risk of presenting further complications.
During the early phase of COVID-19 pandemic ​Liao et al. propose an early warning score
based on an adapted version of the National Early Warning Score 2 (NEWS-2) adding age
as a variable to reflect emerging evidence of age as an independent risk factor for survival 2​​ .
In that score, patients were divided into four categories based on the risk of ​respiratory
failure​: low, medium, high, and extreme. The score was used to manage the monitoring
frequency and to activate a rapid response team.
Early Warning Scores (EWS) predict deterioration in hospitalized patients 3​​ , but are designed
for general hospitalized patients in a non-pandemic scenario. ​COVID-19 pandemic has now
a high proportion of hospitalized patients with a single disease. ​Therefore, a specific EWS
for COVID-1​9 including laboratory test results, clinical features and radiological findings,
could improve t​he detection of high-risk patients in the aim of optimizing the management of
hospital resources. The previous is key in low-income countries where resources are
insufficient even before affronting this pandemic.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Aware of the impact of the current pandemic, “​COVID-19 Severity Index” ​is developed as a
triage tool based on the NEWS-2 score, that could rapidly and reliably be used by frontline
healthcare personnel to identify high-risk patients.

METHODS
Protocol registration
This project was appro​ved by the Ethics Committee for Research Protocols at Hospital
Italiano de Buenos Aires (Cod. 1290). V​oluntary completion of the questionnaire implied
consent and the participants’ responses were received and analyzed anonymously.
Methodological approach
A narrative review was conducted to generate a list of possible predictors based on clinical
signs and symptoms, comorbidities, laboratory and radiographic findings. After initial
identification of predictive variables, they were subjected ​to expert analysis ​through a
2-round Delphi process 4​​ . The output was a set of potential variables based on expert
opinion to be added to the NEWS-2.
Narrative review
Narrative review was conducted in April 2020 using the Ovid MEDLINE and medRxiv
database for articles written i​n English and published until April 2020. The search strategy
included terms suc​h as “COVID-19”, “Risk Factors”, “Respiratory Insufficiency” and
“Mortality”. Studies were selected on the base of the following inclusion criteria: population
over 18 years of age where signs and symptoms were recorded together with ​comorbidities​,
laboratory and radiographic findings and in which all these parameters were valued against
the occurrence of death or disease severity in confirmed COVID-19 patients.
Delphi process
Delphi method is a process used to arrive at a true consensus by surveying a panel of
experts who answer several rounds of questionnaires. Responses are aggregated and
shared with the group after each round, allowing experts to adjust their answer based on
their interpretation of the "group response" provided. Ultimate result is meant to be a true
consensus of what the group thinks.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

A 2-round Delphi process was started in April 2020 and completed in May 2020. It enabled
the construction of a list of 44 predictive variables identified through the narrative review that
could be used as criteria for the selection of patients with worse clinical outcome. This was
achieved using feedback from ​14 ​expert contributors with diverse backgrounds and located
in different countries affected by COVID-19.
Participants
Experts ​from both resources-rich and resource-limited settings were recruited, including
professionals from Argentina, Chile and Canada. Participants are involved in the care of
critically ill adults and active in medical research areas including critical care, infectious
diseases and pneumology on a daily basis. First contact was by email to communicate the
objective of the study and extend invitation to participate in both rounds of the Delphi
process. The target sample size of expert contributors was 14.
Round 1
The first round of the Delphi process had a 7 day elapse; it was initiated on April 15th of
2020 and completed by April 22nd of 2020. The questionnaire form was distributed among
expert participants who were asked to evaluate the variables gathered from the literature
review before mentioned and suggested as potential predictors of worse outcome in
COVID-19 patients.
When the participant answered “yes” to the fact that a given variable was valuable as a
predictor, they were prompted to evaluate 3 domains: predictive potential, measurement
reliability, level of training and/or resources required to measure and collect the variable 4​​ .
Each domain had 4 possible answers: high (3), moderate (2), minimal (1), or not applicable
(0). Finally there was an option for the participant to make comments regarding each
variable. Moreover, they were encouraged to add new variables to the suggested set.
At the stage of analysis, each answer was given a number between 3 and 0 (high (3),
moderate (2), minimal (1), not applicable (0)) based on the strength of the response. The
numbers for each domain were tabulated to calculate a weighted effect (WE) to help
determine the selection threshold. The WE was calculated following the formula exemplified
below, that doubles the weight of the value for predictive potential, adds the value for
measurement reliability and subtracts the value for level of resources and/or training
required.
Weighted Effect​ = Predictive Potential x2 + Reliability - Resources or Training
eg.:

Weighted Effect ​Asthma​ = Moderate (2) x2 + Moderate (2) - Minimal (1)

Weighted Effect ​Asthma ​= 5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

WE was calculated for each variable valued by each expert opinion. The sum of the WE’s for
a given variable was ranked for further selection of those with the greatest value achieved
whereas WE of variables considered as medical records, were analyzed separately from
clinical features.
Afterwards, a threshold was chosen based on a desired number of predictors. Then
variables which WE scored above the threshold, were included in a final set of predictor
variables. Those variables that were below the threshold, were carefully reviewed by the
research team and discharged or included in Round 2 for re-evaluation depending on the
value obtained. Any additional variables proposed by participants were evaluated in Round 2
when they were considered clinically distinct from the variables already assessed in Round
1.
Round 2
The 2nd Round was conducted in a 7 day elapse of time, from 29 April of 2020 to 7 May of
2020. It consisted in re-evaluating selected variables from Round 1 as well as evaluating
newly suggested variables. Participants were provided the responses from Round 1, and a
threshold procedure similar to the one used in the initial round was used in the second
round. Each round demanded 7 days for completion given to each expert consulted who was
sent a reminder one day before the deadline. The final set of variables was obtained and
results were analyzed as follows.
Development of the questionnaire with Google Forms
Questionnaire was developed using the secure web-based application Google Forms.
Participant’s own responses from Round 1 were available in Round 2 along with a mean
response from the other participants.

RESULTS
Narrative review
After analysis, ten articles fulfilled the final inclusion criteria and were, therefore, considered.
Sixty-four relevant variables predictors analyzed in these studies were summarized to
generate a master list (​Supplementary material 1​) created using Microsoft Excel to keep
track of each predictor variable and the frequency of repetition in other studies as a
presumed indicator of its predictive potential and relative commonality. Each variable was
organized into the following categories: 1) patient’s characteristics; 2) signs and symptoms;

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

3) scores; 4) laboratory findings; 5) chest x-ray findings; 6) comorbidities. All variables were
presented at either binary or continuous variable, depending on the way in which it was
presented in the original study.
Round 1
There was a high level of agreement on the following variables alerting to a worse outcome:
age, male gender, dyspnea, d-dimer > 1 μg/ml, lymphopenia, “Sequential Organ Failure
Assessment" (SOFA) score, bilateral compromise in chest x-ray and comorbidities such as
chronic heart failure, diabetes with end-organ damage and hypertension. The thresholds for
age and lymphopenia were discussed in Round 2.
Additionally, there was a high level of agreement to not include: pregnancy, plasma albumin,
pro-B-type natriuretic peptide, lactate dehydrogenase and other comorbidities such as
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), asthma, chronic renal disease, solid tumor,
tuberculosis, active smoking and diabetes without end-organ damage.
Since there was a moderate level of agreement regarding thrombocytopenia, C reactive
protein, creatinine serum levels, chest x-ray findings other than bilateral compromise, those
variables were discussed in Round 2.
Experts also proposed 2 new variables; findings in pulmonary ultrasound and reticulonodular
interstitial pattern in the chest x-ray. These 2 new variables were not considered due to
interobserver variability and the need for highly trained professionals to perform and to
interpret those studies.
Round 2
Due to the lack of a specific cut-off value for age and lymphopenia, possible thresholds were
proposed to participants. After Round 2, cut-off values for age were defined as follows: low
risk for age < 60; moderate risk for ages between 60 and 65; and high risk for age > 65.
Regarding lymphopenia, thresholds were: >1000 mm​3​, low risk; between 500 and 1000
mm​3​, moderate risk; and less than 500 mm​3​, high risk.
Variables from Round 1 that did not reach the WE threshold value for immediate
consideration,

were

reassessed.

Low

platelet

count,

C-reactive

protein,

lactate

dehydrogenase, and serum creatinine were reconsidered to select the one with a higher
predictive value of the worse outcome. Consensus on platelet count <100000 mm​3 was the
variable with higher potential. List of all potential variables proposed to the Delphi process
are available for reference in ​Supplementary material 2​. The final set variables selected
from the Delphi process are exposed in ​Figure 1​.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Final Score
Following the analysis and the application of the modified Delphi process, a final set of
selected variables was combined with a modified NEWS-2 score to generate the ​COVID-19
Severity Index. The modifications to NEWS-2 Score are described as follows. In the case
that the patient needs supplemental oxygen, he will receive 3 score-points instead of 2.
Addition of 1 and 2 score-points related to low blood pressure was eliminated. Low
temperature only added 1 score-point if it was less than 35.6ºC instead of 36,1ºC, while 1
point-score was added if the temperature was 38ºC or higher. ​COVID-19 Severity Index
score is exposed in ​Table 1​. Patients were divided into four risk categories based on their

score (​Table 2​).
Validation

Prediction capacity of this score was studied to evaluate its predictive potential of ICU
transfer in 24 and 48 hours elapse of time.
A group of 220 patients with confirmed COVID-19 were evaluated; 19 of which were
unexpectedly transferred to ICU; and 17 of which were transferred to ICU during the first 3
days, one at 5th day and another at 6th day of hospitalization.
A comparison between ​COVID-19 Severity Index, ​NEWS score adapted by Liao et al. 2​ and
NEWS-2 score was made. All three scores were measured on the first, second and third day
after hospital admission of the patients.
For those patients who were initially admitted into ge​neral wards an​d were later transferred
to the ICU, the score was retrospectively applied for the 72, 48 and 24 hours prior to the ICU
admission, with the intention to identify whether they were parameters that could predict the
need of a more intensive monitoring.
A comparative analysis of the area under the curve (AUC) for the different scores evidenced
a better capacity of the ​COVID-19 Severity Index to predict the need for ICU admission.
When applied in the 24 hours prior to ICU admission, the AU-ROC for the score ​COVID-19

​ as 0.94 ​vs. 0.88 for the modified NEWS score developed by Liao et al.​ , and
Severity Index w

0.80 for NEWS-2 (​Figure 2​). When applied in the 48 hours prior to ICU admission, the

AU-ROC for ​COVID-19 Severity Index was 0.88, for the modified NEWS was 0.84 and 0.62
for NEWS-2.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

DISCUSSION
In this study, an EWS was designed to predict progression towards critical illness among
COVID-19 infected patients during hospitalization.
Although NEWS-2 score is the mainly used EWS, there are few published studies on it’s use
in the specific context of COVID-19 5​​ . A paper published during the early phase of the
COVID-19 pandemic offered an EWS based on an adapted version of the NEWS-2 score in
which age > 65 years was added to reflect emerging evidence of age as an independent risk
factor for survival 2​​ .
The complexity of COVID-19 and the multiple variables involved in its course evidenced the
need to search for a more specific score that could be used in this single disease to better
discern among patients at risk of presenting severe infection. ​The development and us​e of a
simple tool built on the basis of signs and symptoms with moderate to strong predictive
potential, could ideally facilitate the triage process and expedite the care for hospitalized
adult patients with COVID-19.
Due to the current lack of evidence, the effort to carry out careful research with a
methodologically solid process was paramount. The narrative review allowed the research
team to balance information from peer-reviewed articles as well as urgent data reported in
preprints.
Additionally the Delphi method allowed to merge clinical expertise to theoretical reasoning.
Delphi process was chosen with the objective of achieving consensus among a panel of
experts on a defined issue, using iteration of a questionnaire and aggregating the answers to
provide feedback to the participants after each completed round. This method as a way of
generating consensus is widely applied in diverse fields such as program planning and
resource assessment, even in the healthcare sector 6​​ . One of the advantages of using this
method is the facilitation of consensus-building online which significantly enabled the
participation of subject matter experts from various locations worldwide in the current
pandemic scenario 4​​ .
The 10 variables added to the modified NEWS-2 score required for calculation of the risk of
developing a critical illness, are usually available at Hospital admission. In addition to the
previous, a web-based calculator was created to facilitate the use of the tool. ​COVID-19
Severity Index is a dynamic tool designed to be actualized with the clinical changes of the
patient, in the aim of detecting clinical deterioration 24 to 48 hours prior to ICU transfer.
Even though ​COVID-19 Severity Index has a short scale validation, it was designed by
experts’ opinions. It is the case that opinions may be impacted by experts’ training,
exposure, and expertise but this added biological plausibility. The application of this score is

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

being carried out in patients at Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires to define the intensity of
nursing monitoring required.

CONCLUSION
Specifically designed for the current COVID-19 pandemic, ​COVID-19 Severity Index could
serve as a relia​ble tool for strategic planning, organization and administration of resources
by easily distinguishing hospitalized patients with higher risk of ICU transfer.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the experts Marcos Marino, Sergio Giannasi, Fernando Vazquez,
Martin Hunter, Leonardo Uranga, Chung Kyu, José Dianti, Manuel Tisminetzky, Bruno
Ferreyro, Federico Angriman, Eduardo De Vito, Silvia Quadrelli, Alejandro Chirino, Eduardo
Tobar and Pablo Gastaldi for their enthusiastic contribution and suggestions in the modified
Delphi process.
Also, we would like to thank Lisandro Ziperovich (​Zipper Art​) for the artwork of this study and
Maria de los Angeles Magaz for draft editing.

Data Availability Statement: all relevant data are within the manuscript and its Supporting
Information files.
Funding:​ authors received no specific funding for this work.
Competing interests:​ authors have declared that no competing interests exist.
Author Contributions: ​Dr. Huespe had full access to all data in the study and takes
responsibility for integrity of the data and accuracy of the data analysis​.

Conceptualization​: Huespe, Carboni Bisso
Formal analysis​: Huespe, Carboni Bisso, Terrasa
Methodology​: Huespe, Carboni Bisso, Terrasa
Project administration​: Huespe, Carboni Bisso, Las Heras
Visualization​: Las Heras, Risk, Terrasa
Writing – original draft​: Gemelli
Writing – review & editing​: Huespe, Carboni Bisso, Gemelli
Administrative, technical, or material support:​ San Román, Las Heras, Di Stefano, Burgos
Supervision:​ San Román, Las Heras, Risk, Sinner

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

REFERENCES
1. Maves RC, Jamros CM, Smith AG. Intensive Care Unit Preparedness During Pandemics and
Other Biological Threats. ​Crit Care Clin​ 2019; 35: 609–618.
2. Liao X, Wang B, Kang Y. Novel coronavirus infection during the 2019–2020 epidemic: preparing
intensive care units—the experience in Sichuan Province, China. ​Intensive Care Medicine​ 2020;
46: 357–360.
3. Smith MEB, Chiovaro JC, O’Neil M, et al. Early warning system scores for clinical deterioration in
hospitalized patients: a systematic review. ​Ann Am Thorac Soc​ 2014; 11: 1454–1465.
4. Fung JST, Akech S, Kissoon N, et al. Determining predictors of sepsis at triage among children
under 5 years of age in resource-limited settings: A modified Delphi process. ​PLoS One​ 2019; 14:
e0211274.
5. NEWS (or NEWS2) score when assessing possible COVID-19 patients in primary care? - CEBM.
CEBM​,
https://www.cebm.net/covid-19/should-we-use-the-news-or-news2-score-when-assessing-patient
s-with-possible-covid-19-in-primary-care/​ (accessed 17 June 2020).
6. Hsu C-C, Sandford BA. The Delphi Technique. ​Online Research Methods in Urban and Planning
Studies​ 2012; 173–192.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Delphi process results.
In the first round of the Delphi process, variables were suggested to participants to determine their
opinion as to its value as a predictor of worse outcome in COVID-19 patients. If the participant
responded “yes”, they were prompted to evaluate the variable according to three domains: predictive
potential, measurement reliability, and the level of training and/or resources required to measure and
collect the variable. Each domain consisted of 4 possible answers: high (3), moderate (2), minimal (1),
or not applicable (0). For the analysis, each answer was given a number between 0 and 3 based on
the strength of the response. The sum for each domain was tabulated to calculate a weighted effect

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

(WE) to help determine the selection threshold. The WE was calculated by doubling the weight of the
value for predictive potential, adding the value of measurement reliability and subtracting the value of
level of resources and/or training required. The WE was calculated for each variable by expert
opinion. The sum of the WE for each variable was ranked for further selection of those with the
greatest value. A threshold was chosen based on the desired number of predictors. Variables that
scored a WE above the threshold were included in the final set of predictor variables. Predictors
below the threshold were carefully reviewed by the research team and were discharged or included in
Round 2 for re-evaluation, depending on the value obtained. ​A.​ The trends of the sum of responses to
each domain for all 16 variables evaluated in Round 1. ​B. ​The trends of the sum of responses to each
domain for all 12 antecedents evaluated in Round 1. COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
EOD: end-organ damage; MTS: metastasis.PCR: Protein C reactive; LDH: Lactate dehydrogenase
*Values of PCR, proposed were: >10, >100 or >200 mg/dl
**Values of LDH, proposed were: > 250, >300 or >350 ​U/L
***Values of Pro B-type Natriuretic Peptide, proposed were > 350, >500 or >1000 pg/mL

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Figure 2.
Area Under the Curve of COVID Severity Index, NEWS COVID proposed by Liao et al. 2​​ and NEWS-2
Score to predict unexpected ICU transfer in the next 24 hours.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 1. COVID-19 Severity Index.
* Chest X-Ray should be analyzed on admission but it will be reconsidered when a new one is performed.
** If laboratory test results have more than 48 hours, they will not be considered.
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.12.20166579; this version posted August 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license .

Table 2.​ ​COVID-19 Severity Index risk chart.

