medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.07.20170373; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Protocol for a Rapid Scoping Review of
Evidence of Outdoor Transmission of COVID-19
.
Mike Weed (1) & Abby Foad (2)
(1) Professor of Applied Policy Sciences & Pro Vice-Chancellor (Research & Enterprise)
(2) Research Director, Centre for Sport, Physical Education & Activity Research (spear)
Canterbury Christ Church University, North Holmes Campus, Canterbury, CT1 1QU
Correspondence: mike.weed@canterbury.ac.uk
v.1 (7.8.2020) – not peer reviewed

Abstract

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic is both a global
health crisis, and a civic emergency for national
governments, including the UK. As countries
across the world loosen their lockdown
restrictions, the assumption is generally made
that the risk of COVID-19 transmission is lower
outdoors, and this assumption has shaped
decisions about what activities can recommence, the circumstances in which they
should re-commence, and the conditions under
which they should re-commence.
This is
important for events and activities that
generate mass gatherings, particularly mass
participation sports events such as running, but
also events in other sectors such as concerts,
carnivals and festivals.
This paper sets out a protocol for a rapid
scoping review of evidence of incidents of
outdoor transmission of COVID-19, including the
settings, environments and circumstances of
such transmission, and their comparative
prevalence to incidents of indoor transmission.
Its purpose is to inform discussions about the
recommencement of activities that generate
mass gatherings.

Following 213 global deaths and 9,800
infections, on 30th January 2020 the World
Health Organisation categorised COVID-19 as a
Public Health Emergency of International
Concern (PHEIC), and five weeks later, on 11th
March, as a pandemic, at which point 118,000
cases and 4,291 deaths in 114 countries had
been reported (Ghebreyesus, 2020). The first
cluster of COVID-19 cases were recorded in
Wuhan, China on 21st December 2019, and the
first death on 11th January 2020. In the UK, the
first domestically contracted case was recorded
on 28th February, and the first death on 5th
March. A global spread across Europe and
North and South America meant that countries
in every continent around the world, faced with
a virus for which there was no vaccine and no
treatment, implemented lockdown measures to
deal with a global pandemic that had resulted in
over 700,000 recorded deaths worldwide by 1st
August 2020 (Worldometer, 2020).
Following reductions in the spread of the
virus as a result of these periods of lockdown,
many countries are now developing and
implementing plans to cautiously open up their
societies and economies. Most of Europe has
Keywords:
loosened lockdown measures and is now
putting in place mitigation measures to live with
COVID-19,
outdoor
transmission,
mass
the virus, including deciding which activities can
gatherings, events, running, sport, physical
re-commence, and which cannot. In the UK,
activity, concerts, carnivals, festivals
after six weeks of lockdown, the government
published a COVID-19 recovery strategy on 11th
May, with an update for further expansion
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
published on 24th July (HM Government, 2020a).
1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.07.20170373; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

One of the assumptions in the UK recovery
plan, and those of many other countries, is that
the risk of transmission of the virus is lower
outdoors (HM Government, 2020a).
This
assumption is central in informing decisions
about which parts of the economy and society,
and what activities, can re-commence, including
decisions about the mitigation measures
required. One area in which this is of particular
importance is physical activity and sports, and
particularly mass participation events such as
running.
Following government guidelines
issued on 10th July (HM Government, 2020b) it
has been possible for mass participation running
events to take place, and some have done so
under principles drawing on government
guidelines issued by UK Athletics (UK Athletics,
2020).
These principles require additional
mitigation measures to ensure some social
distancing, including but not limited to,
staggered wave starts, and strategies to limit
pre-event gathering (such as not having on-site
briefings, registration and announcements), and
to accelerate post-event dispersal. However,
for many event hosts, the issue of the risk of
transmission of COVID-19 outdoors remains
paramount, and this paper sets out a protocol
for a rapid scoping review to explore evidence
of such outdoor transmission. The findings of
the review will also be relevant to events in
other sectors that generate mass gatherings,
such as concerts, carnivals and festivals.

Review Scope
The review will seek, evaluate and analyse
evidence of incidents of outdoor transmission of
COVID-19, the settings and environments of
such transmission, and, where available, all
relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, temperature, wind conditions, social
crowding or distancing, and the existence or
otherwise of any COVID-19 mitigation
measures. The review will also seek, evaluate
and analyse evidence of the prevalence of
outdoor transmission compared to indoor
transmission, and evidence of the impact of high
profile mass gatherings, both immediately
before (e.g. Champions League soccer matches)

and during (e.g. Black Lives Matter protests)
lockdowns.
The review will not seek, evaluate or analyse
evidence relating to the science of outdoor
transmission. As such, it will be a review of
evidence of whether outdoor transmission has
taken place, not of how outdoor transmission
takes place.
The review has been designed to be
undertaken rapidly in 15 days. Therefore, a key
additional purpose of the review will be to
assess whether a further extended more
detailed and comprehensive review would
capture wider and more extensive evidence. It
will also consider what new research could be
undertaken to generate further evidence in a
timely manner.

Review Protocol
The initial search will be undertaken in Google
Scholar, using the search string < “COVID 19”
outdoor transmission >. Experimental searches
suggest that “COVID 19” with a space within
quotation marks is the most effective search
term, and that adding alternatives for COVID 19
(e.g. SARS-CoV 2, Coronavirus) adds little to the
efficacy of the search.
Similarly, adding
alternatives for “outdoor”, such as “outside” or
“open air”, also does not appear to improve
search efficacy.
Search results will initially be reviewed using
the article title and preview text containing
search terms returned by Google Scholar to
evaluate whether a returned paper refers to
outdoor transmission. If it appears it does, the
full text of the paper will be searched for the
word “outdoor” and the relevant passages of
text reviewed to establish whether any
evidence, or references to other sources of
evidence, of outdoor transmission is included.
Chains of sources referred to in the paper will
be pursued to the original source or sources of
evidence of outdoor transmission, which will be
included for evaluation and analysis. Sources
that provide opinion, summation or only
onward reference to evidence of outdoor
transmission will not be included. Given the
rapidly emerging evidence relating to COVID-19,
neither peer-review status nor the outlet in
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.07.20170373; this version posted August 13, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

which the source is published, will be used as
inclusion/exclusion criteria.
It is expected that evidence of outdoor
transmission will be limited, and while it is likely
to be referred to in many sources, sources
containing actual evidence are likely to be
limited. For this reason, the initial search,
ordered by Google Scholar’s relevance function,
will be limited to the first 100 sources returned.
It is assumed that the search will be saturated at
this point, and no new sources of evidence will
be added. However, if the last 20 returns (81100) do add further sources of evidence, then
the search will be extended to the next 20
sources until the point is reached that the last
20 sources do not add any additional sources of
evidence.
The search will then be repeated, ordered by
Google Scholar’s date added function. This will
ensure that new sources of evidence are not
being overlooked.
The same protocol as
described above will be followed in relation to
establishing the relevance of the returns,
reference mining, and establishing the
saturation point for the search.
In addition to the Google Scholar search, the
papers and evidence sources considered by the
UK government’s Scientific Advisory Group for
Emergencies (SAGE), and its feeder groups,
including the Scientific Pandemic Influenza
Group on Modelling (SPI-M) and the New and
Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory
Group (NERVTAG), will be searched for evidence
and discussion of outdoor transmission. Finally,
specific searches of the research of known
authors researching COVID-19 transmission will
be undertaken.
As evidence of incidents of outdoor
transmission of COVID-19 is expected to be
limited, inclusion criteria will relate only to
relevance – there will be no inclusion/exclusion
criteria related to quality or proxies for quality.
However, quality will be evaluated in the
analysis and synthesis of the included sources.
The product of this analysis will be a critical
narrative synthesis (Pope & Mays, 2006) which,
whilst describing and synthesising evidence in
substantive terms, will also highlight potential
weaknesses in returned evidence, and the
caveats about conclusions that can be drawn,
throughout the narrative.

MW will review and evaluate sources for
inclusion on the basis of relevance, and will
write the narrative synthesis, including an
embedded evaluation of evidence quality. AF
will review and validate the inclusion decisions,
and the evaluation of evidence quality
embedded in the narrative synthesis.

Purpose
The purpose of the review is to inform
discussions about the re-commencement of
activities that will generate mass gatherings.
Primarily, this will focus on physical activity and
sport events, but it will also consider events in
other sectors such as concerts, carnivals and
festivals. The narrative presentation of the
results of the review will reflect this purpose
Conflict of Interests
MW is a member of the parkrun International
Research Board, and regularly takes part in parkrun.
Funding
This work is funded by parkrun.
References
Ghebreyesus, T.A. (2020). WHO DirectorGeneral's opening remarks at the media briefing on
COVID-19 (11 March 2020). Retrieved June 29,
2020, from
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/whodirector-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-mediabriefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020
Pope, C., & Mays, N. (2006). Synthesising
qualitative research. In C. Pope & N. Mays (Eds.),
Qualitative research in health care (pp. 142–152).
London: Blackwell.
UK Athletics. (2020). Principles for Staging Road
and MT Running Events During Covid-19
Restrictions. Retrieved August 7, 2020, from
https://www.runbritain.com/shared/getfile.ashx?itemtype=document&id=6438
HM Government. (2020a). Our plan to rebuild:
The UK Government’s COVID-19 recovery strategy.
London: HM Government.
HM Government. (2020b). Guidance for providers
of outdoor facilities on the phased return of sport
and recreation in England. London: HM Government.
Worldometer. (2020). COVID-19 Coronavirus
Pandemic: Total Deaths. Retrieved August 6, 2020,
from https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/
3

