medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.26.20182824; this version posted January 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Beyond Six Feet: A Guideline to Limit Indoor
Airborne Transmission of COVID-19
Martin Z. Bazanta,b,1 and John W. M. Bushb
a

Department of Chemical Engineering; b Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139

This manuscript was compiled on January 22, 2021

The current revival of the world’s economy is being predicated on social distancing, specifically the Six-Foot Rule, a guideline that offers
little protection from pathogen-bearing aerosol droplets sufficiently
small to be continuously mixed through an indoor space. The importance of airborne transmission of COVID-19 is now widely recognized. While tools for risk assessment have recently been developed,
no safety guideline has been proposed to protect against it. We here
build upon models of airborne disease transmission in order to derive an indoor safety guideline that would impose an upper bound on
the “cumulative exposure time", the product of the number of occupants and their time in an enclosed space. We demonstrate how this
bound depends on the rates of ventilation and air filtration, dimensions of the room, breathing rate, respiratory activity and face-mask
use of its occupants, and infectiousness of the respiratory aerosols.
By synthesizing available data from the best characterized indoor
spreading events with respiratory drop-size distributions, we estimate an infectious dose on the order of ten aerosol-borne virions.
The new virus is thus inferred to be an order of magnitude more infectious than its forerunner (SARS-CoV), consistent with the pandemic
status achieved by COVID-19. Case studies are presented for classrooms and nursing homes, and a spreadsheet and online app are
provided to facilitate use of our guideline. Implications for contact
tracing and quarantining are considered, appropriate caveats enumerated. Particular consideration is given to respiratory jets, which
may substantially elevate risk when face masks are not worn.

C

oronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an infectious
pneumonia that appeared in Wuhan, Hubei Province,
China in December 2019 and has since caused a global pandemic (1, 2). The pathogen responsible for COVID-19, severeacute-respiratory-syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), is
known to be transported by respiratory droplets exhaled by
an infected person (3–7). There are thought to be three primary routes of human-to-human transmission of COVID-19,
large drop transmission from the mouth of an infected person
to the mouth, nose or eyes of the recipient, physical contact
with droplets deposited on surfaces (fomites) and subsequent
transfer to the recipient’s respiratory mucosae, and inhalation
of the microdroplets ejected by an infected person and held
aloft by ambient air currents (6, 8). We subsequently refer to
these three modes of transmission as, respectively, ‘large-drop’,
‘contact’ and ‘airborne’ transmission, while noting that the
distinction between large-drop and airborne transmission is
somewhat nebulous given the continuum of sizes of emitted
droplets (9). We here build upon the existing theoretical
framework for describing airborne disease transmission (12–
18) in order to characterize the evolution of the concentration
of pathogen-laden droplets in a well-mixed room, and the
The possibility of pathogen resuspension from contaminated surfaces has also recently been explored (10, 11).

associated risk of infection to its occupants.
The Six-Foot Rule is a social-distancing recommendation
by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Transmission,
based on the assumption that the primary vector of pathogen
transmission is the large drops ejected from the most vigorous exhalation events, coughing and sneezing (5, 19). Indeed,
high-speed visualization of such events reveals that six feet
corresponds roughly to the maximum range of the largest,
millimeter-scale drops (20). Compliance to the Six-Foot Rule
will thus substantially reduce the risk of such large-drop transmission. However, the liquid drops expelled by respiratory
events are known to span a considerable range of scales, with
radii varying from fractions of a micron to millimeters (9, 21).
There is now overwhelming evidence that indoor airborne
transmission associated with relatively small, micron-scale
aerosol droplets plays a dominant role in the spread of COVID19 (4, 5, 7, 17–19, 22, 23), especially for so-called “superspreading events" (24–27), which invariably occur indoors (28).
For example, at the 2.5-hour-long Skagit Valley Chorale choir
practice that took place in Washington State on March 10,
some 53 of 61 attendees were infected, presumably not all
of them within 6 feet of the initially infected individual (24).
Similarly, when 23 of 68 passengers were infected on a 2hour bus journey in Ningbo, China, their seated locations
were uncorrelated with distance to the index case (27). Airborne transmission was also implicated in the COVID-19 outbreak between residents of a Korean high-rise building whose
apartments were linked via air ducts (29). Studies have also
confirmed the presence of infectious SARS-CoV-2 virions in
respiratory aerosols (30) suspended in air samples collected at
distances as large as 16 feet from infected patients in a hospital room (3). Further evidence for the dominance of indoor
airborne transmission has come from an analysis of 7324 early
cases outside the Hubei Province, in 320 cities across mainland
China (31). The authors found that all clusters of three or
more cases occurred indoors, 80% arising inside apartment
homes and 34% potentially involving public transportation;
only a single transmission was recorded outdoors. Finally,
the fact that face-mask directives have been more effective
than either lock-downs or social distancing in controlling the
spread of COVID-19 (22, 32) is consistent with indoor airborne
transmission as the primary driver of the global pandemic.
The theoretical model developed herein informs the risk of
airborne transmission resulting from the inhalation of small,
aerosol droplets that remain suspended for extended periods
within closed, well-mixed indoor spaces. When people cough,
sneeze, sing, speak or breathe, they expel an array of liquid

1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: bazantmit.edu

Bazant andNOTE:
Bush This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1–12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.26.20182824; this version posted January 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

droplets formed by the shear-induced or capillary destabilization of the mucosal linings of the lungs and respiratory
tract (8, 33, 34) and saliva in the mouth (35, 36). When the
person is infectious, these droplets of sputum are potentially
pathogen bearing, and represent the principle vector of disease
transmission. The range of the exhaled pathogens is determined by the radii of the carrier droplets, which typically lie in
the range of 0.1µm - 1 mm. While the majority are submicron,
the drop size distribution depends on the form of exhalation
events (9). For normal breathing, the drop radii vary between
0.1 and 5.0 µm, with a peak around 0.5 µm (9, 37, 38). Relatively large drops are more prevalent in the case of more violent
expiratory events such as coughing and sneezing (20, 39). The
ultimate fate of the droplets is determined by their size and
the air flows they encounter (40, 41). Exhalation events are
accompanied by a time-dependent gas-phase flow emitted from
the mouth that may be roughly characterized in terms of either continuous turbulent jets or discrete puffs (20, 37, 42).
The precise form of the gas flow depends on the nature of
the exhalation event, specifically the time-dependence of the
flux of air expelled. Coughs and sneezes result in violent,
episodic puff releases (20), while speaking and singing result
in a puff train that may be well approximated as a continuous
turbulent jet (37, 42). Eventually, the small droplets settle out
of such turbulent gas flows. In the presence of a quiescent ambient, they then settle to the floor; however, in the well-mixed
ambient more typical of a ventilated space, sufficiently small
drops may be suspended by the ambient airflow and mixed
throughout the room until being removed by the ventilation
outflow or inhaled (see SI Appendix, Sec. 1A).
Existing theoretical models of airborne disease transmission in closed, well-mixed spaces are based on the seminal
work of Wells (43) and Riley et al. (44), and have been applied to describe the spread of airborne pathogens including
tuberculosis, measles, influenza, H1N1, coronavirus (SARSCoV) (12–16, 45, 46) and most recently, the novel coronavirus
(SARS-CoV-2) (17, 24). These models are all based on the
premise that the space of interest is well mixed; thus, the
pathogen is distributed uniformly throughout. In such wellmixed spaces, one is no safer from airborne pathogens at 60
feet than 6 feet. The Wells-Riley model (13, 15) highlights
the role of the room’s ventilation outflow rate Q on the rate
of infection, showing that the transmission rate is inversely
proportional to Q, a trend supported by data on the spreading of airborne respiratory diseases on college campuses (47).
The additional effects of viral deactivation, sedimentation
dynamics and the polydispersity of the suspended droplets
were considered by Nicas et al. (14) and Stilianakis & Drossinos (16). The equations describing pathogen transport in
well-mixed, closed spaces are thus well established and have
recently been applied to provide risk assessments for indoor
airborne COVID-19 transmission (17, 18). We use a similar
mathematical framework here in order to derive a simple safety
guideline.
We begin by describing the dynamics of airborne pathogen
in a well-mixed room, on the basis of which we deduce an
estimate for the rate of inhalation of pathogen by its occupants.
We proceed by deducing the associated infection rate from a
single infected individual to a susceptible person. We illustrate how the model’s epidemiological parameter, a measure
of the infectiousness of COVID-19, may be estimated from
2

available epidemiological data, including transmission rates in
a number of spreading events, and expiratory drop size distributions (9). Our estimates for this parameter are consistent
with the pandemic status of COVID-19 in that they exceed
those of SARS-CoV (17); however, our study calls for refined
estimates through consideration of more such field data. Most
importantly, our study yields a safety guideline for mitigating
airborne transmission via limitation of indoor occupancy and
exposure time, a guideline that allows for a simple quantitative
assessment of risk in various settings. Finally, we consider the
additional risk associated with respiratory jets, which may be
considerable when face masks are not being worn.

The Well-Mixed Room
We first characterize the evolution of the pathogen concentration in a well-mixed room. The assumption of well-mixedness
is widely applied in the theoretical modeling of indoor airborne
transmission (14, 16, 17), and its range of validity discussed
in Section 1A of the SI Appendix. We describe the evolution
of the airborne pathogen by adapting standard methods developed in chemical engineering to describe the "continuously
stirred tank reactor" (48), as detailed in Section 1B of the
SI Appendix. We assume that the droplet-borne pathogen
remains airborne for some time before either being extracted
by the room’s ventilation system, inhaled or sedimenting out.
The fate of ejected droplets in a well-mixed ambient is determined by the relative magnitudes of two speeds, the settling speed of the drop in quiescent air, vs , and the ambient
air circulation speed within the room, va . Drops of radius
r Æ 100µm and density ﬂd descend through quiescent air of
density ﬂa and dynamic viscosity µa at the Stokes settling
speed vs (r) = 29 ﬂgr2 /µa , prescribed by the balance between
gravity and viscous drag (49), where g is the gravitational
acceleration and ﬂ = ﬂd ≠ ﬂa .
We consider a well-mixed room of area A, depth H and
volume V = HA with ventilation outflow rate Q and outdoor
air change rate (typically reported as air changes per hour,
or ACH) ⁄a = Q/V . In the case of mechanical ventilation,
there is an additional recirculation flow rate Qr that further
contributes to the well-mixed state of the room, but alters the
emergent drop-size distributions only if accompanied by filtration. The mean air velocity, va = (Q + Qr )/A, prescribes the
air mixing time, ·a = H/va = H 2 /(2Da ), where Da = va H/2
is the turbulent diffusivity defined in terms of the largest
eddies (50, 51), those on the scale of the room (52). The
timescale of the droplet settling from a well-mixed ambient
corresponds to that through a quiescent ambient (50, 51, 53),
as justified in SI Appendix, Sec.1B. Equating the characteristic
times of droplet settling, H/v
s , and removal, V /Q, indicates
a critical drop radius rc =
9⁄a Hµa /(2g ﬂ) above which
drops generally sediment out, and below which they remain
largely suspended within the room prior to removal by ventilation outflow. We here define airborne transmission as that
associated with droplets with radius r < rc . The relevant
physical picture, of particles settling from a well-mixed environment, is commonly invoked in the contexts of stirred
aerosols (50) and sedimentation in geophysics (53). The additional effects of ventilation, particle dispersity and pathogen
deactivation in the context of airborne disease transmission
were considered by Nicas et al. (14), Stiliankakis & Drossinos
(16) and Buonanno et al. (17, 18), whose models will be built
Bazant and Bush

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.26.20182824; this version posted January 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

upon here.
In Sec.1A of SI Appendix, we provide justification for our
assumption of the well-mixed room. It is noteworthy that,
even in the absence of forced ventilation, there will generally
be some mixing in an enclosed space: natural ventilation
will lead to flows through windows and doors, as well as
leakage though construction materials and joints. Moreover,
occupants serve to enhance air flow through their motion and
respiration. Traditionally, ventilation standards for American
homes (ASHRAE) recommend a minimal outdoor air exchange
rate of ⁄a = 0.35/h, a value comparable to the average of
0.34/h reported for Chinese apartments, including winter in
Wuhan during the initial outbreak (54). Even with such
minimal ventilation rates, for a room of height H = 2.1m there
is an associated critical drop size of radius rc = 1.3µm. In order
to guard against infectious aerosols, ASHRAE now recommend
ventilation rates greater than ⁄a = 6/h, which corresponds to
rc = 5.5µm. The "airborne" droplets of interest here, those
of radius r < rc , thus constitute a significant fraction of those
emitted in most respiratory events (9, 23, 37).
Wells (55) argued that exhaled drops with diameter less
than around 100 µm will nearly evaporate before settling. The
resulting "droplet nuclei" consist of residual solutes, including
dissolved salts, carbohydrates, proteins and pathogens, which
are typically hygroscopic and retain significant quantities of
bound water (56, 57). For adroplet with initial radius r0 ,
the equilibrium size, req = r0 3 „s /(1 ≠ RH), is reached over
an evaporation time scale, ·e = r02 /(◊(1 ≠ RH)), where „s is
the initial solute volume fraction, RH is the relative humidity,
and ◊ = 4.2 ◊ 10≠10 m2 /s at 25¶ C (57). In dry air (RH π 1),
saliva droplets, which typically contain 0.5% solutes and a
similar
Ô volume of bound water („s ¥ 1%), can thus lose up to
1 ≠ 3 0.01 ¥ 80% of their initial size (57). Conversely,
droplets
Ô
of airway mucus shrink by as little as 1 ≠ 3 0.2 ¥ 40%, since
they typically contain 5-10% gel-forming mucins (glycosylated
proteins) and comparable amounts of bound water (58). The
evaporation time at 50% RH ranges from ·e = 1.2 ms for
r0 = 0.5µm to 12s at 50µm. These inferences are consistent
with experiments demonstrating that stable respiratory aerosol
distributions in the range req < 10µm are reached within
0.8s of exhalation (9). While we note that the drop size
distributions will in general depend on the relative humidity,
we proceed by employing the equilibrium drop distributions
measured directly (9, 37).
We consider a polydisperse suspension of exhaled droplets
characterized by the number density nd (r) (per volume of air,
per radius) of drops of radius r and volume Vd (r) = 43 ﬁr3 . The
drop size distribution nd (r) is known to vary strongly with
respiratory activity and various physiological factors (9, 17,
38). The drops contain a microscopic pathogen concentration
cv (r), a drop-size-dependent probability of finding individual
virions (3, 30, 59), usually taken to be that in the sputum
(RNA copies per mL) (17, 60).
The virions become deactivated (non-infectious) at a rate
⁄v (r) that will in general depend on droplet radius, temperature and humidity (61). Using data for human influenza
viruses (62), a roughly linear relationship between ⁄v and
RH can be inferred (61, 63), which provides rationale for the
seasonal variation of flu outbreaks, specifically the decrease
from humid summers to dry winters. Recent experiments on
the aerosol viability of model viruses (bacteriophages) by Lin
Bazant and Bush

and Marr (64) have further revealed a non-monotonic dependence of ⁄v on relative humidity. Specifically, the deactivation
rate peaks at intermediate values of relative humidity, where
the cumulative exposure of virions to disinfecting salts and
solutes is maximized. Since the dependence ⁄v (RH) is not yet
well characterized experimentally for SARS-CoV-2, we follow
Miller et al. (24) and treat the deactivation rate as bounded
by existing data, specifically, ⁄v = 0 (no deactivation measured in 16 hours at 22 ± 1¶ C and RH = 53 ± 11% (65)) and
⁄v = 0.63/h (corresponding to a half life of 1.1h at 23 ± 2¶ C
and RH = 65% (66)). Pending further data for SARS-CoV-2,
we assume ⁄v = 0.6RH, and note the rough consistency of
this estimate with that for MERS-CoV (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus) at 25¶ C and RH = 79% (67),
specifically ⁄v = 1.0/h. Finally, we note that the effective viral
deactivation rates may be enhanced by use of either ultraviolet
radiation (UV-C) (68) or chemical disinfectants (e.g. H2 O2 ,
O3 ) (69).
The influence of air filtration and droplet settling in ventilation ducts may be incorporated by augmenting ⁄v (r) by
an amount ⁄f (r) = pf (r)⁄r , where pf (r) is the probability of
droplet filtration and ⁄r = Qr /V . The recirculation flow rate,
Qr , is commonly expressed in terms of the primary outdoor
air fraction, Zp = Q/(Qr + Q), where Q + Qr is the total air
flow rate. We note that the United States Environmental Protection Agency defines high-efficiency particulate air (HEPA)
filtration (70) as that characterized by pf > 99.97% for aerosol
particles. Ordinary air filters have required Minimum Efficiency Reporting Value (MERV) ratings of pf = 20 ≠ 90%
in specific size ranges. Other types of filtration devices (22),
such as electrostatic precipitators (71) with characteristic pf
values of 45 ≠ 70%, can also be included in this framework.
We seek to characterize the concentration C(r, t) (specifically, number/volume per radius) of pathogen transported
by drops of radius r. We assume that each of I(t) infectious
individuals exhales pathogen-laden droplets of radius r at a
constant rate P (r) = Qb nd (r)Vd (r)pm (r)cv (r) (number/time
per radius), where Qb is the breathing flow rate (exhaled
volume per time). We introduce a mask penetration factor,
0 < pm (r) < 1, that roughly accounts for the ability of masks
to filter droplets as a function of drop size (72–75).† The
concentration, C(r, t), of pathogen suspended within drops of
radius r then evolves according to
V

ˆC
ˆt

Rate of
change

=
=

I P

≠ (Q + pf Qr + vs A + ⁄v V ) C

Production rate
from exhalation

≠

[1]

Loss rate from ventilation, filtration
sedimentation and deactivation

where vs (r) is the particle settling speed and pf (r) is again
the probability of drop filtration in the recirculation flow Qr .
Owing to the dependence of the settling speed on particle
radius, the population of each drop size evolves, according
to equation [1], at different rates. Two limiting cases of Eq.
[1] are of interest. For the case of ⁄v = vs = Qr = 0, drops
of infinitesimal size that are neither deactivated nor removed
by filtration, it reduces to the Wells-Riley model (43, 44).
For the case of ⁄v = P = Q = Qr = 0, a non-reacting
suspension with no ventilation, it corresponds to established
†

For the sake of simplicity, we do not consider here the dependence of pm on respiratory activity (76) or direction of airflow (77), but note that, once reliably characterized, these dependencies
might be included in a straightforward fashion.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.26.20182824; this version posted January 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

—a (t) = Qb

⁄

0

Œ

C(r, t)pm (r)ci (r)dr,

[2]

thereby accounting for the protective properties of masks, and
allowing for the possibility that the infectivity ci (r) depends
on droplet size. Different droplet sizes may emerge from, and
penetrate into, different regions of the respiratory tract (33, 36,
78), and so have different ci (r); moreover, virions in relatively
small droplets may diffuse to surfaces more rapidly and so
exchange with bodily fluids more effectively. Such a size
dependence in infectivity, ci (r), is also consistent with reports
of enhanced viral shedding in micron-scale aerosols compared
to larger drops for both influenza virus (59) and SARS-CoV2 (30).
4

rc

singing (aah-v-p)
aah-v-p
25

singing softly (aah-w-p)
aah-w-p
speaking (c-v-p)
c-v-p
c-w-p
whispering (c-w-p)

20

b-nm
mouth breathing (b-nm)
b-nn
nose breathing (b-nn)

15

aerosol volume fraction ( 10-16/µm)

models of sedimentation from a well-mixed ambient (50, 53).
For the sake of notational simplicity, we define a size-dependent
sedimentation rate ⁄s (r) = vs (r)/H = ⁄a (r/rc )2 as the inverse
of the time taken for a drop of radius r to sediment from ceiling
to floor in a quiescent room.
When one infected individual enters a room at time t = 0,
so that I(0) = 1, the radius-resolved
! pathogen " concentration increases as, C(r, t) = Cs (r) 1 ≠ e≠⁄c (r)t , relaxing to a steady value, Cs (r) = P (r)/(⁄c (r)V ), at a rate,
⁄c (r) = ⁄a + ⁄f (r) + ⁄s (r) + ⁄v (r). Note that both the equilibrium concentration and the timescale to approach it are
decreased by the combined effects of ventilation, air filtration,
particle settling and deactivation (14, 63). Owing to the dependence of this adjustment process on the drop size, one
may understand it as a dynamic sifting process wherein larger
droplets settle out and reach their equilibrium concentration
relatively quickly. However, we note that, in the absence of
filtration and deactivation (⁄f = ⁄v = 0), the adjustment time,
⁄≠1
c , depends only weakly on drop size, varying from V /(2Q)
for the largest airborne drops (with radius rc ) to V /Q for
infinitesimal drops. The sedimentation rate of the ‘airborne’
droplets of radius r Æ rc is thus bounded above by the air
exchange rate, ⁄s (r) Æ ⁄a . The exhaled drop-size distribution depends strongly on respiratory activity (9, 17, 37, 38);
thus, so too must the radius-resolved concentration of airborne pathogen. The predicted dependence on respiratory
activity (9) of the steady-state volume fraction of airborne
droplets, „s (r) = Cs (r)/cv (r), is illustrated in Fig. 1.
We define the airborne disease transmission rate, —a (t),
as the mean number of transmissions per time per infectious
individual per susceptible individual. One expects —a (t) to
be proportional to the quantity of pathogen exhaled by the
infected person, and to that inhaled by the susceptible person.
Gammaitoni and Nucci (12) defined the airborne transmission rate as —a (t) = Qb ci Cs (t) for the case of a population
evolving according to the Wells-Riley model and inhaling a
monodisperse suspension. Here, ci is the viral infectivity, the
parameter that connects the fluid physics to the epidemiology,
specifically the concentration of suspended pathogen to the
infection rate. We note its relation to the notion of “infection
quanta" in the epidemiological literature (43). Specifically,
ci < 1 is the infection quanta per pathogen, while c≠1
>1
i
is the “infectious dose", the number of aerosol-borne virions
required to cause infection with probability 1 ≠ e≠1 = 63%.
For the polydisperse suspension of interest here, we define
the airborne transmission rate as

10

rc = 2.6 µm

5

0
0

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

2

3

4

5

30

3

0.3

0.03

droplet radius (µm)
Fig. 1. Model predictions for the steady-state, droplet-radius-resolved aerosol volume
fraction, „s (r), produced by a single infectious person in a well-mixed room. The
model accounts for the effects of ventilation, pathogen deactivation and droplet settling
for several different types of respiration in the absence of face masks (pm = 1). The
ambient conditions are taken to be those of the Skagit Valley Chorale super-spreading
incident (24, 26) (H = 4.5m, A = 180m2 , ⁄a = 0.65h≠1 , rc = 2.6µm,
⁄v = 0.3h≠1 , RH = 50%). The expiratory droplet size distributions are computed
from the data of Morawska et al. at RH = 59.4%(9) (see their Fig. 3) for aerosol
concentration per log-diameter, using nd (r) = (dC/d log D)/(r ln 10). The
breathing flow rate is assumed to be 0.5 m3 /h for nose and mouth breathing, 0.75
m3 /h for whispering and speaking, and 1.0 m3 /h for singing.

Indoor Safety Guideline
The reproduction number of an epidemic, R0 , is defined as
the mean number of transmissions per infected individual.
Provided R0 < 1, a disease will not spread at the population level (79). Estimates of R0 for COVID-19 have been
used to compare its rate of spread in different regions and
its dependence on different control strategies (32, 80–82) and,
most recently, viral variants (83, 84). We here define an analogous reproductive number for indoor, airborne transmission,
Rin (· ), as the expected number of transmissions in a room of
total occupancy N over a time · from a single infected person
entering at t = 0.
Our safety guideline sets a small risk tolerance ‘ (typically
1-10%) for the indoor reproductive number, defined as
Rin (· ) = Ns sr

⁄

0

·

—a (t) dt < ‘

[3]

The number of susceptibles, Ns = ps (N ≠ 1), may include all
others in the room (ps = 1), or be reduced by the susceptible
probability ps < 1, the fraction of the local population not yet
exposed or immunized. The relative transmissibility (or suscepBazant and Bush

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.26.20182824; this version posted January 24, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

tibility), sr allows for consideration of different transmission
rates for different sub-populations or viral strains.
In the limit of ‘ π 1, one may interpret Rin (· ) as the probability of the first transmission, which is approximately equal
to the sum of the Ns independent probabilities of transmission
to any particular susceptible individual in a well-mixed room‡ .
In SI Appendix Sec. 3, we show that this guideline follows from
standard epidemiological models, including the Wells-Riley
model, but note that it has broader generality. The exact
transient safety bound appropriate for the time-dependent
situation arising directly after an infected index case enters a
room, is evaluated in SI Appendix, Sec. 2.
We here focus on a simpler and more conservative guideline
that follows for long times relative to the air residence time,
· ∫ ⁄≠1
(which may vary from minutes to hours, and is
a
necessarily greater than ⁄c (r)≠1 ), when the airborne pathogen
has attained its equilibrium concentration C(r, t) æ Cs (r).
In this equilibrium case, the transmission rate (2) becomes
constant:
Q2 p2
—a = b m
V

⁄

0

Œ

nq (r)
Q2 p2 Cq
dr = b m
= p2m fd ⁄q
⁄c (r)
V ⁄c (r)

[4]

where, for the sake of simplicity, we assume constant mask
filtration pm over the entire range of aerosol drop sizes. We
define the microscopic concentration of infection quanta per
liquid volume as nq (r) = nd (r)Vd (r)cv (r)ci (r), and the concentrationsof infection quanta or “infectiousness" of exhaled
Œ
air, Cq = 0 nq (r)dr. The latter is the key disease-specific
parameter in our model, which can also be expressed as the
rate of quanta emission, ⁄q = Qb Cq , by an infected person.
The second equality in Eq. [4] defines the effective infectious
drop radius r, given in Eq. [S7]. The third equality defines
the dilution factor, fd = Qb /(⁄c (r̄)V ), the ratio of the concentration of infection quanta in the well-mixed room to that
in the unfiltered breath of an infected person. As we shall
see in what follows, this dilution factor provides a valuable
diagnostic in assessing the relative risk of various forms of
exposure.
We thus arrive at a simple guideline, appropriate for steadystate situations, that bounds the cumulative exposure time
(CET):
⁄c V + v s A
.
[5]
(N ≠ 1)· < ‘ 2 2
Qb pm Cq sr
where v s = vs (r) and ⁄c = ⁄a + ⁄f (r̄) + ⁄v (r̄) is the effective air exchange rate accounting for air filtration and
virus deactivation. The effect of relative humidity on the
droplet
size distribution can be captured by multiplying r̄ by

3
0.4/(1 ≠ RH), since the droplet distributions used in our
analysis were measured at RH = 60% (9).
By noting that the sedimentation rate of aerosols is usually
less than the air exchange rate, ⁄s (r) < ⁄a , and by neglecting
the influence of both air filtration and pathogen deactivation,
we deduce from Eq. [5] a more conservative bound on the
CET,
⁄a V
,
[6]
N· < ‘ 2 2
Qb pm Cq sr
‡

Markov’s inequality ensures that the probability of at least one transmission, P1 , is bounded above
by the expected number of transmissions, P1 Æ Rin . In the limit, Rin < ‘ π 1, these
quantities are asymptotically equal, since P1 = 1 ≠ (1 ≠ p(· ))Ns ≥ Ns p(· ) = Rin for

Ns independent transmissions of probability, p(· ) = sr

Bazant and Bush

s·
0

—a (t) dt π 1.

the interpretation of which is immediately clear. To minimize
risk of infection, one should avoid spending extended periods
in highly populated areas. One is safer in rooms with large
volume and high ventilation rates. One is at greater risk in
rooms where people are exerting themselves in such a way
as to increase their respiration rate and pathogen output, for
example by exercising, singing or shouting. Since the rate of
inhalation of contagion depends on the volume flux of both
the exhalation of the infected individual and the inhalation
of the susceptible person, the risk of infection increases as Q2b .
Likewise, masks worn by both infected and susceptible persons
will reduce the risk of transmission by a factor p2m , a dramatic
effect given that pm Æ 0.1 for moderately high quality masks
(73, 74).

Application to COVID-19
The only poorly constrained quantity in our guideline is the
epidemiological parameter, Cq sr , the product of the concentration of exhaled infection quanta by an infectious individual,
Cq , and the relative transmissibility, sr . We emphasize that
Cq and sr are expected to vary widely between different populations (85–90), among individuals during progression of the
disease (91, 92) and between different viral strains (83, 84).
Nevertheless, we proceed by making rough estimates for Cq
for different respiratory activities on the basis of existing epidemiological data gathered from early super-spreading events
of COVID-19. Our inferences provide a baseline value for
Cq , relevant for elderly individuals exposed to the original
strain of SARS-CoV-2, that we may rescale by the relative
transmissibilty sr in order to consider different populations
and viral strains. We make these inferences with the hope that
such an attempt will motivate the acquisition of more such
data, and so to improved estimates for Cq and sr for different
populations in various settings.
An inference of Cq = 970 quanta/m3 was made by Miller
et al. (24) in their recent analysis of the Skagit Valley Chorale
super-spreading incident (26), on the basis of the assumption
that the transmission was described in terms of the Wells-Riley
model (12, 13, 17, 44). To be precise, they inferred a quanta
emission rate of ⁄q = Cq Q̄b = 970 q/h for a mean breathing
rate of Q̄b = 1.0 m3 /h apprpriate for singing (24). This
inference is roughly consistent with studies of other related
viral diseases. For example, Liao et al. (45) estimated Cq = 28
quanta/m3 from the rate of indoor spreading of SARS-CoV,
in a hospital and an elementary school. Estimates of Cq for
H1N1 influenza fall in the range 15 ≠ 128 quanta/m3 (46).
For SARS-CoV-2, Buonanno et al. (17) estimate a Cq range of
10.5-1030 quanta/m3 , on the basis of the estimated infectivity
ci = 0.01 ≠ 0.1 of SARS-CoV (93) and the reported viral loads
in sputum (91, 92, 94), and note that the precise value depends
strongly on the infected person’s respiratory activity. Notably,
their range spans the high value inferred for the Skagit Valley
Chorale (24), and all of our inferences to follow.
We proceed by estimating quanta concentrations, Cq , or
equivalently, quanta emission rates, ⁄q = Qb Cq , for different
forms of respiration. First, we solve Eq. [1] to obtain the
steady-state radius-resolved droplet volume fraction „s (r) for
various hypothetical expiratory activities in the room of the
Skagit Valley Chorale, using the drop size distributions of
Morawska et al. (9). Our results are shown in Fig. 1. Integrating each curve up to the critical radius rc , we then obtain
5

Expiratory activity

Singing

Voiced "aahs" (Singin g)Voiced "aah"
"aah"
Whispered "aahs" (SingiWhispered
n g)

Speaking

Loud (Speaking)

103
142

Loud Speech

Voiced Counting

72

Voiced Counting (Speaking)
Intermediate Speech

72

Intermediate (Speaking)
Whispered Counting
29

Breathing

Quiet (Speaking) Nose-Mouth

33
8.5

Fast-Deep

Nose-Nose

Deep-Fast (Breathing)

Nose

Nose (Breathing)

Wuhan
Outbreak

4.2

Deep-Fast

Fast-Deep (Breathing)

calibration

37

Whispered Counting (Speaking)Quiet Speech
Nose-Mouth (Breathing)

970

Skagit
Valley
Chorale

8.8
1.1
0

10

Ningbo
Bus

Diamond
Princess
20

30

40

50

60

Cq

Nose (Breathin g)

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

960

970

(Infection quanta / m3 exhaled air)

Fig. 2. Estimates of the “infectiousness" of exhaled air, Cq , defined as the peak concentration of COVID-19 infection quanta in the breath of an infected person, for various
respiratory activities. Values are deduced from the drop-size distributions reported by Morawska et al. (9) (blue bars) and Asadi et al. (38) (orange bars). The only
value reported in the epidemiological literature, Cq = 970 quanta/m3 , was estimated (24) for the Skagit Valley Chorale super-spreading event (26), which we take as a
baseline case
s rc (sr = 1) of elderly individuals exposed to the original strain of SARS-CoV-2. This value is rescaled by the predicted infectious aerosol volume fractions,
„1 (r) =
„s (r) dr , obtained by integrating the steady-state size distributions reported in Fig. 1 for different expiratory activities (9). Aerosol volume fractions calculated

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

140

150

0

for various respiratory activities from Fig. 5 of Asadi et al. (38) are rescaled so that the value Cq = 72 quanta/m3 for “intermediate speaking" matches that inferred from
Morawska et al.’s (9) for “voiced counting". Estimates of Cq for the outbreaks during the quarantine period of the Diamond Princess (25) and the Ningbo bus journey (27), as
well as the initial outbreak in Wuhan City (2, 80) are also shown (see SI Appendix for details).

an activity-dependent
volume fraction of infectious airborne
sr
droplets „1 = 0 c „s (r) dr in the choir room (see SI Appendix). Finally, we assume that the inferred value, Cq = 970
quanta/m3 , for the super-spreading incident (24) that resulted
from the expiratory activity most resembling singing (voiced
"aahs" with pauses for recovery (9)), and deduce values of Cq
for other forms of respiration by rescaling with the appropriate
„1 values. Our predictions for the dependence of Cq on respiratory activity are shown in Fig. 2. For validation, we also
show estimates for Cq based on the recent measurements of
activity-dependent aerosol concentrations reported by Asadi
et al. (37, 38). Specifically, we calculated the aerosol volume
fractions from the reported drop-size distributions (from Fig.
5 of Ref.(38)) for a different set of expiratory activities that
included various breathing patterns and speaking aloud at different volumes. We then used these volume fractions to rescale
the value Cq = 72 quanta/m3 for speaking at intermediate
volume (38), which we chose to match the value inferred for
the most similar respiratory activity considered by Morawska
et al. (9), specifically voiced counting with pauses (9). Notably,
the quanta concentrations so inferred, Cq , are consistent across
the full range of activities, from nasal breathing at rest (1-10
q/m3 ) to oral breathing and whispering (5-40 q/m3 ), to loud
speaking and singing (100-1000 q/m3 ).

microscopic concentrations of cq = ci cv = 2 ◊ 108 and 7 ◊ 108
quanta/mL (see SI Appendix). Respiratory aerosols mainly
consist of sputum produced by the fragmentation (95) of mucous plugs and films in the bronchioles and larynx (33–35).
Larger droplets are thought to form by fragmentation of saliva
in the mouth (35, 36). Airborne viral loads are usually estimated from that of saliva or sputum (60, 91, 92, 94, 96).
After incubation, viral loads, cv , in sputum tend to peak in
the range 108 ≠ 1011 RNA copies/mL (91, 92, 94), while
much lower values have been reported for other bodily fluids
(91, 92, 97). Virus shedding in the pharynx remains high
during the first week of symptoms and reaches 7 ◊ 108 RNA
copies per throat swab (91) (typically 1-3 mL). Since viral
loads are 20-50% greater in sputum than in throat swabs (92),
the most infectious aerosols are likely to contain cv ¥ 109
RNA copies/mL. Using this viral load and assuming ci = 2%
based on previous inferences for SARS-CoV (93), Buonanno
et al. (17) estimated cq = 2 ◊ 107 q/mL for SARS-CoV-2,
an order of magnitude below our inferences obtained directly
from spreading data for COVID-19 (9, 38). The inference
that SARS-CoV-2 is ten times more infectious than SARSCoV, with ci ≥ 10% (an infectious dose on the order of ten
aerosol-borne virions), is consistent with the fact that only
the former caused a pandemic.

Our inferences for Cq from a number of super-spreading
events are also roughly consistent with physiological measurements of viral RNA in the bodily fluids of COVID-19
patients at peak viral load. Specifically, our estimate of
Cq = 72 quanta/m3 for voiced counting (9) and intermediatevolume speech (38) with integrated aerosol volume fractions
„1 = 0.36 and 0.11 (µm/cm)3 corresponds, respectively, to

Our findings are consistent with emerging virological (3,
30, 65, 66) and epidemiological (5, 19, 23, 27, 28) evidence
that SARS-CoV-2 is present and extremely infectious in respiratory aerosols and that indoor airborne transmission is the
dominant driver of the COVID-19 pandemic (4, 22). Further
support for this hypothesis is provided by crudely applying
our indoor transmission model to a number of slightly less well

6

Bazant and Bush

characterized spreading events, as detailed in the SI Appendix,
all of which yield roughly consistent values of Cq (shown in
Fig. 2). For the initial outbreak of COVID-19 in Wuhan
City (2, 80), we assume that spreading occurred predominantly
in family apartments, as is consistent with the inference that
80% of transmission clusters arose in people’s homes (31). We
may then tentatively equate the average reproduction number
estimated for the Wuhan outbreak (80), R0 = 3.3, with the
indoor reproduction number, Rin (· ). We use · = 5.5 days
as the exposure time, assuming that it corresponds to mean
time before the onset of symptoms and patient isolation. We
consider the mean household size of 3.03 persons in a typical
apartment with area 30 m2 /person and a winter bedroom
ventilation rate of 0.34 ACH (54), and assume that ⁄v = 0.3/h
and r̄ = 2µm. We thus infer Cq = 30 quanta/m3 , a value
expected for normal breathing (see Fig. 2).
For the Ningbo bus incident all model parameters are known
except for the air exchange rate. We estimate ⁄a = 1.25/h for a
moving bus with closed windows, based on studies of pollutants
in British transit buses (98). We thus infer Cq = 90 q/m3 , a
value that lies in the range of intermediate speaking, as might
be expected on board a bus filled to capacity. Considering the
uncertainty in ⁄a , one might also infer a value consistent with
resting on a quiet bus; in particular, choosing ⁄a = 0.34/h
yields Cq = 57 q/m3 . Finally, we infer a value of Cq = 30
q/m3 from the spreading event on board the quarantined
Diamond Princess cruise ship (25), a value consistent with
the passengers being primarily at rest. However, we note that
the extent to which the Diamond Princess can be adequately
described in terms of a well-mixed space remains the subject
of some debate (see SI Appendix, Sec. 5A).
We proceed by making the simplifying assumption that the
dependence of Cq on expiratory activity illustrated in Fig. 2 is
universal, but retain the freedom to rescale these values by the
relative transmissibility sr for different age groups and viral
strains. It is well established that children have considerably
lower hospitalization and death rates (85–87), but there is
growing evidence that they also have lower transmissibility (88–
90, 99, 100). A recent study of household clusters suggests
that children are rarely index cases or involved in secondary
transmissions (88). The best controlled comparison comes
from quarantined households in China, where social contacts
were reduced 7-8 fold during lockdowns (100). Compared to
the elderly (over 65 years old) for which we have assigned
sr = 1, the relative susceptibility of adults (aged 15-64) was
found to be sr = 68%, while that of children (aged 0-14) was
sr = 23%. We proceed by using these values of sr for these
three different age groups and the original strain of SARSCoV-2 in our case studies. However, we anticipate the need to
revise these sr values for new viral variants, such as the lineage
B.1.1.7 (VOC 202012/01) (83, 84), which recently emerged in
the United Kingdom with 60% greater transmissibility and
elevated risk of infection among children.
In summary, our inferences of Cq and sr from a diverse set
of indoor spreading events and from independent physiological
data are sufficiently self-consistent to indicate that the values
reported in Fig. 2 may prove to be sufficient to apply the
safety guideline in a quantitative fashion. Our hope is that
our attempts to infer Cq will motivate the collection of more
such data from spreading events, which might then be used to
refine our necessarily crude initial estimates.
Bazant and Bush

Case studies
We proceed by illustrating the value of our guideline in estimating the maximum occupancy or exposure time in two
settings of particular interest, the classroom and an elder care
facility. Considering our inferences from the data and the
existing literature, it would appear reasonable to illustrate
our guideline for COVID-19 with the conservative choice of
Cq = 30 quanta/m3 . However, we emphasize that this value
is expected to vary strongly with different demographics and
respiratory activity levels (17). In taking the value of Cq = 30
quanta/m3 , we are assuming that in both settings considered,
occupants are engaged in relatively mild respiratory activities
consistent with quiet speech or rest. In assessing critical cumulative exposure times for given populations, we stress that the
tolerance ‘ is a parameter that should be chosen judiciously
according to the vulnerability of the population, which varies
dramatically with age and preexisting conditions (85–88).
We first apply our guideline to a typical classroom in the
United States, designed for the standard occupancy of 19
students and their teacher (see Fig. 3(a)). The importance
of adequate ventilation and mask use is made clear by our
guideline. For normal occupancy and without masks, the safe
time after an infected individual enters the classroom is 1.2
hours for natural ventilation and 7.2 hours with mechanical
ventilation, according to the transient bound, Eq. [S8], with
‘ = 10%. Even with cloth mask use (pm = 0.3), these bounds
are increased dramatically to 8 and 80 hours, respectively.
Assuming six hours of indoor time per day, a school group
wearing masks with adequate ventilation would thus be safe
for longer than the recovery time for COVID-19 (7-14 days),
and school transmissions would be rare. We stress, however,
that our predictions are based on the assumption of a “quiet
classroom", where resting respiration (Cq = 30) is the norm.
Extended periods of physical activity, collective speech, or
singing would lower the time limit by an order of magnitude
(Fig. 2).
Our analysis sounds the alarm for elderly homes and longterm care facilities, which account for a large fraction of
COVID-19 hospitalizations and deaths (85–87). In nursing
homes in New York City, law requires a maximum occupancy
of three and recommends a mininum area of 80 square feet per
person. In Fig. 3(b), we plot the guideline for a tolerance of
‘ = 0.01 transmission probability, chosen to reflect the vulnerability of the community. Once again, the effect of ventilation
is striking. For natural ventilation (0.34 ACH), the Six Foot
Rule fails after only 3 minutes under quasi-steady conditions,
or after 17 minutes for the transient response to the arrival
of an infected person, in which case the 15-Minute Rule is
only marginally safe. With mechanical ventilation (at 8 ACH)
in steady state, three occupants could safely remain in the
room for no more than 18 minutes. This example provides
insight into the devastating toll of the COVID-19 pandemic
on the elderly (85, 87). Furthermore, it underscores the need
to minimize the sharing of indoor space, maintain adequate,
once-through ventilation, and encourage the use of face masks.
In both examples, the benefit of face masks is immediately
apparent, since the CET limit is enhanced by a factor p≠2
m ,
the inverse square of the mask penetration factor. Standard
surgical masks are characterized by pm = 1 ≠ 5% (72, 73), and
so allow the cumulative exposure time to be extended by 400–
10000 times. Even cloth face coverings would extend the CET
7

COVID-19 Indoor Safety Guideline
(b) Nursing home

(a) Classroom
1

2

3

mechanical
ventilation

25

0 q/m3
=0.1
=0.25
.3

(8 ACH)

Occupancy Limit

natural
ventilation

4

normal occupancy

2

Six Foot Rule

52

tra
nsi
en
t

ste
ad
y-s
tat
e

1

Safe

Safe
0

4
10

6
15

8 25
10 12
20
30 14
35 16
40 18
45
Time without masks τ (hours)

20
50

22
55

24
60

125

Unsafe

3

Six Foot Rule

100

75

(8 ACH)

10

0

50

mechanical
ventilation

Unsafe

(0.34 ACH)

5

v2

11

C_q = 30 q/m3
epsilon=0.01
normal occupancy
beta_r = 1
p_m=0.1

20
15

10

25

0

15 Minute
Rule

0

Time with masks τ (hours)

Occupancy Limit

30

Time with masks τ (days)
6
8
4
5
7
9

natural ventilation
(0.34 ACH)

0
0

15

30

45

60

75

Time without masks τ (minutes)

Fig. 3. The COVID-19 indoor safety guideline would limit the cumulative exposure time in a room with an infected individual to lie beneath the curves shown. Solid curves
PNAS
v2 ventilation (⁄a = 0.34/h; blue curve) and mechanical
are deduced from the pseudo-steady formula, Eq. [5], for both
natural
Ô ventilation (⁄a = 8.0/h; red curve). Horizontal
axes denote occupancy times with and without masks. Evidently, the Six-Foot Rule (which limits occupancy to Nmax = A/(6ft)) becomes inadequate after a critical time,
and the 15-Minute Rule above a critical occupancy. (a) A typical school classroom: 20 persons share a room with an area of 900 square feet and a ceiling height of 12 feet
(A = 83.6 m2 , V = 301 m3 ). We assume low relative transmissibility (sr = 25%), cloth masks (pm = 30%) and moderate risk tolerance (‘ = 10%) suitable for children.
(b) A nursing home shared room (A = 22.3 m2 , V = 53.5 m3 ) with a maximum occupancy of three elderly persons (sr = 100%), disposable surgical or hybrid-fabric masks
(pm = 10%) and a low risk tolerance (‘ = 1%) to reflect the vulnerability of the community. The transient formula, Eq. [S8], is shown with dotted curves. Other parameters
are Cq = 30 quanta/m3 , ⁄v = 0.3/h, Qb = 0.5 m3 /h, r = 0.5µm.

limit by 6–100 times for hybrid fabrics (pm = 10 ≠ 40%) or
1.5–6 times for single-layer fabrics (pm = 40 ≠ 80%) (74). Our
inference of the efficacy of face masks in mitigating airborne
transmission is roughly consistent with studies showing the
benefits of mask use on COVID-19 transmission at the scales
of both cities and countries (22, 32, 82).

likely, with probability ‘. When the tolerance ‘ exceeds a
critical value, all occupants of the room should be considered
close contacts and so warrant testing. For relatively short
exposures (⁄a · π 1) initiated when the index case enters the
room, the transient bound should be considered (SI Appendix,
Sec. 2).

Air filtration has a less dramatic effect than face-mask use in
increasing the CET bound. Nevertheless, it does offer a means
of mitigating indoor transmission with greater comfort, albeit
at greater cost (22, 71). Eq. [5] indicates that even perfect
air filtration, pf = 1, will only have a significant effect in the
limit of highly recirculated air, Zp π 1. The corresponding
minimum outdoor airflow per person, Q/Nmax , should be
compared with local standards, such as 3.8 L/s/person for
retail spaces and classrooms and 10 L/s/person for gyms and
sports facilities (71). In the above classroom example with a
typical primary outdoor air fraction of Zp = 20% (22), the
air change rate ⁄a could effectively be increased by a factor of
4.6 by installing a MERV-13 filter, pm = 90%, or by 5.0 with
a HEPA filter, pm = 99.97%. At high air exchange rates, the
same factors would multiply the CET bound.

We proceed by considering the implications of our guideline
for the implementation of quarantining and testing. While
official quarantine guidelines emphasize the importance of
isolating infected persons, our study makes clear the importance of isolating and clearing infected indoor air. In cases of
home quarantine of an infected individual with healthy family
members, our guideline provides specific recommendations for
mitigating indoor airborne transmission. For a group sharing
an indoor space intermittently, for example office coworkers or
classmates, regular testing should be done with a frequency
that ensures that the cumulative exposure time is less than
the limit set by the guideline. Such testing would only be
unnecessary if the time limit set by the CET bound greatly
exceeds the time taken for an infected person to be removed
from the population. For the case of a symptomatic infected
person, this removal time should correspond to the time taken
for the onset of symptoms (¥ 5.5 days). To safeguard against
asymptomatic individuals, one should use the recovery time
(¥ 14 days) in place of the removal time.

Next, we illustrate the value of our guideline in contact
tracing (81), specifically, in prescribing the scope of the testing of people with whom an infected index case has had close
contact. The CDC presently defines a COVID-19 “close contact" as any encounter in which an individual is within 6 feet
of an infected person for more than 15 minutes. Figure 3
makes clear that this definition may grossly underestimate
the number of individuals exposed to a substantial risk of
airborne infection in indoor spaces. Our study suggests that
whenever our CET bound (5) is violated during an indoor
event involving the index case, at least one transmission is
8

Finally, we briefly discuss the influence of the prevalence
of infection in the population on the application of our safety
guideline. Our guideline sets a limit on the indoor reproductive
number, the risk of transmission from a single infected person
in the room. It thus implicitly assumes that the prevalence of
infection in the population, pi , is relatively low. In this lowpi limit, the risk of transmission increases with the expected
Bazant and Bush

number of infected persons in the room, N pi , and the tolerance
should be lowered in proportion to N pi if it exceeds one.
Conversely, when N pi æ 0, the tolerance might be increased
proportionally until the recommended restrictions are deemed
unnecessary.
For instructions on how to apply our guideline to other
situations, we refer the interested reader to the spreadsheet
provided in the SI Appendix. There, by specifying a given
room geometry, ventilation rate and respiratory activity, one
may deduce the maximum cumulative exposure time in a particular indoor setting, and so define precisely what constitutes
an exposure in that setting. An online app based on our
guideline has also been developed (101).

Beyond the Well-Mixed Room
The model developed herein describes the risk of small respiratory drops (r < rc ) in the case where the entirety of the room is
well mixed. There are undoubtedly circumstances where there
are substantial spatial and temporal variations of the pathogen
concentration from the mean (7, 41). For example, it is presumably the spatial variations from well-mixedness that result
in the inhomogeneous infection patterns reported for a number of well-documented transmission events in closed spaces,
including a COVID outbreak in a Chinese restaurant (4), and
SARS outbreaks on airliners (102). Circumstances have also
been reported where air-conditioner-induced flows appear to
have enhanced direct pathogen transport between infected
and susceptible individuals (103). In the vicinity of an infected person, the turbulent respiratory jet or puff will have
a pathogen concentration that is substantially higher than
the ambient (20, 42). Chen et al. (41) referred to infection
via respiratory plumes as ‘short-range airborne transmission’,
and demonstrated that it poses a substantially greater risk
than large-drop transmission. In order to distinguish shortrange airborne transmission from that considered in our study,
we proceed by referring to the latter as ‘long-range airborne’
transmission.
On the basis of the relatively simple geometric form of
turbulent jet and puff flows, one may make estimates of the
form of the mixing that respiratory outflows induce, the spatial distribution of their pathogen concentration and so the
resulting risk they pose to the room’s occupants. For the
case of the turbulent jet associated with relatively continuous
speaking or breathing, turbulent entrainment of the ambient air leads to the jet radius r = –t x increasing linearly
with distance x from the source, where –t ≥ 0.1 ≠ 0.15 is
the typical jet entrainment coefficient (20, 41, 42). The conservation of momentum flux M = ﬁﬂa r2 v 2 then indicates
that the jet speed decreases with distance from the source acÔ
cording to v(x) = M 1/2 /(–t x ﬁﬂa ). Concurrently, turbulent
entrainment results in the pathogen concentration within the
1/2
jet decreasing according to Cj (x)/C0 = Am /(–t x), where
2
Am ≥ 2cm denotes the cross-sectional area of the mouth and
C0 = Cq /cv is the exhaled pathogen concentration.§ Abkarian
et al. (42) thus deduce that for the respiratory jet generated by
typical speaking, the concentration of pathogen is diminished
to approximately 3% of its initial value at a distance of 2
meters.
§

These expressions for v(x) and C(x) are valid in the limit of x > xv where xv is the virtual
origin of the jet, typically on the order of 10cm (20, 104). Near-field expressions well behaved at
x = 0 are given by replacing x with x + xv , and normalizing such that C(0) = C0 .

Bazant and Bush

In a well-mixed room, the mean concentration of pathogen
produced by a single infected person is fd C0 . For example, in
the large, poorly ventilated room of the Skagit Valley Chorale,
we compute a dilution factor, fd = Qb /(⁄c (r̄)V ) of approximately 0.001. We note that since ⁄c (r) > ⁄a = Q/V , the
dilution factor satisfies the bound, fd Æ Qb /Q. For typical rooms and air exchange rates, fd lies in the range of
0.0001 ≠ 0.01. With the dilution factor of the well-mixed room
and the dilution rate of respiratory jets, we may now assess the
relative risk to a susceptible person of a close encounter (either
episodic or prolonged) with an infected individual’s respiratory
jet, and an exposure associated with sharing a room with an
infected person for an extended period of time. Since the
infected jet concentration Cj (x) decreases with distance from
its source, one may assess its pathogen concentration relative
1/2
to that of the well-mixed room, Cj (x)/(fd C0 ) = Am /(–t fd x).
1/2
There is thus a critical distance, Am /(–t fd ) beyond which
the pathogen concentration in the jet is reduced to that of
the ambient. This distance exceeds 10m for fd in the aforementioned range and so is typically much greater than the
characteristic room dimension. Thus, in the absence of masks,
respiratory jets may pose a substantially greater risk than the
well-mixed ambient.
We first consider a worst-case, close-contact scenario in
which a person directly ingests a lung full of air exhaled
by an infected person. An equivalent amount of pathogen
would be inhaled from the ambient by anyone within the
room after a time · = Vb /(Qb fd ), where Vb ¥ 500 mL is
the volume per breath. For the geometry of the Skagit choir
room, for which fd = 0.001, the critical time beyond which
airborne transmission is a greater risk than this worst-case
close encounter with a respiratory plume is · = 1.0 hour. We
next consider the worst-case scenario governed by the 6-foot
rule, in which a susceptible person is directly in the path of an
infected turbulent jet at a distance of 6 feet, over which the jet
is diluted by factor of 3% (42). The associated concentration
in the jet is still roughly 30 times higher than the steadystate concentration in the well-mixed ambient (when fd =
0.001), and so would result in a commensurate amplification
of the transmission probability. Our guideline could thus be
adopted to safeguard against the risk of respiratory jets in a
socially-distanced environment by reducing ‘ by a factor of
C(6f t)/(fd C0 ), which is 3 - 300 for fd in the range of 0.0001
- 0.01. We note that the latter worst-case scenario describes
a static situation where a susceptible individual is seated
directly in the respiratory plume of an infected individual, as
may arise in a classroom or airplane (102). More generally,
with a circulating population in an indoor setting, one would
expect to encounter an infected respiratory plume only for
some small fraction of the time, consideration of which would
allow for a less conservative choice of ‘.
We may thus make a relatively crude estimate for the additional risk of short-range plume transmission, appropriate
when masks are not being worn (pm = 1), by adding a correction to our safety guideline [5]. We denote by pj the probability
that a susceptible neighbor lies in the respiratory plume of the
infected person, and by x > 0 the distance between nearest
neighbours, between which the risk of infection is necessarily
greatest. We thus deduce

5

1/2

pj Am
Rin (· ) 1 +
Ns fd –t x

6

< ‘.

[7]
9

In certain instances, meaningful estimates may be made for
both pj and x. For example, if a couple dines at a restaurant,
x would correspond roughly to the distance across a table, and
pj would correspond to the fraction of the time they face each
another. If N occupants are arranged randomly in an
indoor
space, then one expects pj = tan≠1 –t /ﬁ and x =
A/N .
When strict social distancing is imposed, one may further set
x to the minimum allowed inter-person distance, such as six
feet. Substitution from Eq. [5] reveals that the second term in
Eq. [7] corresponds to the risk of transmission from respiratory
jets deduced by Yang et al. (105), aside from the factor pj .
We note that any such guideline intended to mitigate against
short-range airborne transmission by respiratory plumes will
be, as is [7], dependent on geometry, flow and human behavior,
while our guideline for the mitigation of long-range airborne
transmission [5] is universal.
We note that the use of face masks will have a marked effect
on respiratory jets, with the fluxes of both exhaled pathogen
and momentum being reduced substantially at their source.
Indeed, Chen et al. (41) note that when masks are worn, the
primary respiratory flow may be described in terms of a rising
thermal plume, which is of significantly less risk to neighbours.
With a population of individuals wearing face masks, the risk
posed by respiratory jets will thus be largely eliminated, while
that of the well-mixed ambient will remain.
Finally, we stress that our guideline is based on the average concentration of aerosols within the room. For every
region of enhanced airborne pathogen concentration, there is
necessarily a region of reduced concentration and lower transmission risk elsewhere in the room. The ensemble average
of the transmission risk over a number of similar events, and
the time-averaged transmission risk in a single event are both
expected to approach that in the well-mixed steady state, as
in ergodic processes in statistical mechanics. This feature of
the system provides rationale for the self-consistency of our
inferences of Cq , based on the hypothesis of the well-mixed
room, from the diverse set of spreading events considered
herein.

Discussion and Caveats
We have focused here primarily on airborne transmission, for
which infection arises through inhalation of a critical quantity
of airborne pathogen, and neglected the roles of both contact
and large-drop transmission (6). While motivated by the
COVID-19 pandemic, our theoretical framework applies quite
generally to airborne respiratory illnesses, including influenza.
Moreover, we note that the approach taken, coupling the
droplet dynamics to the transmission dynamics, allows for
a more complete description. For example, consideration of
conservation of pathogen allows one to calculate the rate of
pathogen sedimentation and associated surface contamination,
consideration of which would allow for quantitative models of
contact transmission and so inform cleaning protocols.
Typical values for the parameters arising in our model are
listed in SI Appendix, Table S1. Respiration rates Qb have
been measured to be ≥ 0.5m3 /hr for normal breathing, and
may increase by a factor of 3 for more strenuous activities (17).
Other parameters, including room geometry, ventilation and
filtration rates, will obviously be room dependent. The most
poorly constrained parameter appearing in our guideline is
Cq sr , the product of the concentration of pathogen in the
10

breath of an infected person and the relative transmissibility. The latter, sr , was introduced in order to account for
the dependence of transmissibility on the mean age of the
population (85–87, 90) and the viral strain (83, 84). The
value of Cq sr was inferred from the the best characterized
super-spreading event, the Skagit Valley Chorale incident (24),
as arose amongst an elderly population with a median age of
69 (26), for which we assign sr = 1. The Cq value so inferred
was rescaled using reported drop-size distributions (9, 23, 37)
allowing us to estimate Cq for several respiratory activities, as
listed in Figure 3. Further comparison with inferences based
on other spreading events of new viral strains among different
populations would allow for refinement of our estimates of Cq
and sr . We thus appeal to the public health community to
document the physical conditions enumerated in Table S1 of
SI Appendix for more indoor spreading events.
Adherence to the Six-Foot Rule would limit large-drop
transmission, and to our guideline, Eq. [5], would limit longrange airborne transmission. We have also shown how the
sizeable variations in pathogen concentration associated with
respiratory flows, arising in a population not wearing face
masks, might be taken into account. Consideration of both
short-range and long-range airborne transmission leads to a
guideline of the form of Eq. [7] that would bound both the
distance between occupants and the cumulative exposure time.
Circumstances may also arise where a room is only partially
mixed, owing to the absence or deficiency of air conditioning
and ventilation flows, or the influence of irregularities in the
room geometry (106). For example, in a poorly ventilated
space, contaminated warm air may develop beneath the ceiling, leading to the slow descent of a front between relatively
clean and contaminated air a process described by ‘filling-box’
models (106). In the context of reducing COVID-19 transmission in indoor spaces, such variations from well-mixedness
need be assessed on a room-by-room basis. Nevertheless, the
criterion [5] represents a minimal requirement for safety from
long-range airborne infection in well-mixed, indoor spaces.
We emphasize that our guideline was developed specifically
with a view to mitigating the risk of long-range airborne transmission. We note, however, that our inferences of Cq came
from a number of super-spreading events, where other modes
of transmission, such as respiratory jets, are also likely to have
contributed. Thus, our estimates for Cq are necessarily overestimates, expected to be higher than those that would have
arisen from purely long-range airborne transmission. Consequently, our safety guideline for airborne transmission necessarily provides a conservative upper bound on cumulative
exposure time. We note that the additional bounds required
to mitigate other transmission modes will not be universal;
for example, we see in Eq. [7] that the danger of respiratory
jets will depend explicitly on the arrangement of the room’s
occupants. Finally, we reiterate that the wearing of masks
largely eliminates the risk of respiratory jets, and so makes
the well-mixed-room approximation considered here all the
more relevant.
Our theoretical model of the well-mixed room was developed specifically to describe airborne transmission between a
fixed number of individuals in a single well-mixed room. Nevertheless, we note that it is likely to inform a broader class of
transmission events. For example, there are situations where
forced ventilation mixes air between rooms, in which case
Bazant and Bush

the compound room becomes effectively a well-mixed space.
Examples considered here are the outbreaks on the Diamond
Princess and in apartments in Wuhan City (see SI Appendix);
others would include prisons. There are many other settings,
including classrooms and factories, where people come and
go, interacting intermittently with the space, with infected
people exhaling into it, and susceptible people inhaling from
it, for limited periods. Such settings are also informed by our
model provided one considers the mean population dynamics, specifically, that N be identified as the mean number of
occupants.
The guideline [5] depends on the tolerance ‘, whose value
in a particular setting should be set by the appropriate policy
makers, informed by the latest epidemiological evidence. Likewise, the guideline includes the relative transmissibility sr of
a given viral strain within a particular sub-population. These
two factors may be eliminated from consideration by using
(6) to assess the relative behavioral risk posed to a particular
individual by attending a specific event of duration · with N
other participants. We thus define a risk index,
IR =

N · Cq Q2b p2m
,
⁄a V

[8]

that may be evaluated using appropriate Cq and Qb values
(listed in SI Appendix, Fig. S2). One’s risk increases linearly
with the number of people in a room and duration of the
event. Relative risk decreases for large, well ventilated rooms
and increases when the room’s occupants are exerting themselves or speaking loudly. While these results are intuitive,
the approach taken here provides a physical framework for
understanding them quantitatively. It also provides a quantitative measure of the relative risk of certain environments, for
example, a well ventilated, sparsely occupied laboratory and a
poorly ventilated, crowded, noisy bar. Along similar lines, the
weighted average of (8), provides a quantitative assessment
of one’s risk of airborne infection over an extended period. It
thus allows for a quantitative assessment of what constitutes
an exposure, a valuable notion in defining the scope of contact
tracing, testing and quarantining.
Above all, our study makes clear the inadequacy of the
Six-Foot Rule in mitigating indoor airborne disease transmission, and offers a rational, physically-informed alternative for
managing life in the time of COVID-19. If implemented, our
safety guideline would impose a limit on the cumulative exposure time in indoor settings, violation of which constitutes
an exposure for all of the room’s occupants. Finally, while
our study has allowed for an estimate of the infectiousness of
COVID-19, it also indicates how new data characterizing indoor spreading events may lead to improved estimates thereof
and so to quantitative refinements of our safety guideline.
The spreadsheet included in Dataset S1 provides a simple
means of evaluating this limit for any particular indoor setting.
A convenient online app based on our safety guideline is also
available (101). A glossary of terms arising in our study is
presented in Table S3 of the SI Appendix.
The authors thank William Ristenpart
and Sima Asadi for sharing experimental data and Lesley Bazant,
Lydia Bourouiba, Daniel Cogswell, Mark Hampden-Smith, Kyle
Hofmann, David Keating, Lidia Morawska, Nels Olson, Monona
Rossol, and Renyi Zhang for important references.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.

1. N Chen, et al., Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. The Lancet 395, 507–513 (2020).

Bazant and Bush

2. Q Li, et al., Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected
pneumonia. New Engl. J. Medicine 382, 1199–1207 (2020).
3. JA Lednicky, et al., Viable SARS-CoV-2 in the air of a hospital room with COVID-19 patients.
Int. J. Infect. Dis. 100, 476–482 (2020).
4. L Morawska, DK Milton, It is time to address airborne transmission of COVID-19. Clin. Infect.
Dis. 71, 2311–2313 (2020).
5. L Morawska, J Cao, Airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2: The world should face the reality.
Environ. Int. 139, 105730 (2020).
6. R Mittal, R Ni, JH Seo, The flow physics of COVID-19. J. Fluid Mech. 894, F2 (2020).
7. M Jayaweera, H Perera, B Gunawardana, J Manatunge, Transmission of COVID-19 virus by
droplets and aerosols. Environ Res. 188 (2020).
8. L Morawksa, Droplet fate in indoor environments, or can we prevent the spread of infection?
Indoor Air 16, 335–347 (2006).
9. L Morawska, et al., Size distribution and sites of origin of droplets expelled from the human
respiratory tract during expiratory activities. J. Aerosol Sci. 40, 256–269 (2009).
10. P Khare, L Marr, Simulation of vertical concentration gradient of influenza viruses in dust
resuspended by walking. Indoor Air 25, 428–440 (2015).
11. S Asadi, et al., Influenza A virus is transmissible via aerosolized fomites. Nat. Comm. 11,
1–9 (2020).
12. L Gammaitoni, MC Nucci, Using a mathematical model to evaluate the efficacy of TB control
measures. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 3, 335 (1997).
13. C Beggs, C Noakes, P Sleigh, L Fletcher, K Siddiqi, The transmission of tuberculosis in
confined spaces: an analytical review of alternative epidemiological models. Int. J. Tuberc.
Lung Dis. 7, 1015–1026 (2003).
14. M Nicas, WW Nazaroff, A Hubbard, Toward understanding the risk of secondary airborne
infection: emission of respirable pathogens. J. Occ. Env. Hyg. 2, 143–154 (2005).
15. C Noakes, C Beggs, P Sleigh, K Kerr, Modelling the transmission of airborne infections in
enclosed spaces. Epidemiol. & Infect. 134, 1082–1091 (2006).
16. NI Stilianakis, Y Drossinos, Dynamics of infectious disease transmission by inhalable respiratory droplets. J. Royal Soc. Interface 7, 1355–1366 (2010).
17. G Buonanno, L Stabile, L Morawska, Estimation of airborne viral emission: quanta emission
rate of SARS-CoV-2 for infection risk assessment. Environ. Int. 141, 105794 (2020).
18. G Buonanno, L Morawska, L Stabile, Quantitative assessment of the risk of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Environ. Int. 145, 106112 (2020).
19. L Setti, et al., Airborne transmission route of COVID-19: Why 2 meters/6 feet of interpersonal distance could not be enough. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Heal. 17, 1–6 (2020).
20. L Bourouiba, E Dehandschoewercker, JWM Bush, Violent expiratory events: on coughing
and sneezing. J. Fluid Mech. 745, 537–563 (2014).
21. RS Papineni, FS Rosenthal, The size distribution of droplets in the exhaled breath of healthy
human subjects. J Aerosol Med. 10, 105–116 (1997).
22. R Zhang, Y Li, AL Zhang, Y Wang, MJ Molina, Identifying airborne transmission as the
dominant route for the spread of COVID-19. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 117, 14857–14863 (2020).
23. S Asadi, N Bouvier, AS Wexler, WD Ristenpart, The coronavirus pandemic and aerosols:
Does COVID-19 transmit via expiratory particles? Aerosol Sci. Technol. 54, 635–638 (2020).
24. SL Miller, et al., Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 by inhalation of respiratory aerosol in the
Skagit Valley Chorale superspreading event. Indoor Air, in press (2020).
25. LF Moriarty, Public health responses to COVID-19 outbreaks on cruise ships worldwide,
February–March 2020. MMWR. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69 (2020).
26. L Hamner, High SARS-CoV-2 attack rate following exposure at a choir practice, Skagit
County, Washington, March 2020. MMWR. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69 (2020).
27. Y Shen, et al., Community outbreak investigation of SARS-CoV-2 transmission among bus
riders in eastern China. JAMA Intern. Medicine (2020).
28. H Nishiura, et al., Closed environments facilitate secondary transmission of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19). medRxiv (2020).
29. SE Hwang, JH Chang, O Bumjo, J Heo, Possible aerosol transmission of COVID-19 associated with an outbreak in an apartment in Seoul, South Korea. Int. J. Infect. Dis. (2020).
30. JL Santarpia, et al., The infectious nature of patient-generated SARS-CoV-2 aerosol.
medRxiv (2020).
31. H Qian, et al., Indoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Indoor Air in press (2020).
32. ROJH Stutt, R Retkute, M Bradley, CA Gilligan, J Colvin, A modelling framework to assess
the likely effectiveness of facemasks in combination with lock-down in managing the COVID19 pandemic. Proc. R. Soc. A. 476, 20200376 (2020).
33. JB Grotberg, Respiratory fluid mechanics. Phys. Fluids 23, 021301 (2011).
34. D Johnson, L Morawska, The mechanism of breath aerosol formation. J. Aerosol Medicine
Pulm. Drug Deliv. 22, 229–237 (2009).
35. G Johnson, et al., Modality of human expired aerosol size distributions. J. Aerosol Sci. 42,
839–851 (2011).
36. M Abkarian, H Stone, Stretching and break-up of saliva filaments during speech: A route for
pathogen aerosolization and its potential mitigation. Phys. Rev. Fluids 5, 102301 (2020).
37. S Asadi, et al., Aerosol emission and superemission during human speech increase with
voice loudness. Sci. Reports 9, 1–10 (2019).
38. S Asadi, et al., Effect of voicing and articulation manner on aerosol particle emission during
human speech. PloS one 15, e0227699 (2020).
39. BE Scharfman, AH Techet, JWM Bush, L Bourouiba, Visualization of sneeze ejecta: steps
of fluid fragmentation leading to respiratory droplets. Exp. Fluids 57, 24 (2016).
40. J Gralton, E Tovey, ML McLaws, WD Rawlinson, The role of particle size in aerosolised
pathogen transmission: A review. J. Infect. 62, 1–13 (2011).
41. W Chen, N Zhang, J Wei, HL Yen, Y Li, Short-range airborne route dominates exposure of
respiratory infection during close contact. Build. Environ., 106859 (2020).
42. M Abkarian, S Mendez, N Xue, F Yang, HA Stone, Speech can produce jet-like transport
relevant to asymptomatic spreading of virus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 117, 25237 (2020).
43. WF Wells, Airborne Contagion and Air Hygiene: An Ecological Study of Droplet Infections.
(Harvard University Press), (1955).
44. EC Riley, G Murphy, RL Riley, Airborne spread of measles in a suburban elementary school.

11

Am. J. Epidemiol. 107, 421–432 (1978).
45. CM Liao, CF Chang, HM Liang, A probabilistic transmission dynamic model to assess indoor
airborne infection risks. Risk Analysis 25, 1097–1107 (2005).
46. S Rudnick, D Milton, Risk of indoor airborne infection transmission estimated from carbon
dioxide concentration. Indoor air 13, 237–245 (2003).
47. S Zhu, et al., Ventilation and laboratory confirmed acute respiratory infection (ari) rates in
college residence halls in College Park, Maryland. Environ. Int. 137, 105537 (2020).
48. ME Davis, RJ Davis, Fundamentals of Chemical Reaction Engineering. (Courier Corporation), (2012).
49. WM Deen, Analysis of Transport Phenomena. (Oxford University Press), second edition
edition, (2011).
50. J Corner, E Pendlebury, The coagulation and deposition of a stirred aerosol. Proc. Phys.
Soc. Sect. B 64, 645 (1951).
51. AC Lai, WW Nazaroff, Modeling indoor particle deposition from turbulent flow onto smooth
surfaces. J. aerosol science 31, 463–476 (2000).
52. KC Cheng, et al., Modeling exposure close to air pollution sources in naturally ventilated
residences: Association of turbulent diffusion coefficient with air change rate. Environ. Sci.
& Technol. 45, 4016–4022 (2011).
53. D Martin, R Nokes, Crystal settling in a vigorously converting magma chamber. Nature 332,
534–536 (1988).
54. J Hou, et al., Air change rates in urban Chinese bedrooms. Indoor air 29, 828–839 (2019).
55. WF Wells, , et al., On air-borne infection. study ii. droplets and droplet nuclei. Am. J. Hyg.
20, 611–18 (1934).
56. X Xie, Y Li, A Chwang, P Ho, W Seto, How far droplets can move in indoor environments–
revisiting the wells evaporation–falling curve. Indoor air 17, 211–225 (2007).
57. RR Netz, Mechanisms of airborne infection via evaporating and sedimenting droplets produced by speaking. The J. Phys. Chem. B 124, 7093–7101 (2020).
58. JV Fahy, BF Dickey, Airway mucus function and dysfunction. New Engl. J. Medicine 363,
2233–2247 (2010).
59. DK Milton, MP Fabian, BJ Cowling, ML Grantham, JJ McDevitt, Influenza virus aerosols
in human exhaled breath: particle size, culturability, and effect of surgical masks. PLoS
Pathog. 9, e1003205 (2013).
60. R Woelfel, et al., Clinical presentation and virological assessment of hospitalized cases of
coronavirus disease 2019 in a travel-associated transmission cluster. medRxiv (2020).
61. LC Marr, JW Tang, J Van Mullekom, SS Lakdawala, Mechanistic insights into the effect of
humidity on airborne influenza virus survival, transmission and incidence. J. Royal Soc.
Interface 16, 20180298 (2019).
62. G Harper, Airborne micro-organisms: survival tests with four viruses. Epidemiol. & Infect.
59, 479–486 (1961).
63. W Yang, LC Marr, Dynamics of airborne influenza a viruses indoors and dependence on
humidity. PLOS ONE 6, 1–10 (2011).
64. K Lin, LC Marr, Humidity-dependent decay of viruses, but not bacteria, in aerosols and
droplets follows disinfection kinetics. Environ. Sci. & Technol. 54, 1024–1032 (2019).
65. AC Fears, et al., Comparative dynamic aerosol efficiencies of three emergent coronaviruses
and the unusual persistence of SARS-CoV-2 in aerosol suspensions. medRxiv (2020).
66. N Van Doremalen, et al., Aerosol and surface stability of SARS-CoV-2 as compared with
SARS-CoV-1. New Engl. J. Medicine 382, 1564–1567 (2020).
67. OV Pyankov, SA Bodnev, OG Pyankova, IE Agranovski, Survival of aerosolized coronavirus
in the ambient air. J. Aerosol Sci. 115, 158–163 (2018).
68. FJ García de Abajo, et al., Back to normal: An old physics route to reduce SARS-CoV-2
transmission in indoor spaces. ACS Nano 14, 7704–7713 (2020).
69. A Schwartz, et al., Decontamination and reuse of N95 respirators with hydrogen peroxide
vapor to address worldwide personal protective equipment shortages during the SARS-CoV2 (COVID-19) pandemic. Appl. Biosaf. 25, 67–70 (2020).
70. ES Mousavi, KJG Pollitt, J Sherman, RA Martinello, Performance analysis of portable hepa
filters and temporary plastic anterooms on the spread of surrogate coronavirus. Build. Environ., 107186 (2020).
71. B Blocken, et al., Can indoor sports centers be allowed to re-open during the COVID-19
pandemic based on a certificate of equivalence? Build. Environ. 180, 107022 (2020).
72. CC Chen, K Willeke, Aerosol penetration through surgical masks. Am. journal infection
control 20, 177–184 (1992).
73. T Oberg, LM Brosseau, Surgical mask filter and fit performance. Am. journal infection control
36, 276–282 (2008).
74. A Konda, et al., Response to letters to the editor on aerosol filtration efficiency of common
fabrics used in respiratory cloth masks: Revised and expanded results. ACS Nano 14,
10764–10770 (2020).
75. Y Li, et al., Transmission of communicable respiratory infections and facemasks. J. multidisciplinary healthcare 1, 17 (2008).
76. S Asadi, et al., Efficacy of masks and face coverings in controlling outward aerosol particle
emission from expiratory activities. Sci. reports 10, 1–13 (2020).
77. J Pan, C Harb, W Leng, LC Marr, Inward and outward effectiveness of cloth masks, a
surgical mask, and a face shield. medRxiv (2020).
78. L Nicolaou, T Zaki, Characterization of aerosol Stokes number in 90¶ bends and idealized
extrathoracic airways. J. Aerosol Sci. 102, 105–127 (2016).
79. P van den Driessche, Reproduction numbers of infectious disease models. Infect. Dis.
Model. 2, 288–303 (2017).
80. Y Liu, AA Gayle, A Wilder-Smith, J Rocklöv, The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher
compared to SARS coronavirus. J. Travel. Medicine 27, 1–4 (2020).
81. L Ferretti, et al., Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science 368 (2020).
82. Y Li, R Zhang, J Zhao, MJ Molina, Understanding transmission and intervention for the
COVID-19 pandemic in the united states. Sci. The Total. Environ., 141560 (2020).
83. NG Davies, et al., Estimated transmissibility and severity of novel SARS-CoV-2 variant of
concern 202012/01 in england. medRxiv (2020).

12

84. E Volz, et al., Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 lineage B.1.1.7 in England: Insights from linking
epidemiological and genetic data. medRxiv (2021).
85. S Richardson, et al., Presenting characteristics, comorbidities, and outcomes among 5700
patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the New York City area. JAMA 323, 2052–2059
(2020).
86. N Davies, P Klepac, Y Liu, , et al., Age-dependent effects in the transmission and control of
COVID-19 epidemics. Nat. Medicine 898 (2020).
87. S Garg, Hospitalization rates and characteristics of patients hospitalized with laboratoryconfirmed coronavirus disease 2019: COVID-NET, 14 States, March 1–30, 2020. MMWR.
Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 69 (2020).
88. Y Zhu, et al., A meta-analysis on the role of children in SARS-CoV-2 in household transmission clusters. Clin. Infect. Dis. (2020).
89. APS Munro, SN Faust, Children are not COVID-19 super spreaders: time to go back to
school. Arch. Dis. Child. 105, 618–619 (2020).
90. M Riediker, L Morawska, Low exhaled breath droplet formation may explain why children
are poor SARS-CoV-2 transmitters. Aerosol Air Qual. Res. 20, 1513–1515 (2020).
91. R Wölfel, et al., Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature
581, 465–469 (2020).
92. Y Pan, D Zhang, P Yang, LL Poon, Q Wang, Viral load of SARS-CoV-2 in clinical samples.
The Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 411–412 (2020).
93. T Watanabe, TA Bartrand, MH Weir, T Omura, CN Haas, Development of a dose-response
model for SARS coronavirus. Risk Analysis 30, 1129–1138 (2010).
94. KKW To, et al., Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and
serum antibody responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: an observational cohort study.
The Lancet Infect. Dis. 20, 565–574 (2020).
95. E Villermaux, Fragmentation versus cohesion. J. Fluid Mech. 898, P1 (2020).
96. L Zheng, J Xu, F Wu, W Xu, Z Long, Influences of ventilation modes on the coughing droplet
dispersion process in a cruise cabin. Chin. J. Ship Res. 11 (2016).
97. S Zheng, et al., Viral load dynamics and disease severity in patients infected with SARSCoV-2 in Zhejiang province, China, January-March 2020: retrospective cohort study. Br.
Med. J. 369 (2020).
98. W Song, M Ashmore, A Terry, The influence of passenger activities on exposure to particles
inside buses. Atmospheric Environ. 43, 6271–6278 (2009).
99. O Miron, KH Yu, R Wilf-Miron, I Kohane, N Davidovitch, COVID-19 infections following physical school reopening. Arch. Dis. Child. in press (2020).
100. J Zhang, et al., Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak
in china. Science 368, 1481–1486 (2020).
101. K Khan, MZ Bazant, JWM Bush, COVID-19 indoor safety guideline.
Online app,
https://indoor-covid-safety.herokuapp.com (2020).
102. S Olsen, HL Chang, , et al., Transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome on
aircraft. New Engl. J. Medicine 349, 2146–2422 (2003).
103. KS Kwon, et al., Evidence of long-distance droplet transmission of SARS-CoV-2 by direct
air flow in a restaurant in Korea. J. Korean Med. Sci. 35 (2020).
104. F Ciriello, GR Hunt, Analytical solutions and virtual origin corrections for forced, pure and
lazy turbulent plumes based on a universal entrainment function. J. Fluid Mech. 893, A12
(2020).
105. F Yang, AA Pahlavan, S Mendez, M Abkarian, HA Stone, Towards improved social distancing guidelines: Space and time dependence of virus transmission from speech-driven
aerosol transport between two individuals. Phys. Rev. Fluids 5, 122501(R) (2020).
106. RK Bhagat, MD Wykes, SB Dalziel, P Linden, Effects of ventilation on the indoor spread of
COVID-19. J. Fluid Mech. 903 (2020).

Bazant and Bush

