medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of
modelling studies
Hannah Christensen1*, Katy Turner2*, Adam Trickey1, Ross D. Booton2, Gibran Hemani, Emily
Nixon3, Caroline Relton1, Leon Danon4,5, Matthew Hickman1, Ellen Brooks-Pollock2. Part of
the University of Bristol UNCOVER group.
*Joint first authors
1
Bristol Medical School: Population Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2BN, United Kingdom
and NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Behavioural Science and Evaluation at University of Bristol
2
Bristol Veterinary School, University of Bristol, Bristol, BS40 5DU, United Kingdom and NIHR Health
Protection Research Unit in Behavioural Science and Evaluation at University of Bristol
3
School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol Life Sciences Building, 24 Tyndall Avenue,
Bristol, BS8 1TQ.
4
Computer Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QF.
5
Alan Turing Institute, British Library, 96 Euston Road, London NW1 2DB.
Correspondence to: Hannah Christensen PhD. Bristol Medical School: Population Health Sciences, University
of Bristol, Bristol, BS8 2BN, United Kingdom and NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in Behavioural
Science and Evaluation at University of Bristol Hannah.christensen@bristol.ac.uk

Abstract
Managing COVID-19 within a university setting presents unique challenges. At the start of term,
students arrive from geographically diverse locations and potentially have higher numbers of social
contacts than the general population, particularly if living in university halls of residence
accommodation. Mathematical models are useful tools for understanding the potential spread of
infection and are being actively used to inform policy about the management of COVID-19. Our aim
was to provide a rapid review and appraisal of the literature on mathematical models investigating
COVID-19 infection in a university setting. We searched PubMed, Web of Science, bioRxiv/
medRxiv and sought expert input via social media to identify relevant papers. BioRxiv/ medRxiv and
PubMed/Web of Science searches took place on 3 and 6 July 2020, respectively. Papers were
restricted to English language. Screening of peer-reviewed and pre-print papers and contact with
experts yielded five relevant papers – all of which were pre-prints. All models suggest a significant
potential for transmission of COVID-19 in universities. Testing of symptomatic persons and
screening of the university community regardless of symptoms, combined with isolation of infected
individuals and effective contact tracing were critical for infection control in the absence of other
mitigation interventions. When other mitigation interventions were considered (such as moving
teaching online, social/physical distancing, and the use of face coverings) the additional value of
screening for infection control was limited. Multiple interventions will be needed to control infection
spread within the university setting and the interaction with the wider community is an important
consideration. Isolation of identified cases and quarantine of contacts is likely to lead to large
numbers of students requiring educational, psychological and behavioural support and will likely have
a large impact on the attendance of students (and staff), necessitating online options for teaching, even
where in-person classes are taking place. Models were highly sensitive to assumptions in the
parameters, including the number and type of individuals’ contacts, number of contacts traced,
frequency of screening and delays in testing. Future models could aid policy decisions by considering
the incremental benefit of multiple interventions and using empirical data on mixing within the
university community and with the wider community where available. Universities will need to be
able to adapt quickly to the evolving situation locally to support the health and wellbeing of the
university and wider communities.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

Keywords: COVID-19, Pandemic, Mathematical Modelling, University, UNCOVER group
Page 1 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

Introduction
As COVID-19 continues to circulate in the population, universities are looking to decide how to keep
students, staff and the wider community safe, while providing a high-quality experience for students.
Educational settings are associated with a high number of social interactions and may be important
drivers of transmission for COVID-19. At the present time a low proportion of the student population
are expected to have been infected with SARS-CoV-2, this fact along with the characteristics and
behaviours of student populations poses a real risk of rapidly increasing case numbers at the start of
the academic term. This in turn presents challenges in preparation for, and ongoing management of,
COVID-19 within a university setting. Students travel from all over the UK and abroad to attend
university. Most are between 18-24 years of age and many live in large shared multi-occupancy
households or university halls of residence (mainly in first year). Although this age group are at
relatively low risk severe complications and death from COVID-19, evidence from the Office for
National Statistics serosurvey1 shows that they have similar or higher levels of infection compared
with other age groups and could, therefore, pass on the infection to university staff and the wider
community who may be at higher risk of serious COVID-19 outcomes.
Mathematical models are currently being used to help understand the evolving COVID-19 pandemic
and to inform prevention and control strategies. In the absence of a vaccine, a number of other
mitigation interventions could be relevant in a university setting, including, but not limited to: face
coverings, social/ physical distancing, replacing large group teaching (i.e. in traditional lecture
theatres) with online learning, minimising contacts through “bubbles” for small group taught work or
in accommodation, reduction or elimination of field work, testing on arrival on campus, regular
individual or pooled testing, self-isolation (for those symptomatic, testing positive, or close contacts
of a case), education to recognise possible symptoms, handwashing/hand sanitiser, increased
ventilation, reduced occupancy of staff and students on campus, and increased cleaning. These
interventions could have a varying impact on COVID-19 cases and require different resources to
support them. Some UK universities are planning for students to return to campus in autumn 2020 in a
blended teaching model, for example with large lectures replaced with online teaching and small
group practicals delivered as physically distanced. Other UK universities are considering alternative
teaching models, including some planning fully online delivery for at least the first semester (October
2020 – January 2021).
Here we provide a rapid review of both the peer-reviewed and pre-print literature on mathematical
models of COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) infection in the university or college community. We consider
models describing infection spread in the absence of intervention and those comparing different
scenarios of control strategies; any intervention for COVID-19 control is considered. We provide a
summary of the methodological features and principal outcomes from the models, in terms of number
of cases and effectiveness of interventions in reducing spread of COVID-19 in this setting, and
recommendations on key interventions for COVID-19 control.

Methods
This paper was prepared in accordance with the PRISMA guidelines2. We searched PubMed, Web of
Science, bioRxiv, and medRxiv to identify papers, in English, reporting mathematical models of
coronavirus (COVID-19) in a university setting. PubMed and Web of Science searches took place on
6 July 2020; BioRxiv/medRxiv searches took place on 3 July 2020. The search criteria are presented
in Table 1. We also sought expert input to locate pre-prints and grey literature via social media
(twitter). The results of searches were screened for inclusion by HC and KT initially on the title and
abstract, then full text. Papers were included if they described a mathematical model of COVID-19
infection within a university or college setting, in any geographical location. An updated version of
one paper was obtained directly from the author3. Information was extracted from the included papers

Page 2 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

by several members of the team (HC, RDB, AT, EN, GH). This information (detailed in Table 2)
included the focus and principal finding of the paper, model type and structure, population modelled,
interventions considered, and selected COVID-19 infection related parameters. We did not seek to
formally assess risk of bias in the included studies; there is no validated risk of bias assessment for
modelling studies. Results were summarised through a descriptive synthesis of each study using text
and tables.

Table 1. Search terms for the rapid review

Database
PubMed*

Web of Science

bioRxiv and medRxiv

Search
All fields
Search: “student AND university AND infectious disease AND
mathematical model”
Date range: unrestricted
All fields
Search: “Mathematical model AND COVID AND University”
Date range: unrestricted
Full text or abstract or title (match whole all)
Search: "model* and (university or universities or campus) and
(coronavirus or COVID* or sars*)"
Date range: posted between "01 Dec, 2019 and 03 Jul, 2020"

*An initial search of PubMed including (COVID or coronavirus or SARS) did not return any hits, so a wider
search was included to identify potentially relevant papers considering other infectious disease models of
campus transmission.

Page 3 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies
Table 2. Summary of reviewed papers included in the review
Paper#
Focus

Cashore et al. 20204
Assess the impact of opening Cornell's Ithaca campus and implementing
asymptomatic testing (screening), contact tracing, and quarantine measures,
compared to having full online/ virtual teaching to control COVID-19.
Combinations of contact tracing, testing and low initial prevalence
(supported by testing) can achieve meaningful control over outbreaks on
Cornell's Ithaca campus if screening is frequent enough (5 days) and if
quarantine capacity exceeds the peak requirement of 700 predicted by the
model. In this model a scenario of full online/ virtual teaching resulted in
more infections in the university community, due to a lack of screening. The
model is sensitive to several parameters and modest changes can result in
extremely high numbers of infections and hospitalisations.

Gressman and Peck 20205
Assess the impact of multiple interventions including testing, quarantining,
contact tracing, mask-wearing, and partial transition to online instruction on
COVID-19 in a university environment.
Campus outbreaks could be contained through a suite of interventions
including moving large classes online, mask wearing, large scale screening
(randomized testing), contact-tracing, and quarantining. If the size of the
quarantine population is to be kept manageable there must be high test
speciﬁcity. Moving the largest classes online is required to control the size
of outbreaks and the quarantine population. In this model (where typically
students have 1 residential contact) increased residential exposure impacts
the size of an outbreak considerable, however, controlling non-residential
social contacts may be more important. High quarantine rates even in
controlled outbreaks result in signiﬁcant absenteeism from teaching.

Initial prevalence - compartmental model; principal model - stochastic
transmission dynamic compartmental model

Full-scale stochastic agent-based model

Structure

Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered with additional stratification by
detectable and infectious individuals and symptomatic/asymptomatic states.

Mixing/ contact patterns

Random

Time horizon; time step
Population
Total population
Population type

112 day (16 weeks); daily

Susceptible-Infected-Recovered with additional states for infected persons
(including the incubation period, whether or not they are symptomatic, and
how many days their infection has progressed) and quarantine.
Academic contacts (five subcategories), broad social contacts and residential
contacts are based on individuals' common activities.
100 days; daily

Principal finding

Model set up
Model type

Interventions
Testing

Contact tracing

Quarantining/ isolation
Other non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs)
Summary of sensitivity analysis
considered

Infection related
Initial number infected
Importation of infection from
outside of University community
Latent period/ incubation period
Duration pre-symptomatic but
infectious
Total infectious period
Duration symptomatic until
present to health services
Proportion of symptomatic who
present to health services
Transmission rate
Test sensitivity/ specificity
Proportion/ number of tests
Proportion asymptomatic
Infectiousness of asymptomatic
vs symptomatic
Symptom severity
COVID-related mortality
Code available

#The

34310 (Cornell Ithaca campus, New York, US)
Faculty (1684); Academic professionals (1114); Staff (7485); Students
(24027). Further divided into age groups.

22500 (imaginary university)
20000 students, 2500 instructors

Testing on return to university: 1 test locally 5 days before students return
and 1 test (pooled testing) on arrival. Testing of asymptomatic individuals
every 5 days beginning just after move-in (which means 1/5 probability of
being tested on any day). Testing of symptomatic individuals.
Yes, positive tests result in contact tracing with an assumed 7 contacts
meeting criteria for quarantine, all of whom are quarantined or isolated.

Random daily testing (screening) of 100% of the university community
population per month (3% daily). Testing of those identified through contact
tracing on the previous day.

Yes, symptomatic persons and those testing positive are isolated and persons
contact traced are quarantined for 14 days.
Online teaching.
Sensitivity analysis plots for each parameter; daily likelihood of
symptomatic individual self-reporting; initial prevalence of infection;
probability of transmission; contacts per day; contact trace delay; contact
tracing isolation per individual; probability that infected person is
asymptomatic; % tested; false-negative rate; daily probability of infection
from outside interaction. Peak quarantine capacity needed in move-in
weekends under 3 scenarios (optimistic, nominal, pessimistic)

Yes, positive tests and symptomatic persons result in contact tracing of
contacts from last two days with an assumed average of 11 traceable (58%)
and 8 nontraceable contacts per person per day when all classes are meeting
physically and no social distancing is being exercised. These contacts are
quarantined immediately and flagged for testing the next day.
Yes; symptomatic persons and those testing positive are isolated for 14 days.
Transmission probabilities are reduced by 50% to account for a variety of
NPIs (e.g. mask wearing, online teaching).
Varying parameters: alternate choices of R0, values of false positive and false
negative rates, numbers of daily contacts. Interventions considered: standard
intervention consisted of quarantine and contact tracing, universal maskwearing, daily randomized testing of 3% of university community and
transitioning all classes with 30 or more students to online-only interaction,
other possible interventions were dividing large classes into many smaller
groups.

31
Yes, each member of Cornell has a probability of being infected by a nonCornell person, dependent upon the prevalence locally.
Latent period: 2 days
Incubation period: 5 days
3 days

0
Yes, equivalent to 25% chance daily that one non-quarantined susceptible
individual becomes infected due to a non-university contact.
Incubation period: 5.2 days

15 days
4.545 days

"Infectiousness serial interval" 5.8 days
0

100%

100%

R0=2.5
Sensitivity 90% (false negative rate 10.0%); specificity 99.9% (false positive
rate 0.1%)
Screening 100% of university community every 5 days; 1400 tests daily
47.8%, variable by age
Assumed equivalent

R0=3.8
Sensitivity 97% (false negative rate 3.0%); specificity 99.9% (false positive
rate 0.1%)
Screening 100% every month; 675 tests daily
75%
Asymptomatic assumed half as infectious as symptomatic

Varied by age
Not included
https://github.com/peter-i-frazier/group-testing
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1E4hoMIvmHcq819KeVOTf7PyAt8
26UbBG4G2dnLTv42w/editgid=142118512

Not included
Not included
https://www.github.com/gressman/covid_university

mean or principal value used in the model is provided, many papers vary some of these in sensitivity analyses

Page 4 of 15

Not specified

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies
Table 2. Summary of reviewed papers included in the review continued
Paper
Focus

Principal finding

Model set up
Model type
Structure
Mixing/ contact patterns
Time horizon; time step
Population
Total population
Population type
Interventions
Testing

Contact tracing

Quarantining/ isolation
Other non-pharmaceutical
interventions
Summary of sensitivity analysis
considered

Infection related
Initial number infected
Importation of infection from
outside of University community
Latent period/ incubation period
Duration pre-symptomatic but
infectious
Total Infectious period

Duration symptomatic until
present to health services
Proportion of symptomatic who
present to health services
Transmission rate
Test sensitivity/ specificity
Proportion/ number of tests

Lopman et al. 20203
Assess the impact of testing, screening and isolation/quarantine on the
number of cases of COVID-19 in a university setting in the US (Emory
University, Atlanta, Georgia).
Without any intervention the model estimates that hundreds of infections,
many hospitalisations and some deaths would occur (the authors recommend
the results are not interpreted quantitatively). In a scenario of social
distancing and mask wearing, testing symptomatic persons with isolation of
test positive cases, and tracing and quarantining 75% of their contacts is
effective at controlling transmission, though cases, hospitalisations and
potentially deaths may still occur. Testing the population regardless of
symptoms (screening) on a regular basis needs to occur at least monthly in
order to have much impact.

Martin et al. 20206
Testing required to detect an outbreak at an early stage in a university
campus context in US.

Deterministic transmission dynamic compartmental model
Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Recovered with additional quarantine and
isolation compartments.
Mixing is homogenous within each of the three population types, but varies
between the groups.
116 days, daily

Deterministic transmission dynamic compartmental model
Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered with additional stratification by
detectable and infectious individuals.
Random

30,266 (Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, US)
Students living on campus (4500), students living off campus (10500) and
staff/faculty (15266)

65000 (UC San Diego)
Not further specified

Testing of the population regardless of symptoms (screening) at a given
frequency, from weekly to once a term. Testing of symptomatic individuals
who present for clinical care; includes a background rate of influenza-like
symptoms (0.00333 per day) for which persons will test negative.
Yes, positive tests result in contact tracing, with an assumed 14 contacts
identified by public health authorities and 75% successfully traced and
quarantined.
Yes; those testing positive are isolated and persons contact traced are
quarantined for 14 days.
Mask wearing and social distancing (70% efficacy)

Testing of symptomatic individuals from the university community seeking
medical assistance with or without random daily testing (screening) of 25%,
50%, 75% or 100% of the university community population per month.

Probabilistic sensitivity analysis of parameters to investigate the importance
of specific parameters on model output and scenario analysis of varying: the
testing interval (the time between symptom onset and quarantine), screening
intervals, from weekly to once a semester, R0.

Proportion of students who are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms that do
not seek medical assistance, transmission rate (R), and pre-existing
immunity.

0
Yes, daily rate of introduction of virus onto campus from the community
(0.00005) based on local incidence of confirmed COVID-19 cases and
assuming the actual incidence is ten-times greater than this.
Latent period: 3 days
1 day

1
None

7 days

2 days from onset of infectiousness to testing

14 days (for those who become symptomatic this includes 2 days presymptomatic, 2 days before presenting to health services and 10 days in
isolation)
2 days

100%

1% to 60% considered

On campus student R0=3.5, off campus student R0=2.5, staff to staff or
student R0=of 0.5
Sensitivity varies by day of infectiousness: 75%, 80%, 75% for days 2, 4 and
7 of infectiousness respectively
Screening 100% with scenarios of weekly to once a semester.
For testing with 4-day delay to test n=14038 (46% of population)
Students 65%, staff and faculty 49%
Assumed equivalent

R0=2 to 3 considered

Proportion asymptomatic
Infectiousness of asymptomatic
vs symptomatic
Symptom severity
Staff have a higher risk of severe illness (0.055) than students (0.0224).
COVID-related mortality
Proportion fatal: students 0.0006, staff 0.0052
Code available
Shiny app available from https://epimodel.shinyapps.io/covid-university/
#The mean or principal value used in the model is provided, many papers vary some of these in sensitivity analyses

Page 5 of 15

When there are 9 or fewer detectable cases in the population monthly testing
of 100% of the campus community is required to detect an outbreak, unless
at least 30% of infected people develop symptoms that lead them to present
to a health service and be tested.

70 days; daily

None

Yes; symptomatic cases presenting to health services are diagnosed and
isolated.
None

Latent period: 3 days
2 days

Sensitivity 85%
Screening 100% every month
1% to 30% considered
Assumed equivalent
Not included
Not included
No

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies
Table 2. Summary of reviewed papers included in the review continued
Paper
Focus
Principal finding

Model set up
Model type
Structure

Mixing/ contact patterns
Time horizon; time step
Population
Total population
Population type
Interventions
Testing
Contact tracing
Quarantining/ isolation

Virtual Forum for Knowledge Exchange (V-KEMS)7
Impact of disease transmission amongst freshers on campus when there is a
social bubbling strategy enforced.$
The benefit of social bubbles diminish as the chance of individuals within a
bubble being infected (due to background infection rate) increases. Smaller
bubble sizes withstand higher rates of community infection. A further
(tentative) finding is that low-between bubble interaction or high rates of
testing are required to avoid large outbreaks.
Stochastic transmission dynamic compartmental model
Two models are presented with comparable parameters (1) SusceptibleInfected-Recovered model used to estimate social bubble sizes on size of
epidemics (2) timestep Susceptible-Exposed-Infected-Recovered to evaluate
the effect of testing
Random
50 days; daily
1536
Hypothetical on-campus freshers assorted into bubbles of size 12, 24 or 48
In the second model, testing is parameterised as rate of infection detection
per day
None
Immediate quarantine upon detection and isolation is for longer than a
'reasonable infectious period'
Social bubbling

Other non-pharmaceutical
interventions
Summary of sensitivity analysis
Simulations were repeated over different sets of parameters, varying the
considered
bubble sizes and the number of outside-bubble contacts
Infection related
Initial number infected
Not stated
Importation of infection from
None
outside of University community
Latent period/ incubation period
Not stated
Duration pre-symptomatic but
Not stated
infectious
Infectious period
Not stated
Duration symptomatic until
Not stated
present to health services
Proportion of symptomatic who
Not included
present to health services
Transmission rate
Not stated
Test sensitivity
Specificity 100%
Proportion/ number of tests
Variable
Proportion asymptomatic
Not stated
Infectiousness of asymptomatic
Assumed equivalent
vs symptomatic
Symptom severity
Not included
COVID-related mortality
Not included
Code available
No
#The mean or principal value used in the model is provided, many papers vary some of these in sensitivity analyses
$ The paper contains many models that evaluate different questions and at different scales. In this summary we will
focus on two models in particular, which are comparable to the others in the table.

Page 6 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

Results
Summary of study selection
An initial search of PubMed including (COVID or coronavirus or SARS) did not return any hits, so a
wider search was included to identify potentially relevant peer-reviewed papers considering other
infectious disease models of campus transmission. The search of PubMed yielded 127 hits of which
20 were shortlisted for full text screening and 0 were included in the review. The Web of Science
search yielded 7 hits, of which 2 were shortlisted for full text screening and 0 included in the review.
The search of bioRxiv and medRxiv returned 205 records; after screening of titles 22 were selected
for full text assessment and 3 papers were included in the review. Excluded papers did not report
COVID-19 transmission in a university setting. Request to experts (via social media) resulted in 6
papers of which 4 were included in the review. In total, after removing duplicates, we identified 5
papers describing mathematical models in a university context, 4 with a US focus and 1 from UK. A
summary of the papers included in the review is presented in Table 2.

How SARS-CoV-2 infection is modelled in a university setting
All of the models included in the review are transmission dynamic, that is, the amount of SARS-CoV2 transmission is related to the number of infected people over time and responds to changes in
infection risk as a result of interventions – this is critical to assess the direct and indirect impact of
potential control strategies. Most were compartmental models, which divides up the population into
distinct groups; only one5 was agent-based which models individuals within a population. All models
used a Susceptible-Exposed (latent)-Infectious-Recovered structure to capture the progression of
infection in the population though the time period. Two models allowed for some individuals to be
immune to COVID-19 at the start of the academic term5 6, though only Gressman and Peck5 included
this in their base case model. The length of time for each infection state (for example, how long
people were infectious for) and the assumptions about the transmissibility of the infection varied
between models; only two models explicitly included pre-symptomatic transmission. Fundamentally,
infection is spread between people through ‘effective’ contacts, so how people come into contact with
each other is important. The way this is done across the five included papers is quite different,
ranging from random mixing, to random mixing within a small number of different groups, to highly
specified mixing patterns in the agent based model based on individuals’ shared activities. Altering
the assumptions about these parameters makes a considerable difference to the estimated potential
outbreak in a university setting and the impact of any control measures. All the models assume that
once infected persons have recovered, they are immune to re-infection. Only three models consider
importation of infection from the wider community into the university population; none of the models
included in the review considered the exporting of infection from the university community into the
wider population. Most models start with very few initial cases, in some instances zero cases with the
university epidemic starting due to importation from the local community. For one paper the low
starting number is due to testing of students prior to and on return to university, with isolation if
positive (see below)4. Two papers present predictions for SARS-CoV-2 infections in the autumn term
without any control measures3 5; one estimates 89.4% of the campus population would be infected by
the end of the semester5 and the other predicted 19.5% of the university community would be
symptomatic (many more would be infected and be asymptomatic). When explicitly considered some
of these infections result in fatalities. Infection numbers increased rapidly in the absence of
intervention6.

Interventions considered in models
Testing
Testing interventions included: testing students before they travelled to campus; testing students on
return to campus; testing symptomatic persons3; and testing asymptomatic individuals3 (here we refer
to this regular testing as screening when done on mass, others term this testing, screening, or
surveillance). Only one paper considered testing students before they travelled to campus and the
Page 7 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

same paper also considered testing individuals upon their return to the university setting (pooled
testing on arrival)4. Lopman et al. explicitly state they did not include return to campus testing
because they felt it would have limited effect given in their model the student prevalence is assumed
to be the same as the general population 3. Several papers3 4 6 7 include near-immediate testing of
symptomatic individuals; Gressman and Peck considered isolation but not testing of symptomatic
persons5. Several symptoms associated with COVID-19 are generic to other infections. Particularly
as we approach winter many persons may have what appear to be COVID-19 symptoms but not have
SARS-CoV-2 – this has implications for the number of tests that may be needed and
isolation/quarantine policies. Only one model included a background rate of influenza-like illness,
with persons subsequently testing negative for SARS-CoV-23. All papers considered screening with
the rate of testing asymptomatic persons per day varying between and within papers. Martin et al.
considered varying random daily screening rates so that 25%, 50%, 75%, or 100% of the university
community population would be screened per month. Cashore et al.4 investigated testing the entire
university community on average once every 5 days, Gressman and Peck 5 considered this every
month, whilst Lopman et al.3 also looked at varying these screening rates from weekly to once a term.
The V-KEMS paper looked at testing parameterised as a rate of infection detection per day (from 0 to
1)7. Gressman and Peck5 also included testing of those identified through contact tracing. The
sensitivity and specificity of tests is not 100%. This has implications for the number of true positive
cases not identified who can then go on to infect others and also how many individuals you may
needlessly isolate and quarantine, discussed further below. Test sensitivity varied across the models
from 75%3 to 97%5; only one paper considered variability in testing sensitivity over the course of an
infection3.
Contact tracing
Contact tracing was included in three of the models3-5 and the number of traceable contacts modelled
per case varied. Lopman et al. assumed that on average 14 contacts of individuals testing positive
would be identified by public health authorities and 75% (10.5) of these would be successfully traced
and quarantined. In the Gressman and Peck paper each individual testing positive or developing
symptoms had their contacts from the last two days traced on the next day with an assumed 19
contacts, of which 58% (11) would be traceable; this is the only model that includes testing for
quarantined persons. Cashore et al. included seven contacts meeting the criteria for quarantine for
each person testing positive, and investigated via sensitivity analyses the effect of different delay
periods for contact tracing and lengths of isolation periods for traced individuals.
Isolation and quarantining
All papers include isolation of symptomatic persons, though some include a delay between symptom
onset and testing with isolation only happening once the person has tested positive. All of the
reviewed papers except for that by Martin et al. included quarantining of traced contacts in their
models, with most using a 14 day quarantine period, whilst V-KEMS have quarantine operating for
‘longer than a reasonable infectious period’7. Where included, models assume quarantining reduces
contacts to zero, meaning quarantined persons cannot infect others, and if uninfected, are protected
from further exposure. The only paper to explicitly include false positives from testing (specificity) is
Gressman and Peck, which is important for considering how many people may be subject to
quarantine despite not being in contact with a positive case. None of the papers considered
quarantining of individuals traveling from high-risk COVID-19 areas as a stand-alone intervention.
Additional non-pharmaceutical interventions
All but one paper considered some form of other non-pharmaceutical intervention. These included
reducing contacts through moving face-to-face teaching online4 5, social distancing3, and reducing
contacts through the use of social bubbles7, or reducing transmission in face-to-face interactions by
wearing face coverings.3 5 In both Gressman and Peck and Lopman et al. these are modelled by having

Page 8 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

a term that generally reduces infection transmission by a specified amount, so could encompass a
variety of non-pharmaceutical interventions (for example, increased hand hygiene).

Synthesis of key model findings
In the absence of control interventions, all models suggest a significant potential for transmission of
COVID-19 in universities with rapid growth in case numbers shortly after the start of the academic
year once the students return to campus. Analysis of where in the country, and which countries,
students will be coming from may indicate how many infected persons a university might expect on
the first day of term. Most models considered only a very low number of infected students at the start
of term so infection spread could be quicker than presented in these papers, although this is highly
dependent upon the prevalence rates of the home locations of incoming students at the time of
departure. The assumptions about the rate of transmission in this context are critical for estimating
how large an outbreak any institution might experience and how effective any given control measure
may be. Most models considered US institutions of varying sizes, which may only be partially
relevant to institutions in other countries, and in most cases there were relatively simple assumptions
about how people mix with each other. Lopman et al. state that moving more students to off-campus
housing may make little difference to their conclusions because on-campus transmission is only
moderately higher than off-campus3. However, this may not be the case in all institutions and
modifying how students are placed in first year accommodation may have a large impact in some
university settings.
Early outbreak detection is critical to controlling the spread of infection. Given the high proportion of
asymptomatic cases likely to be observed in the student population, screening will probably be needed
to identify increasing case numbers before there is a very widespread problem. Martin et al. found
when there are nine or fewer detectable cases in the population, monthly testing of 100% of the
campus community is required to detect an outbreak, unless at least 30% of infected people develop
symptoms that lead them to present to a health service and be tested 6. Models suggest meaningful
control over outbreaks could be achieved through testing of symptomatic people and screening of the
asymptomatic university community along with isolation of those who are infected (regardless of
symptoms), contact tracing, and quarantining of those traced. However, strategies relying on this
approach alone need to be very aggressive, with high levels of ascertainment in both testing and
tracing to be effective. The assumed success rate of contact tracing in the models that considered this
(58%, 75% and 100%) was generally higher than currently being achieved with the track and trace
system in the UK (an average of 73% for the 3 weeks reported to 12 August8) and compliance with
quarantine was 100%, which may well be unrealistic.
Cashore et al. included testing of students before travel to university, testing on arrival and testing of
the university community every five days4. This would be logistically and financially challenging for
many institutions. Models indicate that testing for symptomatic persons needs to be timely (less than
a week between symptoms and positive test) and accompanied by effective isolation of the affected
individual and subsequent contact tracing and quarantining of contacts in order to be really effective;
much of the reduction in case numbers through more timely testing was due to the greater number of
contacts reached in these scenarios3. The number of students in isolation and quarantine at any one
time was considerable in some models, for example, Cashore et al. suggest planning for a peak
quarantine capacity in excess of 700 in a population of 343104 (cumulative estimates over the term
were not reported). We consider it quite likely that there will be more delays in the system than
modelled in many of the papers included in this review, that is, symptomatic people may not get
tested and isolate themselves immediately, and contact tracing with quarantine may not be as
successful, so control may be more challenging than presented without additional mitigation.
Combinations of interventions are likely to be required to effectively control infection5 and several
options are available (see appendix). When evaluated, the number of cases was sensitive to the
frequency of screening3 4 even with other mitigation measures in place; screening was required at least
Page 9 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

monthly for the whole university community to make a discernible impact. In models where other
non-pharmaceutical interventions were not considered, screening was essential for COVID-19 control
and findings were sensitive to the frequency of screening 4. Screening was relatively less important
when a package of interventions including partial online teaching to reduce contacts, use of facecoverings, and social/ physical distancing was used3 5. Gressman and Peck found moving classes with
30+ students online was a big driver in keeping infections low (moving the largest classes with 100+
students was particularly critical) and that face-masks were also moderately important (universal
mask-wearing was assumed to reduce transmission by 50%). However, this model assumed an
average of only one residential contact per student, and as residential and broad social contacts
(dining halls/ restaurants, social events etc) were increased, these became more important in driving
case numbers5. Limiting face-to-face contacts reduces infection spread. If students are placed into
bubbles where only a small number of individuals mix with each other, low levels of interaction
between bubbles are required to avoid large outbreaks and bubbles are of less benefit with increasing
chance of infection from the wider community 7 and may not be acceptable to students. Additionally,
Gressman and Peck conclude large classes need to be held online to reduce the risk of a significant
outbreak and it is not enough to break large face-to-face classes into smaller ones.5 Even small
numbers of contacts between students in large group settings (dining halls/parties) may be sufficient
to sustain an outbreak, even with other interventions in place5.

Discussion
All models suggest a significant potential for transmission of COVID-19 in universities. Early
identification of cases is critical to inform effective infection control. Smaller outbreaks are easier to
control, thus symptom monitoring and testing will be an important feature of outbreak control and
management. Seasonal effects may be important; SARS-CoV-2 may be more transmissible in winter
and an increase in background influenza-like illness may lead to increased testing and self-isolation,
increasing the burden on university support systems. Modelling findings suggest that regular testing
strategies (including testing asymptomatic individuals), isolation of infected individuals and contact
tracing, together with use of face coverings and social distancing measures to reduce class sizes and
face-to-face teaching could be effective in controlling transmission of COVID-19 in universities. One
study found moving teaching online and wearing masks5 was more important than screening
(monthly) to mitigate cases, however, the screening may be more valuable with higher frequencies of
testing. In models much of the importance of testing was due to the impact of effective contact
tracing and isolation/quarantining reducing onward transmission, but high numbers of contacts must
be reached to be effective. Specificity of testing is important because even a low false positive rate
could lead to a considerable number of uninfected students being quarantined5, especially when
contact tracing is taken into consideration. A policy of reconfirming positives could avoid
unnecessary quarantining, which could be important for managing the student population’s adherence
to any guidance. Most of the studies identified that even with strong control measures in place,
isolation of symptomatic cases and quarantine of contacts for 14 days may have a large impact on
attendance of students (and staff) requiring online options for quarantining students even where inperson classes are taking place. Multiple interventions are likely to be needed to control infection
spread within this setting and efforts to reduce transmission may be limited given the connectivity of
students, staff, and the wider community, the varying capacity of institutions to employ such
aggressive mitigation interventions, and likely varying compliance with any interventions imposed.
To our knowledge this is the first review of modelling studies considering COVID-19 infection in a
university setting. The results are timely given universities are currently making decisions about if
and how to re-open for the autumn term – there is no universal guidance for universities about how to
do this and indeed university responses may need to be tailored to the institution given the variations
in geography (campus or city based, in areas of high or low community infection) and student body.

Page 10 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

The general messages here about the importance of quarantining and the need for multiple
interventions for COVID-19 control in a university setting are consistent with work considering all
settings9. We only found pre-prints relevant for inclusion, thus the papers here have not been through
the critique of peer-review, which often results in authors being asked to provide additional
information required for accurate interpretation of results or to amend analysis approaches. This
presents a challenge for the review, however, bringing together the available evidence is critical now
to help understand how universities may be affected by COVID-19 when they re-open in the next few
months. We also only considered papers in English and from a select number of potential sources,
therefore it is possible we have missed some models that could be relevant. Most papers had a US
focus; the size and set-up of universities in other countries may be quite different to these institutions,
influencing contact patterns and thus the spread of infection so policy makers should be mindful that
mitigation strategies may perform differently in different settings. This rapid review has focused on
mathematical models of SARS-CoV-2 infection and disease in a university setting, however, we are
aware of other work that may be useful for informing policy decisions around how best to manage
COVID-19 in this sector. Research assessing real contact patterns between college students in
different countries has shown differences in the number and network of close proximity interactions,
and that this influenced the spread of influenza10, thus considering local contact patterns is important
for understanding potential risk and mitigation strategies. An increased risk of infectious diseases has
been observed with mass gatherings11 and epidemiological studies have shown the capacity for
infectious diseases to spread rapidly in a university context. For example, in a study of 2507 students
in their first year at University of Nottingham in 1997, carriage of meningococci (a bacterium
transmitted through droplets of respiratory and throat secretions from carriers) increased rapidly over
the first week of term from 6.9% on day 1 to 23.1% on day 412. For students living in catered halls
the average carriage rate increased from 13.9% during the first week of term in October, to 31.0% in
November and 34.2% in December12. Mathematical models for influenza have captured the spread of
this illness in students and outbreaks with high attack rates have been observed in universities 13.
Indeed ‘Freshers (freshman) flu’ – caused by a number of infections (not necessarily influenza) - is
well-known for causing illness amongst students during the first few weeks at university.
Students come to university from across the country and world – given the rapidly changing
epidemiological situation is it unclear how many infected students each institution may have at the
start of term. Individuals are at risk of contracting COVID-19 in the community, so even institutions
considering wholly online teaching will still need to consider how best to support students and staff
who may become unwell. There are also challenges when students return home, both within and at
the end of term, in terms of potentially spreading infection. International students are likely to face
particular challenges with uncertainties around travel and their ability to return home at the end of
term. Interventions to minimise contacts for a period at the start and end of term, including
quarantining all students, could be effective at avoiding outbreaks. While the university campus
environment can be controlled to some extent, the students live within a wider local community
accessing public transport, shops, bars, and restaurants, and many have part-time jobs, thus the
relationship between the university community and the general population is important for driving
infection. Universities are considering intervention measures that go beyond government advice to
augment national outbreak control systems to meet the particular challenges faced in this sector. All
universities should be working on strategies that reduce face-to-face interactions in the university
community and mitigate potential SARS-CoV-2 transmission where interactions must take place,
through use of physical distancing, hand sanitising and with use of face coverings. Structural changes
such as moving teaching online and influencing the dynamics of students mixing, particularly those
living in first year university accommodation, are difficult for people to avoid. Testing was found to
be important in some models to limit outbreaks, and multiple interventions, including regular
university population testing has been recommended by Independent SAGE 14. However, not all
universities have access to in-house testing and even where they do this may be logistically

Page 11 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

challenging and expensive if deployed widely and regularly. Any testing provision will require close
liaison with existing national systems (Local Authority and Public Health England). For those with
capacity, batch or pooled testing may facilitate testing, but this raises issues about the sensitivity and
specificity of such protocols. Individuals must also be willing to undergo testing – differential
compliance between groups of lower and higher risk for transmission could have important
implications for how effective testing may be6. Asymptomatic screening is assumed to happen at
regular intervals across term when included in the models4, however, testing frequency may need to
be adjusted in response to changing incidence/prevalence in order to be most effective in informing
control strategies4. The national contact tracing system has been criticised for not being adequate,
prompting some areas to set up their own15 - universities may need to consider whether additional
tracing support may be helpful for their context. Antibody responses may not be long lasting16 17
(although other elements of the immune system may be longer lasting, though this is unknown) – so
models assuming long term immunity may be over optimistic. Many potential interventions strategies
are being considered and even if theoretically effective for controlling COVID-19 may not be feasible
on the ground, thus clear information should be given to students, staff, and the wider community
about what is realistic and the implications of this. There may be important negative consequences of
some COVID-19 mitigation strategies in terms of the wellbeing of individuals
The situation with COVID-19 is rapidly evolving and there are a number of unanswered questions
around the epidemiology. The infectiousness of asymptomatic persons is critical; it is believed to be
lower than that of symptomatic individuals but largely unknown. This is particularly important in a
university setting where it is currently assumed the vast majority of students are likely to be
asymptomatic. Universities have a duty of care to students and to staff and the models identified in
this review primarily consider the typical student and staff population. We know individuals from
particular ethnic backgrounds and with underlying health conditions are at increased risk of poor
outcomes from COVID-19 and this should be considered in university planning. Modelling and
epidemiological evidence from the UK suggests that staff, such as catering and cleaning personnel,
may be at particular risk. Other groups such as library or student administrative staff also have high
rates of contact with students and may therefore be at elevated risk compared to other staff. The
models have considered accommodation and teaching facilities, but not specifically risks of
transmission in other settings such as public transport (including student buses), the use of other
facilities such as sports centres or canteens, or social settings such as clubs and societies.
Additionally, mathematical models could usefully focus on the incremental benefit of each additional
intervention, particularly screening, to aid decision making.
Most of the models have considered campus universities in the US. In the UK there may be additional
considerations. Differences for campus or city integrated universities in terms of mixing with general
population are important for importation of infection to the university community, but also spill over
of any university outbreaks into the community. However, limited work has been done in this area to
date. There is much uncertainty in the model parameters and the structure of the models, particularly
related to how people mix with each other. Student behaviour and mental health under quarantine is
important, particularly as many students have small living quarters. Quarantining for students new to
university may find isolation particularly lonely and significantly adversely affect mental health – if
parents choose to pick up their students for quarantining at home this may drive an increase in
community transmission leading to a worse outcome nationally. Additional risk to the broader
population is due to education and accommodation breaks during reading weeks, Christmas and
Easter holidays. Requiring students to remain at university during those times is unlikely, and should
a substantial number of cases be present in the student population, a large-scale return to home is
likely to disperse the infection across the country.
In summary, the modelling COVID-19 studies in a university setting that have been reported to date
point to the essential requirement for mitigation measures tailored to the student context. Enhanced
Page 12 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

testing, including rapid testing of symptomatic individuals as well as screening of asymptomatic
individuals should be given close consideration. Rapid contact tracing, effective student support for
adherence to isolation and quarantine alongside a suite of other established mitigation measures all
have a place in effective outbreak control. The situation is dynamic and although the large scale
migration of over 2 million students to arrive at or return to their university locations in the Autumn
is the immediate focus of attention, universities will need to closely monitor the developing situation
and be able to adapt and rapidly respond to the likely occurrence of future outbreaks.

Acknowledgements
HC, KT and EBP acknowledge support from the NIHR Health Protection Research Unit in
Behavioural Science and Evaluation at University of Bristol. The Health Protection Research Unit
(HPRU) in Behavioural Science and Evaluation at University of Bristol is part of the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) and a partnership between University of Bristol and Public
Health England (PHE), in collaboration with the MRC Biostatistics Unit at University of Cambridge
and University of the West of England. We are a multidisciplinary team undertaking applied research
on the development and evaluation of interventions to protect the public’s health. Our aim is to
support PHE in delivering its objectives and functions. Follow us on Twitter: @HPRU_BSE
RDB acknowledges support from the Elizabeth Blackwell Institute for Health Research, University of
Bristol.
LD is supported by Medical Research Council (MRC) (MC/PC/19067) The Alan Turing Institute
EPSRC EP/N510129/1.

Funding statement
There was no project specific funding for this work; the funders of the co-authors did not have a role
in the conception, design or writing of the manuscript.

Author contributions statement
EBP conceived the study, HC and KT designed and ran the searches, and reviewed the papers for
inclusion. HC, RDB, AT, EN, GH extracted the data from relevant papers. All authors wrote and
critically reviewed the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Page 13 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

Appendix
Table A1. Potential interventions - highlighted rows show interventions considered in some form in
mathematical models included in this review.
Intervention

Comments

Smaller class sizes for faceto-face teaching

Allow only small classes to meet in person

Virtual instruction for some
students/classes
Virtual instruction for all
students

This could include transitioning large classes to online only.

Face coverings/masks
Social distancing

Bubbles for courses or
accommodation

Cleaning of facilities
Hand washing and alcohol
gels
Communications

Testing prior to arrival to
university
Testing on arrival to
university
Testing if symptomatic

Testing of university
community without
symptoms (screening)
Regular pooled testing of
“bubbles”
Contact tracing
Short term request to
minimise contacts
Recognition of (mild)
symptoms, seeking testing
and self-isolation

Students and staff will still be at risk of infection from the community;
screening would only be possible for a reduced number of students and
faculty/staff.
Using masks has implications for teaching and learning - face shields for
lecturers could facilitate lip-reading/clarity.
This can include physical distancing and within University buildings
encourage 1-way flow and distancing. Lower building occupancy on-site
reduces pressure on shared facilities such as canteens/toilets etc.
Aim to minimise contact between groups of students. May increase
contact time for tutors if teaching smaller groups multiple times. Difficult
to enforce in accomodation. University accommodation is varied, even
within an institution and can includes halls arranged in flats, with shared
kitchen, but en-suite bathrooms to halls with larger corridors of rooms,
shared bathrooms and large dining halls.
Regular cleaning of facilities.
Encourage regular handwashing and provide alcohol gels
Information to students about symptoms (symptom survey), numbers of
cases in students, in wider community. Positive messaging about mask
use/ hand hygiene.
Reduces the number of infected persons travelling at the start of term if
combined with effective isolation policies.
Reduces the number infected at the start of term.
Clear advice and signposting – how to get a test, who to tell, what to do
(isolation/quarantine). Contact tracing (including bubbles) and other close
contacts. Needs to be rapid and linked with local public health.
Various strategies are possible considering the proportion and frequency of
testing and whether testing is random across the population or focused on
potentially high risk groups.
Bubbles based on course or accommodation would allow rapid
communication with the most likely close contacts.
Initiated when individual self-reports or is test positive, leading to
quarantine for contacts
Minimising or eliminating contacts until test results are back and/or
request to minimise contacts before returning to university and not
travelling when symptomatic.
Education and awareness materials about recognising COVID-19
symptoms and information on getting tested promptly can help with this;
completion of symptom surveys, links with Public Health England, NHS,
local authorities and university.

Page 14 of 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.07.20189688; this version posted September 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 transmission in a university setting: a rapid review of modelling studies

References
1. Office for National Statistics. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey: characteristics of people
testing positive for COVID-19 in England, August 2020. 2020. [updated 18 August 2020]. Available
from:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/a
rticles/coronaviruscovid19infectionsinthecommunityinengland/characteristicsofpeopletestingpositivef
orcovid19inenglandaugust2020#characteristics-of-individuals-testing-positive-for-covid-19antibodies [accessed 24 August 2020].
2. Liberati, A, Altman, DG, Tetzlaff, J, et al. The PRISMA statement for reporting systematic reviews
and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate healthcare interventions: explanation and elaboration. BMJ
2009;339:b2700. doi: 10.1136/bmj.b2700
3. Lopman, B, Liu, CY, Guillou, AL, et al. A model of COVID-19 transmission and control on
university campuses. medRxiv preprint 2020 doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.23.20138677
4. J Massey Cashore, Ning Duan, Alyf Janmohamed, et al. COVID-19 Mathematical Modeling for
Cornell's Fall Semester. 2020 Available from:
https://people.orie.cornell.edu/pfrazier/COVID_19_Modeling_Jun15.pdf
5. Gressman, PT, Peck, JR. Simulating COVID-19 in a University Environment. arXiv preprint 2020
doi: Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.03175
6. Martin, NK, Schooley, RT, Gruttola, VD. Modelling testing frequencies required for early
detection of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak on a university campus. medRxiv preprint 2020 doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.01.20118885
7. Virtual Forum for Knowledge Exchange in the Mathematical Sciences (V-Kems). Unlocking
Higher Education Spaces - What Might Mathematics Tell Us? Working Paper. Available from:
https://gateway.newton.ac.uk/sites/default/files/asset/doc/2007/Unlocking%20HE%20Spaces%20July
%202020_small_0.pdf
8. Department of Health and Social Care. NHS Test and Trace statistics 28 May to 12 August 2020:
data tables. [updated 20 August 2020]. Available from:
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/910
741/NHS_T_T_Statistics_28May_12Aug_DataTables.ods [accessed 24 August 2020].
9. Nussbaumer-Streit, B, Mayr, V, Dobrescu, A, et al. Quarantine alone or in combination with other
public health measures to control COVID‐19: a rapid review. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2020(4) doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD013574
10. Huang, C, Liu, X, Sun, S, et al. Insights into the transmission of respiratory infectious diseases
through empirical human contact networks. Sci Rep 2016;6:31484. doi: 10.1038/srep31484
11. Karami, M, Doosti-Irani, A, Ardalan, A, et al. Public Health Threats in Mass Gatherings: A
Systematic Review. Disaster Med Public Health Prep 2019;13(5-6):1035-46. doi:
10.1017/dmp.2018.161
12. Neal, KR, Nguyen-Van-Tam, JS, Jeffrey, N, et al. Changing carriage rate of Neisseria
meningitidis among university students during the first week of term: cross sectional study. BMJ
2000;320(7238):846-9. doi: 10.1136/bmj.320.7238.846
13. Nichol, KL, Tummers, K, Hoyer-Leitzel, A, et al. Modeling seasonal influenza outbreak in a
closed college campus: impact of pre-season vaccination, in-season vaccination and holidays/breaks.
PLoS One 2010;5(3):e9548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009548
14. The Independent Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage). Independent SAGEBehaviour Group Consultation Statement on Universities in the context of SARS-CoV-2. Available
from: https://documentcloud.adobe.com/link/review?uri=urn:aaid:scds:US:8606a4a2-9237-4f70-8e8e8a5384a8db39 [accessed 25 August 2020].
15. Limb, M. Covid-19: Sandwell Council in West Midlands sets up contact tracing, citing failures of
national scheme. BMJ;370:m3065 doi: https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m3065
16. Wang, X, Guo, X, Xin, Q, et al. Neutralizing Antibodies Responses to SARS-CoV-2 in COVID19 Inpatients and Convalescent Patients. Clin Infect Dis 2020 doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa721
17. Jeffrey Seow, Carl Graham, Blair Merrick, et al. Longitudinal evaluation and decline of antibody
responses in SARS-CoV-2 infection. medRxiv preprint 2020 doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.09.20148429

Page 15 of 15

