medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sensing of COVID-19 Antibodies in Seconds via Aerosol Jet Printed Three
Dimensional Electrodes
Md. Azahar Ali1, Chunshan Hu1, Sanjida Jahan1, Bin Yuan1, Mohammad Sadeq Saleh1,
Enguo Ju2, Shou-Jiang Gao2, and Rahul Panat1,*
1

Department of Mechanical Engineering and Department of Biomedical Engineering,
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
2

Cancer Virology Program, UPMC Hillman Cancer Center and Department of

Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
PA 15213 USA

Keywords: COVID-19; Pandemics; Antibody Tests; 3D Sensor; 3D Printing; Micropillar; Gold
Nanoparticles; Reduced Graphene Oxide
*

Corresponding Author: Prof. Rahul Panat; E-mail: rpanat@andrew.cmu.edu
1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Rapid diagnosis is critical for the treatment and prevention of diseases. In this research, we
report sensing of antibodies specific to SARS-CoV-2 virus in seconds via an electrochemical
platform consisting of gold micropillar array electrodes decorated with reduced graphene oxide
and functionalized with recombinant viral antigens. The array electrodes are fabricated by
Aerosol Jet (AJ) nanoparticle 3D printing, where gold nanoparticles (3-5nm) are assembled in 3D
space, sintered, and integrated with a microfluidic device. The device is shown to detect antibodies
to SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 protein and its receptor-binding-domain (RBD) at concentrations down
to 1pM via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and read by a smartphone-based user
interface. In addition, the sensor can be regenerated within a minute by introducing a low-pH
chemistry that elutes the antibodies from the antigens, allowing successive testing of multiple
antibody samples using the same sensor. The detection time for the two antibodies tested in this
work is 11.5 seconds. S1 protein sensing of its antibodies is specific, which cross-reacts neither
with other antibodies nor with proteins such as Nucleocapsid antibody and Interleukin-6 protein.
The proposed sensing platform is generic and can also be used for the rapid detection of
biomarkers for other infectious agents such as Ebola, HIV, and Zika, which will benefit the public
health.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Main
Pandemics and epidemics caused by emerging infectious agents such as SARS-CoV, SARSCoV-2, influenza viruses, ZIKA virus, and Ebola virus have seriously affected human health, and
led to lost economic activity and challenged health-care systems.1-3 Early detection of the infection
allows isolation of the patients and contact tracing that leads to saving of lives and resuming of
economic activity. Even after opening of the economy, secondary spikes are likely to occur,
requiring low-cost, rapid methods for early detection of the infection. Recently, the SARS-CoV-2
virus has caused the COVID-19 pandemic with a significant global impact.4-6 A testing platform
that can detect the infection of this virus within seconds can be of significant help in saving lives.
This is especially true since a significant proportion of the patients transmitting the disease are
asymptomatic.7 In addition, such a device will open up sectors of the economy such as educational
institutions, theme parks, airlines, and cruise ships where large gatherings of people are inevitable.
Two primary approaches have been used to detect the COVID-19 infection. The first approach
utilizes the genetic sequence of the virus and includes genomic sequencing, CRISPR-based test8,
and reverse transcription real time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR).8-10 These methods are relatively
accurate but are generally slow because of multiple sample processing steps and the need to ship
the sample to a testing laboratory. The accuracy of these methods is also dependent upon the
protocol of sampling, preservation, transportation, and processing of the samples.11 Since the viral
RNA polymerase does not possess the proof-reading function, it leads to a high mutation rate. As
a result, the accuracy of these methods is compromised if the virus mutates in the targeting
genomic region, which occurs frequently.12 The second approach is to detect specific antibodies
to the viral antigens.13 These serological methods include enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) and lateral flow immunoassay, some of which often give on-site results within ten
minutes without requiring sophisticated sample preparation.14, 15 Current assays for detection of
COVID-19 infections are based on structural proteins including spike protein (S-protein) and/or
nucleocapsid protein (N-protein).16 These assays have a relatively low sensitivity, a false positive
rate of about 5-11%,13 and usually a long sample preparation time of at least 0.5-2 hr. Hence, there
is an urgent need to develop a sensitive and specific assay for rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2
infection within minutes or if possible, seconds; ideally within days of infection, which could
particularly be useful for medically underserved areas if the readout is enabled by a smartphone.
Electrochemical sensing is a promising method for the detection of pathogens or antibodies.17, 18
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In this method, the formation of antibody-antigen complex is detected via electrochemical
transduction. The sensitivity, specificity, and speed of detection, however, will depend upon the
electrochemical cell and the geometry and surface chemistry of the electrodes, in addition to the
antigen and assay procedures. In conventional electrochemical sensors, the electrodes are typically
planar 2D structures which are often decorated with nanomaterials to increase their surface area.19
We note that biosensing devices have evolved with the developments in microelectronics –
moving from bio-MEMS to miniaturized lab-on-chip constructs made by advanced
photolithographic techniques.20 Recently, nanoparticle-based 3D printing methods have emerged
in microelectronics that enable intricate geometries, material combinations, and custom
microstructures. These methods offer many exciting advantages over conventional lithography
such as a simple two-step fabrication process controlled by CAD programs, customizability, and
prototypability. Amongst the different additive manufacturing methods, Aerosol Jet (AJ)
nanoparticle 3D printing is a technique that uses a stream of aerosolized droplets to deposit an
array of functional materials at a resolution of 10 µm and has been used to fabricate various
electronic devices.21 Until recently, AJ printing was primarily used to create 2D planar structures
as electronic components in devices.22 Recently, however, Saleh et al.23 have used the dynamics of
the aerosol microdroplets to create 3D device geometries with aspect ratios as high as 50:1,
providing pathways to create complex and intricate geometries with high surface-to-volume ratios
for electrodes.
The work presented in this paper was thus motivated by two factors. First, we aimed to utilize
the latest advance in microelectronics fabrication, namely nanoparticle 3D printing, to solve the
pressing need of developing a rapid test for the detection of antibodies to COVID-19 infection.
The focus was to use AJ nanoparticle 3D printing to create three-dimensional electrode geometry
and develop a unique surface chemistry that significantly enhances the transport of diffusing
species in an electrochemical cell. The second aim was to use electrochemical transduction to
detect COVID-19 antibodies within seconds and with a regeneration capability, along with a
readout enabled by a smartphone-based platform. The focus was to develop a chemistry that can
regenerate the device within minutes and establish selectivity, sensitivity, reproducibility, and
repeatability of this sensor platform. We also discuss the significant positive implications of this
work to the benefit of public health.
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
Design and Construction of COVID-19 Test Chip with 3D Electrodes
We first describe the 3D Printed COVID-19 Test Chip (3DcC) platform. The schematic of the
3DcC device along with AJ printing of the three-dimensional electrodes is shown in Fig. 1. The
functionalization of 3D electrodes by viral antigens is also a critical step in 3DcC device formation
and is described in Fig. 2. Although details of the fabrication process are given in Materials and
Methods, the device construction and surface chemistry are central to the function of the sensor
and hence briefly described below. Fig. 1a shows a glass slide coated with patterned chromium (5
nm thick) and gold (100 nm thick) which formed the base layer of the three electrodes (working
electrode or WE, counter electrode or CE, and reference electrode or RE) of an electrochemical
cell. Fig. 1b shows the AJ printing process of the micropillar array on the WE shown in Fig. 1a.
The AJ printer breaks the gold nanoparticle ink in the vial via ultrasonication into microdroplets,
each containing the gold nanoparticles (2-5 nm in diameter). The microdroplets were carried to the
nozzle via an inert gas (N2) and aerodynamically focused on the WE, which was heated to 150 °C.
Figs. 1c and 1d show a CAD (Computer Aided Design) controlled process of droplet dispense to
form individual pillars. The deposition was in the form of micro-rings of gold nanoparticle ink.
Once one layer was printed, the solvent evaporated due to the heat from the substrate, forming
solidified ‘dry’ material containing the nanoparticles and binders. When the next ring was printed,
the surface tension of the solvent in the ring allowed the micropillars to be built without the use of
any support structures. Each layer of the rings was about 5-10 µm thick and formed within a
fraction of a second. A succession of these processes formed a 10×10 micropillar array consisting
of unsintered nanoparticles and binders. Upon sintering of the printed structure, the gold
micropillars for the electrode were formed. Fig. 1e shows the schematic of the construction of the
PDMS housing by replica-molding method, which involved using polymethylmethacrylate
(PMMA) mold and a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) mold to create a PDMS microfluidic channel.
The RE, shown in Fig. 1a was coated with a thin silver/silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) layer via a
shadow mask. The PDMS housing was then placed manually on the glass slide containing the
micropillar array electrode and other electrodes (CE and RE). The complete construction of the
3DcC device is shown in Fig. 1f. Note that fluid could be introduced in the device by tubes inserted
into the microfluidic channel.
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

An important step in the working of the 3DcC device is the functionalization of the 3D printed
microelectrode by viral antigens for detection of antibodies from the fluid introduced in the
electrochemical cell. This process is depicted in Figs. 2a-2d. The bare 3D micropillar electrode is
shown in Fig. 2a. The micropillar electrode array functionalized using reduced graphene oxide
(rGO) is shown in Fig. 2b. The carboxylated (-COOH) groups of rGO are also shown in the Fig.
2b. Due to the π-π interactions amongst the coated rGO, the coating was expected to be nonuniform.24 Fig. 2c shows antigens bonded with the rGO flakes of the electrode. This was achieved
by activating the -COOH groups of rGO using a coupling chemistry of EDC:NHS (1-Ethyl-3-(3dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide, N-Hydroxy-Succinimide).25 This chemistry facilitates the
formation of C-N co-valent bonding between rGO and antigens via an amidation reaction.25
Specifically, this reaction involved the EDC molecules acting as cross-linkers between −COOH
and -NH2 (i.e., amine group of the viral antigens) and NHS molecules acting as stabilizers during
this reaction.25 Two SARS-CoV-2 viral antigens, namely, spike S1 and receptor binding domain
(RBD), were separately used in this process (in different sensors). Schematic in Fig. 2d shows
antibodies selectively binding with the antigens when a fluid containing antibodies was introduced
in the chamber. It is noted that a treatment with bovine serum albumin (BSA) molecules was used
to block non-specific sites of the sensor. The details of the electrode surface functionalization are
described in Materials and Methods section.
The 3DcC device works on the principle of electrochemical transduction.26 When an AC
potential is applied between WE and RE, an electrical double layer is formed at the WE-electrolyte
interface (Fig. 2e). For an electrolyte such as ferro/ferricyanide, the double layer can be formed
due to accumulation of oppositely charged ions at the interface compared to the charge on the
electrode (Fig. 2e). This creates a characteristic impedance (i.e., charge transfer resistance) when
a constant potential is applied between, WE and RE. An equivalent circuit is shown in Fig. 2e,
where Cdl is the double layer capacitance, Rct is the charge transfer resistance, and Rs is the
electrolyte resistance. Note that in the current study, the electrolyte used was phosphate buffer
solution mixed with ferro/ferricyanide. When a fluid containing antibodies to the antigens shown
in Fig. 2c are introduced in the microfluidic chamber, we expect selective binding of the target
antibodies to the corresponding antigens on the electrode, which would increase the thickness of
Cdl layer, causing a higher Rct, which could then be detected via electrochemical impedance
spectroscopic (EIS) measurements (Fig. 2f). First, we expect the 3D geometry to accelerate the
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

formation of the electrical double layer compared to a corresponding 2D surface, enabling a fast
detection of the changes in Rct and an increase in the sensitivity. Further, we expect that binding
of the antibodies with antigens will increase the thickness of the double layer, causing the Rct to
increase proportionally. Thus, simple measurements of Rct values would provide an excellent
measure of the presence of antibodies in the fluid introduced in the 3DcC device.
Physical Characterization of 3DcC Device
Figure 3 shows the microscopic and spectroscopic analysis of 3DcC device constructed using
the process shown in Figs. 1 and 2. An optical micrograph of the device with CE, WE, and RE is
shown in Fig. 3a. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of three-dimensional gold
micropillar array electrode (i.e., WE) fabricated by AJ printing prior to rGO and antigen
functionalization is shown in Figs. 3b and 3c. The diameter and pillar-to-pillar gap of the
micropillars measured over 5 randomly chosen pillars per device across three devices was 73 µm
(± 2.13%) and 122 µm (± 0.25%), respectively, while the height was about 250 µm. The top surface
of solid pillar had a 15 µm deep and 20 µm diameter dip which was a result of the printing process
depicted in the schematic of Fig. 1d. The surface texture of the gold pillars formed by nanoparticle
sintering is shown in the zoomed-in SEM images of Fig. 3c and Fig. S1a. This texture consisted
of micron-sized gold crystals on the pillar surface and a surface porosity caused by the nanoparticle
sintering process. This surface texture was expected provide additional sites for rGO adhesion in
addition to increasing the total surface area. The micropillar electrode after the rGO and antigen
treatment (Fig. 2c) is shown in Figs. 3d, S1b, and S1c. Fig. 3d shows the rGO flakes attached to
the gold micropillars as well as the gold base layer (also see Fig. S1c). The rGO sheets are attached
to Au pillar surface non-uniformly due to their electrostatic interactions. Graphene flakes appeared
wrinkled on the Au surface (zoomed-in images of Figs. S1b and S1c) which was expected to
enhance the loading capacity of the antigens.
Raman spectroscopic measurements were conducted to investigate the defect (D) and
graphitic (D) bands present in the rGO-Au micropillars (Fig. 3e) with and without antigens. The
Au micropillar surface prior to rGO treatment did not show any Raman peaks. The Raman
spectrum of rGO-Au micropillars revealed a D-band at 1348.1 cm−1 and a G-band at 1590.5 cm-1.
The D-band (symmetry A1g mode) is due to the vibration of –sp3 carbon atoms or defects while
G-band originates due to first-order scattering of E2g phonon of sp2 carbon atoms at the center of
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Brillion zone.27 The appearing D and G peaks in the Raman spectrum indicate the presence of rGO
sheets on gold pillars. The intensity ratio (ID/IG) of rGO-Au was 0.84, which was slightly changed
to 0.85 after incorporation of antigens. Antigen immobilization on rGO sheets influenced the peak
position, which was shifted to higher wavenumber (5.5 cm-1) due to the decreased graphitic nature
of the rGO sheets. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) studies indicated presence of large amount of
carbon when rGO was coated on the gold micropillars (Fig. 3f and spectrum in Fig. S2). The
existence of nitrogen for antigen immobilized sample (Fig. 3f and spectra in S2c) may come from
the -NH2 group of the protein (i.e. antigen). We note that the user interface for reading of the
electrochemical cell signal was a laptop or a smartphone. A 3DcC device with a readout using a
cellphone-based interface is shown in Fig. 3g.
Electrochemical Characterization of 3DcC Device
The 3DcC device shown in Fig. 3 was characterized by using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). For comparison with the 3DcC device, we created
a sensor with planar 2D WE, where the spike S1 antigen and bovine serum albumin (BSA)
molecules were immobilized on a 2 mm × 2 mm planar Au surface (i.e., surface without AJ printed
micropillars). For the 2D WE, however, we did not functionalize rGO on the surface as the rGO
could not be bonded to the relatively smooth 2D gold surface which lacked surface porosity. Other
experimental conditions for both sensors were kept identical. The 2D sensor showed low oxidation
and reduction currents of a redox couple (ferro/ferricyanide) as shown in Fig. S3a of Supporting
Information, which we believe was due to the immobilized spike S1 antibody and BSA molecules
that blocked the electron transfer to the electrode from the electrolyte. Fig. S3a also shows that the
3DcC sensor (with rGO and S1 antigen coated gold micropillars) exhibits clear oxidation and
reduction peaks of redox mediator with a 50× increase in current compared to the 2D electrode.
Based on the Randles−Sevcik equation,26, 28 this significant increase in current cannot be explained
by surface area alone (e.g., from pure geometry, the area of 3D electrode is 2.6× that of the 2D
electrode). We speculate that since the two electrodes differ not only in geometry but also in
surface chemistry, the diffusion of the electroactive species occurred differently for the two cases.
For 3D electrodes, the geometry, in addition to an increase in the area, allowed radial or spherical
diffusion, in addition to planar diffusion; compared to just planar diffusion for the 2D electrode.
This was confirmed by COMSOL simulations described below. The effective diffusion
coefficients for 3D electrodes will thus differ significantly when compared to the 2D electrodes.
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The scan rate studies for sensors with 2D and 3D electrodes were carried out to assess the mass
transport of potassium ferro/ferricyanide as shown in Figs. S3b and S3c of the Supporting
Information. By varying the scan rate from 0.5 to 2 V/s, both the sensors were characterized (Fig.
S3d). The anodic and cathodic peak currents for both sensors were directly proportional to their
scan rates, but the voltages are shifted to more positive and negative potentials, respectively. This
indicated that both the sensors exhibited a diffusion-controlled redox process.29 The Nyquist plots
and phase shift (q) of sensors with 3D electrodes immobilized with recombinant SARS-CoV-2
spike S1 and RBD antigens and 2D electrodes immobilized with recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike
S1 antigens are shown in Fig. S3e and S3f, respectively. This data shows that the 3D electrodes
exhibited a charge-transfer-limited process, whereas the 2D electrodes showed diffusion limited
process (Warburg impedance) indicating a poor charge transfer characteristic.
In order to understand this phenomenon further, we carried out simulations of the CV
experiments using COMSOL Multiphysics Software for the 2D and 3D electrodes (Fig. S4 of the
Supporting Information). The bulk concentration was assumed to be 1 mol/m3, while the diffusion
coefficient was taken from that obtained in the experiments from the Randles−Sevcik equation.26
Fig. S4a shows the electrode geometry, while Fig. S4b shows the diffusion profiles for a 10×10
array configuration. Fig. S4c shows 2D and 3D electrodes with their planar, and spherical and
planar diffusion profiles, respectively. The concentration of the diffusing species for array
configurations of planar and 10×10 3D electrodes are also shown in Fig. S4d. The presence of
radial diffusion as shown in COMSOL simulations confirms the speculation that this phenomenon
may help create high redox current in case of the 3D electrodes.
3D Sensing of COVID-19 Antibodies
SARS-CoV-2 S and N proteins have been used for serologic assays for detecting antibodies
of SARS-CoV-2 infection.14, 15 The S protein binds to viral entry receptor angiotensin-converting
enzyme-2 (ACE2) and mediates viral entry. It is present as a trimer with three receptor-binding S1
heads sitting on top of a trimeric membrane fusion S2 stalk.30 The receptor-binding subunit S1
contains the N-terminal domain (NTD) and the receptor-binding domain (RBD) while the
membrane fusion subunit S2 contains the fusion peptide (FP), two heptad repeats (HR1 and 2), a
transmembrane anchor (TM) and the intracellular tail (IC).30 Serologic assays using both
recombinant S1 and RBD proteins have been shown to detect specific antibodies in COVID-19
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

patients.31 For antibody tests in this work, we thus chose the spike S1 and RBD antigens of SARSCoV-2 to develop the 3DcC testing platform.32
Figure 4 shows the impedimetric sensing plots and charge transfer resistance (Rct) for the
3DcC sensor when the electrodes are exposed to phosphate buffer saline (pbs), rabbit serum (rs),
fetal bovine serum (fbs), and spike S1 antibodies (rabbit IgG). The spike S1 antibodies were
introduced successively at concentrations of 0.01 fM, 1 fM, 1 pM, 100 pM, 1nM, and 30 nM, three
times each, wherein the sensor was regenerated after each set of measurements, including the
controls testing. In the first set of measurements (Fig. 4a), a testing baseline was set by allowing
only the pbs solution with no target antibodies which showed a charge transferred-limited process
with Rct of 3.51 kW. While the sensor was tested with biological samples such as rs and fbs as
controls, the sensor generated similar profiles of Nyquist plots having a deviation of ± 6.01%
compared to the baseline signal. The adsorption of any proteins or albumins can change the sensor
signals significantly. However, though these proteins have a major composition of albumin
protein, the sensor did not show a significant change in the baseline signal. The sensor surface
contained a layer of BSA molecules which are negatively charged, which may have repelled the
albumin molecules in the serum due to their identical charge polarity.29 This result indicated that
the sensor was selective to specific proteins as was desired. With these control measurements, the
3DcC device was tested with low concentrations of spike S1 antibodies at 0.01 fM and 1 fM. With
the 0.01 fM concentration, a change of impedance signal (4.2 kW) was observed (Fig. 4d)
compared to the sensor baseline and the control serum. This is as expected since binding of the
antibodies with the antigens will obstruct electron transfer from the electrolyte to the electrode
surface resulting in an increase in circuit impedance as captured by the Nyquist plot. Between 0.01
fM and 1 fM, the sensor did not show any significant change in impedance signal. Within this
range of concentration of antibodies, the sensor surface may have only limited number of
antibodies resulting in an unchanged signal. At 1 pM concentration of antibodies, however, the
sensor showed a significant increase in the impedance to 5.21 kW. As the antibody concentration
was increased to 1 nM, the Rct increased further as reflected in the Nyquist plots. Interestingly,
when a 10 nM concentration was tested, the sensor provided a very significant increase in the
impedance signal (12.3 kW). Further, a minute change of signal (12.7 kW) was observed at 30 nM
concentration. Testing beyond 10 nM concentration of spike S1 antibodies showed that the sensor

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

exhibited a saturated impedance signal, wherein the maximum number of binding sites on the
sensor surface are likely to be occupied by the target antibodies.
To elute antibodies from the sensor surface, we exposed the sensor electrodes to a solution of
formic acid (1.0 M) having a pH of 2.5. This was chosen as a pH of 2.5 is outside the physiological
range for human body (7-7.4 pH), where antibodies are expected to elute from the antigens via a
disruption of immunoaffinity.33 Indeed, upon introduction of the formic acid solution for 60
seconds into the sensor, the Rct values dropping to about 1.2 kW. In addition to eluting the
antibodies, the low Rct is caused by high electron transfer rates in acidic media. Note that the signal
from formic acid in Figs. 4a, 4b, and 4c are after the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd regeneration. After the 60
second incubation by formic acid solution, the sensor was washed with pbs solution. At this point,
the sensor recovered to 94% of its base signal. Figs. 4b and 4c show sets of measurements after
regeneration for the same set of spike S1 antibody concentrations as studied in Fig. 4a. After 1st
regeneration, the signal with rb and fbs (Fig. 4b) was within ±6.96% of the baseline. After 2nd
regeneration, this signal did not change significantly (Fig. 4c). We also observed similar patterns
of impedance signals for spike S1 antibody solutions at different concentrations after 2nd
regeneration as shown in Figs. 4c and 4d. The sensor could provide a low LoD of 1 pM for
detection of spike S1 antibodies.
Figure 5 shows the sensing of RBD antibodies using the 3DcC device where results are
presented in a similar manner as that for spike S1 antibodies (Fig. 4). The device had micropillar
electrodes with immobilized SARS-CoV-2 RBD-His recombinant antigens. The EIS spectra for
each concentration of RBD antibodies with control biofluids such as rs and fbs are shown in Fig.
5a; while that after two successive regenerations are shown in Figs. 5b and 5c. The RBD antibody
concentrations were set from 1 fM to 10 nM to test the sensor. The sensor base signal was obtained
by collecting impedance spectra in presence of pbs solution where the sensor showed a Rct of 3.89
kW (Fig. 5d). With the rs and fbs, the sensor showed a deviation of 3.0% in the impedance after
regeneration when compared to sensor baseline. The sensor did not show any increased signal
when 1.0 fM concentration of RBD antibodies were introduced. At RBD antibody concentration
of 1 pM, the Rct value changed to 5.07 kW. Similar to the spike S1 antibodies, as the concentration
of RBD antibodies was increased from 1pM to 10 nM, the Rct values were found to increase as
shown in Fig. 5d. The regeneration of the RBD sensor was achieved by 1.0 M formic acid (pH
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.5) solution in 60 seconds; the same as that used for the regeneration of spike S1 antibodies.
Unlike the spike S1 sensor, the RBD sensor showed different linear responses between 1 pM to
100 pM, and 100 pM to 10 nM. After two regenerations, a minimum loss of sensitivity (± 1%) was
observed for the RBD sensor. Based on the results in Figs. 4 and 5, we created a detection band
for spike S1 and RBD sensing, respectively, where a minimum Rct value was identified above
which the sensing could be achieved (see Fig. S5a and S5b of Supporting Information).
We next discuss the detection time of the 3DcC sensor for spike S1 antibodies and RBD
antibodies. Fig. 6a show the impedance of the sensor as a function of time in seconds for the
detection of spike S1 antibodies. It is noticed that with no target in the pbs solution, the sensor
impedance started to change at 3 seconds and reached to ~1 kW in 10 seconds, beyond which it
became saturated. When spike S1 antibodies (1 nM) were introduced in six different sensors, a
significant change of impedance was observed (in line with data in Fig. 4) and reached about
93.2% of the saturation value in 11.5 seconds, indicating detection of antibodies. The magnitude
of impedance at 11.5 seconds as a function of the spike S1 antibody concentrations (0.01 fM to 30
nM) for the 3DcC device is shown in Fig. S6a of Supporting Information. The Fig. 6b shows the
impedance as a function of time for six different 3DcC RBD sensors when RBD antibodies are
introduced at 1 nM concentration. For all the sensors, the signal reached 92% of the saturation
signal at 11.5 seconds, again indicating detection of the antibodies. Fig. S6b shows the time
required to reach 95% of the saturation signal for the data presented in Figs. 6a and 6b. The 3DcC
device can thus detect the antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 virus within seconds, which is faster than
any data yet reported in literature.
To validate the sensor regeneration phenomenon, 3DcC sensors for the detection of spike S1
antibody and RBD antibody were regenerated 9× each as shown in Figs. 6c and 6d, and Figs. 6e
and 6f, respectively. A pbs solution was used as a reference while 1 nM antibody solutions were
used as the target. After 9× regenerations, the spike S1 and RBD sensors did not show significant
changes in the Rct values as evidenced by their low relative standard deviation (RSD) of less than
±3.2 % and ±0.25 %, respectively. However, the base line Rct of spike S1 and RBD sensors was
found to change by ±4.6% and ±3.1% when compared to that with no regeneration. We noted that
even after 9 regenerations (i.e., 10th reading), both sensors provided a good signal, indicating a
high regeneration capability. We speculate that acidic media may degrade the bonding between
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

rGO and antigens after repeat exposures, possibly limiting the regeneration capability beyond a
certain limit.
The sensitivities of the 3DcC device for spike S1 and RBD sensors are shown in Figs. S6c
and S6d of the Supporting Information. These plots are obtained from the Rct values in Figs. 4d
and 5d. For spike S1 sensor, the slope of Fig. S6c was 0.27 ±0.04 kΩ/nM in the range of 1.0 fM
to 1 nM, and 4.5 ±1.1 kΩ/nM in the range of 1 nM to 30 nM. The high sensitivity at higher
concentrations is likely due to higher number of antibodies captured by the sensing surface. For
RBD sensors the slope of Fig. S6d was 3.9 ±0.04 kΩ/nM for a range of 1.0 fM to 0.1 nM, and 1.6
± 0.16 kΩ/nM for a range of 0.1 nM to 10 nM. The spike S1 sensor showed a higher sensitivity at
a higher concentration of antibodies when compared to RBD sensor. We speculate that this high
sensitivity of the 3DcC device was due to the 3D architecture, a high porosity, and specific surface
chemistry that allowed an enhanced loading capacity of the antigens.
Figs. 7a and 7b show the Nyquist plots and Rct for cross-reactivity study of the 3DcC sensor
designed to test spike S1 antibodies, respectively. The sensor was tested in the presence of RBD
antibodies, nucleocapsid (N) antibodies, and cytokines such as interleukin (IL)-6 antigens, without
and with the spike S1 antibodies (1 nM). In the absence of spike S1 antibodies, the sensor was
found to be insensitive to N antibodies, RBD antibodies, and IL-6 protein molecules as evidenced
by its low Rct values and low RSD (±6.9%). The sensor showed a slight deviation (±6.5%) from
the initial signal in the presence of RBD antibodies suggesting the sensor was either saturated by
the S1 antibodies. Alternatively, the RBD antibodies might recognize linear epitope while the S1
protein might have a specific confirmation that prevents binding to the RBD antibodies. The sensor
was highly sensitive when the spike S1 antibodies were introduced with the above molecules,
leading to an increase in the Rct values s shown in Fig. 7b. Figs. 7c and 7d show the cross-reactivity
studies of RBD antibodies. Again, we used N antibodies, IL-6 antigens, and spike S1 antibodies
in the absence and presence of RBD antigens (1 nM). In this result, the 3DcC device tested with
IL-6 antigen showed a deviation of ±11.0 % compared to base line with no target. We note that
the decrease of Rct value with IL-6 antigen did not affect the sensor response when target antibodies
were present in the buffer solution. Without RBD antibodies, the 3D sensor showed an RSD of ±
5.81 % compared to baseline signal while the RSD was reduced to ± 2 % in the presence of 1 nM
target RBD antibodies. It is clear that specific binding sites on the antigen molecules (epitope)

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

reject binding by non-specific molecules but allow binding to a specific antibody (paratope). These
results indicated that the sensor showed a good selectivity even within a similar group of proteins.
We next show the sensor reproducibility (Figs. 7e-7h) where twelve 3DcC sensors, 6 for spike
S1 antibodies and 6 for RDB antibodies were evaluated. Nyquist plots were obtained and Rct values
were calculated at fixed concentration (1nM) of spike S1 (Figs. 7e and 7f) and RBD (Figs. 7g and
7h) antibodies. For spike S1 and RBD antibodies, the sensors showed a RSD of ± 2.7% and ±
2.5%, respectively, indicating reasonable reproducibility of the sensor. Note that additive
manufacturing (AM) processes are digital (i.e. controlled by CAD programs) and hence are
expected to be repeatable. However, all AM processes are known to have microstructural
inhomogeneities in their final parts.34 It is clear that for the 3DcC device, the AJ nanoparticle
printing process created repeatable structures (Fig. 3b, S1a) that provided acceptable repeatability
in antibody sensing performance (Figs. 7e-7h), but led to a microstructure on the pillar surface
(high magnification images of Figs. 3c and S1a) that aided in the surface functionalization process.
We also investigated the real-time tracking of binding kinetics of antigens and antibodies at
the sensor surface. Figs. 8a-8c show Rct values, impedance graphs, and a schematic explaining the
various phases of binding events such as association, dissociation, and regeneration, respectively.
In the association phase, the sensor is exposed to a concentration of target antibodies (spike S1 in
this case) where both bound and unbound molecules were present resulting in a slightly higher Rct
(Fig. 8a). In the dissociation phase, the sensor was washed by buffer solution and unbound
antibodies were removed from the sensor resulting in a slight reduction in the Rct. However, during
regeneration by a low-pH chemistry, elution or desorption of antibodies from the antigens occurred
via disruption of ionic and hydrogen bonds between in the immunocomplex,35, 36 reducing the Rct
to a low value. Quantification of the minute changes in impedance behavior thus leads to a
sensitive tracking of both association and dissociation phases of the 3DcC sensor operation.
Discussion
The AJ printed biosensing platform (i.e. 3DcC device) developed in this work can detect
antibodies for SARS-CoV-2 within seconds. This result is highly significant in pandemic control
and will positively impact public health. The research also represents an important advance in
biotechnology where 3D printing is used to realize architected electrodes that enable rapid
detection of pathogenic biomarkers at low concentrations.
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The 3DcC device (Fig. 3), which includes the WE with micropillar geometry and surface
porosity, and a chemistry involving flaky rGO (Fig. 3 and S1b) allowed a high redox current for
the electrochemical cell forming the sensor (Fig. S3a). This increase was due not only to the larger
surface area of the 3D electrode but also to the presence of radial and linear diffusion in the 3D
microelectrode geometry (Fig. S4c). Further, the 3D geometry allowed a relatively high loading
of biorecognition elements (antigens) for the sensor, enabling the detection of the antibodies at
concentrations as low as 1 pM and 1 fM for spike S1 and RBD antibodies (Figs. 4 and 5),
respectively. Figs. 7a-7d demonstrate that the natural construction of antigen-antibody
immunocomplex makes sensing selective. Another important outcome of this work is the
regeneration of the sensor in one minute. By introducing formic acid with a pH of 2.5, which is
outside of the physiological range observed in the body (7-7.4), the antibodies were eluted from
the antigens allowing full recovery of the original sensor signal. The demonstration of 10
repetitions (9× regenerations) of the sensors for each of the antibodies (Fig. 6c-6f) gives the
opportunity for the same sensor to be used multiple times in the field without losing the specificity
and sensitivity. We also note that the 3DcC requires only a few µL of fluid for detection of
antibodies (e.g. volume obtained by a finger prick). Lastly, a convenient cell phone-based user
interface (Fig. 3g) will enhance testing accessibility of the device in underdeveloped areas.
We point to several advantages offered by the 3D printing method used to manufacture the
micropillar electrodes of the device. The AJ nanoparticle 3D printing is a digital manufacturing
platform where the sensor design is controlled by CAD programs. The fabrication is also rapid –
the 10×10 gold micropillar array (Fig. 2b) takes 35 minutes to print per printhead. With the
availability of AJ printers with four printheads working in tandem, the effective printing time can
be reduced to 7-8 minutes per sensor followed by a batch sintering process. Such digital
manufacture allows fabrication in two simple steps without the need for any cleanroom processes,
lowering resources/cost per sensor that can improve accessibility of testing. In addition, 3D
printing enables the sensor design to be changed via simple changes to CAD programs. A
multiplexed chip where several working electrodes are printed on the same device can allow
selective immobilization of several antigens of SARS-CoV-2 to detect multiple antibodies at the
same time. Such a device can improve fidelity of detection and also allows the same device to be
used for multiple tests. Such work will be part of a future investigation. The microstructural
features (Fig. 3c and S1a) of the gold micropillars are a result of the AJ printing process and allows
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

an excellent coverage of the rGO on the electrode surface (e.g. rGO could not be coated on a
smooth gold surface). In addition, rGO forms a secondary 3D structure (Fig. S1b), allowing high
loading of the antigens. We also note that the EDC:NHS chemistry used in the work covalently
binds the -COOH group of rGO to -NH2 group of antigens, which is common to several proteins.
It is thus feasible to immobilize antibodies on the sensor surface and detect pathogens directly via
their antigens, which will be part of a future investigation
The 3DcC device has several advantages over other methods for COVID-19 detection.
Genomic sequencing, CRISPR-based test, and RT-qPCR8-10 are accurate but have a long testing
time (days). Other methods such as ELISA and lateral flow measurements are less sensitive and
cannot provide diagnostic information within seconds at high accuracies.14, 15 The 3DcC device,
however, has the ability to detect SARS-CoV-2 antibodies non-destructively within seconds at a
low LoD (down to a pM concentration) with label-free probing of antibodies and an ability for
regeneration within one minute. These results are highly encouraging and a device for field use,
after appropriate human trials, will have a significant positive impact on public health and the
course of the current37 as well as future pandemics. Note that we obtained a signal in all the 3DcC
devices used in this research every time when an antibody solution was introduced (Figs. 4-8).
Although this is a very good initial indicator, studies with large scale patient samples to evaluate
the sensitivity and specificity are necessary in order to establish statistical rates for false negatives
and false positives. We also note that the concentration of antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in body
fluids of COVID-19 patients likely varies significantly (e.g. for asymptotic vs symptomatic
patients) and has not been investigated at this time. However, 1 femto or 1 picomolar limit-ofdetections for antibodies may enable an early detection of the disease which needs to be
investigated urgently.
In summary, we have developed a 3D printed biosensing platform to detect antibodies specific
to SARS-CoV-2 within seconds. The device is fabricated by using Aerosol Jet nanoparticle 3D
printing method to create gold micropillar array electrodes, followed by functionalization of rGO
and immobilization of antigens on the electrode surface using an EDC:NHS chemistry. The
detection of antibodies was achieved by electrochemical transduction when antibodies introduced
in a fluid formed an immunocomplex with antigens on the 3D electrode surface. This signal was
highly selective and repeatable. Antibodies to spike S1 and RBD antigens of the virus were
detected at concentrations of 1 pM and 1 fM, respectively. A low pH chemistry was used to
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

regenerate the sensor via elution of antibody-antigen immunoaffinity within 1 minute, allowing up
to 10 successive readings from the same sensor with high fidelity. This biosensing platform will
allow rapid detection and early isolation of infection, saving lives. The test platform is generic and
can potentially be used to detect biomarkers for other pathogens. The research represents a
significant advance in biotechnology and will have a positive impact on public health.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Materials and Method
Materials: To construct the three-dimensional array electrode using AJ printing, we used a
commercial gold (Au) nanoparticle ink (UTDAu40, UT Dots Inc., Champaign, IL). The average
Au particle size was 4 nm, the ink viscosity was 3 cP, and particle loading in the ink was 40 wt%.
The Au nanoparticles were dispersed in an organic non-polar solvent, which was aerosolized
during AJ printing via ultrasound energy. The PDMS (SYLGARD™ 184 Silicone Elastomer Kit,
Dow Corning, Midland, MI, USA) mixed with a base to hardener ratio of 10:1 to create the
microfluidic channel of the 3DcC device.
Human recombinant SARS-CoV-2 spike S1-His protein (50 μg/mL) and SARS-CoV-2 spike
receptor binding domain (RBD)-His protein (50 μg/mL) expressed in HEK293 cells, were the
antigens purchased from the Sino Biological US Inc., Wayne, PA. Before immobilizing on the 3D
electrode surface, both the antigens were diluted to 5 μg/mL using the carbonate buffer solution
(pH ~9.6). Two rabbit immunoglobin (IgG) antibodies, SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 antibody (10 μL),
and SARS-CoV-2 spike RBD antibody (10 μL) were also obtained from Sino Biological US Inc.,
Wayne, PA. Both the antibodies were diluted in phosphate buffer saline solution (pH 7.4)
containing a 5 mM ferro/ferricyanide before their introduction into the microfluidic channel for
measurement. These solutions were stored in -20ºC before their use. Mouse monoclonal antibody
(MAb) of human recombinant SARS-CoV-2 nucleoprotein (Cat. No. 40143-MM05) was
purchased from Sino Biological Inc., Wayne, PA. E. coli derived human recombinant interleukin6 (IL-6; Cat. No., 206-IL) antigen was purchased from R&D Systems, Inc., Minneapolis, MN.
Bovine serum albumin (BSA), sodium bicarbonate, sodium carbonate, formic acid, phosphate
buffered saline powder, EDC (1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimide hydrochloride)
and NHS (N-hydroxysuccinimide) were acquired from Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO. A room
temperature curable silver/graphene conductive epoxy (type G6E-RTSG, Graphene Supermarket,
Inc., Ronkonkoma, NY) was used to connect wires to the pads of WE, CE, and RE (Fig. 1) of the
3DcC device.
Fabrication of Electrodes for 3DcC Device: Figure 1 shows the fabrication process of the
3DcC device for rapid detection of COVID-19 antibodies. First, a patterned Au layer (with Cr
adhesion layer) was deposited on a glass slide (Fig. 1a) which formed the base for the three
electrodes, namely, RE, WE, and CE. To pattern Au/Cr layer, a shadow mask was created using a
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Kapton tape which cut using an automated cutter (Silhouette Curio™, Silhouette America®, Inc.,
Lindon, UT) with the aid of AutoCAD software (AutoCAD 2015, Autodesk Inc., San Rafael, CA).
A 5 nm thick Cr layer was deposited as an adhesive layer, followed by a 100 nm thick Au layer
using an e-beam evaporator (Kurt Lesker PVD 75, Jefferson Hills, PA) while using the Kapton
shadow mask. The area of the patterned WE was 2 mm × 2 mm. Aerosol Jet nanoparticle 3D
printing was then used to fabricate the three-dimensional micropillar electrode on the WE as shown
in Figs. 1b-d.
The schematic of the AJ 3D printer (Model AJ-300, Optomec, Inc., Albuquerque, NM USA)
is shown in Fig. 1b. The AJ printer consisted of an ultrasound atomizer, a deposition head with a
nozzle, a movable and platen (X-Y direction) with temperature control, and a shutter to break the
flow of the aerosol as necessary. The ultrasonic atomizer created a mist of aerosol droplets of about
1-5 µm diameter from the Au ink, with each droplet containing the 2-5 nm Au particles. A carrier
gas (N2) transported the droplets to the nozzle of the deposition head, while a sheath gas (also N2)
helped focus the nanoparticle beam to a length scale of 10 µm. The carrier gas pressure was set to
be about 24 sccm and sheath gas pressure to set to 60 sccm. The nozzle diameter used for printing
was 150 µm. Before printing, the geometry of the micropillar array was drawn in AutoCAD using
a program in the software AutoLISP (AutoCAD 2015, Autodesk Inc., San Rafael, CA) and
converted to a “prg” file compatible with the AJ printer software. One milliliter gold nanoparticle
ink without any dilution was loaded inside a glass vial (Fig. 1b), atomized using ultrasonic energy,
and transported to the AJ printer. An external heating element was placed on top of the X-Y stage
to heat the substrate to 150 oC. A layer-by-layer printing sequence was used to build up the 3D 10
×10 micropillar arrays from AJ droplets where the path of the droplets could be periodically
blocked (or cleared) by controlling the shutter. The schematic of complete micropillar array is
shown in Fig. 1c. The printing of an individual pillar is shown in Fig. 1d, where a layer of droplets
was deposited on top of the previously printed and solidified Au micropillars. The strong surface
tension of the printed ink caused the pillar to form without any support structures (Fig. 1d). The
printing process for the 10×10 micropillar array was completed within 35 min for a given
printhead. After printing, the dried micropillars array was heated to 400 oC for 5 h to completely
remove the binders and sinter the Au nanoparticles which completed the manufacture of the WE
of the device.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The surface of the RE on the glass substrate (Fig. 1a) was then coated with commercial
silver/silver chloride ink (Ercon, Inc. Wareham, MA) by using a Kapton shadow mask. The curing
temperature for this coat was 150 ºC for 2 hr. The ink composition comprised of dispersed
chloridised silver flake particulates in a solvent. Compared to thin film Ag/AgCl reference
electrode, the commercial ink was chosen due to its improved stability as demonstrated in
literature.38
The process of functionalization of WE are shown in Fig. 2. First, the gold micropillars were
functionalized with rGO (Fig. 2a and 2b). The rGO sheets were obtained in powder form (CASNo. 7782-42-5, ACS Materials LLC, Pasadena, CA). The rGO sheets were dispersed in DI water
(0.2 mg/mL) and sonicated for 2 h. As per the manufacturer, the rGO was obtained from graphene
using a reduction process based on hydrazine (N2H4) treatment. Per the manufacturer data sheet,
the rGO sheets had a conductivity >500 S/m, a diameter 0.5-10 µm, and a thickness ~1 nm. Before
coating, a PDMS fence was created and placed surrounding the Au micropillar array. A 20 µL
rGO solution was drop-cast onto the Au micropillar array using a pipette and dried at 80ºC for an
hour. This process was repeated three times. Though we did not expect the coating to be uniform,
the Au pillars were covered by rGO sheets as observed in the SEM images (Figs. 3d, and S1b and
S1c of supporting information) and Raman analysis (Fig. 3e). The Au micropillar-rGO surface was
further functionalized using SARS-CoV-2 antigens (Fig. 2c). This was achieved by using a
coupling reagent consisting of a mixture of EDC (0.2 M) and NHS (0.05 M) in ratios 1:1 by
volume. A 20 µL solution of the EDC:NHS mixture was spread over the rGO-Au surface to
activate -COOH groups of the rGO sheets. The electrode on the glass substrate was kept in a humid
chamber (~100% of humidity) for four hours and washed with PBS solution. Next, a 20 μL of
SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 antigen solution (5 µg/mL) was spread on the surface of the rGO-Au array
electrode via drop-casting using a pipette (10-50 µL; Cole-Parmer; Vernon Hills , IL 60061) and
kept for 4 hr in a humid chamber and then washed with PBS. The activation achieved by EDC:NHS
chemistry enabled the primary amine (-NH2) groups of the protein molecules (i.e., antigens) of
SARS-CoV-2 spike to form C-N bonds with the -COOH groups of rGO sheets via an amidation
reaction. In this reaction, the EDC is known to act as a cross-linker and NHS as an activator.25
Another SARS-CoV-2 antigen called spike RBD, was also immobilized on a different sensor using
same mechanism as that described above. For the RBD antigen, a 20 μL solution (5 µg/mL) was
used for drop-casting over the Au micropillar-rGO electrode. For all sensors, a 20 µL solution of
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

BSA solution (2 mg/mL) was introduced to the WE surface to block any non-specific sites of the
antigen conjugated rGO-Au pillar. In this device, the 3D electrodes are acted as sensitive immunodetectors for COVID 19 antibodies without any labelling agents via antibody-antigen interactions
(Fig. 2d).
Fabrication of PDMS housing and Assembly of the 3DcC Device: The PDMS housing of
the 3DcC device depicted was fabricated by soft-replica molding method (Fig. 1e) and integrated
with the glass containing functional electrodes (Fig. 1f). A thick polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA)
mold was created using high-precision milling machine that had a channel with 1 mm depth, 2 mm
and width, and 2 cm length. The channel width in the middle 1 cm section was increased to 2 mm
(Fig. 1e, Step 1). A PDMS solution was poured on the PMMA channel to copy an opposite pattern
(Fig. 1e, Step2). The bubbles were removed form liquid PDMS mixer by degassing of 1 hour (104

Torr) in a vacuum chamber. Curing temperature was 80º C for 2 h. The PDMS substrate was

peeled off from PMMA channel (Fig 1e, Step 2) and acted a master mold for creating the final
microfluidic channel. The surface of this PDMS mold was treated with silicone oil (Ease Release™
205, Reynoldsam Advanced Materials, Macungie, PA). A new mixer solution of PDMS was then
poured into the PDMS mold (Fig. 1e, Step 3) and then peeling off, resulting in the PDMS channel
required for the 3DcC device (Fig. 1e, Step 4). Holes were then punched at two ends of the
channels by a hollow needle and tygon tubes were inserted for fluid injection. Finally, the PDMS
slab was manually placed on the glass substrate such that the CE, WE, and RE were under the
channel. Wires were connected to the pads of the electrode outside the PDMS channel using a
room temperature curable silver/graphene conductive epoxy to connect to a potentiostat.
Electrode Characterization: An electrochemical workstation with Zview software
(VersaSTAT 3 Potentiostat Galvanostat, Princeton Applied Research, Oak Ridge, TN) were used
to record the electrochemical signals and analyze the impedance spectra. In addition, we also
enabled a smartphone-based reading platform where the sensor was interfaced with an Android
mobile phone using a portable device (Sensit Smart Device, PalmSens, Inc., Randhoeve 221, GA
Houten, The Netherlands). The Au micropillar electrodes were imaged by a scanning electron
microscope (FEI Sirion SEM, Hillsboro, OR). The elemental analysis was carried out using Energy
Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) in the same instrument as the SEM imaging. The Raman
spectra was collected using the NT-MDT AFM/Raman (NT-MDT America, Tempe, AZ) that used
a 532 nm green laser with 12 mW laser power for excitation.
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Electrochemical Simulations. The modeling and 3D simulation of the different electrode
structures was conducted using finite element software, COMSOL Multiphysics® (Version 5.5,
COMSOL Inc., Burlington, MA). This study was carried out to investigate the diffusion profiles
of different geometries of the electrodes and their corresponding electrochemical currents which
were generated due to an electrochemical reaction at the surface of the electrode. In this
electroanalysis scheme, a redox species B was considered to be oxidized to form a product (A) by
losing an electron (B↔A +e-). At the boundary, the product concentration is zero, but the bulk
concentration of oxidative species is 1 mol/m3 and uniform. In this study, Fick’s second law of
diffusion was utilized as the domain equation which is given as

!"!
!#

= ∇. (𝐷$ . ∇𝑐$ ), wherein the 𝑐$ =

1 mol/m3. The diffusivities were taken for the 2D and 3D electrodes as obtained from the cyclic
voltammograms at different scan rates, along with the Randles−Sevcik equation (Fig. S3b and
S3c).28,

Acknowledgement: The authors would like to acknowledge use of the materials characterization
facility such as SEM and Raman at Carnegie Mellon University under grant # MCF-677785.
Author contributions: R.P. came up with the concept and directed the research. A.A. built the
device, developed the various chemistries required for functioning of the device, carried out all the
tests, and wrote the first draft of the manuscript. S.J.G. and E. J. provided inputs from biology side
and provided several biomolecules used in this research. C.H. and B.Y. carried out the AJ printing
of the Au micropillar electrodes. M.S.S. wrote the original program for AJ printing of micropillars.
S.J. carried out SEM microscopy, EDX analysis, and Raman studies, along with the simulations
of the electrochemical process using COMSOL software. All authors contributed to interpreting
the data and preparing and editing the manuscript. Competing interests: The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: All data needed to evaluate
the conclusions in the paper are present in the paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Additional data related to this paper may be requested from the authors.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

Ferretti, L. et al. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital
contact tracing. Science 368 (2020).
Zhou, P. et al. A pneumonia outbreak associated with a new coronavirus of probable bat origin.
Nature 579, 270-273 (2020).
Editorial The COVID-19 testing debacle. Nature Biotechnology 38, 653-653 (2020).
Hui, D.S. et al. The continuing 2019-nCoV epidemic threat of novel coronaviruses to global
health—The latest 2019 novel coronavirus outbreak in Wuhan, China. International Journal of
Infectious Diseases 91, 264-266 (2020).
Nachtigall, F.M., Pereira, A., Trofymchuk, O.S. & Santos, L.S. Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in nasal
swabs using MALDI-MS. Nature Biotechnology, 1-6 (2020).
Tan, C.W. et al. A SARS-CoV-2 surrogate virus neutralization test based on antibody-mediated
blockage of ACE2–spike protein–protein interaction. Nature Biotechnology, 1-6 (2020).
Gatto, M. et al. Spread and dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency
containment measures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117, 10484-10491
(2020).
Broughton, J.P. et al. CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nature Biotechnology, 15 (2020).
Zhu, N. et al. A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. New England
Journal of Medicine (2020).
Corman, V.M. et al. Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RT-PCR.
Eurosurveillance 25, 2000045 (2020).
Bwire, G.M., Majigo, M.V., Njiro, B.J. & Mawazo, A. Detection profile of SARS-CoV-2 using
RT-PCR in different types of clinical specimens: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal
of Medical Virology.
Shen, M. et al. Recent advances and perspectives of nucleic acid detection for coronavirus. Journal
of Pharmaceutical Analysis (2020).
Riccò, M. et al. Point-of-Care Diagnostic Tests for Detecting SARS-CoV-2 Antibodies: A
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Real-World Data. Journal of Clinical Medicine 9, 1515
(2020).
Li, Z. et al. Development and clinical application of a rapid IgM-IgG combined antibody test for
SARS-CoV-2 infection diagnosis. Journal of Medical Virology (2020).
Guo, L. et al. Profiling early humoral response to diagnose novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Clinical Infectious Diseases (2020).
Bedford, J. et al. COVID-19: towards controlling of a pandemic. The Lancet 395, 1015-1018
(2020).
de Eguilaz, M.R., Cumba, L.R. & Forster, R.J. Electrochemical detection of viruses and antibodies:
A mini review. Electrochemistry Communications 116, 106762 (2020).
Drummond, T.G., Hill, M.G. & Barton, J.K. Electrochemical DNA sensors. Nature Biotechnology
21, 1192-1199 (2003).
Gao, Z. et al. Ultrasensitive electrochemical immunosensor for quantitative detection of HBeAg
using Au@ Pd/MoS2@ MWCNTs nanocomposite as enzyme-mimetic labels. Biosensors and
Bioelectronics 102, 189-195 (2018).
Saliterman, S. Fundamentals of BioMEMS and medical microdevices, Vol. 153. (SPIE Press,
2006).
Hong, K. et al. Aerosol jet printed, Sub-2 V complementary circuits constructed from P-and N-type
electrolyte gated transistors. Advanced Materials 26, 7032-7037 (2014).

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

22.
23.
24.

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.
38.

Yang, H., Rahman, M.T., Du, D., Panat, R. & Lin, Y. 3-D printed adjustable microelectrode arrays
for electrochemical sensing and biosensing. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 230, 600-606
(2016).
Saleh, M.S., Hu, C. & Panat, R. Three-dimensional microarchitected materials and devices using
nanoparticle assembly by pointwise spatial printing. Science advances 3, e1601986 (2017).
Chia, J.S.Y., Tan, M.T., Khiew, P.S., Chin, J.K. & Siong, C.W. A bio-electrochemical sensing
platform for glucose based on irreversible, non-covalent pi–pi functionalization of graphene
produced via a novel, green synthesis method. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 210, 558-565
(2015).
Liu, E.Y., Jung, S., Weitz, D.A., Yi, H. & Choi, C.-H. High-throughput double emulsion-based
microfluidic production of hydrogel microspheres with tunable chemical functionalities toward
biomolecular conjugation. Lab on a Chip 18, 323-334 (2018).
Bard, A.J. & Faulkner, L.R. Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and applications, Edn. 2nd.
(John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; 2001).
Wu, N. et al. Synthesis of network reduced graphene oxide in polystyrene matrix by a two-step
reduction method for superior conductivity of the composite. Journal of Materials Chemistry 22,
17254-17261 (2012).
Elgrishi, N. et al. A practical beginner’s guide to cyclic voltammetry. Journal of Chemical
Education 95, 197-206 (2018).
del Río, J.S., Henry, O.Y., Jolly, P. & Ingber, D.E. An antifouling coating that enables affinitybased electrochemical biosensing in complex biological fluids. Nature Nanotechnology 14, 11431149 (2019).
Shang, J. et al. Cell entry mechanisms of SARS-CoV-2. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 117, 11727-11734 (2020).
den Hartog, G. et al. SARS-CoV-2–Specific Antibody Detection for Seroepidemiology: A
Multiplex Analysis Approach Accounting for Accurate Seroprevalence. The Journal of infectious
diseases (2020).
Baum, A. et al. Antibody cocktail to SARS-CoV-2 spike protein prevents rapid mutational escape
seen with individual antibodies. Science (2020).
Li, Q., Gordon, M., Cao, C., Ugen, K.E. & Morgan, D. Improvement of a low pH antigen-antibody
dissociation procedure for ELISA measurement of circulating anti-Aβ antibodies. BMC
Neuroscience 8, 22 (2007).
Wang, Y.M. et al. Additively manufactured hierarchical stainless steels with high strength and
ductility. Nature Materials 17, 63-71 (2018).
Schasfoort, R.B. in Handbook of surface Plasmon resonance 1-26 (2017).
Kandimalla, V. et al. Regeneration of ethyl parathion antibodies for repeated use in immunosensor:
a study on dissociation of antigens from antibodies. Biosensors and Bioelectronics 20, 903-906
(2004).
Spinelli, A. & Pellino, G. COVID-19 pandemic: perspectives on an unfolding crisis. The British
Journal of Surgery (2020).
Ali, M.A. et al. Continuous Monitoring of Soil Nitrate Using a Miniature Sensor with Poly (3octyl-thiophene) and Molybdenum Disulfide Nanocomposite. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces
11, 29195-29206 (2019).

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.13.20193722; this version posted September 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figures
Figure 1. Schematic of the Manufacturing process of the 3D Printed COVID-19 Test Chip
(3DcC) by Aerosol Jet nanoparticle 3D printing. (a) Glass substrate with patterned gold film
forming the base for working electrode (WE), counter electrode (CE) and reference electrode (RE)
of the electrochemical cell of 3DcC. (b) Construction of Aerosol Jet machine where gold ink is
converted into an aerosol consisting of micro-droplets using ultrasonic energy and transported to
a nozzle by N2 gas where it is focused on the gold film of the WE using a sheath gas (also N2) to
form the micropillars. The entire process is digitized with the CAD program controlling the
printing process. (c) An AJ printed 10×10 gold micropillar array where pillar-to-pillar gap is
indicated. (d) Details of AJ printing of a single micropillar where rapid layer-by-layer stacking of
the micro-rings of the nanoparticle ink are achieved using surface tension (g) of the printed ink.
The entire process is achieved without the use of any support structure. Once a layer was printed,
the ink loses solvents due to the heat from the platen (which was heated to 150 ºC using a custom
heater). The dried ink provides a base to receive the next micro-ring; and the process is repeated.
(e) Process of fabrication of the PDMS housing of the 3DcC device. A PDMS structure is created
using a PMMA master mold using replica molding. This structure then acts as a mold for the
PDMS housing that contains a cavity for microfluidic channel as shown. (f) The 3DcC device
formed by placing the PDMS housing with microfluidic channel on the glass substrate with the
micropillar electrodes. Prior to this step, the micropillar electrodes were functionalized with
reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and viral antigens as described in Fig. 2.

25

(b)

N2 ga
s

(c)

Drop
le

ts loa
ded
N2

2m

Au ink
Shea
th

Print
head
Ultrasound
atomizer

Plate
n

(d)
10 × 10 Array
m

Solvent
nanoparticles
g

g

N2

Solidified

Nozzle

ass
Gl

Nozzle

Au la
y

120 µm

2 mm

er

250 µm

72 µm

(a)
Patterned Au
by evaporation

(f)

Outlet
Microfluidic
channel;

s
as
Gl

RE
WE

Sensor
platform

Inlet

(e)

Step 4

Step 1
PDMS

Sample

A

Peeling off
CE

RE

WE

Step 3

CE

3DP COVID-19 Rapid
Test Chip (3DcC)

26

PDMS

PDMS

A1

A

Step 2

Peeling off

PMMA
Channel

Figure 2. Functionalization of 3D Printed Micropillar Electrode and 3DcC Sensor Operation.
(a) AJ printed gold micropillars prior to the surface treatment (step 1). (b) Coating of the electrodes
by carboxylated (-COOH) reduced-graphene oxide (rGO) sheets by a simple drop-casting process
(step 2). An SEM image shows the decoration of rGO sheets on the gold pillar. The electrostatic
or Van der Waals interactions allow the rGO sheets to be connected to the micropillar. The surface
porosity of the 3D printed micropillar shown in the SEM images in Fig. 3c aid in this process.
Molecular structure of a rGO sheet is shown where –COOH and –OH groups are indicated. (c)
Coupling of the viral antigens with the rGO sheets using EDC:NHS chemistry (step 3). The EDC
and NHS molecules activate the –COOH group of rGO sheets. Recombinant antigens of the SARSCoV-2 virus are immobilized and bound to rGO sheets by establishing strong covalent bonds
between the –COOH group of rGO and -NH2 group of antigens via an amidation reaction. Two
antigens, namely, spike S1 and RBD, were separately immobilized in this manner. A bovine serum
albumin (BSA) treatment on the pillar surface blocked the non-specific sites of the sensor. (d)
Antibodies selectively attached to the specific antigens upon introduction to the sensor via an
antibody-antigen interaction (step 4). (e, f) Schematics showing the sensing principle of the 3DcC
device. The electrode/electrolyte interface of the WE was expected to form an electrical double
layer (Cdl), inner Helmholtz plane or IHP, outer Helmholtz plane or OHP, and a diffusion layer
during the redox reaction. An equivalent electrical circuit is shown. When antibodies are
introduced (f), they rapidly bind with the antigens on the electrode surface, altering the Nyquist
plot (schematics in e and f) which is captured by electrical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).

27

(c)

rGO

EDC-NHS

During Test

Antigen

Antibody

Step 2

Step 1

Step 3
OH

N

Ox

Fe(CN)6

Z im (kΩ)

Fe(CN)6

4-

3-

+ e-

CE

Cdl

No antibody

WE

pbs

Rs

OH

OH

sio
n

P2

Di
ffu

P2

(f)

OH

sio
n

S1 antigen

Di
ffu

1

IH
P
OH 1
P

+ -

S1 antibody

IH

CO
OH

+-

+ -

S1 antigen

COOH OH

Rct

+ -

+ e

-

-

Fab

C
N

+ -

+ -

+

-

+

Fab OH

COOH

OHP2 > OHP1

+-

(e)

COOH OH

Au Micropillar
with rGO
10 µm

Fc

OH

C

OH
COOH

COO
H

COOH

Step 4

+-

OH COOH

(d)

Zre (kΩ)

e-

+-

+ e-

Z im (kΩ)

(b)

(a)

With antibody

No antibody

+Zre (kΩ)

28

+ -

Figure 3. Physical and Chemical Characterization of the 3DcC device. (a) Optical image of
the 3DcC device made by the fabrication process described in Figs. 1 and 2. (b) Optical and SEM
images of the AJ printed gold micropillar array (10×10) at different magnifications. (c) SEM
images showing the morphology of a single gold micropillar at different magnifications. The tips
of the micropillars are pointed and have a small circular dip at the top (diameter 20 mm) which is
a result of the printing process described in Fig. 1d. Surface morphology of the micropillars
consisted of gold clusters that created a characteristic surface porosity. This morphology helps
attach rGO flakes to the electrode surface. The diameter and pillar-to-pillar gap of the micropillars
was 73 µm (± 2.13%) and 122 µm (± 0.25%), respectively, while the height was about 250 µm.
(d) SEM images showing the morphology of a gold micropillar after rGO decoration. The rGO
sheets have formed secondary three-dimensional networks adjacent to the micropillars. The rGO
has also formed wrinkles due to π-π interactions between graphene sheets. The 3D micropillar
geometry and the rGO coating are responsible for the increase in the loading of the viral antigens.
(e) Raman spectra of an AJ printed gold micropillars without coating, after coating with rGO, and
after immobilization of antigens on rGO-Au. The spectra show both defect and graphitic peaks for
the coated samples, but no Raman peaks for the bare gold micropillar. The graphitic peak is shifted
to higher number upon S1 antigen immobilization. (f) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDX) studies showing atomic % before coating, after coating with rGO, and after immobilization
of antigens on rGO-Au. (g) The 3DcC device interfaced with a portable Potentiostat (Palmsens
Inc) which was connected to a smartphone via a mini-USB connection with the signal being read
by PStouch software.

29

(a)

(b)

(g)

CE

WE

3DcC

0.4 mm

RE

Android
mobile

0.4 mm

200 µm

0.5 mm

Display

(e)

(c)
(c)

1349.6

antigen/rGO-Au

Intensity (count)

100 µm

20 µm

1596

1348.1

D

1590.5

G
rGO-Au

2 µm
1200

(d)
(d)

3DcC

Au

(f)

1400

1600

USB
port

1800

-1

Raman Shift (cm )

Syringe

Wrinkles

100 µm

20 µm

0.5 µm

Connectors

30

Portable
circuit

Figure 4. Sensing of Antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 Spike S1 Antigen at Different Molar
Concentrations with Regeneration. (a) Nyquist plots of the 3DcC sensor measured by EIS
method without and with the spike S1 antibodies at concentrations of 0.01 fM, 1 fM, 1 pM, 100
pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, and 30 nM in PBS buffer solution. (b, c) Nyquist plots similar to that in (a)
after two successive sensor regenerations by a low pH chemistry consisting of 1.0 M (pH 2.5)
formic acid solution. The regeneration was achieved within 60 seconds. For all concentrations, the
signal in (b, c) was within 95% of that in (a). (d) The charge transfer resistance (Rct) for the 3DcC
sensor for each concentration of antibodies and control serum before and after each regeneration
for the data in (a, b, c). The fetal bovine serum (fbs) and rabbit serum (rs) in (a-d) were utilized as
control biofluids. For all measurements, a 50 mM PBS (pH 7.4) solution containing an equimolar
concentration (5 mM) of a ferro/ferricyanide mediator was used. Three successive readings were
obtained at each concentration of the antibodies for the three data-sets. Detection frequencies from
1 Hz to 10,000 Hz were applied to obtain this data. There was no incubation time for all the
measurements in this figure. The Rct values in (d) were calculated by fitting the data in (a, b, c) to
a Randles equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 2e.

31

32

(R
e

2)

g.

0
3

Zre (kW)

Regeneration (1 min)

g

4

1 pM
100 pM
1 nM
10 nM
30 nM
Reg
pbs

9

Se
ns
in

0

control

2

Zim (kW)

(b)

pbs
rs
fbs
0.01 fM
1 fM

Regeneration (1 min)

6

30 nM
Reg

1)

g.

3

10 nM

100 pM
1 nM

(R
e

Zre (kW)

1 pM

g

0

1 fM

Se
ns
in

9

0.01 fM

6

control

fbs
1pM
10nM
formic acid

fbs

Zim (kW)

2.0

rs

Zim(kW)
4.0

pbs

Base
Regeneration (1 min)

3

30 nM
Reg

rs;
1fM;
1nM;
Reg.

10 nM

g

pbs;
0.01fM;
100pM;
30nM;

100 pM
1 nM

1 pM

6

Se
ns
in

0.0

1 fM

0

0.01 fM

control

9

fbs

rs

3

pbs

Rct (kW)

(a)
(c)

4

2

0

6
9

Zre (kW)

(d)
12

0

Figure 5. Sensing of Antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 receptor binding domain (RBD) Antigens at
Different Molar Concentrations with Regeneration. (a) Nyquist plots of the 3DcC sensor
measured by EIS method without and with the RBD antibodies at concentrations of 0.01 fM, 1 fM,
1 pM, 100 pM, 1 nM, 10 nM, and 30 nM in PBS buffer solution. (b, c) Nyquist plots similar to
that in (a) after two successive sensor regenerations by a low pH chemistry consisting of 1.0 M
(pH 2.5) formic acid solution. The regeneration was achieved within 60 seconds. For all
concentrations, the signal in (b, c) was within 95% of that in (a). (d) The charge transfer resistance
(Rct) for the 3DcC sensor for each concentration of antibodies and control serum before and after
each regeneration for the data in (a, b, c). The fetal bovine serum (fbs) and rabbit serum (rs) in (ad) were utilized as control biofluids. For all measurements, a 50 mM PBS (pH 7.4) solution
containing an equimolar concentration (5 mM) of a ferro/ferricyanide mediator was used. Three
successive readings were obtained at each concentration of the antibodies for the three data-sets.
Detection frequencies from 1 Hz to 10,000 Hz were applied to obtain this data. There was no
incubation time for all the measurements in this figure. The Rct values in (d) were calculated by
fitting the data in (a, b, c) to a Randles equivalent circuit shown in Fig. 2e.

33

3

(a)

(b)

3

3

(c)

10 nM

2

Zim (kW)

Reg.

pbs

0

0

1

3
4
Zre(kW)

5

-1

6

0

10 fM;
100 pM;
formic acid;

1

2

3
Zre (kW)

4

1 pM
1 nM
pbs

5

6

1

0

-1

1 fM;
10 pM;
10 nM;

0

1

2

10 fM;
100 pM;
Reg;

3
4
Zre (kW)

1 pM
1 nM
pbs

5

6

base
2

Regeneration (1 min)

4

Regeneration (1 min)

control

6

Regeneration (1 min)

10
8

34

Reg
pbs

10 nM

1 nM

100 pM

10 pM

1.0 pM

10 fM

1.0 fM

Reg
pbs

10 nM

1 nM

10 fM

1.0 fM
1.0 pM
10 pM
100 pM
1 nM
10 nM
Reg
pbs

fbs

0

pbs
rs

Rct (kW)

2

1 fM;
10 pM;
10 nM;

10 pM
fbs

100 pM

0

100 pM;
rs;
formic acid

10 pM

-1

1 nM;
1fM
Reg.;

1.0 pM

10 nM;
1pM;
pbs;

(d)

1

1.0 fM

Zim (kW)

1 pM

1

2

Zim (kW)

2

Figure 6. Detection Time and Regeneration Studies of the 3DcC Device. (a, b) The detection
time for spike S1 and RBD antibodies during the EIS measurements, respectively, for twelve
different 3DcC devices. The device impedance is plotted against the detection time. The spike S1
and RBD sensors reached 93.2% and 92% of their saturation impedance at 11.5 seconds,
respectively, allowing the signal detection in seconds. The concentration of antibodies was set to
1 nM for this measurement. A frequency range of 1-10000 Hz was used to obtain this data. The
(Zim) data is recorded from 3 seconds after the introduction of antibodies as the EIS measurement
had to overcome the solution resistance, Rs prior to obtaining the charge transfer resistance (see
schematic in Fig. 2e). (c, d) Regeneration study showing Nyquist plots and charge transfer
resistance for the detection of spike S1 antibodies for the 3DcC device. The regeneration is carried
out 9-times (a total of 10 readings). For each measurement, the sensor was first exposed to pbs,
then to 1 nM concentration of S1 antibodies in pbs, and finally to formic acid (1M) with an
incubation time of 60 s. The charge transfer resistance as a function of the number of regenerations
is plotted in (d). (e, f) Regeneration data for sensing of RBD antibodies by the 3DcC device. For
both the sensors, a minimal loss in sensor performance is observed after 9 regenerations.

35

93.2%
0 nM

S1 sensor

2

1;
4;
7;

0

RBD sensor

1

15

0

18

3
6
9

1

(d)
1 nM

92%
0 nM

2

2;
5;
8;

3
4
Zre (kW)

(1 nM)

1;
4;
7;

1

3
6
9

0

6

15

(f)

S1 sensor
12

12

9

9

Target (1 nM); ±3.2%
6

1

6

9

12

Time (s)

15

18

0

3
6
9

2

3
Zre (kW)

2;
5;
8;

4

3
6
9

5

6

RBD sensor

Target (1 nM); ±0.25%
6
3

Base (no target); ±3.16%

Base (no target); ±4.6%

3

1;
4;
7;

0

5

2;
5;
8;

pbs
(no target)

formic acid

3

0

9

target

2

15

11.5 s

sensor 1
sensor 2
sensor 3
sensor 4
sensor 5
sensor 6
pbs

2
Zim (kW)

9
12
Time (s)

Rct (kW)

(b) 3

6

2;
5;
7;

pbs
(no target)

1

formic acid

3

RBD sensor

9
target
(1 nM)

1;
4;
8;

0

1

3

Zim (kW)

Zim (kW)

1

1 nM

(e)

1

3

Rct (kW)

sensor 1
sensor 2
sensor 3
sensor 4
sensor 5
sensor 6
pbs

2

(c)

11.5 s

S1 sensor

Zim (kW)

(a) 3

0

2

4

6

Number of Regeneration

36

8

10

0

2

4

6

Number of Regeneration

8

Figure 7. Cross-reactivity and Reproducibility Studies of the 3DcC Device. (a) Crossreactivity test for the 3DcC device designed to detect spike S1 antibodies. Nyquist plots for the
device are plotted for multiple antigens and antibodies in absence and presence of spike S1
antibodies. Interleukin-6 or IL-6 antigen (0.05 nM), nucleocapsid (N) antibody (1 nM), and RBD
antibody (0.1 nM) are used for this measurement. (b) The Rct values were calculated from the
Nyquist plots shown in (a). The 3DcC device provided minimal interference with other related
proteins. (c) Cross-reactivity test for the 3DcC device designed to detect RBD antibodies. Nyquist
plots for the device are plotted for multiple antigens and antibodies in absence and presence of
RBD antibodies. Interleukin-6 or IL-6 antigen (0.05 nM), nucleocapsid (N) antibody (1 nM), and
spike S1 antibody (0.1 nM) are used for this measurement. (b) The Rct values were calculated from
the Nyquist plots shown in (a). The 3DcC device provided minimal interference with other related
proteins. (e, f) The sensor reproducibility test on six different 3DcC sensors in presence of S1
antibodies (1nM in pbs). The sensor-to-sensor variation is evaluated by calculating the Rct values
for each sensor. This variation is within about 6%. The error bar is from at least three repeated
measurements of the sensor. (g, h) Reproducibility test data for sensing of RBD antibodies (1 nM
in pbs) from six different sensors. This sensor-to-sensor variation in this case was about 5%.

37

Zim (kW)

4

S1sensor

5

0

6

±3.7% (RSD)

(h)

3
Zre (kW)

4

5

6

±2.73% (RSD)

6

Base

6
so
r

Se
n

so
r

5

4
Se
n

3

so
r
Se
n

2

so
r

so
r
Se
n

Se
n

6

5

so
r
Se
n

4

so
r
Se
n

so
r

3
Se
n

so
r

so
r

2
Se
n

Se
n

so
r

1

3

Se
n

dy

N

bo

D

38

2

RBD sensor
9

6

1

Target

3
Zre (kW)

sensor 2
sensor 4
sensor 6

Base

Zim (kW)

od
+I
y
L6P
ro
tei
n

y

An
tib

od
y

ib

od
y+

y
od
ib
An
t
D
RB

od
ib

ib

D

An
t

o
Pr

RB

ib

-6
IL

RB

in
te

od
y

dy
bo

s

y

N

pb

od
ib

An
t

2

3
s

pb

An
t

0

An
ti

0

An
tib
od
IL
y
-6
Pr
S1
o
t
An
e
S1
in
tib
An
od
tib
y+
od
S1
RB
y
An
D
An
tib
od
tib
S1
y+
o
dy
An
N
tib
An
od
tib
y+
od
IL
y
-6
Pr
ot
ein

2

D

Rct (kW)

4

2

1

sensor 1;
sensor 3;
sessor 5;
pbs

0

9

6

S1

4

0

1

sensor 2
sensor 4
sensor 6

Target

8

Rct (kW)

6

RB

Rct (kW)

8

0

(f)

Electrode
Functionalized
with RBD
Antigen

senosr 1;
sensor 3;
sensor 5;
pbs

1

(d) 10
Electrode
Functionalized
with S1 Antigen

N

(b) 10

2

1

6

RBD sensor

so
r

4
Zre (kW)

3

Se
n

2

(g)

S1 sensor

Rct (kW)

0

6

An
t

4

Zre (kW)

An
t

2

0

3

2

Detect RBD Antibodies
Sensor functionalize with RBD antigens

S1

0

1

+

Detect S1 Antibodies
Sensor functionalize with S1 antigens

0

pbs
S1 Antibody
N Antibody
IL-6 Protein
RBD Antibody
RBD Antibody + S1 Antibody
RBD Antibody + N Antibody
RBD Antibody+ IL-6 Protein

2

pbs
RBD Antibody
N Antibody
IL-6 Protein
S1 Antibody
S1 Antibody + RBD Antibody
S1 Antibody + N Antibody
S1 Antibody + IL-6 Protein

1

(e)

RBD sensor

D

Zim (kW)

2

3

An
ti

(c)

S1 sensor

RB

3

Zim (kW)

(a)

Figure 8. Study of the Kinetics of Antigen-Antibody Interactions. (a) Variation in the charge
transfer resistance (Rct) during antigen-antibody interaction for spike S1 antibodies at the
micropillar surface indicating their association, dissociation, and regeneration. (b) Nyquist plots
for the data in (a). (c) Schematic of the association, dissociation, and regeneration of the kinetics
shown in (a, b). In associate phase, the target antibodies (30 nM) with buffer solution are loaded
into the 3DcC device. The antibodies attach to the antigens. However, some unbound antibodies
may be present in the solution near the sensor surface and contribute to the Rct. In dissociation
phase, a fresh pbs (without antibodies) is used to wash the 3DcC device, thus removing the
unbound antibodies in the solution, and reducing the Rct slightly. In the regeneration phase, a
solution of formic acid (1 M; pH 2.5) is used to regenerate the sensor surface, thus eluting the
antibodies from the antigens and lowering Rct significantly. Five repeated measurements are
carried out during the dissociation phase.

39

(a)

(b)

5

12
4

12.8

Zim (kW)

Rct (kW)

Rct (kW)

9

6

pbs
Association
Dissociation
Rep 2
Rep 3
Rep 4
Rep 5
formic acid
Reg

3
2
1

12.7

0

3

0

2

4

6

8

Zre (kW)

0
1

2

Antigen at rGO

4

3

5

Re
g

pb
s

rGO

4

Au

Separated
antibody

Bound
antibody

2

Re
pe
at

3
Re
pe
at

2
Re
pe
at

Re
pe
at

As
so
cia
tio
n
Di
sso
cia
tio
n

pb
s

Unbound
antibody

1

(c)

-3

3

1

4

40

5

10

