medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Quantifying the Effects of Social Distancing on
the Spread of COVID-19
Talal Daghriri1 , Ozlem Ozmen 2
Department of Industrial Engineering 1 - Department of Computer Science2
(Jazan University - University of Central Florida)1 , (University of Central Florida)2
Jazan, Saudi Arabia - Orlando, Florida, USA
Tdaghriri@knights.ucf.edu - Ozlem@ucf.edu
Keywords: COVID-19, disease spread, social distancing, agent-based modeling

Abstract—This paper studies the interplay between the social
distancing and the spread of COVID-19 disease—a widely
spread pandemic that has affected nearly most of the world
population. Starting in China, the virus has reached the United
States of America with devastating consequences. Other
countries severely affected by the pandemic are Brazil, Russia,
United Kingdom, Spain, India, Italy, and France. Even though
it is not possible to eliminate the spread of the virus from the
world or any other country, it might be possible to reduce its
effect by decreasing the number of infected people.
Implementing such policies needs a good understanding of the
system’s dynamics, generally not possible with mathematical
linear equations or Monte Carlo methods because human
society is a complex adaptive system with complex and
continuous feedback loops. As a result, we use agent-based
methods to conduct our study. Moreover, recent agent-based
modeling studies for the COVID-19 pandemic show significant
promise assisting decision-makers in managing the crisis
through applying some policies such as social distancing, disease
testing, contact tracing, home isolation, providing good
emergency and hospitalization strategies, and preventing
traveling would lead to reducing the infection rates. Based on
imperial college modeling studies that prove increasing levels of
interventions could slow down the spread of disease and
infection cases as much as possible, and taking into account that
social distancing policy is considered to be the most important
factor that was recommended to follow. Our proposed model is
designed to test if increasing the social distancing policies
strictness can slow down the spread of disease significantly or
not, and find out what is the required safe level of social
distancing. So, the model was run six times, with six different
percentages of social distancing with keeping the other
parameters levels fixed for all experiments. The results of our
study show that social distancing affects the spread of COVID19
significantly, where the spread of disease and infection rates
decrease once social distancing procedures are implemented at
higher levels. Also, the behavior space tool was used to run ten
experiments with different levels of social distancing, which
supported the previous results. We concluded that applying and
increasing social distancing policy levels led to significantly
reduced infection rates, which result in decreasing deaths. Both
types of experiments prove that infection rates are reduced
dramatically when the level of social distancing intervention is
implemented between 80% to 100%.

pandemic is yet to be seen as cases continue to rise
exponentially. Since there is not yet a vaccine for COVID19, a lot of uncertainty remains about its impact and the
best way to slow the spread of the virus. Countries around
the world are implementing various policies such as social
distancing, which aims to reduce the amount of contact
people have with each other.
The effectiveness of various policies is best shown through
data collected from China and Italy, which were the first
countries to feel the impacts of the pandemic. Italy was
slower to implement social distancing policies than China,
and it is evident from this data that they paid the price for
their inactivity. Meanwhile, the economic cost can be seen
in the data from China and from the US, where there have
been unprecedented numbers of people claiming
unemployment benefits. Goldman Sachs predicted quarteron-quarter annualized growth rates of -6%in Q1 and -24%
in Q2 for the US [1]. It clear that social distancing policies
are taking their toll on the economy and the future looks
bleak.
With such high economical costs and long-term impacts of
strict social distancing policies, questions about whether
such policies are worth it will naturally arise. The data
coming out of China (as well as South Korea and Singapore)
demonstrates the effectiveness of social distancing at
slowing the spread of coronavirus; however, it is possible
that less strict interventions would have a less severe impact
on the economy while still slowing the spread [2][3][4].
At this point, the main study that has examined the data
to weigh up the benefits of social distancing versus the
economic cost compared two scenarios [1][5]. The first
scenario is 3-4 months of social distancing in the form of
isolating people with symptoms at home, quarantining at
home people who live in the same house as the suspected
case and social distancing for the elderly and people most at
risk. The second scenario is without any social distancing.
This study showed that in the first scenario (social
distancing) there would be 1.76 million fewer fatalities from
COVID-19 over a period of 6 months than in the second
scenario (no policy).

I. INTRODUCTION
We developed an agent-based simulation model by using
Netlogo simulation software to quantify the effect of social
In 2020, the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) has spread
distancing on the spread of COVID-19 disease. Simulation
across the globe, taking lives and wreaking havoc. The
helps in conducting our study since we can replicate the case
world has not seen a health threat like this since the 1918
study with much less cost and predict valid outcomes that
influenza pandemic. During that pandemic, at least 50
help in providing the right recommendations to save the
million NOTE:
people
died,
and
one-third
of
the
world’s
This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
lives and improve the required health care services during
population was affected. The full impact of the coronavirus

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

the crisis. Our simulation model can be verified and
validated with the data from the countries that have
implemented social distancing and those countries which
cannot implement due to any reason. It would certainly help
the policymakers to decide what to do and what not to do.
It is intended to be a decision support system that can show
the outcome effectively and efficiently. In our study, we
seek to quantify the safest level of social distancing that
should be applied and followed by the citizens in the United
States.
II. METHODS
We used agent-based modeling to capture the causeeffect relationship of COVID-19 with the well-known
intervention of social distancing. We used ODD+ D
protocol, which is an extension of the ODD protocol, where
ODD+ D means (Overview, Design Concepts, and Details)
+ decision. Moreover, ODD+ D was extended to introduce
human decision behavior to the previous code so it would
help to study and analyze the human behaviors regarding
the decision-making process [6] [7].

Figure 1: ODD Protocol

A. Overview
1)
Purpose: This paper describes the development and
implementation of a simulation model in NetLogo software to
understand the effect of social distancing on the spread of
COVID-19. Starting in China, the virus has reached the United
States of America with most numbers. Other countries
severely affected by the pandemic are Brazil, Russia, United
Kingdom, Spain, Italy, and France. Even though it is not
possible to eliminate the spread of the virus from the world or
any other country, however, it might be possible to reduce its
effect by decreasing the peak of infected peoples.
Implementing such policies needs a solid ground, which is
impossible with a simple mathematical linear equation or
Monte Carlo method because human society is a complex
adaptive system with complex and continuous feedback loops.
In such scenarios, an agent-based model is a good choice to
investigate the action effects relationships.
2)
Entities, State variables, and scales: This model
contains only a single agent, which is a person. The person has
three states: healthy, infected, and recovered. Agents are
colored according to state and change their state according to
the respective state. The healthy agents are colored with green,
the infected are colored with red, and the recovered agents are
colored with yellow. Each agent has one of two strategies:
following social distancing or not following social distancing.
Agents would move randomly on the canvas. As described
above, the agents must have a label representing the strategy.
“S” represents that agents are following “Social Distancing,”
while the “N” represents that the agents are not following the
social distancing policy. The environment is a 2D grid of 32X32
cells. One cell can contain only one agent at a time. Agents can
randomly move inside the model, pursuing the strategy they
consider feasible for survival.
3)
Process Overview and Scheduling: Each agent must
follow one of the two strategies: Social Distancing or NonSocial Distancing. A person moves randomly in the model, and
encounter or meet another person. If the person is meeting
another person who has COVID-19, then this healthy person
would be affected by that sick person and get sick too. In the
model, every person who is following the non-social distancing
strategy would meet other persons. However, the persons who
are following the social distancing strategy would not meet any
others.

Figure 2: ODD+D protocol
Figure 3: Process overview and scheduling

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

B. Design Parameters
This section describes the design concept of the model.
1)
Basic Principle: The basic principle of the model is to
understand the effect of social distancing on COVID-19 spread.
We would use two types of strategies to understand this effect.
2)
Emergence: By employing the simple rule of social
distancing, we found the emergent structure of healthy and sick
people in society.
3)
Adaption: People would adapt to the optimal strategy
to remain healthy.
4)
Objectives: The people's objective is to remain
healthy, and also maintain their relationships.
5)
Learning: The agent would learn how to survive by
following the social distancing rule.
6)

Prediction: Overall death and survival rates.

7)
Sensing: gents would sense the other agents who are
infected with COVID-19.

Table 1: The experiment factors and levels

2) Input Data: There is no input data in this model.
3) Sub Models:
•

8)
Interaction: Every agent would interact with other
agents randomly.
9)

Stochasticity: Agent moves randomly in the canvas.

10)

Collectives: There are no collectives in the model.

11)
Observation: Infection, recovery, death, and survival
rates are the observations.
C. Details
1) Initialization: Every experiment has different values
for initialization. The following figure depicts one of them.

Total Immune Population %

𝑃𝑖

𝑃recovered=𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒) /𝑃𝑡

(1)

Where:
Pi is the total immune population
Pt is the total population
Precovered=True is the total population recovered
•

Total infected People %

𝑃𝑖𝑛𝑓

𝑃infected=𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒)/𝑃𝑡

(2)

Where:
Pinf is the total infected population
Pt is the total population
Pinfected=True is the total population infected
•

𝑃𝑇𝐷

Total Deaths and Death%

𝑃infected

𝑃recovered=𝑇rue
(3)

Figure 4: Sliders and switches

𝑃𝐷%
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
records, the total infected and deaths cases are 6,706,374 and
198,099, respectively, until the moment [8]. So, the fatality rate
is about 3%, and it would be used in all experiments as a fixed
value. Also, Niklas Bobrovitz and his team at the University of
Toronto assessed the disease test data to determine the
proportion of infected people in the countries, where the
infection rate is 6% in the United States [9].

𝑃infected

𝑃recovered=𝑇𝑟𝑢𝑒)/𝑃𝑡
(4)

Where:
PD% is the percentage of total deaths from population
PTD is the total deaths
Pt is total the population
Pinfected=True is the total population infected
Precovered=True is the total population recovered

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2: The six experiments conditions/settings

III. RESULTS (GRAPHS, CHARTS, TABLES)

In the first experiment, the social distancing percent slider was
set up at zero percent to test the spread of COVID-19 without
following social distancing procedures at all, as shown in Figure
6. Since we are just interested in studying and analyzing the
effect of social distancing on the disease spread, the other
factors values would remain fixed among all experiments such
as the number of people in the sample, infected people percent,
and fatality rate. In addition, the initial visualizations of all
experiments tend to produce the same visual outputs, but the
final visualizations would yield different visual outputs
depending on the different percentages of followed social
distancing in each experiment. Figure 7 shows the initial
visualization of the first experiment where the infected and
healthy people are represented by red and green agents,
respectively. In addition, the disease transmission occurs
through close contact between them; then, the infected cases
would survive or die. So, the final visualization of the model
gives a clear idea about the rates of healthy, infected, recovered,
and deaths of people at the end of the experiment.

A. Social Distancing 0%

Figure 7: The initial visualization of the experiment

Figure 5: First experiment settings

Figure 8: First experiment results

After completing the first experiment, as shown in figures 8 and
9, it was feasible to read and analyze the final visualization and
statistical records. To explain, the numbers of infected people
were too high due to the absence of social distancing, and there
were only 3% fatality rates. So, most of the infected cases have
recovered, which explains why most of the agents have turned
yellow at the end of the experiment, while the number of healthy
people who have never infected is too small.
Figure 6: The Netlogo model interface

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 9: Final visualization of agent’s situation
Figure 12: Infected versus the recovered people curve, when
the fatality rate is 3%, and zero percent of social distancing

B. Social Distancing 30%
Then, the experiment was carried out with a higher level of
social distancing, where the social distancing level was
increased from zero to 30 percent without modifying any other
parameters in the Netlogo model settings, as appears in figure
13.

Figure 10: Movement patterns in the first experiment.

The movement patterns of the three different categories of
agents were traced, as shown in figure 10, where the red,
yellow, and green movement patterns represent the motion of
infected, recovered, and healthy agents, respectively. It is clear
that the infected and recovered people represent a huge part of
the final visualization, while the health people represent a small
part of motion patterns.

Figure 13: Second experiment settings

Figure 11: Infected, recovered, and deaths population rate.

Figures 11 and 12 show the statistical estimates and records of
total recovered, infected, and dead populations. These records
are useful to compare all experiment results after using different
levels of social distancing. It would also be possible to
understand how changing social distancing strictness levels will
influence the transmission of disease, which will allow
decision-makers to create effective recommendations and
regulations.

Figure 14: Movement patterns in the second experiment.

The final visualization of movement patterns in the second
experiment indicates that red and yellow patterns are lower
compared to the first experiment, while the green patterns

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

are greater in the second experiment, which means there is
a significant improvement in reducing the probability of
infection and increasing the survival rate.

Figure 15: Infected versus the recovered people curve, when the
fatality rate is 3%, and 30% percent of social distancing

Based on figure 15, the results of using 30\% of social
distancing prove that the numbers of infected and deaths were
reduced compared to the previous experiment. The number of
infected people was 997 in the first experiment, but in the
second experiment, it became 708 infected cases. Therefore, the
decline in infected numbers of people in the second experiment
lead to a decrease in the number of deaths too.

Figure 17: The visual outputs of applying different levels of social
distancing

C. Social Distancing 40%
Then, the percentage of social distancing was increased to the
next level, which is higher and equal to 40%, resulting in further
improvement and reduction in the spread of disease compared
to the lower previous levels of social distancing, as shown in
Figure 16.

Figure 18: Final visualizations of movement patterns
Figure 16: Infected versus the recovered people curve, when
the fatality rate is 3%, and 40% percent of social distancing

increasing the social distancing level to 60%, 80%, and 100%
in the last three experiments, respectively. The final findings
indicate significant improvements in protecting the population
from infection, where the different visualizations of the six
experiments are shown in figure 17.

By comparing the final visualizations of movement
patterns of the six experiments, as shown in figure 18, we
can see that increasing social distancing levels leads to
reduce the spread of COVID-19 dramatically. To explain,
following 100 percent of social distancing generated the
best results with the highest rate of survival and the lowest
rate of death.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

and recovery rates were declined too. In fact, the survival rate
has been dramatically improved by analyzing the population’s
survival rate, as shown in figure 22. Therefore, the study results
support what the governments and agencies are doing right now
about making strict instructions and procedures for keeping the
social distancing phenomena exist everywhere in our daily lives
until the disease disappeared completely.

Figure 19: Effect of social distancing on infection rate

As we presented previously, the previous six experiments
have visual outputs. However, there are ten other
experiments done with ten different levels of social
distancing by using the behavior space tool, and their results
are shown in figure 19. The curve proved and confirmed
that increasing the social distancing percentage leads to a
lower infection rate, which results in decreasing the deaths
and recovery rates.

Figure 22: Survival rate

IV. DISCUSSION
In this agent-based simulation model, we verified that social
distancing could help in reducing the spread of COVID19 and
slow down the infection and fatality rates. We have observed
with the help of simulation experiments that social distancing
implication decreases infected cases, which helps in handling
and treating severe patients. In other words, a lower number of
critical cases means that the hospital team would be able to
handle any case, so the chance of survival is far greater, and the
healthcare system will never be stressed.

Figure 20: Deaths numbers

We have studied and simulated the social distancing behavior
on discrete values ranging from zero to 100%. Therefore, we
call it zero percent of social distancing when it is not
implemented at all, and people do not follow any kind of
preemptive measure to stop or reduce the spread of the
pandemic. In the extreme case, we suppose that everyone is
following the instruction to stop or reduce the spread of disease
either implemented by law enforcement agencies or by the selfdriving factors, and we call it 100% social distancing.
With the help of the experiment, it can be easily verified that
the social distancing at zero percent implementation is very
dangerous as compared to the social distancing at 80% to 100%.
At zero percent of the social distancing, the spread of the
COVID-19 is much faster, and the fatality rate is much higher
as compared to the spread of disease at 100% social distancing.
We can conclude that the enforcement of social distancing can
help in reducing the spread of disease and also assist in handling
the effected patient by the health care system very well.

Figure 21: Recovery rate
The death rates and recovery rates are represented in figures
20 and 21, respectively, and they agree with what we discussed
previously in figure 19. Since increasing the social distancing
level reduced the infection rate initially, the number of deaths

One of the most prominent features that are really fascinating is
that we can predict the outcome by using any materialistic
resources and at a much lower cost. We can assist the decisionmakers and legislators that what factors are more important to
consider with the help of a replica of a real-world situation,
which is not possible with the help of linear mathematical

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.19.20197996; this version posted October 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

equations. Even though in agent-based simulation, very few
variables are considered, the efficiency of the simulation model
with respect to speed is not much satisfactory. However, with this
small sampling, it can help in getting the overall picture of the
system, which is very useful.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this model, we verified that social distancing affects the
spread of COVID-19 and slows down its spread. It results in
decreasing the active cases, which help in handling and treating
serious patients. A few serious cases allow medical providers to
handle each patient properly; thus, the chance of recovery is
much greater. On the other hand, if the numbers of patients are
higher, then we may not be able to accommodate and manage
these cases in hospitals. In the United States, the level of social
distancing intervention should be at least 80% to reduce the
infected cases to the lowest number.
VI. FUTURE WORK
We are planning to extend the model to understand the effect of
lockdown on the economy, which results in serious issues with
the country’s overall growth rate, people's survival, and
unemployment. Our main purpose is to investigate how much
lockdown can be eased so that the people would be able to earn
enough money for survival and can be saved from the deadly
virus.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Hatzius, D. Struyven, and I. Rosenberg, “The effect of virus
control measures on the outbreak,” Goldman Sachs Global
Economics Analyst (April 20), 2020.
[2] J. Hilsenrath and S. Armour, “March 23, 2020.“,” As Economic
Toll Mounts, Nation Ponders Trade-Offs,” The Wall Street Journal.
[3] M. C. Bender and R. Ballhaus, “Trump’s coronavirus focus
shifts to reopening economy, defending his response,” Apr 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-assailscritics-ofhis- coronavirus-response-as-he-focuses-on-reopening-u-s11587149080.
[4] L. Thunstr¨om, S. C. Newbold, D. Finnoff, M. Ashworth, and
J. F. Shogren, “The benefits and costs of using social distancing to
flatten the curve for covid-19,” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis, pp.
1–27, 2020.
[5] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani, N. Imai, K. Ainslie,
M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia, A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G.
Cuomo- Dannenburg et al., “Report 9: Impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions (npis) to reduce covid19 mortality and healthcare
demand,” 2020.
[6] B. M¨uller, F. Bohn, G. Dreßler, J. Groeneveld, C. Klassert, R.
Martin, M. Schl¨uter, J. Schulze, H. Weise, and N. Schwarz,
“Describing human decisions in agent-based models–odd+ d, an
extension of the odd protocol,” Environmental Modelling &
Software, vol. 48, pp. 37– 48, 2013.
[7] T. De Wildt, “Supporting the adoption of smart grid appliances
in city districts: A quantitative evaluation of policy options using
agent-based modelling and scenario discovery,” 2014.
[8] E. Livingston, K. Bucher, and A. Rekito, “Coronavirus disease
2019 and influenza 2019-2020,” Jama, vol. 323, no. 12, pp. 1122–
1122, 2020.
[9] J. Hamzelou, “How many have caught coronavirus?”

2020.

