medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Personal protective equipment for reducing the risk of
COVID-19 infection among healthcare workers involved in
emergency trauma surgery during the pandemic: a
systematic review protocol.

Dylan P Griswold1,2 Andres Gempeler3 Angelos Kolias1,2 Peter J. Hutchinson1,2
Andres M. Rubiano1,4,5
1

NIHR Global Health Research Group on Neurotrauma, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Addenbrooke’s Hospital & University of
3
4
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK Clinical Research Center, Fundación Valle del Lili, Cali, Colombia
Neuroscience Institute, INUB-MEDITECH Research Group, El Bosque University, Bogotá, Colombia 5
Neurological Surgery Service, Vallesalud Clinic, Cali, Colombia.
2

Conflict of interest: All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form and declare: no
support from any organisation for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any organisations
that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous three years, no other relationships or
activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. The lead author* affirms that this
manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important
aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if
relevant, registered) have been explained.
Acknowledgements: None to report
Disclosure of funding
This work is supported by the NIHR Global Health Research Group on Neurotrauma, which was
commissioned by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) using United Kingdom aid from the
United Kingdom Government (project 16/137/105)Dr Hutchinson is the Chief Investigator of the
RESCUEicp and RESCUE- ASDH randomised trials. Mr Griswold was supported by the Gates
Cambridge Trust. Prof Hutchinson was supported by a Research Professorship from the NIHR, the NIHR
Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, a European Union Seventh Framework Programme grant
(CENTER-TBI; grant no. 602,150), and the Royal College of Surgeons of England. Dr Kolias was
supported by a Clinical Lectureship from the School of Clinical Medicine, University of Cambridge, and
the Royal College of Surgeons of England.

Keywords: umbrella review; broad evidence synthesis; COVID-19; global health;
trauma surgery; evidence-based practice; PPE; N95 masks.
Correspondence:
Andres M. Rubiano
Neuroscience Institute, INUB-MEDITECH Research Group
El Bosque University
Bogotá, Colombia
andresrubiano@aol.com

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
Objective: The objective of this broad evidence synthesis is to identify and summarize
the available literature regarding the efficacy of different personal protective equipment
(PPE) for reducing the risk of COVID-19 infection in health personnel caring for patients
undergoing trauma surgery in low-resource environments (LREs).
Introduction: Many healthcare facilities in low-and middle-income countries are
inadequately resourced and may lack optimal organization and governance, especially
concerning surgical health systems. COVID-19 has the potential to decimate these
already strained surgical healthcare services unless health systems take stringent
measures to protect healthcare workers from viral exposure and ensure the continuity of
specialized care for the patients.
Inclusion criteria: This review will preferentially consider systematic reviews of
experimental and quasi-experimental studies, as well as individual studies of such
designs, evaluating the effect of different PPE on the risk of COVID-19 infection in
healthcare workers (HCWs) involved in emergency trauma surgery.
Methods: We will conduct several searches in the L·OVE (Living OVerview of
Evidence) platform for COVID-19, a system that performs automated regular searches
in PubMed, Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and
over thirty other sources. The search results will be presented according to the
Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses (PRISMA) flow
diagram. Critical appraisal of the eligible studies for methodological quality will be
conducted. Data will be extracted using the standardized data extraction tool in
Covidence. Studies will, when possible, be pooled in a statistical meta-analysis using
JBI SUMARI. The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and
Evaluation (GRADE) approach for grading the certainty of evidence will be followed,
and a Summary of Findings (SoF) will be created.
Systematic review registration number: CRD42020198267

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

INTRODUCTION
Many healthcare facilities in low-and middle-income countries are inadequately resourced.
COVID-19 has the potential to decimate these already strained surgical healthcare services
unless health systems take stringent measures to protect healthcare workers (HCWs) from
viral exposure. A recent study showed that 15.6% of confirmed COVID-19 patients are
symptomatic and that nearly half of patients with no symptoms at detection time will develop
symptoms later.[1] Furthermore, the preoperative evaluation of emergency trauma patients
is limited. These factors impede and confound diagnostic triage. Improper infection
prevention may create a ‘super-spreader’ event in a high-volume healthcare facility or
reduce available personnel. Consequently, the infection control strategy of trauma surgery
staff is a top priority.
To take care of patients, providers must first take care of themselves. Personal protective
equipment (PPE) is paramount to protect health care workers from contracting the virus and
becoming disease carriers. Basic recommended PPE for trauma surgery staff of highincome country facilities include: 1) a surgical mask or better for all personnel interacting
with patients and in the OR (including cleaning staff); 2) N95 or better mask for all staff in
close contact with the patients (<6 feet away); 3) PAPR for aerosolising and high-risk
procedures (ear, nose, throat, thoracic, and transsphenoidal neurosurgery operations); 4)
universal testing of patients pre-operatively to enable appropriate PPE use, and 5) changing
scrubs after every procedure.[2] These recommendations are suitable for high-resource
settings but are less feasible in low-resource settings. A rapid-turnaround survey of 40
healthcare organisations across 15 LMICs revealed that 70% lack PPE and COVID-19
testing kits, and only 65% of the respondents showed confidence in hospital staff’s
knowledge about precautions to be taken to prevent COVID-19 infection among hospital
personnel.[3]
Some resource-adjusted recommendations include the use of cloth masks and bandanas.
While innovative, their moisture retention, reusability, and filtration are considered very
inferior to N95, and other masks.[4] What is most needed is evidence guided
recommendations for PPE use and COVID-19 screening in LMICs surgical systems where
resources are either limited or unavailable. HCWs have been instructed to consider
refraining from caring for patients in the absence of adequate PPE availability.
A preliminary search of PROSPERO, MEDLINE, the Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, and the JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports was
conducted, and no current or underway systematic reviews on the topic were identified.
The primary objective of the review is to summarise the effects of different personal
protective equipment in reducing the risk of COVID-19 infection of health personnel caring
for patients undergoing trauma surgery. The purpose of the review is to inform
recommendations for the rational use of PPE in emergency surgery staff, particularly in low
resources environments where PPE shortages and high costs are expected to hamper the
safety of HCWs and affect the care of trauma patients. A preliminary search of
PROSPERO, MEDLINE, the Cochrane Database ofSystematic Reviews, and the JBI
Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports was conducted, and no
current or underway systematic reviews on the topic were identified.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

REVIEW QUESTIONS
What is the available evidence on the effects of various personal protective equipment
(PPE) in reducing the risk of COVID-19 infection of health personnel caring for patients
undergoing trauma surgery? We are also interested in data on the costs associated with
the use of PPE since it is a vital aspect to consider when generating recommendations
for low-resources environments.

INCLUSION CRITERIA
Participants
The review will preferentially include studies involving healthcare workers in emergency
trauma surgery during the COVID-19 pandemic. Given the likelihood that reports on this
specific population are scarce or even non-existent, if not available or insufficient we will
consider studies of healthcare workers in any procedural and in-hospital setting such as
ER and critical care management in COVID-19. Studies summarizing the available
evidence for other viral respiratory illnesses will be considered if COVID-19 evidence is
not available and the setting reported is trauma surgery.
Intervention(s)
Different types of PPE used for treating patients requiring emergency trauma surgery.
Comparator(s)
Comparators of interest are no PPE use and different types of PPE.
Outcomes
This review will consider studies that include the following outcomes: Risk of contagion
to health personnel involved in the care of the described population during the COVID19 pandemic; differences in surgical field vision; expressed as incidence differences,
risk ratios or odds ratios.
If available, we will also extract and summarize information on cost associated with
differenttypes of PPE. All outcomes will be summarized narratively
Types of studies
This review will consider systematic reviews of experimental and observational studies,
and experimental or observational studies if not included in systematic reviews that
fulfilled population and intervention criteria. We will also include reports of costs
associated with the use of PPE and reports on implementation strategies that could
inform recommendations for low resource settings. Only studies published in English or
Spanish will be included. We will include preprint studies identified in our search, but no
ongoing studies will be considered.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

METHODS
A protocol of this review following the PRISMA statement was registered in the
International Prospective Registry of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO;
CRD42020198267). This review was conducted following the JBI methodology for
systematic reviews of aetiology and risk.[5]
Search strategy
We will conduct several searches in the L·OVE (Living OVerview of Evidence) platform
for COVID-19, a system that performs automated regular searches in PubMed,
Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and over thirty
other sources. We will search for systematic reviews and randomized trials evaluating
the effect of different personal protective equipment (PPE) on the risk of COVID-19
infection in personnel involved in emergency trauma surgery during the pandemic.
Other in-hospital clinical settings will be considered for inclusion and synthesis if
evidence for trauma surgery setting is not available. Different clinical settings will be
treated as subgroups from which extrapolation will be possible when considered
adequate. Non-randomized studies will be considered if systematic reviews and RCTs
are not available, or if they report data on costs associated with the implementation of
the interventions of interest. We will include preprint studies identified in our searches,
but no ongoing studies will be considered. Ongoing studies will be counted as excluded
studies in the corresponding tables and PRISMA diagram.
Information sources
The databases to be searched include the L·OVE (Living OVerview of Evidence)
platform for COVID-19, a system that performs automated regular searches in PubMed,
Embase, Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), and over thirty
other sources. When compared to manual searches, this platform consistently identifies
all the available studies associated with the terms of interest. It allows for a fast
(automated) search that is easy to update - a crucial element given the urgent need to
answer the research question rapidly and thoroughly.
Study selection
Following the search, all identified citations will be collated and uploaded into
EndNoteX9 (Clarivate Analytics, PA, USA). The citations will then be imported into JBI
SUMARI for the review process. Two independent reviewers will examine titles and
abstracts for eligibility. The full text of selected studies will be retrieved and assessed.
Full-text studies that do not meet the inclusion criteria will be excluded, and a list of
such excluded studies will be provided. Disagreements between the reviewers during
title and abstract screening or full-text screening, will be resolved by consensus, or with
a third reviewer. The results of the search will be reported in full in the final report and
presented in a Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses
(PRISMA) flow diagram.[6]

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Assessment of methodological quality
Eligible studies will be critically appraised by one reviewer and verified with the other.
We will use the AMSTAR tool to assess the risk of bias in systematic reviews, the
Cochrane risk of bias tool (RoB2) for RCTs, and the ROBINS-I tool for non-randomized
studies.[7–9] Risk of Bias will be assessed only for the primary outcome: infection of
healthcare workers. The results of the risk of bias assessment will be reported
narratively and inform grading of evidence summarized in SoF tables. Disagreements
will be solved by consensus or by a third reviewer.
Data extraction
Data will be extracted from the included studies by a reviewer and verified by a second
reviewer using a data extraction tool from JBI SUMARI.[5] The data extracted will
include specific details about the populations, study methods, interventions, and
outcomes of significance to the review question and specific objectives. Disagreements
will be solved by consensus.
Data synthesis
Studies will be summarized narratively. Effect sizes from systematic reviews and from
individual studies not included in them, will be expressed as odds ratios (for
dichotomous data) with their 95% confidence intervals. Decision rules regarding data
extraction for situations where data are:
· reported at multiple time points: include all and note time of measurement for each.
· multiple “doses”: N/A – (all types of PPE will be recorded)
· multiple exposures are compared (e.g., ever exposed, frequency of exposure): as
mentionedbefore, exposure will relate to the clinical setting of healthcare workers
studied and will be classified accordingly.
For summarizing results from other settings different to trauma surgery, effect of PPE
will be summarized by subgroups according to different clinical settings.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Assessing certainty in the findings
The Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation
(GRADE) approach for grading the certainty of evidence will be followed , and a
Summary of Findings (SoF) will be created using online software GRADEPro GDT 2020
(McMaster University, ON, Canada).[10,11] The SoF will present the following
information where appropriate: absolute risks for the treatment and control, estimates of
relative risk, and quality of the evidence based on the risk of bias, directness,
heterogeneity, precision, and risk of publication bias. The outcomes reported in the SoF
will be risk of COVID-19 infection.

REFERENCES

1 Zhu J, Ji P, Pang J, et al. Clinical characteristics of 3062 COVID 19 patients: A
meta analysis. J Med Virol 2020;92:1902–14. doi:10.1002/jmv.25884
2 Stewart CL, Thornblade LW, Diamond DJ, et al. Personal Protective Equipment and
COVID-19: A Review for Surgeons. Ann Surg 2020;272:e132–8.
doi:10.1097/sla.0000000000003991
3 Gonzalez N, Hatchcock A, Jansen N, et al. A Rapid Turnaround Survey of COVID-19
in LMICs: The Readiness, Responses, and Challenges of Healthcare Organizations.
2020.
4 R C, T D, R J, et al. Masks for Prevention of Respiratory Virus Infections, Including
SARS-CoV-2, in Health Care and Community Settings: A Living Rapid Review. Ann
Intern Med Published Online First: 1 January 2020. doi:10.7326/m20-3213
5 Aromataris E, Munn Z, Tufanaru C, et al. JBI Reviewer’s Manual. Published Online
First: 2019. doi:10.46658/jbirm-17-03
6 Moher D, Liberati A, Tetzlaff J, et al. Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews
and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Int J Surg LondEngl 2010;8:336–41.
doi:10.1016/j.ijsu.2010.02.007
7 Sterne JAC, Savović J, Page MJ, et al.RoB 2: a revised tool for assessing risk of bias
in randomised trials. Bmj 2019;366:l4898. doi:10.1136/bmj.l4898

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.26.20201954; this version posted October 8, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

8 Shea BJ, Reeves BC, Wells G, et al. AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for
systematic reviews that include randomised or non-randomised studies of healthcare
interventions, or both. Bmj Clin Res Ed 2017;358:j4008. doi:10.1136/bmj.j4008
9 Sterne JA, Hernán MA, Reeves BC, et al. ROBINS-I: a tool for assessing risk of bias
in non-randomised studies of interventions. Bmj Clin Res Ed 2016;355:i4919.
doi:10.1136/bmj.i4919
10 Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of
recommendations. Bmj 2004;328:1490. doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7454.1490
11 Guyatt G, Oxman AD, Akl EA, et al. GRADE guidelines: 1. Introduction—GRADE
evidence profiles and summary of findings tables. J Clin Epidemiol 2011;64:383–94.
doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.04.026

