medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

DESIGN OF A RAPID AND REVERSIBLE FLUORESCENCE ASSAY TO DETECT
COVID-19 AND OTHER PATHOGENS
V. Siddartha Yerramilli and Suzanne Scarlata
Dept of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA 01602
Abstract: We describe a rapid and reusable biophysical method to assay COVID-19 and other
pathogens. The method uses fluorescent sensors (i.e. molecular beacons) designed to detect
COVID-19 RNA or any RNA of interest, concurrent with an internal control without the need for
amplification. The molecular beacons are stem-loop structures in which a ~10 nucleotide loop
region has the complementary sequence of a region of the target RNA, and a fluorophore and
quencher are placed on the 5’ and 3’ ends of the stem. The energy of hybridization of the loop with
its target is designed to be greater than the hybridization energy of the energy of the stem so that
when the beacon encounters its target RNA, the structure opens resulting in dequenching of the
fluorophore. Here, we designed a COVID-19 beacon that is completely quenched in its native
form and undergoes a 50-fold increase in fluorescence when exposed to nanomolar amounts of
synthetic viral oligonucleotide. No changes in intensity are seen when control RNA is added. A
control beacon to a human GAPDH RNA, chosen for its high levels in saliva, behaved similar to
the COVID-19 beacon. This increase in fluorescence with beacon opening can be completely
reversed upon addition of single stranded DNA complementary to COVID-19 beacon loop region.
Beacons can be attached to an insert matrix allowing their use in concentrated form and can be
made from morphilino oligonucleotides that are resistant to RNases. We present an analysis of
the parameters that will allow the development of test strips to detect virus in aerosol, body fluids
and community waste.
Statement of significance: A platform for reusable and rapid detection of COVID-19 RNA and
other pathogenic RNAs without the need for amplification or sophisticated instrumentation in a
complex environment is described.
Introduction:
Stopping the spread of COVID-19 has been greatly inhibited by the ability to rapidly and
inexpensively assay the presence of the virus in an individual and in a community. While most
assays use nasal swabs, more recent assays use saliva which may contain high levels of virus in an
infected individual [1]. Assessment of community infection can be determined by continuous
monitoring of sewage from dormitories, apartment complexes and other residences, which will
alert the need for individual testing (see https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment53257101).
Here, we describe a simple, reusable fluorescent assay for COVID-19 RNA. This assay has the
potential to simultaneously detect and monitor multiple RNAs in real time in a bar code format.
The method uses molecular beacons [2]. Molecular beacons are oligonucleotides arranged in a

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

stem-loop ‘lollipop’ structure. At the bottom of the stem is a fluorophore on one end (either the
5’ or 3’) and a quencher on the other. The nucleotides in the loop are designed to be
complementary to a target a specific mRNA so that when the beacon is exposed to its target
mRNA, hybridization occurs. Hybridization opens the stem, pulling the quencher away from the
fluorophore resulting in a large increase in fluorescence (see Fig. 1A).
Previously, our lab has used molecular beacons to isolate stem cells induced to express exogenous
genes [3]. In those studies, we designed a molcular beacon with a green fluorophore that targeted
an exogenous gene that codes a choloride channel that helps transform stem cells into a cardiac
pacemaker lineage. The studies necessitated the use of a tracking probe that was incorporated into
the beacon between the stem and the loop to identify cells containing the beacon by red
fluorescence, and cells containing the mRNA of the gene of interest by green fluorescence. Cells
expressing the target gene were then separated by fluorescence activated cell sorting. In recent
months, a molecular beacon detection system for COVID-19 has been produced although this
system is solution based an requires amplification and specialized reagents. In this study, we show
how molecular beacon can be applied in a simple, rapid and reusable platform to simultaneously
detect COVID-19 and other pathogens in complex environments without the need for specialized
instrumention that might be beneficial for use in underdeveloped nations.
Methods
Gene sequences. The sequence for the COVID envelope protein was derived [4] and later verified
using BLAST. The sequence for GAPDH was beacon was obtained randomly from the GAPDH
mRNA and further verified using BLAST.
Materials. The beacons labeled with FAM at te 5’end and Iowa-BHQ (black hole quencher) at the
3’end were purchased from IDT Technologies. The single stranded DNA oligonucleotides were
obtained from Eton Biosciences. The sequences used for the oligonucleotides Beacons and
oligonucleotides were dissolved into stock solutions and further diluted using DEPC water.
Fluorescence measurements. All measurements were conducted on Cary Eclipse fluorometer
(Varian). Fluorescence was measured in a quartz cuvette where the excitation wavelength was 490
nm and emission was 520 nm. The data was exported from the manufacturer’s software into
graphing softwares such as Excel (Microsoft) and Prism (GraphPad).
Saliva collection. Whole-mouth saliva samples were self-collected in DNase- and RNase-free
Falcon tubes (50 mL). The volumes collected ranged from 5 ml to 10 ml. If the samples are not
processed for RNA extraction immediately, the samples were frozen and stored at −80 °C until
further analysis. The individual has been tested negative for COVID-19 using SARS-CoV2 Realtime Reverse Transcriptase (RT)-PCR Diagnostic Assay prior to sample collection.
RNA extraction. Whole cell RNA was obtained from HeLa cells (ATCC) with RNAeasy extraction
kit (Qiagen) based on the manufacturer’s instruction. RNA was isolated from human saliva by
boiling human saliva specimen with 1X TE buffer at 95C as described earlier [5].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
Beacon Design. Ideally, beacons should be designed to detect unique sequences in the 3’
untranslated region of the mRNA. This length is long enough to give stable hybridization with
target mRNA and short enough so that stable secondary structures within the loop do not occur,
and thus the optimal length of the loop is usually ~10 nucleotides. Similarly, the optimal length of
the stem is ~5 base paired nucleotides on the 5’ and 3’ ends which can be longer or shorter to
enhance stability. This short length stabilizes the beacon structure and can be easily destabilized
by hybridiation of the loop region with the target mRNA.
We designed a COVID-19 beacon based on the primers described by Kim et. al [4] that
was in turn based on the SARS-CoV genome detailed in Paraskevis et al [6]. The SARS-CoV-2
mRNA encodes a range of structural and non-structural proteins that can be targeted, i.e. spike
glycoprotein, envelope protein, membrane glycoprotein, nucleocapsid protein and RNAdependent RNA polymerase. We designed a beacon corresponding to the mRNA encoding for the
envelope protein region of SARS-COV-2 that was verified to not match any in the human genome
using BLAST. Based on the selected loop region, the stem nucleotides were chosen to be 5’ CGU
UAA UAG UUA AUA GCG using the pairing energies calculated with RNAfold software[7].
The free energy of the thermodynamic ensemble is -1.82 kcal/mol and the melting temperature is
36.7o C. (Fig 1B).
As a control, we also designed a beacon to GAPDH whose mRNA expression levels in saliva have
been used extensively as a reference gene [8]. The sequence and energetics associated with this
beacon are 5’ CCU CUG ACU UCA ACA GCG G whose predicted free energy of the
thermodynamic ensemble is -2.66 kcal/mol and the Tm is 55oC. (Fig.1C). For this proof-ofconcept study, we attached FAM and BHQ at the 5’ and 3’ ends of the beacons, and note that
responses can be optimized with probes optimized to the specific conditions and instrumentation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1 A. Left- diagram of a molecular beacon showing the stem-loop (closed) structure. The close
proximity of the fluorophore (green circle) to the quencher (black circle) eliminates all fluorescence. Rightupon encountering target mRNA (blue) the beacon opens and becomes fluorescent. B. Beacon used for
COVID-19. C. Beacon used for GAPDH.

Beacon performance. We first tested the response of the beacons dissolved in RNAse free
water on an analog fluorometer. The COVID-19 beacon had a fluorescence intensity comparable
to background. However, upon addition so synthetic COVID-19 mRNA, the fluorescence at
488nm showed a large and reproducible ~50 fold increase (Fig. 2A). The GAPDH beacon had a
similar response as the COVID-19 beacon as expected from the similar energetics of the
oligonucleotide sequence and the attachment of the same probes (Fig. 2B).
Titration of the target oligonucleotide with beacons gave us a Kd of 532 nM for COVID
and 910 nM for GAPDH when added to 250 nM of beacons giving us a response factor (i.e. the
amount of opening of the beacon with RNA) of 1:2 for the COVID-19 beacon and less than 1:4
for the GAPDH beacon (Fig. 2C).

Figure 2 A. COVID-19 beacon (final concentration 400 nM) was added to 1 μM of DNA oligos that is
analogous to (COVID analog CGTTAATAGTTAATAGCG) or complementary to COVID-19 beacon
(COVID GCAATTATCAATTATCGC) in a cuvette in a fluorometer B. GADPH beacon (final
concentration 400 nM) was added to 1 μM of DNA oligos that is analogous to (GAPDH analog
CCTCTGACTTCAACAGCGG)
or
complementary
to
GAPDH
beacon
(GAPDH
GGAGACTGAAGTTGTCGCC) in a cuvette in a fluorometer C. COVID and GAPDH DNA oligos were
titrated into 250 nM of COVID-19 and GAPDH beacons respectively. The fluorescence measurements
were then fitted using a curve fitting function to calculate the Kd of the RNA-DNA interaction. All

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

fluorescence measurements were taken at an excitation wavelength of 490 nm and emission wavelength of
520 nm.

Beacon responses were tested in two biological conditions, saliva and HeLa cells. For
saliva, samples were heated in TE buffer to expose RNA [5]. We note that RNA can also be
released from COVID particles by other methods including heat. When added to the saliva
samples, only background fluorescence from the COVID-19 beacon was detected indicating that
the closed, non-fluorescence beacon strucutre remains intact in a cellular environme Alternately,
the GAPDH beacons showed a high level of fluorescence indicating the presence of endogenous
GAPDH RNA. When the samples were spiked with oliognucleotides to COVID-19 the
fluorescence increases drastically (Fig. 3C).
In another experiment, we added beacons to COVID-19 or GAPDH to RNA extacted from
HeLa cells. As expected, no fluorescence was observed when the COVID-19 beacon was added,
while a small but measureable fluorescence was seen for the GAPDH beacon due to hybridation
with endogenous mRNA(GAPDH). (Fig. 3B). Both beacons showed a substantial increase in
fluorescence. Interestingly, the fluorescence from the GAPDH beacon showed a spike and rapid
decreased that leveled at a high level most likely due to internal mechanisms, the fluorescence
from the COVID-19 beacon remained relatively stable possible due to a lack of specific
degradation mechanisms.

Figure 3 A. Human saliva sample boiled in TE buffer was added to 400 nM COVID-19 or GAPDH RNA
beacons in a cuvette and then measured in a fluorometer. The saliva sample was then spiked with 20 μM of
COVID DNA oligo before being added to 400 nM COVID-19 RNA oligo and measured similarly. B. RNA
extracted from HeLa cells (190 ng/μl) was added to 400 nM COVID-19 or GAPDH RNA beacons in a
cuvette and then measured in a fluorometer. C. COVID-19 beacon (final concentration 400 nM) was added
to 1 μM of COVID or COVID analog DNA oligos in a cuvette in a fluorometer and measured at
temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 60 °C. All fluorescence measurements using an excitation wavelength
of 490 nm and emission wavelength of 520 nm.

Beacon stability. We wished to determine the limitations of the beacons to environmental
factors. While the beacons were found to be insensitive to proteases, unfolding of the beacons can
be seen at high salt and temperatures. In Fig. 4 we show the behavior of the beacons alone or with
oligonucleotides in solution. Although the calcuated melting temperature is ~55oC, we find that

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the midpoint of the melting curves is closer to 48oC. This temperature is unchanged even in the
presence of the complementary oligonucleotides since now the hydration energy of this region
replaces the loss in energy of the stem.

5

GADPH
GAPDH
(analog)

Intensity

4
3
2
1
0

20

30

40

50

60

Temperature
Figure 4. COVID-19 beacon (final concentration 400 nM) was added to 1 μM of COVID or COVID analog
DNA oligos in a cuvette in a fluorometer and measured at temperatures ranging from 20 °C to 60 °C. All
fluorescence measurements using an excitation wavelength of 490 nm and emission wavelength of 520 nm.

Viability of using beacons for use in non-clinical settings. The commercial apparatus
that uses molecular beacons requires amplification, and specialized components and
instrumentation which greatly inhibits their use in underdeveloped nations. Detection of COVID19 and other pathogens in a non-clinical setting would be possible if beacons were attached to an
inert matrix in a concentrated form thereby overcoming the need for amplification, and allow for
detection using a simple black light. Beacons can be commercially purchased with a biotin group
attached to a thymidine on a stem nucleotide and attached to inert matrices. Thus, the only
requirement for an inexpensive assay would be detergent, protease to expose the mRNA from the
virus particles, and salt to displace the viral RNA from the beacons and regenerate the matrix or
testing strip holding the beacons.
We can easily estimate the optimal density of beacons that should be attached to an insert
matrix. Our data show that the response of the beacon is ~50%. In saliva, the amount of virus has
been reported to be several million per milliliter [9] and the amount in aerosol is expected to a few
orders of magnitude lower so the needed detection should be ~500-5000 molecules. Here, we
used an FAM probe since fluorescein is inexpensive and has a high quantum yield (0.8) at neutral
pH [10]. Noting that the human eye is most sensitive to the fluorescence wavelength of
fluorescence and it has been reported that humans can detect as little as one photon [11], detection
of 500 photons at ~500nm by eye should be possible.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

To optimize beacon use, it is useful to estimate the density of beacon that must be attached
to a test strip. A fully extended beacon would be ~6 nm and this would be considered the minimal
separation to prevent tangling and allow opening and closing without tangling of the molecules.
This spacing would also be too far to permit intermolecular quenching or fluorescence transfer.
Another potential problem to consider is the small Stokes shift of fluorescein (i.e. 20 nm) that may
result in reabsorption of the fluorescence from a neighboring probe [10]. Because the quantum of
fluorescein is 0.8, then each reabsorption event will reduce the fluorescence by at least 20%. The
distance dependence of trivial reabsorption is R3 as compared to R6 for Forster resonance energy
transfer. Based on our previous characterization of fluorescein [12], then increasing the separation
of the beacon molecules by a factor of 10-100 would prevent any untoward optical effects.
By far, the main limitation is the size of the target mRNA [1]. COVID-19 mRNA is large
30kB making its estimated radius of gyration to be close to 1 micron [13], which may cause
crowding for beacon separated much more closely. This problem can be resolved by decreasing
the beacon density on the assay strip. Alternately posited , by mild digestion of COVID19 mRNA
by including small quantities of RNAase in the detergent / protease solution used to release viral
particles, and would require the use of beacons be made from morphilino oligonucleotides (see
Discussion), or by using a mixture of beacons that detect different regions of a single COVID
RNA.
Discussion:
Here, we present guidelines of how a simple and inexpensive COVID-19 assay in complex
solutions can be prepared for use in a non-clinical setting. Fluorescence increases from beacon
responses signals are rapid and can be reversed by the addition of inexpensive ssDNA with a
sequence identical to the loop region, or high salt if attached to a matrix. Beacons can be designed
to detect any oligonucleotide of interest. As mentioned, it is best to select of beacon sequences
that are unique to the particular RNA, and not found in the human genome, or at least not found in
sample materials (see [3]). Our stability studies show that beacons must be kept at temperatures
below ~45oC and other conditions that may promote premature opening. Design of the stem region
can be made after calculating the hybridization energy of the loop using freely available software.
We tested the performance of the COVID-19 beacon in solution, saliva and HeLa cells.
Instead of using live virus, we spiked solutions with a synthetic COVID-19 oligonucleotide at
concentrations below the amount estimated to be in human saliva of an infected individual [14].
In practice, biological samples would have to be mixed with detergent with added salt and possibly
protease. Heat treatment has been shown to release viral RNA, and if pure viral RNA is desired
when coupling this method to others, treatment with acid can be used [15]. Our data show that the
response of the beacon for viral RNA is close to 1:4 and because the beacon can be used in
concentrated form (see below) and the viral load of infected patients can range from 104-1010
copies/mL [9, 14], we propose that viral RNA can be detected be by eye using a simple black light.
While we focus here on assay development that may benefit underdeveloped nations,
beacon technology can be readily adapted for commercial use in individual human diagnostic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

assays or community detection in sewage, airborne droplets or other fluids. For commercial
purposes, substituting natural nucleotides with morphilinos will make beacons resistant to
degradation.
Morpholinos
are
identical
to
regular
oligonucleotides
with
a phosphorodiamidate group instead of phosphate making them resistant to degradation by
naturally occurring DNAs and RNAs [16], and morphilino beacons perform similar to DNA/RNA
beacons [17]. Importantly, RNA or morphilino beacons can be chemically attached to streptavidin
and immobilized on inert matrices using the method described by Bao and corworkers [18]. As
discussed, attachment will allow dense concentration of beacons to COVID-19 in a band pattern
or barcode at different concentrations, to other pathogenic RNAs to allow for differentiation of
different infections, and simultaneous detection of a standard control RNA, such as GAPDH.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NIH GM11687
Author Contributions
SS initiated the study, designed experiments and wrote the paper. VSY helped designed the
experiments, carried out the experiments, analyzed the data and helped write the paper
References
1. Esbin, M. N., Whitney, O. N., Chong, S., Maurer, A., Darzacq, X. & Tjian, R. (2020) Overcoming the
bottleneck to widespread testing: a rapid review of nucleic acid testing approaches for COVID-19
detection, RNA. 26, 771-783.
2. Tyagi, S. & Kramer, F. R. (1996) Molecular Beacons: Probes that Fluoresce upon Hybridization, Nature
Biotechnology. 14, 303-308.
3. Guo, Y., Lu, Z., Cohen, I. S. & Scarlata, S. (2015) Development of a Universal RNA Beacon for Exogenous
Gene Detection, Stem Cells Translational Medicine. 4, 476-482.
4. Kim, J. M., Chung, Y. S., Jo, H. J., Lee, N. J., Kim, M. S., Woo, S. H., Park, S., Kim, J. W., Kim, H. M. & Han,
M. G. (2020) Identification of Coronavirus Isolated from a Patient in Korea with COVID-19, Osong Public
Health Res Perspect. 11, 3-7.
5. Ranoa, D. R. E., Holland, R. L., Alnaji, F. G., Green, K. J., Wang, L., Brooke, C. B., Burke, M. D., Fan, T. M.
& Hergenrother, P. J. (2020) Saliva-Based Molecular Testing for SARS-CoV-2 that Bypasses RNA Extraction,
2020.06.18.159434.
6. Paraskevis, D., Kostaki, E. G., Magiorkinis, G., Panayiotakopoulos, G., Sourvinos, G. & Tsiodras, S. (2020)
Full-genome evolutionary analysis of the novel corona virus (2019-nCoV) rejects the hypothesis of
emergence as a result of a recent recombination event, Infect Genet Evol. 79, 104212.
7. Lorenz, R., Bernhart, S. H., Honer Zu Siederdissen, C., Tafer, H., Flamm, C., Stadler, P. F. & Hofacker, I.
L. (2011) ViennaRNA Package 2.0, Algorithms Mol Biol. 6, 26.
8. Kumar, S. V., Hurteau, G. J. & Spivack, S. D. (2006) Validity of messenger RNA expression analyses of
human saliva, Clin Cancer Res. 12, 5033-9.
9. Yoon, J. G., Yoon, J., Song, J. Y., Yoon, S. Y., Lim, C. S., Seong, H., Noh, J. Y., Cheong, H. J. & Kim, W. J.
(2020) Clinical Significance of a High SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in the Saliva, J Korean Med Sci. 35, e195-e195.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.02.20196113; this version posted October 5, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10. Albani, J. R. (2004) Chapter 3 - Fluorophores: Descriptions and Properties in Structure and Dynamics
of Macromolecules: Absorption and Fluorescence Studies (Albani, J. R., ed) pp. 99-140, Elsevier Science,
Amsterdam.
11. Tinsley, J. N., Molodtsov, M. I., Prevedel, R., Wartmann, D., Espigulé-Pons, J., Lauwers, M. & Vaziri, A.
(2016) Direct detection of a single photon by humans, Nature Communications. 7, 12172.
12. Runnels, L. W. & Scarlata, S. F. (1995) Theory and application of fluorescence homotransfer to melittin
oligomerization, Biophysical Journal. 69, 1569-83.
13. Gopal, A., Zhou, Z. H., Knobler, C. M. & Gelbart, W. M. (2012) Visualizing large RNA molecules in
solution, RNA. 18, 284-299.
14. Wyllie, A. L., Fournier, J., Casanovas-Massana, A., Campbell, M., Tokuyama, M., Vijayakumar, P., Geng,
B., Muenker, M. C., Moore, A. J., Vogels, C. B. F., Petrone, M. E., Ott, I. M., Lu, P., Lu-Culligan, A., Klein, J.,
Venkataraman, A., Earnest, R., Simonov, M., Datta, R., Handoko, R., Naushad, N., Sewanan, L. R., Valdez,
J., White, E. B., Lapidus, S., Kalinich, C. C., Jiang, X., Kim, D. J., Kudo, E., Linehan, M., Mao, T., Moriyama,
M., Oh, J. E., Park, A., Silva, J., Song, E., Takahashi, T., Taura, M., Weizman, O.-E., Wong, P., Yang, Y.,
Bermejo, S., Odio, C., Omer, S. B., Dela Cruz, C. S., Farhadian, S., Martinello, R. A., Iwasaki, A., Grubaugh,
N. D. & Ko, A. I. (2020) Saliva is more sensitive for SARS-CoV-2 detection in COVID-19 patients than
nasopharyngeal swabs, medRxiv, 2020.04.16.20067835.
15. Wozniak, A., Cerda, A., Ibarra-Henriquez, C., Sebastian, V., Armijo, G., Lamig, L., Miranda, C., Lagos,
M., Solari, S., Guzmán, A. M., Quiroga, T., Hitschfeld, S., Riveras, E., Ferres, M., Gutiérrez, R. A. & García,
P. (2020) A simple RNA preparation method for SARS-CoV-2 detection by RT-qPCR, bioRxiv,
2020.05.07.083048.
16. Summerton, J. & Weller, D. (1997) Morpholino Antisense Oligomers: Design, Preparation, and
Properties, Antisense and Nucleic Acid Drug Development. 7, 187-195.
17. Chen, J., Wu, J. & Hong, Y. (2016) The morpholino molecular beacon for specific RNA visualization in
vivo, Chemical Communications. 52, 3191-3194.
18. Nitin, N., Santangelo, P. J., Kim, G., Nie, S. & Bao, G. (2004) Peptide‐linked molecular beacons for
efficient delivery and rapid mRNA detection in living cells, Nucleic Acids Research. 32, e58-e58.

