medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Role of high-dose exposure in transmission hot zones as a
driver of SARS-CoV2 dynamics

Dominik Wodarz1*, Natalia L. Komarova2*, and Luis M. Schang3*.
1

Department of Population Health and Disease Prevention, Program in Public Health, Susan and
Henry Samueli College of Health Science, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697.
dwodarz@uci.edu; 949-824-2531
2

Department of Mathematics, University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697. komarova@uci.edu;
949-824-1268.
3

Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Baker Institute, Cornell University College of
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853. luis.schang@cornell.edu.
.
* Dominik Wodarz, Natalia L. Komarova, and Luis M. Schang.
Email: dwodarz@uci.edu, komarova@uci.edu, luis.schang@cornell.edu

0000-0002-5789-8590 (LMS).
Keywords
SARS CoV-2, COVID-19, epidemiology, infectious dose.
Author Contributions
DW: conceptualization, writing - original draft, writing -review and editing, data curation, funding
acquisition. NK: conceptualization, writing - original draft, formal analysis, visualization, funding
acquisition. LMS: conceptualization, writing - original draft, writing -review and editing, funding
acquisition.

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Epidemiological data on the spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the absence and presence of
various non-pharmaceutical interventions indicate that the virus is not transmitted
uniformly in the population. Transmission tends to be more effective in select settings that
involve exposure to relatively high viral dose, such as in crowded indoor settings, assisted
living facilities, prisons, or food processing plants. To explore the effect on infection
dynamics, we describe a new mathematical model where transmission can occur (i) in the
community at large, characterized by low dose exposure and mostly mild disease, and (ii)
in so called transmission hot zones, characterized by high dose exposure that can be
associated with more severe disease. Interestingly, we find that successful infection
spread can hinge upon high-dose hot zone transmission, yet the majority of infections are
predicted to occur in the community at large with mild disease. This gives rise to the
prediction that targeted interventions that specifically reduce virus transmission in the hot
zones (but not in the community at large) have the potential to suppress overall infection
spread, including in the community at large. The model can further reconcile seemingly
contradicting epidemiological observations. While in some locations like California, strict
stay-home orders failed to significantly reduce infection prevalence, in other locations,
such as New York and several European countries, stay-home orders lead to a
pronounced fall in infection levels, which remained suppressed for some months after reopening of society. Differences in hot zone transmission levels during and after social
distancing interventions can account for these diverging infection patterns. These
modeling results warrant further epidemiological investigations into the role of high dose
hot zone transmission for the maintenance of SARS-CoV-2 spread.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
As the United States and other countries around the world have witnessed the first wave
of SARS-CoV-2 spread and the associated morbidity and mortality, it is clear that a
balance between non-pharmaceutical interventions that limit the public health burden on
the one hand, and a continued functioning of society that limits economic damage on the
other, is required until other means to combat the pandemic are available (such as
effective vaccines). Non-pharmacological management interventions appear to be the
most appropriate approach in this context. Mathematical models have been used to
characterize the dynamics of SARS CoV-2 and predict potential numbers of COVID-19
cases [1-7], which has resulted in the estimation of the basic reproduction number [1, 8],
a better understanding of expected transmission dynamics in the absence and presence
of non-pharmaceutical interventions [9-16], and in the critical effect of age structure on
disease dynamics [11, 17], among many other contributions. Some of these models have
been extremely useful for predicting and quantifying the demands on health care
resources.
At the same time, it is becoming clear that the spread of SARS-CoV-2 is
characterized by unique aspects that have so far not been taken into account by
epidemiological models and that might be crucial for predicting how the virus and the
disease may spread, depending on the degree to which the society and economy is open.
The data on infection spread during various phases of lockdown and re-openings in the
US indicate that the virus does not spread uniformly in the population, but that some
settings contribute more to virus transmission that others[18]. In California, initial stayhome orders in March prevented continued virus spread, but failed to drive the effective
reproduction number significantly below one and to reduce the existing infection
prevalence. After a significant surge occurred following a wide-spread re-opening of
society and businesses, more targeted interventions were implmented, under which
business activities that involved large indoor gatherings (such as bars, indoor seating in
restaurants, or indoor hair salons) were restricted. This resulted in a significant reduction
in virus prevalence to levels that are similar to those during the stay-home orders, despite
the fact that many other aspects of society, such as outdoor business operations or
activities in the community at large remained mostly unrestricted. An increased focus on
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

mask wearing, which minimizes viral shedding and thus environment load, might have
also contributed. These trends indicate that similar levels of infection control can be
achieved whether society as a whole is totally shut down, or more select aspects of society
are preferentially restricted. Similar patterns have occureed in other states, or countries
(e.g. most of Europe). While strict shut-downs of society have brought infection levels
under control in New York and in countries such as Germany, the UK, or Denmark, the
infection then remained controlled for several months following a reopening of society.
During those times, although most restrictions were lifted for the community at large,
certain restrictions remained in place. Those included infection control measures in critical
places such as hospitals and long-term assisted living facilities (which minimize infection
of the elderly), as well as avoiding large indoor gatherings. Indeed, it appears that local
outbreaks during this time may have been driven by infection spread in select settings.
Examples include food processing plants [19], assisted living facilities [20], or hospitals
[21].
These observations indicate that overall viral transmission appears to occur mostly
in the context of select settings, in which people are exposed to relatively high doses of
the virus, and less so in the community at large, where viral doses tend to be lower. Viral
dose upon exposure can influences the chances of developing a productive infection and
can impact the severity of disease. Viral infectious dose has drastic consequences for
SARS and MERS infections [22, 23], and for pathogenesis of SARS COV-2 in animal
models [24, 25]. Recent evidence strongly suggests that reducing viral infection load by
using facemasks has a pronounced effect on the outcome of human infections [26].
Considering this evidence, one can presume that situations that lead to exposure to higher
viral doses may well drive a substantial portion of SARS CoV-2 spread. These situations
can be collectively referred to as “transmission hot zones”, and comprise physical
locations such as long term assisted living facilities (which also tend to house older, more
susceptible, people), prisons, food processing plants, and bars, among others, or transient
situations of large or periodic recurrent gatherings [27]. Understanding the principles of
hot zone-driven infection spread requires the incorporation of these assumptions into
mathematical models, in particular the assumption that the rate of disease transmission,
as well as disease severity, depend on exposure dose. Hot zone transmission is defined
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

by settings in which people are exposed to a higher virus dose than in the community at
large.
Here, such a mathematical model is constructed and analyzed with special focus
on the basic reproduction number. We find that, somewhat counterintuitively, successful
infection spread can hinge upon hot zone transmissions that promote severe infections,
yet at the same time the majority of the SARS-CoV-2 infections are mild and occur in the
community at large. The model further predicts that in such cases, targeted interventions
that limit virus spread in hot zones can result in the long-term suppression of infection
levels in the community at large, even if non-pharmaceutical interventions in the
community are relaxed to some extent. According to our mathematical model, these
dynamics are a direct consequence of the assumed viral dose-dependency, which might
thus warrant further attention from a clinical and epidemiological perspective.

Results
The mathematical modeling framework
We consider a mathematical model that distinguishes between patients with mild or
asymptomatic infection and those with severe SARS CoV-2 infection, including
symptomatic but ambulatory COVID-19 patients. We further assume that a higher
infectious dose promotes development of more severe outcomes, as has been
documented with SARS, MERS, and even SARS CoV-2 [22-24, 28]. In particular, the
model couples viral load to the setting in which transmission takes place. Hence, we
distinguish between two basic types of transmission varying in the viral load to which
susceptible individuals are exposed (Fig 1). The first type of transmission occurs in the
“community-at-large”. A characteristic of this environment is that people are exposed to
relatively low viral loads for short times, and that disease tends to be mild. This can include
streets and other outdoor areas, as well as indoor locations where it is unlikely that several
infected individuals converge periodically for long periods, and where human density is
low and contacts between individuals are short and occasional. The second type of
transmission is in what we call “hot zones”. These are characterized by exposure to high
viral loads and by a higher chance of severe disease. This can result from exposure to
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

multiple infected individuals, exposure to individuals shedding high viral levels in locations
with poor ventilation, or from an increase in viral load over time through silent amplification
rounds of infection[29]. The model is based on the general SIR framework [30, 31]. The
corresponding ordinary differential equations are given as follows:

where x denotes the population of susceptible individuals, y1 and y2 denote the populations
of mildly and severely infected individuals, respectively, and z represents the population
of removed infecteds (recovered and dead). Further, C and H represent environmental
viral load in the community at large and in the hot zones, respectively. The processes
underlying the model are further explained in Fig 1, where all the parameters are defined.
The following sections discuss results arising from this model, and further mathematical
details are provided in the Supplementary Materials.

The basic reproduction number and maintenance of infection spread
We use this model to calculate the basic reproduction number of the infection, R0, as well
as the effective reproduction number, R. We start by defining two matrices, a virus
deposition matrix, Qdep, and a virus acquisition matrix, Qacq. The former matrix is given by

and depends on the rates at which mildly and severely infected individuals deposit the
virus both in hot zones and the community, and also on the virus life-span in each
environment. The latter matrix is defined as

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

and depends on the infectivity coefficients for mildly and severely infected individuals in
both environments, as well as the expected disease duration for mild and severely infected
patients. To determine the reproductive number (including the basic reproductive number)
of the infection, we form a product of the acquisition and deposition matrices,
A=

QacqQdep.

(1)

The elements of this matrix, Aij, are combinations of all of the rates, see Fig 1 and the
Supplement. These four quantities have a clear meaning, as they express the intensity of
infection spread via four pathways: A11 is the probability to become mildly infected as a
result of another mildly infected individual depositing virus in a C or an H location; A12 is
the probability to become mildly infected as a result of a severely infected individual
depositing virus in a C or an H location, etc.
Using the matrix A, the basic reproductive number of the infection can be expressed
concisely as
R0=x0r,
where x is the initial number of susceptible individuals and r is the larger of the two
eigenvalues of the matrix A. Similarly, the effective reproductive number, R, is calculated
as R=xr, where x is the current number of susceptible individuals. The quantity r depends
on the model coefficients, and will be affected e.g. by social distancing measures.

Depending on the parameters, the virus may spread faster through some pathways
than others. For example, if A11 in equation (1) is significantly larger than the other matrix
elements, then we simply have R»xA11, that is, infection spread mostly occurs from mildly
SARS CoV-2 infected individuals to result in more mildly infected individuals, and the
kinetic parameters associated with mild infection define the R value of the whole system:
R»x

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

On the other hand, if the element A22 is significantly larger than the rest of the matrix
elements, we have R»xA22, and it is COVID-19 severely infected individuals that maintain
the epidemic:
R»x
The off-diagonal elements A12 and A21 define the contribution of one group of infected to
the expansion of the other group. The relative size of these pathways influences the
population sizes of y1 and y2. For example, A12>A21 tends to increase the population of the
mildly infected. The opposite inequality results in the boosting of the y2 population, see
Supplement for a more precise statement.
Depending on the relative values of the matrix elements Aij, this model can give rise to a
variety of different dynamics and outcomes. To understand this better, it is instructive to
first consider extreme cases that bracket all possible outcomes.
•

(Ia): Maintenance of the epidemic depends on the mildly infected individuals, y1,
transmitting virus through the C (or H) compartment and giving rise to mostly more
mildly infected individuals. Most infected individuals have mild disease, whereas
given subsets develop serious COVID-19.

•

(Ib): Maintenance of the epidemic again relies on transmission by y1 individuals
creating more y1-infected people, but most infected individuals are y2 and have
severe disease.

•

(IIa): Maintenance of the infection depends on severely infected individuals, y2,
transmitting the infection (through C or H). The majority of the infected individuals,
however, are y1 and have mild disease, whereas given subsets develop serious
COVID-19.

•

(IIb): Maintenance of the infection again depends on severely infected individuals,
y2, but most of the infected individuals have severe disease.

While not all of these cases are realistic, an important and novel point emerges from this
analysis: It is possible that the group of infected individuals that is responsible for
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

maintaining the epidemic (i.e. for keeping R0>1) comprises only a small subset of the
infected people. For example, in case (IIa), severely infected individuals that transmit the
virus to generate new patients with severe infection, including serious COVID-19 (via hotzone transmission) is critical for keeping R0>1. At the same time, however, the majority of
the individuals is mildly infected, y1, see Fig 2(b). This gives rise to the possibility that the
targeting of a relatively small fraction of infected individuals in hot zones through specific
interventions could curb overall SARS CoV-2 prevalence in the community at large.

Simulating non-pharmaceutical interventions and re-openings
Some valuable insights can be gained by simulating the implementation of nonpharmaceutical interventions and their relaxation. At time t1, social distancing is initiated
by parameter changes that promote a reduction in the reproduction number, e.g. by
reducing virus deposition rates (bC, bH, BC, and BH) and infection rates (b1C, b2H, b1H and
b2C), or by increasing virus removal rates (aC,aH) and patient removal rates through
quarantining (g1,g2) (Fig 1). At time t2, re-opening is simulated by reverting most
parameters back to their original values, with the exception of select parameters
connected to either C or H transmission.
We focus on realistic cases, where mild infections predominate. For nonpharmaceutical interventions, we simulate the stay home orders that were implemented
around March-April 2020, where it is assumed that virus transmission in the community at
large is significantly suppressed, but that hot zone transmission may or may not continue
to operate. When simulating the opening of society, different assumptions are made about
the extent to which virus transmission resumes in the community at large and in the hot
zones.

Community at large transmission alone maintains infection spread
First, we assume that maintenance of the epidemic depends only on community spread
and that hot zone transmission contributes little (case (Ia) above). This corresponds to a
scenario in many previously published COVID-19 models, e.g. [13]. Under this
assumption, we observe that the suppression of virus transmission in the community at
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

large leads to a marked reduction in infection prevalence. Upon re-opening, a pronounced
second wave of infection ensues until a vast majority of individuals in the population have
been affected (Fig 2a).

Hot zone transmission alone maintains infection spread
Next, we assume that maintenance of the epidemic relies on hot zone transmission and
that community transmission contributes little (case (IIa) above). We distinguish between
two scenarios. First we assume that during stay-home orders, hot-zone transmission
continues to occur. We then assume that hot-zone transmission is also suppressed.
(i) Assume that high viral load hot zone transmission remains elevated in certain pockets
during the interventions, such that the overall reproduction number is slightly larger than
one. In this case, the infection continues to spread slowly during social distancing, and the
majority of the infections are predicted to be mild. Under this scenario, infection prevalence
is predicted to not decline during the lockdown, similar to the dynamics observed in
California. Upon reopening, a renewed and accelerated spread is always predicted to
occur. Because the reproduction number continues to be larger than one during the
intervention period, it can only increase further during relaxation of the interventions (Fig
2c).
(ii) If hot zone transmission is suppressed during the stay-home interventions, virus
prevalence markedly declines during the intervention period (Fig 2d). If re-opening only
leads to resumption of virus transmission in the community at large, and hot zone
transmission remains suppressed, no second wave is predicted to occur because the
reproduction number remains below one (Fig 2d). If, however, hot zone transmission
increases after reopening (due to re-activation of previous hot zones or generation of new
ones), the reproduction number can increase beyond one, and a second wave happens
in the model (not shown). This scenario might correspond to dynamics observed in New
York and several European countries: Stay-home interventions resulted in significant
suppression of the infection, and this level of suppression was maintained for 2-3 months
even after the initial re-opening of society, presumably because of the continued
suppression of hot zones. As the infection levels started to rebound e.g. in Germany, this
was associated with outbreaks in hot zones, such as food processing plants[19].
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Both hot zones and the community at large can maintain virus spread
Here, we assume a more balanced contribution of hot zones and the community at large:
either pathway alone can lead to sufficient transmission such that R>1, but both
transmission pathways are needed for the virus to achieve its full spread potential.
Different outcomes are possible depending on the particulars. For stay-home interventions
to lead to a marked reduction of infection levels, transmission reduction has to occur both
in the community at large and in the hot zones. If hot zone transmission is not significantly
affected by the intervention, infection spread will be slowed, but no decline will occur (not
shown). In any case, reopening is likely to lead to a second wave, even if virus
transmission only resumes in the community at large. The magnitude and timing of the
second wave depends on social distancing and reopening parameters. For example, if hot
zone transmission is suppressed to a larger degree, the second wave will be characterized
by a slower growth rate and a lower size (Fig 2(f) compared to 2(e), note the different
range of the horizontal axes and the lower final epidemic size).

Further Complexities
Additional insights can be obtained by incorporating further complexities that might better
characterize the SARS CoV-2/COVID-19 pandemic. A mathematical model that includes
these assumptions is presented in the Supplementary Materials. In the example of Fig 3
we assume that once the virus load in the hot zones rises to high levels, it is likely that the
rate of virus transmission saturates rather than increases in an unlimited way. Further, we
assume that severity of infection is not only transmission zone-dependent, but that a
higher viral load in both C and H locations results in a higher chance of severe infection.
The model now predicts that the fraction of severe infections rises as total infection levels
increase, but that it then declines post-peak (Fig 3(b)). This might correspond to the
observations of increased disease severity as the epidemic expands, and then reduced
disease severity as the outbreak declines, which has been observed in Italy [32] and
Sweden [33], among other locations. Importantly, the simulations in Figure 3 show that
during the initial stages of spread, mild SARS CoV-2 infections predominate, but once the
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

infection has spread beyond a certain threshold, the total viral load in both hot zones and
the community at large increases to the point that severe COVID-19 cases predominate.
This would translate into a health crisis with overload of the health systems and into high
levels of mortality even if health care resources did not become limiting. According to this
model, it is critical to implement interventions sufficiently early rather than only once
increased mortality becomes apparent (which occurs with an additional delay).

Discussion
We have presented and analyzed a new epidemiological model in which infection severity
depends on the virus dose received during transmission, assuming that exposure to higher
virus loads is more likely to occur under certain conditions, which we refer to as
transmission hot zones. These high viral loads can be reached by silent, undetected
amplification cycles before the first clinical cases are detected [29]. One important insight
was that a relatively small population of severely infected patients can be responsible for
driving infection through hot zone transmission, even though the majority of infections are
mild and acquired in the community at large. A logical consequence of this is that even
though the majority of infections are found in the community at large, interventions that
specifically target the hot zones can be very effective. They can reduce the viral
reproduction number, inducing a decline of the overall infection prevalence, including that
in the community at large. Hence, effective virus suppression in hot zones might allow to
maintain a relatively strong degree of overall infection control with fewer restrictions in the
community at large, although critical interventions in the community at large will most likely
also be required.
The model can further explain some seemingly contradictory observations. For
example, in California, stay-home orders halted further infection spread, but a significant
decline of infection levels was not observed during this phase. According to our model, an
effective reproduction number that is larger than one can be obtained during interventions
by continued viral transmission in yet unidientified hot zones, even though infection spread
in the community at large is strongly inhibited due to the stay home orders. In agreement
with this hypothesis, a large fraction of the recorded infections and deaths occurred in
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

nursing homes and assisted living facilities in California during the time period when the
stay-home order was in place [34]. On the other hand, in other locations, such as New
York and several European countries, lockdowns were more effective at driving infection
numbers down, and when society subsequently opened up to a certain extent, infection
levels appeared to remain controlled for several months. According to our model, this
would be explained by more efficient suppression of viral transmission in the hot zones
during lockdown, and continued hot zone suppression after the initial reopening phase
(e.g. by protecting assisted living facilities and hospitals, and by avoiding larger indoor
gatherings in bars etc.). The model further makes the prediction that renewed hot zone
transmissions would be able to trigger a second wave. This is again consistent with
observations. For example, in Europe, the initial growth in case numbers during the
emerging second waves seemed to be associated with hot zones, such as food
processing plants [19].
This epidemiological model also provides a motivation to act early and decisively
to prevent the amplification of the viral loads and to prevent potential transmission hot
zones with severe disease from forming. Facemasks might be crucial in this respect,
because they reduce exposure dose. Facemasks can thus turn a potential hot zone that
drives infection spread into a lower dose transmission environment, which does not have
the same ability to maintain overall infection spread.
Past coronavirus outbreaks have been characterized by large numbers of
infections resulting from superspreading events; the corollary to this finding is that most
individuals infected with these viruses did not transmit the virus efficiently [18, 35, 36]. The
“hot zone” transmission framework proposed here is broadly consistent with these
findings: hot zones are characterized by the exposure of susceptible individuals to a
relatively high virus dose, which may lead to more severe disease. Large gatherings,
including several infected individuals shedding virus at the same time, can provide the
high dose exposures, as could amplifications of the viral load by the repeated visits to a
location by the same people. While early virus exposure from one infected person would
likely constitute a low dose exposure and result in mild infection in several individuals,
these individuals would then all shed virus, thus increasing the viral dose with which others
are infected. Hence, amplification through asymptomatic or mild cases will eventually
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

result in exposure to a higher virus dose and in a higher chance of severe disease in the
newly infected people, thus generating a hot zone environment. Such characteristics could
exist in crowded/ poorly ventilated office work spaces, schools, prisons, places of worship,
long term care/assisted living communities, and health care/hospital settings, as well as
in multigenerational households, which have all been identified as transmission clusters
in various countries [18]. Long term care facilities and hospitals might be especially prone
to this effect, which is consistent with the large percentage of deaths in long term care
facilities. People with pre-existing health conditions regularly visit hospitals, which could
start such an amplification cycle anywhere in a hospital before the presence of the virus
in the location is known.
These notions are consistent with data from Italy, where at least some hospitals
were identified as a major contributor to early COVID-19 spread, like in Bergamo [37].
Similarly, in the United States, an infection cluster has been recently identified in a hospital
in Boston [38]. These notions are further consistent with the many analyses of the
disproportionately high mortality of elderly people residing in long term care living facilities
[39, 40] rather than at individual homes across the world [41], and with the disproportionate
impact on minority communities in America [42],

who may have been required to

physically go to work during the outbreak due to their employment in “essential services”
like transportation and food preparation. A number of Asian countries implemented strong
protection measures in the health care system before the first COVID-19 cases were
identified, due to previous experiences with SARS and MERS. Countries such as South
Korea performed intensive testing, resulting in early identification of infected individuals,
which were thus removed from both transmission chains and any potential amplification
circles [43]. Such strategies limit the seeding of transmission hot zones and prevent the
initial rounds of viral load amplification, which might have contributed to the relatively
lighter disease burdens documented there, despite somewhat less strict social distancing
[44].
This model can be refined by including risk factors, social networks and other
complexities, which all are likely to be critical for any practical predictive use. For example,
we assumed in our model that disease severity was associated with the dose of virus
exposure. Risk factors (importantly age and comorbidities), however, are another
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

important determinant of disease severity, and incorporation of these additional details will
refine the accuracy of the model. Moreover, model predictions depend on assumptions,
which need to be tested with epidemiological, clinical, and virology data. The strength of
modeling, however, is to identify potential key drivers of the pandemic, which we would
not be aware of otherwise, thus directing the required epidemiological, clinical, and
virology investigations. The finding that severe infection transmission through high viral
load exposure in hot zones might be an important driver of SARS CoV-2 spread, even as
mild disease cases predominate, could allow us to improve the outcome of reopening
society through targeted interventions.

Materials and Methods
We have modeled the spread of infection by using ordinary differential equations (ODEs)
of SIR type, where we distinguished between patients with mild or almost asymptomatic
infection and those with severe SARS CoV-2 infection. Transmission happened through
two different “channels”. Several extensions of the model are also considered including a
model with saturation in the infection term. The precise formulations and complete
analysis of the ODEs are presented in the Supplementary Materials.

Acknowledgments
All authors wish to thank Dr. Nathaniel Hupert, MD, MPH (Weill Cornell) for most helpful editions,
and LMS also for many stimulating discussions. This work was funded in part by NSF DMS
1662146/1662096 (NK & DW). LMS is funded by NIH AI153396 and NS111416, and by start-up
funds from Cornell University.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figures:

⍺C

Qdep=

Mildly infected
(SARS CoV-2 +)

y1

Severely infected
(COVID-19)

y2

BC

Qacq=

Mildly infected
(SARS CoV-2 +)

β1C

bC
bH

Virus
inactivation or
removal

C
Virus
deposition

y1

β1H

γ1

Virus
acquisition

H

β2C
β2H

BH
⍺H

Virus
inactivation or
removal

Recovery
(death)

Severely infected
(COVID-19)

y2

Recovery
or death

γ2

Figure 1. A schematic showing the model structure and its parameters. Infection deposition and
acquisition matrices, Qdep and Qacq are defined, see Supplement for details. In the model,
transmission can result in two types of infected populations: asymptomatic/mild SARS CoV-2
infection (denoted by y1) and severely SARS CoV-2 infected, including ambulatory symptomatic
COVID-19 patients (denoted by y2). It is assumed that severe COVID-19 is promoted by exposure
to a higher viral load. Hence, exposure of susceptible individuals to virus in the community at large
compartment (C) results mostly in mild infection with a probability b1C, and less frequently in
severe infection with a probability b2C, where b1C> b2C because local viral load is assumed to be
relatively low in the C compartment. Exposure in the hot zone compartment (H) results in mild
infection with a probability b1H, and in more frequent severe COVID-19 with a rate b2H, where
b1H<b2H, because virus load is assumed to be higher in the hot zone. Mildly infected individuals
are assumed to deposit virus in the C and H compartments with rates bC and bH, respectively.
Severely SARS CoV-2 infected, including symptomatic but ambulatory, individuals are assumed to
deposit virus in those compartments at rates BC and BH, respectively. Finally, virus decays in the
two locations at rates aC and aH, and mildly and severely infected individuals cease to be
infectious (because of recovery or death) with rates g1 and g2.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Simulated epidemic dynamics in different cases. Four populations are shown as functions
of time: susceptible (green), mildly SARS CoV-2 infected (orange), severely COVID-19 infected
(red), and recovered/dead (blue). Insets show detail in the dynamics of infecteds, and the matrix
elements Aij. Intervention is shown by dashed lines. It is assumed that during intervention, both H
and C channels are suppressed, and afterwards channel C is restored to its full capacity. (a) Case
(Ia) (see text), where the spread of infection is mostly through mildly infected who comprise the
majority; opening up leads to a second wave of infection. (b-d) Case (IIa), where the spread of
infection is mostly through severely infected although the majority are still mildly infected. In (b) no
intervention is implemented; the effects of social distancing are shown in (c) (insufficient H
suppression, a second wave is predicted) and (d) (significant H suppression, no second wave).
(e,f) Both C and H channels contribute about equally to infection spread; opening up the C channel
results in a second wave, but a higher degree of H suppression leads to a smaller and more delayed
second wave. In all simulations, R0=2.4. Other parameters are given in Fig S2 and S4.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. More realistic scenarios of infection spread: included is a saturation term in the C and H
channels, and the probability of becoming severely infected through channels C and H depends on
the infection level, resulting in a change in the proportion of severely infected. The epidemic
dynamics are shown in (a) and the fraction y2/(y1+y2) in the inset in (b). For all parameter values,
see figure S4.

References

1.
Kucharski AJ, Russell TW, Diamond C, Liu Y, Edmunds J, Funk S, et al. Early dynamics of
transmission and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling study. The lancet infectious
diseases. 2020.
2.
Peng L, Yang W, Zhang D, Zhuge C, Hong L. Epidemic analysis of COVID-19 in China by
dynamical modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:200206563. 2020.
3.
Peak CM, Kahn R, Grad YH, Childs LM, Li R, Lipsitch M, et al. Modeling the comparative
impact of individual quarantine vs. active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID-19.
medRxiv. 2020.
4.
Jewell NP, Lewnard JA, Jewell BL. Predictive mathematical models of the COVID-19
pandemic: Underlying principles and value of projections. Jama. 2020;323(19):1893-4.
5.
Holmdahl I, Buckee C. Wrong but useful—what covid-19 epidemiologic models can and
cannot tell us. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020.
6.
Gatto M, Bertuzzo E, Mari L, Miccoli S, Carraro L, Casagrandi R, et al. Spread and
dynamics of the COVID-19 epidemic in Italy: Effects of emergency containment measures.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2020;117(19):10484-91.
7.
Vespignani A, Tian H, Dye C, Lloyd-Smith JO, Eggo RM, Shrestha M, et al. Modelling
COVID-19. Nature Reviews Physics. 2020:1-3.
8.
Wu JT, Leung K, Leung GM. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study.
The Lancet. 2020;395(10225):689-97.
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9.
Ferguson N, Laydon D, Nedjati Gilani G, Imai N, Ainslie K, Baguelin M, et al. Report 9:
Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID19 mortality and healthcare
demand. 2020.
10.
Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Lipsitch M, Grad Y. Social distancing strategies for curbing the
COVID-19 epidemic. medRxiv. 2020.
11.
Prem K, Liu Y, Russell TW, Kucharski AJ, Eggo RM, Davies N, et al. The effect of control
strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a
modelling study. The Lancet Public Health. 2020.
12.
Giordano G, Blanchini F, Bruno R, Colaneri P, Di Filippo A, Di Matteo A, et al. Modelling
the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nature
medicine. 2020:1-6.
13.
Morris DH, Rossine FW, Plotkin JB, Levin SA. Optimal, near-optimal, and robust epidemic
control. arXiv preprint arXiv:200402209. 2020.
14.
Block P, Hoffman M, Raabe IJ, Dowd JB, Rahal C, Kashyap R, et al. Social network-based
distancing strategies to flatten the COVID-19 curve in a post-lockdown world. Nature Human
Behaviour. 2020:1-9.
15.
Chinazzi M, Davis JT, Ajelli M, Gioannini C, Litvinova M, Merler S, et al. The effect of
travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak. Science.
2020;368(6489):395-400.
16.
Ngonghala CN, Iboi E, Eikenberry S, Scotch M, MacIntyre CR, Bonds MH, et al.
Mathematical assessment of the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on curtailing the
2019 novel Coronavirus. Mathematical biosciences. 2020:108364.
17.
Zhang J, Litvinova M, Liang Y, Wang Y, Wang W, Zhao S, et al. Changes in contact
patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak in China. Science. 2020.
18.
Leclerc QJ, Fuller NM, Knight LE, Funk S, Knight GM, Group CC-W. What settings have
been linked to SARS-CoV-2 transmission clusters? Wellcome Open Research. 2020;5(83):83.
19.
Middleton J, Reintjes R, Lopes H. Meat plants—a new front line in the covid-19
pandemic. British Medical Journal Publishing Group; 2020.
20.
Barnett ML, Grabowski DC, editors. Nursing homes are ground zero for COVID-19
pandemic. JAMA Health Forum; 2020: American Medical Association.
21.
Klompas M. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): protecting hospitals from the
invisible. American College of Physicians; 2020.
22.
Chu C-M, Cheng VC, Hung IF, Chan K-S, Tang BS, Tsang TH, et al. Viral load distribution in
SARS outbreak. Emerging infectious diseases. 2005;11(12):1882.
23.
Chu C-M, Poon LL, Cheng VC, Chan K-S, Hung IF, Wong MM, et al. Initial viral load and
the outcomes of SARS. Cmaj. 2004;171(11):1349-52.
24.
Imai M, Iwatsuki-Horimoto K, Hatta M, Loeber S, Halfmann PJ, Nakajima N, et al. Syrian
hamsters as a small animal model for SARS-CoV-2 infection and countermeasure development.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2020;117(28):16587-95.
25.
Golden J, Cline C, Zeng X, Garrison A, Carey B, Mucker E, et al. Human angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 transgenic mice infected with SARS-CoV-2 develop severe and fatal
respiratory disease. bioRxiv. 2020.
26.
Gandhi M, Rutherford GW. Facial Masking for Covid-19—Potential for “Variolation” as
We Await a Vaccine. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.07.20208231; this version posted October 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

27.
Lee DF, Drouin R, Pitsikas P, Rainbow AJ. Detection of an involvement of the human
mismatch repair genes hMLH1 and hMSH2 in nucleotide excision repair is dependent on UVC
fluence to cells. Cancer research. 2004;64(11):3865-70. PubMed PMID: 15172995.
28.
Liu Y, Yan L-M, Wan L, Xiang T-X, Le A, Liu J-M, et al. Viral dynamics in mild and severe
cases of COVID-19. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020.
29.
Gandhi M, Yokoe DS, Havlir DV. Asymptomatic transmission, the Achilles’ heel of current
strategies to control COVID-19. Mass Medical Soc; 2020.
30.
Kermack WO, McKendrick AG. Contributions to the mathematical theory of epidemics –
I. Proc R Soc Med. 1927;115A:700-21.
31.
Anderson RM, May RM. Infectious diseases of humans. Oxofrd, England: Oxfors
University Press; 1991.
32.
Flacco ME, Martellucci CA, Bravi F, Parruti G, Mascitelli A, Mantovani L, et al. SARS-CoV2 lethality decreased over time in two Italian Provinces. medRxiv. 2020.
33.
The infection fatality rate of COVID-19 in Stockholm – Technical report, Public Health
Agency of Sweden. 2020.
34.
Harrington C, Ross L, Chapman S, Halifax E, Spurlock B, Bakerjian D. Nurse staffing and
coronavirus infections in California nursing homes. Policy, Politics, & Nursing Practice.
2020;21(3):174-86.
35.
Lloyd-Smith JO, Schreiber SJ, Kopp PE, Getz WM. Superspreading and the effect of
individual variation on disease emergence. Nature. 2005;438(7066):355-9.
36.
Lau MS, Grenfell B, Nelson K, Lopman B. Characterizing super-spreading events and agespecific infectivity of COVID-19 transmission in Georgia, USA. medRxiv. 2020.
37.
Nacoti M, Ciocca A, Giupponi A, Brambillasca P, Lussana F, Pisano M, et al. At the
epicenter of the Covid-19 pandemic and humanitarian crises in Italy: changing perspectives on
preparation and mitigation. NEJM Catalyst Innovations in Care Delivery. 2020;1(2).
38.
Cohan A. Brigham and Women’s nurses call for stronger safety measures after COVID
cluster expands. Boston Herald. 2020.
39.
State Data and Policy Actions to Address Coronavirus. https://www.kff.org/healthcosts/issue-brief/state-data-and-policy-actions-to-address-coronavirus/: 2020.
40.
Pandemic Experience in the Long-Term Care Sector.
https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/covid-19-rapid-response-long-term-caresnapshot-en.pdf?emktg_lang=en&emktg_order=1: 2020.
41.
Fisman D, Lapointe-Shaw L, Bogoch I, McCready J, Tuite A. Failing our most vulnerable:
COVID-19 and long-term care facilities in Ontario. medRxiv. 2020.
42.
COVID-19 in Racial and Ethnic Minority Groups https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/need-extra-precautions/racial-ethnic-minorities.html2020. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/need-extra-precautions/racial-ethnicminorities.html.
43.
Park SW, Sun K, Viboud C, Grenfell BT, Dushoff J. Potential roles of social distancing in
mitigating the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in South Korea. medRxiv. 2020.
44.
Shim E, Tariq A, Choi W, Lee Y, Chowell G. Transmission potential and severity of COVID19 in South Korea. International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 2020.

20

