medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Original article submitted to Medrxiv preprint service October 2020

Persistent symptoms after Covid-19: qualitative study of 114
“long Covid” patients and draft quality criteria for services
Emma Ladds,1 academic clinical fellow
Alex Rushforth,1 postdoctoral researcher
Sietse Wieringa,1 postdoctoral clinical researcher
Sharon Taylor,2,3 child psychiatrist, honorary senior lecturer and expert by experience
Clare Rayner,4 occupational physician and expert by experience
Laiba Husain,1 research assistant
Trisha Greenhalgh,1 clinical professor

1

Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford

2

Central and North West London NHS Foundation Trust and 3Imperial College School of
Medicine, London, United Kingdom
4

Independent Occupational Physician, Manchester

Corresponding author:
T Greenhalgh trish.greenhalgh@phc.ox.ac.uk
Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences
University of Oxford, Oxford OX2 6GG
UK

Key words: Post-acute Covid-19, Chronic Covid-19, long Covid, qualitative study, quality
standards

5979 words

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background
Approximately 10% of patients with Covid-19 experience symptoms beyond 3-4 weeks.
Patients call this “long Covid”. We sought to document the lived experience of such patients,
their accounts of accessing and receiving healthcare, and their ideas for improving services.

Method
We held 55 individual interviews and 8 focus groups (n = 59) with people recruited from
UK-based long Covid patient support groups, social media and snowballing. We restricted
some focus groups to health professionals since they had already self-organised into online
communities. Participants were invited to tell their personal stories and comment on others’
stories. Data were audiotaped, transcribed, anonymised and coded using NVIVO. Analysis
incorporated sociological theories of illness, healing, peer support, the clinical relationship,
access to care, and service redesign.

Results
The sample was 70% female, aged 27-73 years, and comprised White British (74%), Asian
(11%), White Other (7%), Black (4%), and Mixed (4%). 27 were doctors and 23 other health
professionals. 10% had been hospitalised. Analysis revealed a confusing illness with many,
varied and often relapsing-remitting symptoms and uncertain prognosis; a heavy sense of loss
and stigma; difficulty accessing and navigating services; difficulty being taken seriously and
achieving a diagnosis; disjointed and siloed care (including inability to access specialist
services); variation in standards (e.g. inconsistent criteria for seeing, investigating and
referring patients); variable quality of the therapeutic relationship (some participants felt well
supported while others felt “fobbed off”); and possible critical events (e.g. deterioration after
being unable to access services). Emotional touch points in participants’ experiences
informed ideas for improving services.

Conclusion
Quality principles for a long Covid service should include ensuring access to care, reducing
burden of illness, taking clinical responsibility and providing continuity of care, multidisciplinary rehabilitation, evidence-based investigation and management, and further
development of the knowledge base and clinical services.

Study registration
NCT04435041

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
“Long” Covid is the name patients gave to Covid-19 infection that has not got better yet.1
Working definitions of ‘post-acute’ (symptoms beyond 3-4 weeks) and ‘chronic’ (symptoms
beyond 12 weeks) Covid-19 are yet to be formally confirmed.2 3 A positive test for Covid-19
is not a prerequisite for diagnosis of post-acute or chronic disease, since many people were
never tested.4
The prevalence and patterning of persistent symptoms after Covid-19 is contested.5
Mainstream medical opinion considers them commoner in people with conditions such as
asthma, diabetes and autoimmune disorders (though they are also known to occur in those
with no pre-existing conditions),4 6-8 and in those who were admitted to hospital.8-10 However,
there has been little or no systematic research on people who were not hospitalised and it is
even conceivable that a protracted illness may be more common in those whose acute illness
was less severe. Whilst academic publications have estimated that 10-20% of people are still
unwell after 3 weeks and 1-3% are still significantly unwell after 12 weeks,3 8 self-surveys of
patients recruited from long Covid peer support groups suggest a much high incidence of
persistent symptoms even taking account of sampling bias (for example, several thousand
people from the UK in such groups report symptoms six months after their acute illness,
which suggests that the figure of 1% cannot be correct).11 12 The high proportion of women in
long Covid support groups4 12 may or may not reflect a true gender difference in incidence.

People with long Covid experience a confusing array of persistent and fluctuating symptoms
including cough, breathlessness, fever, sore throat, chest pain, palpitations, cognitive deficits,
myalgia, neurological symptoms, skin rashes, and diarrhoea; some also have persistent or
intermittent low oxygen saturations.2 4 9-13 The cause of persisting symptoms is unknown, but
probably involves several different disease mechanisms including an inflammatory reaction
with a vasculitic component.14-16 Documented post-acute sequelae include myo- or
pericarditis, heart failure, arrhythmias, and thrombo-embolic complications including
myocardial infarction, stroke and venous thrombosis.17 18
Persisting symptoms seem to fall into three broad patterns:4 11 people who were initially
hospitalised with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) and now have long-term
respiratory symptoms dominated by breathlessness; people who were (usually) not

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

hospitalised initially but who now have a multisystem disease with evidence of cardiac,
respiratory, or neurological end-organ damage manifesting in a variety of ways; and people
who have persisting symptoms, often but not always dominated by fatigue, with no evidence
of organ damage. The second two groups have been little studied, and – surprisingly – were
excluded from a recently-established long-term follow-up study of Covid-19 (which is
limited to those who were hospitalised).19
Despite preliminary guidance from multiple sources,2 20-24 there is not yet a consistent
approach to the diagnosis, management and follow-up of patients with long Covid. In the
UK, the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence, Scottish Intercollegiate
Guidelines Network, and Royal College of General Practitioners are collaborating on a more
definitive guideline and NHS England has allocated funding for a new Long Covid service.25
To be effective, all these initiatives need to be informed not only by objective research
evidence of the accuracy of tests and efficacy of treatments, but also by research on the
subjective evidence of the patient experience.26

In this study, we sought to answer three key questions. First, how do people with long Covid
(including those who were never hospitalised) experience the development, course and
perhaps resolution of the illness over time? Second, what services have they accessed (or
tried to access), and what was their experience of those services? Third, what are their ideas
for improving the management of their condition and the design and delivery of services?

Methods
Management and governance
The dataset reported here emerged from two research studies: a mixed-method study of how
patients and staff experienced remote care in the Covid-19 pandemic (funded by UK
Research and Innovation Covid-19 Emergency Fund), and a funded extension, designed to
embrace Covid-19, of an ongoing qualitative study of the challenges of living with multiple
health conditions (from the Wellcome Trust). The work received ethical approval from the
East Midlands – Leicester Central Research Ethics Committee (IRAS Project ID: 283196;
REC ref 20/EM0128) on 4th May 2020 and subsequent amendments. It was overseen by an
independent advisory group with patient representation and a lay chair which met 3-monthly

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

via video link. People with lived experience of Covid-19 helped interpret and analyse the data
and gave feedback on drafts of the paper.

Study design and setting
Participants were invited to choose between an individual narrative interview or participation
in an online focus group. The study was conducted in UK between May and September 2020
(towards the end of the first wave of the pandemic).

Sampling and recruitment
We originally sought to interview people who had had telephone or video consultations for
acute Covid-19, as part of a wider study of remote services. We identified those individuals
first via Twitter, and the link was shared on a then nascent Facebook support group
(https://www.facebook.com/groups/longcovid). This brought a large response from
interviewees reporting symptoms many weeks after their acute illness. We decided to
undertake a focused study of such people with the following inclusion criteria: symptoms
developed between February and July 2020 following an acute illness consistent with Covid19; symptoms continued beyond 3 weeks. We contacted Covid-19 online patient support
groups (LongCovidSOS, Long Covid Support, Longcovid.org, Patient Safety Learning,
Positive Path of Wellness, Patient Voices) from which we identified a third online group of
UK doctors with long Covid), and also advertised on social media (Twitter) using the
#longcovid hashtag. We used snowballing from our initial sample to identify further
participants who were not in online groups or users of social media. Potential participants
were screened for eligibility and baseline demographic information collected (Table 1). To
correct for an initial gender and ethnic skew, we offered ‘men only’ focus groups and
included additional rounds of invitations for participants from racial groups other than White
British.

Consent
All potential participants were sent brief details of the study and offered a more detailed
standard information sheet. In accordance with ethics committee recommendations and
infection control measures at the time (which discouraged exchange of paper documents),
consent was collected either by email or verbally at the beginning of the audio or videotape.
Participants were assured that all data would be de-identified and stored and handled

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

anonymously, and that if they changed their mind about anything they said, they could
contact a named researcher and withdraw that section of the data.

Interviews
Interviewees were invited to tell their story uninterrupted and in their own words, with the
interviewer using conversational prompts (such as “what happened next?” or “how did you
feel when that happened?”) to maintain the narrative.27 Narrative interviews may be
particularly useful for raising sensitive issues and identifying emotional touchpoints in an
illness journey. All but one interviews were conducted by phone or by video using the
business version of Zoom; one (of a participant who was not comfortable using video) was
done by email at their preference. Phone and video interviews were audiotaped with consent
and contemporaneous notes were also made. 11 individuals also submitted symptom diaries.

Focus groups
Focus groups have the added advantage that group members may respond to the stories
related by others, and group dynamics (e.g. humour, conflict) can be used as data, though
lack of privacy may be a concern for some.28 Groups contained between 3 and 12
participants; they lasted 90 minutes (though participants were told they could leave any time
if they were feeling tired). Each group had two trained facilitators including at least one
clinically qualified researcher, plus a research assistant. Four groups were mixed; two were
restricted to doctors, two to nurses and allied health professionals, and one to men (with male
facilitators). One facilitator led the group; the other made contemporaneous notes and also
captured real-time comments in the chat window, inviting comments on these as appropriate.
In each group, all participants were asked to introduce themselves and outline briefly how
Covid-19 had affected them before inviting positive stories about encounters with health
services and then less positive experience.

Data management and analysis
The first 10 individual interviews and all the focus groups were transcribed in full. For
resource and speed reasons, and since many themes raised had already been covered, only
selected portions of the other 45 interviews were transcribed. Transcripts and notes were deidentified by removing reference to real names and entered onto NVIVO software version 12.
In an initial familiarisation phase, texts were grouped into broad categories (e.g. the illness

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

experience, accessing services). An interim synthesis was produced from early transcripts and
progressively refined using the constant comparative method (data from each new transcript
were used to add nuance to the existing synthesis.29 Our analysis was informed by theories of
illness experience,30 self-care,30 peer support,31 32 the clinical relationship,33-35 access to
care,32 36 and service redesign37 (see Discussion).

Patient involvement statement
The study was planned, undertaken, analysed and written in collaboration with people with
long Covid. Two people with long Covid, both clinically qualified, assisted with the data
interpretation and analysis and are listed as co-authors. We gave a webinar presentation via
Zoom to which all 114 patient participants were invited (28 attended), and presented the key
findings including the quotes used in this paper. A recording and copies of the presentation
was shared with all participants and all were invited to correct any errors or
misinterpretations. The draft paper was modified in response to their feedback.

Results
Description of dataset
Demographic and selected occupational details of participants are shown in Table 1. Despite
our efforts to balance for gender and ethnicity, the final sample was skewed to 70% female
and 75% White. By comparison, long Covid support groups are up to 86% female and the
UK population is 80-85% White British (depending on how defined).38 The 55 interviews, 8
focus groups and 11 symptom diaries produced over 1000 pages of transcripts and notes. Our
broad coding produced five over-arching themes which we discuss in more detail below: the
illness experience, accessing care, relationships (or lack of) with clinicians, emotional
touchpoints in encounters with health services, and ideas for improving services.

A serious, uncertain and confusing illness
Participants described symptoms in every part of the body which were sometimes severe or
fluctuating, made worse by the uncertain prognosis and stalled recovery, all of which
combined to make this a frightening, confusing and debilitating illness. Many participants
were unable to make sense of their suffering – an experience intensified by absence of
medical knowledge or guidance. They described being trapped in a cycle of modest

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

increments followed by setbacks which were physically and emotionally stressful, with no
clear prospect of full recovery.

I've been absolutely floored and I don’t know... I mean I'm just at the beginning of...
I've got all sorts of... I've got... I see in [Town A] tomorrow, a rheumatologist, to find
out what I've got because I've got vasculitis, which I think is a common thing […].
So, I don’t know how long that'll unfortunately go on for. And I've been left with
nerve issues, like really horrible nerve... stabbing pains in my hands and feet and I
can't move my toes anymore either, so I don’t know what the long term effects; I'm
only at that point of just beginning to discover what the long term effects are, which
are the ones that are kind of you expect to only affect people that were seriously ill in
hospital, not the sort of the everyday people that managed at home with it really, so.
So, I think my... unfortunately, my journey is far from over.
(Individual interview WB1)

Many participants described themselves as previously fit and active, and as having had to
come to terms with a dramatic decline in their ability to perform basic everyday activities.

I'm trapped, in that I can't park that far away and walk [to the shops] like I normally
would because I can't do hills. I can just, in the last couple of weeks, I can do gentle
inclines now, but I sort of grind to a halt on a hill. So, it's very limiting.
(Individual interview TA1)

Participants had discovered the need to establish new routines and explicit self-disciplinary
measures, such as counting steps and planning out visits to the shops, to avoid inevitable
exhaustion if they over-exerted themselves:

I find that it's bizarre how... for instance, yesterday when I went to get my blood tests,
I accidentally ended up getting five thousand steps on my step tracker because of the
doctor's trip and the pharmacy trip and, you know, moving around the house, getting
dressed and stuff. It literally sent me crippled by six pm because it was just too much
for me, compared to the days before where I'd done three thousand steps. So, even
like the small increase like that just literally sends me completely washed out.
(Individual interview EB1)
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Symptoms such as fatigue and cognitive blunting (“brain fog”) severely limited the prospect
of returning to work or finding new employment, as this office worker describes:

I'm not working, I haven't... I wasn’t able to go back to work and then I got made
redundant. I'm... I can't even imagine how I'm going to find a new job yet. In the last
week, I'm wondering because my brain fog seems to have lifted and it's feeling
possible finally, after nearly six months, that I might one day find a new job. But my
life is just nothing like it was and it's not really the life I want, you know; I need to
improve.
(Individual interview TA1)

A few clinicians and non-clinicians in our sample made comparisons with post viral fatigue
states like myalgic encephalomyelitis (ME) and chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS), expressing
empathy and newfound solidarity with people suffering with these conditions. More
commonly, our respondents felt the fatigue they were experiencing was distinct, and a
consequence of their organ damage.

The level and duration of debility experienced by people in our sample often drew a negative
response from friends, family or employer (as early expert advice suggested that nonhospitalized patients with mild disease would recover in two weeks39), especially when they
had not had the disease confirmed by a test.

The only reason I wanted the test is, however lovely friends are, it didn’t fit the twoweek image they had of what this illness looks like. They said are you sure this isn’t
anxiety? High pollen? It [wanting a positive test result] is more for validation.
(Individual interview JH1)

Doctors and other clinicians in our sample described how their symptoms and the
accompanying prognostic uncertainty, in addition to having all the effects listed above, had
also stripped them of confidence in their professional abilities. They were especially afraid
of the impact of cognitive deficits that might make them unsafe as clinicians. Some were
keen to quantify their deficits by formal cognitive testing.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[T]he medicolegal aspect is huge and I think possibly certainly feels that way as a GP
and it’s scary to not be able to recognise potentially where you have deficits because
if you can’t recognise them then that’s an unknown unknown in what can you do with
that. And just the sort of fast-paced nature of GP and as [another participant]
mentioned earlier you’ve got all these things having to kind of keep windows open at
once. […] It seems terrifying to think how we’re going to get back to it
(Participant from Doctors FG1)

In some cases, these professional concerns were compounded by the perception that clinical
colleagues disbelieved or dismissed their symptoms as “just anxiety”.

Difficulty accessing and navigating services
Participants found accessing care complex, difficult and exhausting. Many had contacted the
national telephone advice service, NHS111, as directed by public messaging, and reported
what they felt were delayed, absent or inappropriate responses due to pressure on the service
itself, a perception among providers that their symptoms were less serious than they actually
were, or lack of clearly defined care pathways for patients with long-term persisting
symptoms.

One day I had blue finger nails and I wasn’t cold and my husband was working at
home at the time and I said to him and he looked, I mean I’d real proper cyanosis on
all my finger nails and I phoned the GP and the GP answer phone said if you’ve got
any of the signs of, of Covid please ring 111 and so I rang 111 and, I live in [city with
high incidence of Covid-19] I don’t know if that makes any difference but I was put
on hold and after over an hour, an hour and twenty minutes nobody answered so I just
put the phone down because I was listening to music and a looped tape of what the
symptoms were and I was getting, going crazy
(Participant from Allied Health Professionals FG2)

Remote by default primary care services accessed through ‘total triage’ (which required
every patient to complete an online consultation form or have a triage phone call) had been
introduced as part of infection control policy in England and Wales in the acute phase of the
pandemic.40 This system had generated additional queues and obstacles to getting seen by a

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

general practitioner, which were particularly burdensome for participants whose disease was
draining their energy or who did not own mobile phones.

I’ve been able to get a lot of, book a lot of services online on the internet, they’ve now
switched to Dr iQ which is only for mobile phones at the moment, I can’t afford my
mobile phone, I have to phone in my deepest coma sleep at 8:00 am to talk to any GP
now.
(Participant in Patient FG1)

Some participants who had been discharged from hospital or contacted the national helpline
NHS111 had been directed towards their general practitioner for managing long Covid
symptoms (since the NHS111 route had been designed for acute Covid-19), but then directed
back to NHS111. There was perceived to be a missing tier of support between patients selfmanaging their own symptoms and presenting acutely to hospital or being seen in a specialist
clinic.

The focus when you do get a new GP speaking to you seems to be that they go back
to the beginning and I’ve had a few consultations where I know I don’t need to go to
hospital but you’re assessment is really all around ‘do I stay at home and wait this out
or do I go to hospital?’ and there’s nothing in between that. And I think if there was
the same GP who we are able to consult regularly they would build a picture of your
baseline and I think that’s what’s lost with digital ways of working.
(Participant in Doctors FG2)

Some though not all general practitioners were reported to be unaware of rehabilitation
services locally. Clinicians in our sample described finding out about rehabilitation clinics
themselves and then asking for a referral. Few participants had been referred to a specialist
and some who had received a specialist assessment described the experience as fragmented
(they felt that “one bit of me” had been assessed by organ-specific tests and imaging, but
there had no overall assessment of how long Covid had affected them generally and how they
were functioning on a day to day basis). More often, they found local hospital outpatient
services effectively closed for business, leaving them with no clear options.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

I've had to do a lot of this myself, to be honest. It was in the early on stages, I actually
rang around the hospitals to see if there was anything, so, but there wasn't anything. I
just rang the switch board and said, ‘What’s the deal with people who’ve had Covid?’
But they said nothing. Gosh, yeah, I was desperate. I'm sorry, I'm one of these people
who want answers and I wasn't getting any answers’
(Individual interview RH)

As the above quote illustrates, many participants did much work to self-advocate by
emailing, telephoning or otherwise cajoling providers to make referrals or circumvent
bottlenecks. These efforts occasionally included attempts – perhaps out of desperation – to
‘play’ an algorithm-driven system by omitting information (for example, deliberately
conveying the impression to a receptionist or call handler that they had not had Covid-19).
Others called on contacts or friends of friends to secure ‘back door’ appointments. Clinicians
who used such tactics expressed guilt but also anger that most fellow sufferers lacked the
kind of system knowledge that would allow them to do the same. Some non-clinicians,
however, showed remarkable resourcefulness in this regard. The participant below describes
her efforts to work around an NHS111 online form in order to be seen by her GP for a blood
test:

I did the e-consult – I had to do it a couple of times – I kind of learned to answer the
questions to get it to send a message to my GP surgery… If you say you’ve got heart
palpitations or breathlessness it’s telling you to call 111 which I didn’t want to do.
And so I had to downplay symptoms [laughs] to get through. I cancelled it and did it
again.
(Patient AN1)

Another tactic employed, especially by clinicians who suspected they had end-organ damage,
was to seek a private consultation. We heard several accounts of privately-ordered specialised
tests (such as cardiac magnetic resonance imaging) which confirmed such damage; positive
test results helped to validate their illness and (sometimes) gained them a specialist NHS
referral.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Concerns about quality and safety of care
Some of our participants described strong therapeutic relationships with particular clinicians,
who listened to their stories, believed them, validated their suffering, acknowledged
uncertainties, arranged appropriate tests and follow-up, and offered continuity of care.

I was amazed at my experience because she was kind, empathetic she was
compassionate [um] on the phone and she was listening to everything I was saying no
matter how random or crazy the symptoms sounded but not only that she, I think for
the first five days after I called her she had a daily check in call with me to monitor
how I’m doing so it was like a ten minute phone call every day for the first five days
(Participant in Patients FG1)

Unfortunately, such experiences were greatly outweighed in our dataset by the many who
expressed concern that their clinician did not recognise their condition, did not believe that it
existed, did not know how to diagnose it, did not empathise or acknowledge their suffering,
did not know how to manage it (including ignorance of local rehabilitation services and
referral pathways described above), and refused to test or refer. Some participants felt a
responsibility, on behalf of fellow sufferers, to persuade clinicians that their symptoms were
real, undertake their own research (individually or collectively) on this novel disease, and
construct their own care pathway in the absence of an established local one. The following is
from a patient who was getting troubling palpitations which they were aware could have a
cardiac cause.

They said ok we’ll get someone to phone you. My GP called back and just said ‘oh
well it’s probably anxiety’. He didn’t seem to have any idea what it could be. I felt
fobbed off. I said I’m worried – there are articles and news outlets that I’ve been
reading and I want to know what’s happening to me – people are having strokes,
blood clots. I haven’t been to hospital but I’m concerned I’m still getting these
effects. He said ‘oh you’ll be fine you’ve only had it mildly’.
(Individual interview ED1)

Whilst many participants liked the convenience of remote consulting (usually by telephone),
others expressed concern about a lack of face-to-face examination, particularly for worrying

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

symptoms. In some but by no means all cases, a request for a consultation was picked up by
whoever was on duty, leading to loss of continuity of care – which mattered because the
person’s story was often long, unusual and complex. Others described negative impacts on
their clinical management (one patient with diabetes, for example, developed pain and
tingling in the hands and feet and reduced ability to walk, and was surprised not to have been
invited in to be examined).

Several participants related what may have been significant events which raised safety
concerns. Some of these seemed to have been compounded by remote assessments and overadherence to protocols.

About five weeks in I think it was for me I was still desperately short of breath a little
bit better than right at the start but it was still coming back in massive waves and I
remembered ringing my GP from the floor on my lounge laying on my front and kind
of saying I’m really short of breath, you know, do you think I should try an inhaler do
I need to go back to A&E and I was kind of told well you don’t really sound too out
of breath over the phone and I got given diazepam and I was just kind of just
heartbroken at that point I was just absolutely like right I’m, I’ll take it so that I can
tell you tomorrow maybe that that hasn’t helped or whatever but I just, I really felt at
that point right if you could see me you would see that I am really like broken
(Participant in Doctors FG2)

One interviewee described making a total of 16 phone calls to obtain a repeat prescription for
an asthma inhaler. They had told a triage administrator that the long Covid had exacerbated
their asthma, been told to contact NHS111 because this was what the protocol demanded for
Covid-19 symptoms, but then been told by the NHS111 doctor to request the repeat
prescription from their own doctor. The duty doctor eventually phoned them and told them
they did not sound breathless enough to be given an inhaler. Further phone calls were needed
to track down the regular general practitioner and secure the inhaler.

Given the many and evident gaps in services, many participants – both men and women –
found that online peer support groups offered the greatest source of support through shared
experiences, knowledge and validation. These groups contained considerable experiential

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

expertise, and many participants heard about them from professionals who recognised the
limitations of their own knowledge and understanding.

At least I know I'm not alone. And I think people who actually have had the disease
tend to know a little bit more about it. So, you know, sixth sense, I actually think that
the support group has given more knowledge than the doctors have.
(Patient EB1)
Discovery of such groups were described as “epiphany” moments and as “salvation” by
participants, giving them hope that they might begin to move on from the chaos of long
Covid illness and onto a story of restitution.41

Emotional touch points
The experiences described above were associated with what Bate and Robert have called
emotional touch points:42 powerful feelings such as anger, frustration, fear and hopelessness.
Our participants described feeling physically and emotionally exhausted from the burden of
trying to access services, be believed, navigate incomplete and inadequate care pathways,
gain knowledge, organise their own recovery plan, and integrate their own care across a
disjointed and siloed service. Some talked of a profound breakdown of trust in a previously
valued family doctor service.

When asked what changes would be needed in services to avoid or repair these emotional
touch points, participants made many suggestions, from which we distilled some preliminary
quality principles for a long Covid service (see Box 1).

BOX 1

Discussion
Summary of key findings
This qualitative study of 114 people with long Covid in UK, including high representation
from health professionals, has revealed a number of important findings. People experience
long Covid as a confusing illness with many, varied and often relapsing-remitting symptoms,
uncertain prognosis and a heavy sense of loss and stigma. They find it difficult to access and

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

navigate services which they experience as fragmented and siloed; some described not being
taken seriously. There appears to be wide variation in clinical practice (e.g. inconsistent
criteria for seeing, investigating and referring patients), and in the quality of the therapeutic
relationship. We identified a number of possible critical events which may have been partly
due to overstretched, disjointed services designed to discourage face-to-face encounters.
These findings informed draft quality principles, summarised in Box 1.

Comparison with theoretical literature
Unlike disease, which can be defined in terms of a typical constellation of symptoms, signs
and test results, illness is a personal, lived experience that is both emotionally laden and
socially meaningful.30 Participants’ experiences of Covid-19 and its sequelae fitted Frank’s
depiction of the “chaos narrative”, in which an illness experience is uncertain, confusing and
with no clear direction or purpose.41 Many of the narratives conveyed a sense of shame and
blame consistent with stigma.43 Our findings illustrate that serious illness does not merely
disrupt people’s activities and routines; it can threaten their very identity as healthy,
independent and successful selves.44 45 “Spoiled identity” seemed a particular concern in our
sample, especially since symptoms were largely non-specific and not biomedically validated.

The heavy burden of treatment described by our participants, where the patient is expected to
self-manage some or all aspects of their care, accords with contemporary theories of illness
burden.46 Accounts of positive care experiences are explained by theories of good
professional practice.35 The good clinician engages reflexively with the patient’s lived
experience and acts not merely as diagnostician or technical expert but also as active listener
and professional witness.33 34 Continuity of the clinical relationship is particularly important
in chronic illness.34 These qualities are enshrined within the professional standards outlined in
the General Medical Council’s ‘Duties of a Doctor’.47

Our data are consistent with previous theorisations of access to healthcare in relation to
objectively defined dimensions of the service (e.g. approachability, acceptability, availability,
affordability, appropriateness48). Patients’ struggles to be seen as legitimate and gain access
to services also resonate with the sociological notion of candidacy – that is, how the patient’s
eligibility for care is negotiated between them and their healthcare providers (a construct
which is structurally, culturally, organisationally and professionally shaped).49 50

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Making sense of, and managing, chronic illness may become easier in peer support
communities (often though not always online), where new members learn practical
approaches from more experienced ones and that was certainly the case amongst our cohort,
who frequently felt this was their only option.32 36

The identification of emotional touch-points in our participants’ narratives draws on
experience-based [co-]design (EBCD), an approach developed to ensure that health services
are designed around the patient experience.37 Key features include a grounding in the
perceptions and reactions of individual patients, pragmatic application in front-line health
services, and the use of collective sensemaking to produce new understandings.37

Strengths and limitations of the study
To our knowledge, this is the largest and most in-depth qualitative study of long Covid
published in the academic literature to date. The research team included both clinicians and
social scientists. Our participants spanned a wide range of ages, ethnic and social
backgrounds, and illness experiences – including, importantly, the under-researched majority
who were never hospitalised. We oversampled men and people from non-White ethnic
groups to partially correct an initially skewed sample. Offering the choice of interviews or
focus groups allowed those with sensitive stories to tell to do so in private, and for all
participants to select a method with which they were comfortable. The use of multiple linked
sociological theories allowed to produce a rich theorisation of the lived experience of the
illness and draw on that theorisation to produce principles and practical proposals for
improving services. We included experts by experience (people with long Covid) as steering
group members, co-interpreters of the data, co-authors on the paper and peer reviewers. The
inclusion of a high proportion of healthcare workers both reflects the occupational risk in
these groups51 52 and allowed participants to draw on their system knowledge as well as their
personal illness experience when suggesting improvements to services.

The study does, however, have some limitations. The sample was drawn entirely from the
UK, though we hope to go on to produce cross-national comparisons by collaborating with
researchers in other countries. We did not fully correct for skews in the sample, and in
particular the perspectives of some minority ethnic groups have not been fully captured. It is

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

likely that despite our efforts to do democratic collaborative research with patients, we may
not have fully grasped the lived experience or represented all voices.

Comparison with previous empirical studies
Perhaps the most important contribution our findings make to previously published data is to
affirm the experience of patients with long Covid previously published in autoethnographies,53 patient-led surveys,4 narrative reviews,54 commentaries,1 55 and the views of
‘doctors as patients’.56 Our findings also resonate to a large extent with surveys on patients
discharged from hospital.7 9 57 These sources, like our own dataset, emphasise the varied
manifestations, uncertain course and sometimes protracted recovery from this disorienting
and new illness; the stigma of not being believed; the frustration of scientific and medical
uncertainty and ignorance; and problems accessing health services. We have captured the
voices of patients who were excluded from other formal research studies because they were
not admitted to hospital. We have taken forward suggestions for new services and
improvements in healthcare, based on the emotional touch points of the patient experience.

Implications for services
A wholescale redesign of clinical services for long Covid is beyond the scope of this paper.
Moreover, the details of such services will be determined by local and contextual factors.
However, based on our data, we believe that the quality principles listed in Box 1 should
inform and underpin both generalist and specialist services for long Covid.

Many of these principles accord strongly with a recently published manifesto written by a
group of doctors with long Covid which calls for: greater emphasis on research and
surveillance; appropriate development of, and access to, clinical services; and significant
patient involvement in both research and service development.56

Whilst policymakers in UK have recently announced a new service for Covid-19
rehabilitation in specialist clinics, 25 primary care services are not mentioned. Based on our
findings, general practitioners and other primary care clinicians appear to need better
knowledge, better guidance, and more time and resources to deliver the generalist care and
support which many patients with long Covid need, though this would have resource
implications.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Conclusion
This study has illustrated the uniquely varied, burdensome and uncertain nature of the lived
experience of long Covid and provided some preliminary principles for developing services
to address their needs (Box 1).

Perhaps the most important contribution of this study is to have identified a mismatch
between what the peer-reviewed scientific literature is saying about persistent symptoms and
what patients are actually experiencing. Our findings suggest that the various online patient
support groups for long Covid have earnt a place at the table when designing services and
planning new research. Whilst such groups are not new,31 and may sometimes grow to a
membership of thousands and provide a source of patient-generated data for researchers,58 the
long Covid peer support groups on Facebook and Slack have taken the lead in generating the
evidence base on long Covid,4 sharing practical advice, filling gaps in the formal support
system, and campaigning for better and more consistent services.

While health social movements studied by sociologists have traditionally been founded and
driven by non-clinically trained patients,36 long Covid is perhaps novel in including relatively
large numbers of clinicians and scientists among its ranks (many of whom contracted the
virus in the course of their work and now have multisystem complications). The combination
of clinical and experiential knowledge offered by such communities is an important resource
for both service planning and research.56 It is time to collaborate with these groups to take
forward a genuinely patient-centred research agenda.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements: We thank the 114 participants for their interest and contributions, and
xx peer reviewers for helpful comments on a previous draft of this paper.

Contributors and sources: EL, AR and TG conceptualised and designed the study. EL, AR,
SW and TG conducted interviews and focus groups. EL and AR led data analysis, with input
from SW and TG, and produced a first draft of the results section. TG wrote the first draft of
the paper which was refined by all authors. LH provided research assistant support and
conducted some interviews. ST and CR provided expertise by experience and knowledge of
patient-led research. TG presented findings to long Covid patient participants with
assistance from EL, AR, SW and LH. All authors contributed to refinement of the paper
provided additional references. TG is corresponding author and guarantor. TG affirms that
the manuscript is an honest, accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported;
that no important aspects of the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the
study as planned (and, if relevant, registered) have been explained.

Competing interests: TG is currently sitting on the oversight group for the long Covid
guideline at the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. TG and EL provided
evidence to the House of Lords Select Committee on long Covid. CR and ST are members of
a long Covid patient support group. Other authors have no relevant interests to declare.

Copyright: The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and
does grant on behalf of all authors, a worldwide licence to the Publishers and its licensees in
perpetuity, in all forms, formats and media (whether known now or created in the future), to
i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store the Contribution, ii) translate the
Contribution into other languages, create adaptations, reprints, include within collections
and create summaries, extracts and/or, abstracts of the Contribution, iii) create any other
derivative work(s) based on the Contribution, iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights in the
Contribution, v) the inclusion of electronic links from the Contribution to third party material
where-ever it may be located; and, vi) licence any third party to do any or all of the above.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Funding: This research is funded from the following sources: National Institute for Health
Research (BRC-1215-20008), ESRC (ES/V010069/1), and Wellcome Trust (WT104830MA).
Funders had no say in the planning, execution or writing up of the paper.

Table 1: Participant characteristics
Total participants
Gender
• Female
• Male
• Other
• TOTAL
Age
• Median
• Range
Ethnicity
• White British
• White other
• Black
• Asian
• Mixed
Health professionals
• Doctor
• Nurse
• Paramedic
• Clinical psychologist
• Pharmacist
• Dental hygienist
• TOTAL
Recruited from
• Online patient group
• Social media
• Other
Hospitalised with acute Covid-19
• Yes
• No

Individual interviews
55

Focus group participants
59

Total
114

40
15
0
55

40
19

80
34

59

114

48
31-68

43
27-73

46
27-73

39
4
3
7
2

45
4
2
6
2

84
8
5
13
4

8
6
1
1
1
1
1

19
12

27
18
1
1
1
1
1

31
17
7

48
11

5
50

6
53

[note to editor and reviewers: we are re-checking some of the figures in the above table – we know we had at
least one physio for example – minor corrections will be made before final submission]

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Box 1: Quality principles for Long Covid services
1. Access
Everyone with long Covid should have access to appropriate care, whether or not
they have had a positive laboratory test for Covid-19 or a hospital admission.

2. Burden of illness
The burden on the patient for accessing, navigating and coordinating their own care
should be minimised. Care pathways should be clear and referral criteria explicit.

3. Clinical responsibility and continuity of care
Clinical responsibility for the patient should be clear. Whilst specialist investigation
and management of particular complications is important, one clinician should take
care of the whole patient and provide continuity of care.

4. Multi-Disciplinary rehabilitation services
Patients requiring a formal rehabilitation package should be assessed by a multidisciplinary team including (e.g.) rehabilitation, respiratory and cardiac consultant,
physiotherapist, occupational therapist, psychologist and (if needed) neurologist.

5. Evidence-based standards
Standards and protocols should be developed, published and used so that
investigation and management is consistent wherever care is received.

6. Further development of the knowledge base and clinical services
Clinical teams should proactively collect and analyse data on this new disease so as
to improve services and build the knowledge base. Patients should be partners in
this endeavour. As a first step, patients need to be counted and prevalence rates and
prognosis established.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. Perego E, Callard F, Stras L, et al. Why the Patient-Made Term 'Long Covid' is needed [version 1; peer
review: awaiting peer review]. Wellcome Open Research 2020;5(224) doi:
10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16307.1
2. Greenhalgh T, Knight M, Buxton M, et al. Management of post-acute covid-19 in primary care. bmj
2020;370:m3026.
3. COVID Symptom Study. How long does COVID-19 last? (blog). London: Kings College London. Accessed
1st October 2020 at https://covid.joinzoe.com/post/covid-long-term 2020.
4. Assaf G, Davis H, McCorkell L, et al. An Analysis of the Prolonged COVID-19 Symptoms Survey by
Patient-Led Research Team. Patient Led Research (https://patientresearchcovid19com/) 2020
5. Alwan NA. Surveillance is underestimating the burden of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet
2020;396(10252):e24.
6. Carfi A, Bernabei R, Landi F, et al. Persistent Symptoms in Patients After Acute COVID-19. JAMA
2020;324(6):603-05. doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.12603 [published Online First: 2020/07/10]
7. Halpin SJ, McIvor C, Whyatt G, et al. Postdischarge symptoms and rehabilitation needs in survivors of
COVID‐19 infection: A cross‐sectional evaluation. Journal of medical virology 2020
8. Tenforde M, Kim S, Lindsell C, et al. Symptom Duration and Risk Factors for Delayed Return to Usual
Health Among Outpatients with COVID-19 in a Multistate Health Care Systems Network — United
States, March–June 2020. . MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;ePub: 24 July 2020. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.15585/mmwr.mm6930e1external
9. Carfì A, Bernabei R, Landi F. Persistent Symptoms in Patients After Acute COVID-19. JAMA 2020;epub
ahead of print. Accessed 24th July 2020 at doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12603
10. Arnold DT, Hamilton FW, Milne A, et al. Patient outcomes after hospitalisation with COVID-19 and
implications for follow-up; results from a prospective UK cohort. medRxiv 2020
11. Goërtz YM, Van Herck M, Delbressine JM, et al. Persistent symptoms 3 months after a SARS-CoV-2
infection: the post-COVID-19 syndrome? ERJ Open Research 2020
12. Vaes AW, Machado FV, Meys R, et al. Care Dependency in Non-Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19.
Journal of Clinical Medicine 2020;9(9):2946.
13. Dhont S, Derom E, Van Braeckel E, et al. The pathophysiology of 'happy' hypoxemia in COVID-19. Respir
Res 2020;21(1):198. doi: 10.1186/s12931-020-01462-5 [published Online First: 2020/07/30]
14. Tay MZ, Poh CM, Rénia L, et al. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity, inflammation and intervention.
Nature Reviews Immunology 2020:1-12.
15. Libby P, Lüscher T. COVID-19 is, in the end, an endothelial disease. European Heart Journal
2020;41(32):3038-44. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa623
16. British Society for Immunology. Long-term immunological health consequences of COVID-19. London:
BSI. Accessed 12th October 2020 at
https://www.immunology.org/sites/default/files/BSI_Briefing_Note_August_2020_FINAL.pdf 2020.
17. Puntmann VO, Carerj ML, Wieters I, et al. Outcomes of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Imaging in
Patients Recently Recovered From Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA Cardiology 2020
doi: 10.1001/jamacardio.2020.3557

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18. Mitrani RD, Dabas N, Goldberger JJ. COVID-19 cardiac injury: implications for long-term surveillance and
outcomes in survivors. Heart rhythm 2020
19. PHOSP-COVID consortium. PHOSP-COVID: Improving long-term health outcomes. Leicester: University
of Leicester. Accessed 12th October 2020 at https://www.phosp.org 2020.
20. NHS England. After-care needs of inpatients recovering from COVID-19 (CO388). London: NHS England.
Accessed 22nd June 2020 at https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wpcontent/uploads/sites/52/2020/06/C0388-after-care-needs-of-inpatients-recovering-from-covid-19-5june-2020-1.pdf 2020 (5th June).
21. Royal College of Occupational Therapists. How to conserve your energy: Practical advice for people during
and after having COVID-19. London: RCOP. Accessed 25th June 2020 at
https://www.rcot.co.uk/conserving-energy 2020.
22. Phillips M, Turner-Stokes L, Wade D, et al. Rehabilitation in the wake of Covid-19-A phoenix from the
ashes: British Society of Rehabilitation Medicine. Accessed 24th July 2020 at
https://www.bsrm.org.uk/downloads/covid-19bsrmissue1-published-27-4-2020.pdf 2020.
23. British Thoracic Society. COVID-19: information for the respiratory community. London: BTS 2020 (last
updated 21st April). Accessed 22nd June 2020 at https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/documentlibrary/quality-improvement/covid-19/resp-follow-up-guidance-post-covid-pneumonia/.
24. Barker-Davies RM, O'Sullivan O, Senaratne KPP, et al. The Stanford Hall consensus statement for postCOVID-19 rehabilitation. British Journal of Sports Medicine 2020;doi:10.1136/ bjsports-2020-102596
25. NHS England. NHS to offer ‘long covid’ sufferers help at specialist centres. London: NHS England.
Accessed 10th October 2020 at https://www.england.nhs.uk/2020/10/nhs-to-offer-long-covid-help/
2020 (7th October).
26. Greenhalgh T, Hurwitz B. Narrative based medicine: why study narrative? BMJ 1999;318(7175):48-50.
27. Chase SE. Narrative inquiry: Toward theoretical and methodological maturity. In: Denzin N, Lincoln Y, eds.
Sage handbook of qualitative research. London: Sage 2018.
28. Kamberelis G, Dimitriadis G, Welker A. Focus group research and/in figured worlds. In: Denzin N, Lincoln
Y, eds. The SAGE handbook of qualitative research. London Sage 2018:692-716.
29. Glaser BG. The constant comparative method of qualitative analysis. . Social problems 1965;12:436-45.
30. Bruner JS. Acts of meaning: Harvard university press 1990.
31. Kingod N, Cleal B, Wahlberg A, et al. Online peer-to-peer communities in the daily lives of people with
chronic illness: a qualitative systematic review. Qualitative Health Research 2017;27(1):89-99.
32. Anthony KE, Reif‐Stice CE, Iverson JO, et al. Belonging in Practice: Using Communities of Practice
Theory to Understand Support Groups. The Handbook of Applied Communication Research 2020:76579.
33. Frank AW. Just listening: narrative and deep illness. Families, Systems, & Health 1998;16(3):197.
34. Heath I. Following the story: continuity of care in general practice. Narrative Based Medicine: dialogue and
discourse in clinical practice London: BMJ Books 1998:83-92.
35. Schei E. Doctoring as leadership: the power to heal. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine 2006;49(3):393406.
36. Brown P, Zavestoski S, McCormick S, et al. Embodied health movements: new approaches to social
movements in health. Sociology of health & illness 2004;26(1):50-80.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

37. Bate P, Robert G. Bringing user experience to healthcare improvement: The concepts, methods and practices
of experience-based design: Radcliffe Publishing 2007.
38. Office of National Statistics. Population Estiomates by Ethnic Group and Religion 2019. London: ONS.
Accessed 5th October 2020 at
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/
articles/researchreportonpopulationestimatesbyethnicgroupandreligion/2019-12-04#populationestimates-by-ethnic-group 2020.
39. Anonymous. Report of the WHO-China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Geneva:
World Health Organisation. Accessed 10th October 2020 at https://www.who.int/docs/defaultsource/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-finalreport.pdf#:~:text=Using%20available%20preliminary%20data%2C,severe%20or%20critical%20disea
se.
40. NHS England. Advice on how to establish a remote ‘total triage’ model in general practice using online
consultations. London: NHS England 2020. Accessed 31.3.20 at
https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/03/remote-total-triagemodel-in-general-practice-27-march-2020.pdf.
41. Frank AW. The wounded storyteller: Body, illness, and ethics: University of Chicago Press 2013.
42. Bate P, Robert G. Experience-based design: from redesigning the system around the patient to co-designing
services with the patient. BMJ Quality & Safety 2006;15(5):307-10.
43. Scambler G. Health‐related stigma. Sociology of health & illness 2009;31(3):441-55.
44. Strauss AL. Chronic Illness and the Quality of Life. St Louis: Mosby 1975.
45. Bury M. The sociology of chronic illness: a review of research and prospects. . Sociology of health & illness
1991;13:451-68.
46. May CR, Eton DT, Boehmer K, et al. Rethinking the patient: using Burden of Treatment Theory to
understand the changing dynamics of illness. BMC health services research 2014;14(1):281.
47. General Medical Council. Duties of a Doctor. London: GMC. Accessed 5th October 2020 at
https://www.gmc-uk.org/ethical-guidance/ethical-guidance-for-doctors/good-medical-practice 2020.
48. Levesque J-F, Harris MF, Russell G. Patient-centred access to health care: conceptualising access at the
interface of health systems and populations. International journal for equity in health 2013;12(1):18.
49. Dixon-Woods M, Cavers D, Agarwal S, et al. Conducting a critical interpretive synthesis of the literature on
access to healthcare by vulnerable groups. BMC medical research methodology 2006;6(1):1-13.
50. Mackenzie M, Conway E, Hastings A, et al. Is ‘candidacy’a useful concept for understanding journeys
through public services? A critical interpretive literature synthesis. Social policy & administration
2013;47(7):806-25.
51. Nguyen LH, Drew DA, Graham MS, et al. Risk of COVID-19 among front-line health-care workers and the
general community: a prospective cohort study. The Lancet Public Health 2020;5(9):e475-e83.
52. Pallett SJ, Rayment M, Patel A, et al. Point-of-care serological assays for delayed SARS-CoV-2 case
identification among health-care workers in the UK: a prospective multicentre cohort study. The Lancet
Respiratory Medicine 2020;8(9):885-94.
53. Callard F. Very, very mild: Covid-19 symptoms and illness classification. Somatosphere 2020;8th May.
Accessed 14th May 2020 at http://somatosphere.net/2020/mild-covid.html/

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.13.20211854; this version posted October 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

54. Alwan NA. What exactly is mild covid-19? . BMJ (Opinion) 2020;28th July:Accessed 5th October 2020 at
https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/20/07/28/nisreen-a-alwan-what-exactly-is-mild-covid-19/.
55. Garner P. Covid-19 at 14 weeks—phantom speed cameras, unknown limits, and harsh penalties. BMJ (blog)
2020;Accessed 26th June 2020 at Covid-19 at https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/06/23/paul-garnercovid-19-at-14-weeks-phantom-speed-cameras-unknown-limits-and-harsh-penalties/
56. Alwan NA, Attree E, Blair JM, et al. From doctors as patients: a manifesto for tackling persisting symptoms
of covid-19. BMJ 2020;370:m3565. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m3565
57. Garrigues E, Janvier P, Kherabi Y, et al. Post-discharge persistent symptoms and health-related quality of
life after hospitalization for COVID-19. Journal of Infection 2020
58. Jones J, Pradhan M, Hosseini M, et al. Novel approach to cluster patient-generated data into actionable
topics: case study of a web-based breast cancer forum. JMIR medical informatics 2018;6(4):e45.

26

