medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Low-Cost Manually Assembled Open Source Reader for Isothermal Pathogen Detection
from Saliva using RT-LAMP: SARS-CoV-2 Use Case
Authors: John C. Bramley, Jason E. Waligorski, Colin L. Kremitzki, Mariel J. Liebeskind, Alex L.
Yenkin, Xinyuan E. Xu, Matthew A. Lalli, Jane A. O’Halloran, Philip A. Mudd, Stacey L. House,
Robi D. Mitra, Jeffrey D. Milbrandt, William J. Buchser

Abstract:
Distributed “Point-of-Care” or “at-Home” testing is an important component for a complete suite
of testing solutions. This manuscript describes the construction and operation of a platform
technology designed to meet this need. The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will be used as the
proof-of-concept for the efficacy and deployment of this platform. The technology outlined
consists of a one-pot, reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP)
chemistry coupled with a low-cost and user-assembled reader using saliva as input. This
platform is readily adapted to a wide range of pathogens due to the genetic basis of the
reaction. A complete guide to the construction of the reader as well as the production of the
reaction chemistry are provided here. Additionally, analytical limit of detection data and the
results from saliva testing of SARS-CoV-2, are presented. The platform technology outlined
here demonstrates a rapid, distributed, molecular point-of-care solution for pathogen detection
using crude sample input.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The rapid spread of SARS-CoV-2 illuminated the stress a pandemic can put on traditional
disease-testing paradigms and their associated global supply chains. The spread of the virus
requires extensive testing to quickly identify and control outbreaks. This has led to testing
shortages and delays in results reporting, and therefore a need for the development of more
distributed and less supply-chain-limited testing solutions. This manuscript describes one such
solution through the development of a pathogen-agnostic, distributed, rapid, saliva-based,
molecular testing platform. This platform consists of an isothermal reaction evaluated real time
using a heated fluorescence reader. This manuscript details the design, assembly, and
operation of the reader as well as the formulation of the reaction chemistry and the exploration
of both laboratory and clinical effectiveness in a SARS-CoV-2 use case.
SARS-CoV-2 testing can be conducted using a wide range of techniques and technologies. A
common gold standard is sample collection via nasopharyngeal swab followed by RNA
isolation, then detection through RT-qPCR. However, shortages in reagents and swabs, as well
as testing backlogs, have created the need for additional testing systems. Recent advances, by
us and others, in saliva-based testing have expanded the tools available to centralized testing
facilities and have the potential to reduce the supply chain burden of NP swab-based testing
(Becker et al., 2020; M. A. A. Lalli et al., 2020). However, advancements for centralized lab
facilities are not able to solely address the broad spectrum of testing needs under the challenge
of a pandemic. Smaller healthcare facilities, as well as rural and remote areas, are not equipped
to house these types of facilities and delays caused by sample transportation reduce the impact
of testing. Thus, the need for rapid, distributed, and accessible “point-of-care” solutions. The
system proposed here was designed specifically to provide a low-cost point-of-care testing
solution using readily available components.
The development of this platform was guided by a core set of principles. 1 Distributed. The
instrumentation should not be reliant on a centralized laboratory facility and allow testing to be
conducted outside of a CLIA environment. 2 Molecular (genetic). The advantages of this are
two-fold, first is being pathogen agnostic, meaning primers can be replaced to identify other
pathogens, and the second is the high specificity afforded by genetic-based tests. 3 “One-Pot”
Chemistry. No sample preprocessing is necessary to enhance ease of use and eliminate the
need for microfluidics or cartridges. 4 Real time fluorescence. We sought to avoid the problems
of both colorimetric and lateral flow-based assays, namely the potential for ambiguity in results
and interpretation. The advantages of a real-time fluorescent system are the ability to determine
results analytically and to automatically report to a digital record or database.
The platform presented here will illustrate the design, construction, and performance of a rapid
genetic test using SARS-CoV-2 as a proof of concept. This system consists of a low-cost, easyto-assemble, fluorescent reader and one-pot, saliva-based, reverse-transcription loop-mediated,
isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) reaction chemistry. A full guide to the assembly and use of
this testing platform is provided. Additionally, performance data in a simulated clinical matrix
using viral particles as well as an experiment on clinical saliva samples is also reported.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

LAMP and Saliva Chemistry
The choice of assay for point-of-care testing must satisfy several criteria in order to meet the
demands of the project. Traditional qRT-PCR requires sample pre-processing (RNA extraction)
as well as thermal cycling, which increases the complexity of the instrumentation and handling
of the sample. Isothermal reactions, therefore, provide a suitable alternative. Specifically,
reverse-transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) has shown to be
effective in viral detection using a crude sample as input (Augustine et al., 2020; Chotiwan et al.,
2017; Das, Babiuk, & McIntosh, 2012; Kaneko, Kawana, Fukushima, & Suzutani, 2007). RTLAMP provides a sensitive platform for nucleic acid detection in less than 30 minutes and is
compatible with the reader described in this manuscript. Saliva-based testing was the preferred
route for this platform due to the ease of collection, patient comfort, and testing worker safety.
High viral loads have also been detected in saliva samples throughout the course of infection
and at levels noticeably higher than nasopharyngeal swabs (La Scola et al., 2020; Wölfel et al.,
2020). To overcome inhibitors present in saliva and create a test reaction that requires no
sample processing (a “one pot reaction”), several modifications to the standard RT-LAMP
reaction were needed (M. A. Lalli et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2020). The modifications include the
addition of 6 molar Guanidine hydrochloride, RNAsecure, 10% Tween 20, and additional BST
2.0 polymerase. The concentrations and protocol for creation of the master mix can be found in
the methods section. This modified reaction overcomes the inhibitors found in saliva and is
capable of robust nucleic acid detection in viral particles containing clinical matrix (saliva) as
well as clinical samples.
Volumetric Loop-Based Sample Collection
Commercial saliva collection devices are designed to hold several hundreds of microliters to
milliliters in volume and preserve the samples for later assays, but these tubes (designed to
minimize the exposure of the machine operator to infectious saliva) add complexity and cost to
the assay. Since our point-of-care assay is performed immediately and requires only one
microliter of saliva, we decided to implement volumetric inoculating loops for saliva collection (or
self-collection). Similar saliva collection methods are currently in use in France and Israel for
SARS-CoV-2 detection. Individually wrapped, sterile, plastic 1 microliter inoculating loops (EZ
BioResearch K1021 and Cole-Parmer 06231-07) can be touched to the tongue then dipped
directly into the LAMP reaction. This flexibility in sample collection reduces dependence on
specialized manufacturing and diversifies the supply chain options as well as being extremely
inexpensive (~10x less than commercial saliva collection tubes).

Methods
Chemistry Production
Chemistry Production Reagent Preparation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A total of 12 primers (two sets of six) are used in the LAMP reaction chemistry. Each set targets
a different genomic region, the E1 and N2 regions of the SARS-CoV-2 virus (Augustine et al.,
2020; Yu et al., 2020). The purpose of the two sets is to increase sensitivity and add
redundancy in the case of a partially degraded sample. All primers were ordered from Integrated
DNA Technologies (IDT). The primer sequence information is listed in Table 1.
Preparation of the LAMP reaction chemistry is done in a batch format and aliquoted into 0.2 mL
PCR tubes (reaction tubes). The process described allows for the production of 432x 40µl
reactions (40µl is the standard reaction volume used for testing). All reagent preparation should
be done on ice and in a designated “Clean Space” free of DNA/RNA contaminants. The use of a
PCR enclosure is advised to further minimize the risk of contamination. The LAMP enzyme and
buffer, as well as fluorescent dye, are provided through a kit (NEB-E1700L), with additional
enzyme (NEB – M0537L). Additionally, 6M Guanidine hydrochloride (EMD Millipore - G3272),
10% Tween 20 (EMD Millipore - P9416), and nuclease-free water (Fisher - AM9937) are also
needed. All primers and gene block positive controls were acquired from Integrated DNA
Technologies (IDT).
In order to prepare the chemistry, ensure that all reagents are thawed and the workspace has
been cleaned with 10% bleach then 70% ethanol. Batches of reactions are prepared in 50mL
RNAse-Free conical tubes prior to being aliquoted into 0.2mL PCR tubes. Add each reagent in
the order found in Table 2. Ensure that reagents are mixed thoroughly through pipetting.
Following reagent addition, the reactions can be aliquoted into the 0.2mL PCR tubes (40µl) and
briefly centrifuged to eliminate any bubbles that may have formed. Mark ⅓ of the tubes with a
blue dot designating them as negative controls leaving another ⅓ unmarked for sample testing.
The remaining ⅓ will be used for positive controls.
A positive control reaction is needed to ensure proper reader and reaction functionality. A nonbiohazardous gene block is used in this reaction formulation. In the case of positive control
reaction production, gene block needs to be added to the 50ml conical tube prior to aliquoting.
Positive control template can be created by adding equal parts E1 gBlock (IDT - custom) and
N2 control amplicon (IDT - 10006621) to a concentration of 10,000 parts per µl, diluted with
10:0.1mM TE buffer, pH 8.0. 144µl of diluted gene block should be added to the 50ml conical
tube (equivalent to 1µl per 40µl reaction). Add 41µl of positive control containing reagents to
0.2mL PCR tubes and label with a red + to designate as a positive control. Reactions are stable
at 4C for up to two days and several months at -20C.

E1 gBlock sequence 5’-3’:
GCCTTTGTAAGCACAAGCTGATGAGTACGAACTTATGTACTCATTCGTTTCGGAAGAGACA
GGTACGTTAATAGTTAATAGCGTACTTCTTTTTCTTGCTTTCGTGGTATTCTTGCTAGTTACA
CTAGCCATCCTTACTGCGCTTCGATTGTGTGCGTACTGCTGCAATATTGTTAACGTGAGTCT
TGTAAAACCTTCTTTTTACGTTTACTCTCGTGTTAAAAATCTGAATTCTTCTAGAGTTCCTGA
TC
10X E1/N2 LAMP Primer Recipe

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Primer Name

10X (Stock)
Concentration Sequence

Volume from
100µM individual
primers

N2-F3

1µM

ACCAGGAACTAATCAGACAAG

60µl

N2-B3

1µM

GACTTGATCTTTGAAATTTGGATCT

60µl

N2-FIP

8µM

TTCCGAAGAACGCTGAAGCGGAACTGATTACAAACATTGGCC

480µl

N2-BIP

8µM

CGCATTGGCATGGAAGTCACAATTTGATGGCACCTGTGTA

480µl

N2-LF

2µM

GGGGGCAAATTGTGCAATTTG

120µl

N2-LB

2µM

CTTCGGGAACGTGGTTGACC

120µl

E1-F3

1µM

TGAGTACGAACTTATGTACTCAT

60µl

E1-B3

1µM

TTCAGATTTTTAACACGAGAGT

60µl

E1-FIP

8µM

ACCACGAAAGCAAGAAAAAGAAGTTCGTTTCGGAAGAGACAG

480µl

E1-BIP

8µM

TTGCTAGTTACACTAGCCATCCTTAGGTTTTACAAGACTCACGT

480µl

E1-LB

2µM

GCGCTTCGATTGTGTGCGT

120µl

E1-LF

2µM

CGCTATTAACTATTAACG

120µl

Nuclease-free Water (not DEPC treated)

3360µl

Fisher - AM9937

Table 1. Primer sequences for the LAMP reaction. Two complete sets of LAMP primers are
listed, one targeting the N2 region with the other targeting the E1 region. The starting point for
each individual primer is 100µM, then they are combined to this 10x stock solution. The 10X
primer concentration applies across both sets of primers reducing the concentration of each
individual primer but maintaining the 10X concentration for all 12 primers.

LAMP Master Mix Recipe - 432 reactions
Volume to
add in µl

Reagent

5,076

Nuclease-free Water (not DEPC treated) - (Fisher - AM9937)

1,728

10X LAMP E1/N2 Primers (IDT, diluted in house)

114.5

6M Guanidine hydrochloride (EMD Millipore - G3272, diluted in
house)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

345.6

RNAsecure (Fisher - AM7005)

345.6

Warmstart Dye (included in Warmstart LAMP Kit - NEB - E1700L)

172.8

10% Tween 20 (EMD Millipore - P9416, diluted in house)

8,640

Warmstart Master Mix (Warmstart LAMP Kit - NEB - E1700L)

864

Bst 2.0 DNA Polymerase (NEB - M0537L)

Table 2. Chemistry reagent information.
Reaction Chemistry Quality Control
In order to ensure that a given batch/lot of reaction chemistry is suitable for use, quality control
measures are undertaken. Using a reader that has been assembled and quality controlled
(outlined below), a minimum of four positive controls and four negative controls should be run.
In each run, the negative control should show no amplification and the positive control should
show amplification (X50 between 12 and 20 minutes). Negative controls showing more than a
background amplification (X50 24 minutes) may be contaminated. It is unfortunately very easy
to contaminate all your tubes with the positive control mix (for example from gloves > surface of
pipette > new reaction tube), so take great care to separate the tubes, change gloves, and clean
areas so that there is no possibility of positive-control contamination.

Reader Construction
Electronics: Overview
We intended the reader to be constructed with few tools and readily available components. All
components for the reader were acquired through consumer-accessible suppliers with several
alternatives available. A circuit diagram of the reader can be found in Figure 1. The circuit
consists of a series of six sensors powered by the 5-volt supply of the controller, two blue LED
lights, buzzer, multicolor LED, and a 3.6-Watt heating element supplied by a 9-volt power
supply. The 9-volt supply has been validated using both off-the-shelf 9V batteries and an AC
power supply (at 0.55 Amps). The six sensors consist of photoresistors and thermistors that are
housed within the “tube holder,” a 3-D printed part detailed below. An Arduino Nano with an
ATMega chipset was selected as the reader’s controller. All product number information can be
found in Table 3. The following electronics build can be most easily accomplished by referring
to Figure 2. The construction of the reader requires a limited understanding of electronics,
access to a 3D printer (or a printing service), and a small tool set consisting of wire strippers,
forceps, hand-held saw, and scissors. A soldering iron can add robustness to elements of the
construction and is recommended (but not required).

Component

~Price

# per Device

Catalog #

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

$14.99

1

Mfr: CZ0350
Micro Center: 055251

USB Connector

0

1

Included in Nano FT232 Set

Male-Male Jumper Ribbon

0

8

Included in Nano FT232 Set

Male-Female Jumper Ribbon

0

6

Included in Nano FT232 Set

LEDs (blue, red)

0

2/1

Included in Nano FT232 Set

Full Color RGB

0

1

Included in Nano FT232 Set

10 K Ohm Resistors

0

1

Included in Nano FT232 Set

470 Ohm Resistors

0

3

Included in Nano FT232 Set

220 Ohm Resistors

0

1

Included in Nano FT232 Set

Bud Industries
170-Tie Point Breadboard

$2.60

1

Mfr: BB-32650-B
Digi-Key: 377-BB-32650-B-ND

Advanced Photonix
Photoresistors

$0.54

2

Mfr: PDV-P8104
Digi-Key: PDV-P8104-ND

On Semiconductor
NPN Transistors

$0.09

1

Mfr: KSP2222ABU
Digi-Key: KSP2222ABUFS-ND

Micro Commercial Co
PNP Transistors

$0.09

2

Mfr: PN2907A-AP
Digi-Key: PN2907A-APCT-ND - Cut Tape
(CT)

Murata Electronics
Thermistors

$0.34

2

Mfr: NXRT15XV103FA1B040
Digi-Key: 490-7171-ND

Vishay Beyschlag/Draloric/BC
Components
7.5 Ohm Heating Resistors

$0.05

3

Mfr: PAC100007508FA1000
Digi-Key: PPC1D7.5CT-ND - Cut Tape
(CT)

Stackpole Electronics Inc
10 K Ohm 1% Resistors

$0.02

6

Mfr: RNF14BTE10K0
Digi-Key: RNF14BTE10K0TR-ND - Tape &
Reel (TR)

Inland Nano
FT232 Set (contains main Board Nano)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Stackpole Electronics Inc
100 Ohm 1% Resistors

$0.10

1

Mfr: RNMF14FTC100R
Digi-Key: S100CATR-ND - Tape & Reel
(TR)

Keystone Electronics
Battery Clip

$0.53

1

Mfr: 235
Digi-Key: 36-235-ND

XP Power
AC/DC Wall Mount Adapter 9V 5W

$6.50

1

Mfr: VEL05US090-US-JA
Digi-Key: 1470-2773-ND

TDK Corporation
Buzzer

$0.51

1

Mfr: PS1240P02BT
Digi-Key: 445-2525-1-ND - Cut Tape (CT)

Adafruit Industries LLC
Heat Shrink

$0.16

2

Mfr:1649
Digi-Key: 1528-1649AD-ND

Adafruit Industries LLC
Wire (optional)

$0.06

1

Mfr: 2990
Digi-Key: 1528-1766-ND

Bud Industries
Wire Jumpers

$0.07

1

Mfr: BC-32626
Digi-Key: 377-2258-ND

3D Printing Material, Printing Costs

$5.00

4

Felt Insulation (about 2” square per
reader)

$0.03

2

Any fabric store (Joann Fabric, Michaels)

Optical Filter
(We cut these from a larger piece that
was used for UV protection goggles,
but other sources are also likely
available)

$9.80

1

Clare Chemical: AG16

Table 3. Parts required. The first line of each row is the brand of the part and the second is the
item name. The next column is an estimated price per single part (what we paid, but we often
purchased in bulk). The 3rd column indicates how many of these go into each reader. The final
column lists the manufacturer part number and the supplier part number.
Electronics: Arduino Nano Controller and Breadboards
The base of the electronics build is an Arduino nano and a pair of 170 tie solderless
breadboards. Solderless breadboards were chosen to simplify reader construction and allow for
flexibility with regard to component reconfiguration. However, without an enclosure, leads may
become dislodged during handling of the reader. The Arduino nano is positioned to span the
two breadboards. The adhesive pad of the breadboards can be used to affix the electronics
assembly to the base of the housing following the completion of the electronics buildout.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Electronics: Sensor Array Assembly
The assembly of the sensor array begins with seven 10k Ohm resistors (R0-R6). A resistor
should be placed to correspond to analog pins A0-A6 by using one of the resistor leads as a
bridge (see Figure 2B). The second lead of the resistors R0-R5 are twisted together with the
lead for R6 which is placed into the ground tie on the far right of the breadboard. Ensure that a
space is left on the breadboard between each resistor. Next, insert jumper wires (or male-tomale ribbon cables) to connect each pin position to the 5-volt power supply provided by the
controller. A method for this wiring can be seen in Figure 2A. Jumper wires are preferred over
ribbon cables as they reduce the height making cable management and assembly within the
housing easier. Additional jumper wires are needed to establish a 5 volt and ground rail on the
portion of the breadboard opposite the Arduino nano (Figure 2a). The sensors and NPN are
added to the breadboard following their insertion into the tube holder and heating assembly
(Figure 4).
Electronics: Lighting Circuit Assembly
The lighting circuit assembly starts with the placement of two 470 Ohm resistors bridging the D2
and D3 rails of the controller to the outer portion of the breadboard. Each resistor should
correspond to the rail of the middle position of each of the overlapping PNP transistors at the
rear of the board. The leads of these resistors can be shortened to bring them lower to the
breadboard. A jumper wire, coupled with a 100 Ohm resistor, supplies the 5-volt power. The
placement of the cable lines up with the shared positive lead of the overlapping PNP transistors
seen in Figure 2A. Four male-to-female ribbon cables are needed to connect LED lights to the
breadboard. The male ends of two of the ribbon cables are inserted directly into the breadboard
each on the non-overlapping outside ends of the PNP transistors. The female end of the cable
will go to the positive lead of the LED (longer lead). The other two male-to-female cables will be
used to ground each LED. The male end of the cable can be placed in any of the ground
positions provided by the controller. The female ends are attached to the negative lead of each
LED.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. The circuit diagram. A0-A6 are the analog inputs and D2, D3, D5-D8, D12 are digital
pins outputs of the Arduino nano. Note the transistor near R12 is an NPN BJT while the two
transistors near R20 and R30 are PNP BJTs. The diagram shown allows for the system to be
easily converted into a two-color fluorescence system (those elements are grayed out and are
not necessary for the primary build in this paper). Each tube position is also indicated showing
which components relate to which reaction tube.
Electronics: Status Indicators
An optional but useful feature of the electronics are the components that constitute the status
indicators. These two components are a multicolor LED and a piezo buzzer. The buzzer is
placed on the D5 controller on the controller and grounded using the ground rail supplied by the
controller and a jumper wire. The multicolor LED has the three short leads placed in D6, D7,
and D8 and is similarly grounded. The schematic layout can be found on the top of Figure 2A.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

B

A

C

Figure 2. Graphical rendering of the electronics. A. An overhead view of the electronics. The
controller (Arduino Nano) is centrally located spanning the two 170 tie breadboards. The top of
the image depicts the back of the reader assembly. This area houses the status indicators such
as the status LED (white with leads to D6, D7, D8) and buzzer (black ring to D5). This section
also contains the heating indicator (red LED), light controls (PNPs), and AC adaptor. A 470-ohm
resistor connects digital pin D12 to the red LED, which is then jumped down to the base of the
NPN. The lighting control components are PNP transistors whose base is connected to digital
pins D2 and D3 by 470-ohm resistors on the upper right along with their collectors to jumper
wires connecting to the LED lights. A 100-ohm resistor paired with a jumper wire provides 5-volt
power from the controller to the PNPs’ common emitters. The bottom of the image displays the
front of the electronics featuring the sensor array that attaches to the tube holder (assembly
shown in Figure 4). Sensors are powered by the controller’s 5-volt supply, which vary their
resistance for either light or temperature, then go to analog pins A0 through A6 and have a
parallel path through a 10K-ohm resistor to ground. The ground and 5-volt rails are extended to
the outer board via the jumper wires shown. NPN transistor is also depicted with its leads:
Collector, Base, Emitter from left to right. B. Single resistor bridge depiction. Folding of the
resistor lead enables it to be used as a bridge to connect the sensor rail to the proper analog pin
of the controller. Forceps or fine nose pliers can be used to create the fold. C. In-Tube
thermistor.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Electronics: In-Tube Thermistor
The in-tube thermistor is used to regulate temperature in the reaction tubes. It is placed in the
T2 position of the tube holder. Assembly consists of one thermistor, two male-female jumper
ribbons, oil/water, one 0.2mL hinged PCR tube, and 3/32” heat shrink wrap (optional). Begin by
piercing the lid of the 0.2mL hinged PCR tube to feed the leads of the thermistor. Thermistor
leads are fed through the lid, so the thermistor is seated at the bottom of the PCR tube (Figure
2C). If using heat shrink cut two 20mm sections and cover the leads of the thermistor not
inserted into the PCR tube. Trim away the plastic shielding on both the female ends of the
ribbon cables using wire strippers. Insert the leads of the thermistor into the remaining female
connectors. Solder is applied to the insertion point to secure the thermistor to the ribbon cable.
After the solder has cooled, if heat shrink was added, cover the remaining exposed leads, and
shrink using the soldering iron. Fill the PCR tube with water or oil. The 2 male leads of the
jumper ribbons are attached to the breadboard in the A3 rail of the breadboard position (Figure
2A, Figure 4).
Electronics: Heating Element
The heating element of the reader went through several design iterations to find a cheap and
easy-to-assemble element that could reach temperatures of 65°C within 2 minutes and to
remain as low wattage as possible. Early testing using nichrome-based heating pads or small
metal heating elements at the base of the tube were not sufficient to heat the reaction. This led
to use of wirewound heating resistors positioned proximal to the reaction tubes. Specifically,
three 7.5 Ohm 1-watt wirewound resistors connected in series. Each resistor is lined up to heat
a single tube that is inserted into the reader. The control of the heating element is through an
NPN transistor regulated by digital pin D12 of the controller. A 470-ohm resistor from this pin
connects to a red LED, used to indicate the heater status, and a jumper wire to the base of an
NPN transistor serves as the switch to turn the heat on and off. The wirewound resistor array is
placed within the tube holder backed by insulation. If AC power is selected for the heating
element take extra precaution by only testing heat when the reader is fully assembled. A
graphical view of the heating element can be found in Figure 3.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. A side view of the components inside the “tube holder”. Contained within the tube
holder is the heating element, in-holder thermistor, in tube thermistor, blue LEDs, and
photoresistors. Clips are present to hold both the filter and heating element insulation in place.
Additionally, a blue emission filter is placed in front of the photoresistors.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4 Instructions for Tube Holder construction. A Photoresistors, thermistor, and emission
filter insertion. B Heating element construction. C Heating element insertion to the holder. D
NPN and final assembly.
Reader Housing Assembly
The housing of the reader was designed to consist of a minimal parts list and be printed using
enthusiast-grade 3D printers. The overall design adopts a rectangular “clamshell” approach
meaning that the reader is assembled on a base and the enclosure and lid of the housing clips
into the base. Designs were done in the open source software Blender (http://blender.org) and
were exported to STL format for printing, source files are made available in the supplement.
Testing can be done without the enclosure so that most of the build is easily accessible (only
plug in the USB, not the AC power until the enclosure is fitted). The housing consists of 4 main
components: the base, enclosure, lid, and tube holder.
Reader Housing: Tube Holder

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The tube holder houses the heating element, excitation LEDs, thermistors, and photoresistors.
This design accommodates a three-tube compatible reader, but the third (T2, middle) tube is
utilized to regulate heating. The first step of assembly is the insertion of the photoresistors and
thermistors. Three photoresistors are inserted on the interior of the assembly and the leads are
fed through the printed holes corresponding to each spot (Figure 4A). A circular indentation
allows the photoresistor to be seated in the tube holder to prevent slipping of the sensor and
ensure uniform positioning of all three photoresistors. A similar printed indentation is located on
top of the tube holder for the in-holder thermistor. Each resistor corresponds to an individual
tube slot in the holder. Following insertion of the photoresistors, the blue light filter (which is
orange in color) is slid into clips on the interior of the holder. Specifications for the size of the
filter can be found in Table 3. The heating element (Figure 4B) is placed opposite the filter and
photoresistors. The outer leads of the heating element resistors are fed through the diagonal
holes of the tube holder (Figure 4C). The blue LED lights are inserted into the printed ports on
either side of tube holder (Figure 4C). Insulation is necessary between the heating resistors and
the interior wall of the tube holder. Felt sufficiently insulated and prevented softening or melting
of the 3D printed components while reducing heat loss. The NPN transistor is the final
component inserted into the tube holder (Figure 4D). Following assembly, the leads of the
thermistor, photoresistors, and NPN can be placed into their designated pin positions on the
breadboard (Figure 4D).
Reader Housing: Base and Enclosure
The base of the reader housing serves as a platform for all of the internal components. The
completed breadboard and controller are centrally located on the base. The adhesive pad found
on the underside of most 170 tie breadboards can be used to affix the board and controller to
the reader base. The sensor array portion of the board faces the pedestal end of the reader
base. The pedestal serves as the platform for the tube holder assembly. 4 clips on the front and
back of the base serve to secure the enclosure. An additional battery slot is located adjacent to
the breadboard position if battery power is selected to run the reader. The enclosure serves to
cover the electronics and secure the tube holder and base of the reader. Power supply and USB
ports are located on the rear and side of the enclosure respectively to accommodate both power
options. The final element of the enclosure is the slot for the lid which serves to cover the tube
holder when in use (Figure 5).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5. View of all components. From the bottom up, you can visualize the pieces and how
they fit together. Bottom is the “base” 3-D printed part, then the electronics boards. Then the
tube holder, then tube thermistor, then the “enclosure”, then the reaction tubes, then the lid. This
ordering is not precise to the build, since the tube holder is assembled before all the
connections to the electronics. The middle tube is separated from the outer tubes since this tube
is used for the temperature control (in-tube thermistor) and is placed and tested before the top
enclosure is fitted.
Reader Power Considerations
To increase the breadth of usage, two primary modes of power were assessed in the
development of this platform. The first was a standard 9-volt battery offering the ability to use
the device in the absence of an outlet and flexible deployment. Performance under battery
power yielded effective testing, however, the drain on the battery limited the use of the system
to 2-3 hours of continuous usage. Battery failure resulted in a loss in temperature invalidating

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the results of the most recent test. Following feedback from healthcare providers and analysis of
different usage scenarios, AC adaptor compatibility was added to the reader. A 9-volt AC
adaptor provided the ability to use the reader continuously throughout the day without the need
to monitor power. The drawback of this method is the need for a 9-volt power supply and the
additional safety considerations when using AC power (never plug in without the full enclosure
fitted).
Firmware and Software
All firmware for the reader was uploaded to the Arduino nano ATMega through the Arduino IDE
(https://www.Arduino.cc/en/main/software). The firmware was also developed using the Arduino
IDE (C, C++). The PC software application was written in DOTNET framework. Detailed
instructions on the usage of the software can be found in the protocols section. All software and
firmware source code are available (https://gitlab.com/buchserlab/rgd).

Figure 6. Timing of the system. The software controls the timing of the firmware through 6
different variables. Shown is a snapshot of what occurs across a single cycle (which repeats
throughout the 30-minute run). The cycle length is 2.5 seconds, and each light comes on for 500
msec. The figure above shows that the Tube 1 LED comes on from 500-999 msec, then turns
off, while the Tube 3 LED comes on from 2000-2499 msec. After the LED turns on, there is a
delay of 200 ms before the sensors start recording the light intensity. The sensor then captures
a measurement every 50 msec (which they do ~6 times while the light is still on). These data
points are averaged together and transmitted once every cycle (the ‘send’ mark). Finally, the
delta parameter just sets the minimum internal delay inside the ATMega. Nothing can happen
faster than this value.
Quality Control Protocols
Quality Control Protocols: Initial Startup
A reader must be quality controlled following completion of the electronics build. Before starting,
ensure that both the Arduino IDE (https://www.arduino.cc/en/Main/software) and dotNET Core
(https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) are installed on the PC that will be connected to the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

reader. Following installation, connect the reader to the PC through the USB cable provided in
the kit. Upload the firmware to the device through the Arduino IDE (ensure that that proper port
is selected in the tools menu of the IDE). The upload will trigger a series of light flashes from the
Arduino nano if successful. Run RGD_Control.exe on the PC to start the software, which should
automatically detect and connect to the reader upon startup. Navigate to the Settings tab
(Figure 7A) to begin configuring the reader. Click the more button to open the pin assignment
menu. The controller’s pins are correctly assigned by clicking the default button. Confirm that
the pins are correct. The correct assignments are as follows: ST1 (A)=1, ST2 (A)=4, ST3 (A)=6,
LED T1 (D)=2, LED T3 (D)=3, Thermo1 in tube thermistor (A)=3, Thermo2 in holder thermistor
(A)=2, Heater (D) = 12, Buzzer (D)=5. Pin positions can be manually edited if an alternative
layout is desired. The Push Pins (Status) and Push Pins (up to Heater) buttons are clicked
once all of the pins are set correctly. The buzzer can be tested using the Try Buzzer button.
Each press will cycle through the 4 different buzzer sounds. The Status Lights button confirms
proper pin designation and breadboard insertion of the multicolor LED. Each press will cycle
through the flashing status light LED colors (Red, Green, Blue, Cyan, Magenta, Yellow).
Returning to the Settings tab, select the lights checkbox and click Update. The Blue LEDs on
each side of the tube holder should flash blue at rapid intervals. Deselect the lights check box
and then click Update again which will turn LEDs off. Blue LEDs will flash in series with a cycle
length of 2.5 seconds, and each light comes on for 500 msec once a test run is started. The
timing of the LED lights and photoresistor reading frequency is outlined in Figure 6. A flashlight
can be used to test photosensor 1 and photosensor 3 by waving the light over corresponding
tube holders. The plots for Tube 1 and Tube 3 should increase when the light is above the
corresponding tube position.

Figure 7 Software. A. Settings tab of the reader software. This tab contains the device ID
information as well as calibration settings and pin designations. The destination of the run data
is designated here. B. Advanced tab of the software. The advanced tab contains thermistor
calibration inputs as well as device selection and metadata input. C. “Basic run” tab of the
software. Following quality control all testing will be facilitated here through following the
software guided instructions. Additional information such as the sample ID, user, and notes can

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

also be recorded here. D. “Post run” screen displaying final amplification curves, test result
interpretation, and options.
Quality Control Protocols: Thermistor Calibration
Begin reader thermistor calibration by removing the in-tube thermistor from tube holder position
2. Place the in-tube thermistor on the benchtop so that it is immobile. Once the TEMP C reading
has stabilized record the room’s temperature in the Cal Lo section of the Advanced tab. A
laser-based thermometer can increase calibration accuracy by obtaining a reading directly from
the thermistor tube. Press the Cal Lo button to record this reading. Using a thermocycler (Or
device capable of holding constant heat up to 60C), set the temperature to 60C and allow it to
get to temperature with the in-tube thermistor. A quick rise in the displayed Temp C should
become apparent. Allow Temp C to stabilize with the in-tube thermistor in the thermocycler.
Enter “60” into Cal Hi section and then Press Cal Hi. Navigate to the settings tab. Enter any
number into the deviceID and then click Push*. deviceID is a user-assigned number to
distinguish between multiple readers. A message will appear regarding the maximum number of
pushes the controller can accommodate. Accept this message to complete the push. The intube thermistor has completed calibration once the above steps are completed.
Quality Control Protocols: Heating Verification
Upon completion of thermistor calibration, the heating element can be properly tested. Start by
navigating to the Advanced tab and check the heater box to begin heating (Figure 7B). The
red LED on the reader should illuminate following checking the box. As heating continues, a rise
in TEMP C (displayed in the plot), should be observed. Allow TEMP C to reach 60C to ensure
that the heating element is able to deliver sufficient heat. Once the set temp has been reached,
examine the red heating LED. The LED should oscillate on and off depending on the set
tolerance. The default tolerance is 0.8C. The in-tube thermistor should be examined to confirm
that the thermistor is seated at the base of the PCR tube. This is needed to obtain the most
accurate temperature reading for best reaction results.
Quality Control Protocols: Precheck Procedure
Navigate to the Advanced tab of the software and click Precheck (Figure 7B). This initiates an
automatic reader self-test. The first sequence of the precheck evaluates the blue LED lights.
The reader records “dark mode” data by turning off the LED lights and recording from both the
T1 and T3 sensors. A second reading with the LED lights on is then taken for both sensors. The
difference in sensor readings will be calculated and the delta displayed in the software. A delta
of 10% or more is satisfactory to continue. The heater is then turned on and the rise following
20 seconds is recorded. A temperature rise of at least 5 degrees should be observed. A report
will be generated following the pre check and saved in the directory specified in the folder box
in the advanced tab. If one of the tests fails, check the wiring for that part of the circuit.
Quality Control Protocols: Viral Particle Testing

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Following completion of the aforementioned quality control measures we validated our readers
through testing using viral particles (NIH: SARS-Related Coronavirus 2, Isolate USA-WA1/2020,
Heat Inactivated, NR-52286). Testing using viral particles in clinical matrix (saliva) was
performed to validate the chemistry as well as reader performance in a simulated test scenario.
During this testing, software instructions were followed to ensure appropriate controls were run.
The order of the controls is displayed in Figure 7C. A red “plus” corresponds to a positive
control and a blue “dot” corresponds to a negative control. The sample condition “s” during this
process represents the viral particle testing. Testing was repeated four times per reader using
the same number of viral particles and reaction chemistry lot. Appropriately dispose of the
reaction tubes following the completion of a test and take care to not open the reaction tube.
Extensive internal testing using this paradigm allowed the validation of multiple readers and
batches of reaction chemistry. If appropriate facilities are available, viral particle testing can be
undergone, however, it is sufficient to replace this testing with the non-biohazardous gene block
controls spiked into clinical matrix (saliva).
Testing Protocol
Testing Protocol: Sample Testing
All sample testing is conducted through the Basic Run tab of the software (Figure 7C). Upon
startup, the reader should automatically be detected (ensure that the reader is plugged into a
compatible USB port). Press the PreHeat button to begin heating the reader. Samples cannot
be run until the reader has reached the set temp of 60C. The software will instruct the user to
perform a set of initial runs using controls to ensure proper reader functionality. These runs
consist of a positive and negative control. Ensure that both control tubes are fully thawed before
being placed into the reader. The user will be notified if the run has failed and that sample
testing should not proceed prior to examination of the reader and chemistry. Following each
quality control run and sample test the user will be provided with a screen displaying the
amplification curve, results, and options for continuing (Figure 7D). To continue running
samples select the Keep Heater ON and Go to Standby option. The other options will either turn
off the heater or prompt the user to proceed with the shutdown QC run.
Following the initial quality control runs, the software indicates what tube position the reaction
tubes should be placed as well as what reaction tubes are needed. The appropriate sample and
control tubes should be removed from the freezer and thawed together. Do not place the control
tube in the reader before the sample tube. Remove a sterile loop from its packaging and touch
the loop either to the surface of the tongue or beneath the tongue to collect the saliva needed
for the test (no scraping). Insert the loop into the sample tube, discard the loop, and close the
sample tube. Place both tubes in the reader, close the lid, and press run. The duration of the run
is 30 minutes. Allow the run to complete before interpreting the results. The software will
perform an analysis upon completion of the run and determine if there was amplification in the
sample (called “product amplification”) as well as other parameters of the curve fit (Figure 7d).
After the last sample, the software will instruct one more QC run, and then shutdown.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
Analytical Limit of Detection in Simulated Clinical Matrix
In order to determine an analytical limit of detection (LOD), heat inactivated viral particles were
spiked into a simulated clinical matrix. This simulated matrix consisted of the 40 µl LAMP
reaction with 1 µl of saliva (from 5 different individuals) and a known number of viral particles
(NIH: SARS-Related Coronavirus 2, Isolate USA-WA1/2020, Heat Inactivated, NR-52286). Viral
titers of 10^4 were used to quality control readers prior to LOD testing (with 100% success).
Testing consisted of viral particles levels of 100, 30, and 10 in each reaction, aka per 1 µl of
saliva (Figure 10). Viral loads down to 100 viral particles (VP) per µl of saliva were reliably
detected in 95% of runs. 30 viral particles were detectable at a rate of 92%. Given recent
research into viral loads showing less than ~100 copies per microliter were not infectious (La
Scola et al., 2020; Quicke et al., 2020; Wölfel et al., 2020) an LOD near 30 particles is sufficient
to detect infectious levels of SARS-CoV-2.

Figure 10. Limit of Detection using Viral Particles in Clinical Matrix. Known concentrations
of viral particles were spiked into reactions with one microliter of loop-delivered saliva. Readers
used to evaluate the LOD had previously passed initial quality control to eliminate reader-based
reaction failures. A LOD of between 30 (92%) and 100 (95%) viral particles was determined
after repeated testing with decreasing concentrations. 10 viral particles (not shown) was able to
be detected at a rate of 85%. The traces are directly saved from reader (as constructed per the
instructions above). The raw trace and a curve fit are displayed for each replicate.
Clinical Saliva Results
A series of clinical samples were run on several readers to determine performance of the test
using saliva samples collected from patients with corresponding RT-qPCR NP swab results. All
saliva sample collection was approved by the institutional review board at Washington

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

University School of Medicine (WU350, IRB#202003085). Informed consent was obtained for all
samples. All of these saliva samples were also run with the Fluidigm Advanta Dx SARS-CoV-2
RT-PCR Assay testing system. A total of 117 samples were run blinded to the NP swab result.
As in all testing done with this system, each reader started with QC, and controls were placed
on the reader as instructed by the software throughout the experiment. All analytical thresholds
for the determination of positive, negative, and ambiguous results were predetermined prior to
testing and unblinding. A view of the amplification curves for the first 38 samples is shown in
Figure 11 A. The red curves represent those samples called positive by NP swab while the blue
shows negative samples. Overall, the sensitivity of the assay was calculated to be 87% with a
specificity of 95.8%. All samples used in the trial were transferred into the tube containing the
test chemistry with a one microliter inoculating loop unless insufficient sample was present in
which case a pipette was used to transfer the sample.

A
Gold Standard

B
1-Pot Saliva Assay on
Prototype Readers

Positive

Negative

Total

Positive

40

3

43

Negative

6

68

74

Total

46

71

117

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Positive Predictive Value

93.0% (40/43)

Negative Predictive Value

92.0% (68/74)

Sensitivity

87.0% (40/46)

Specificity

95.8% (68/71)

Accuracy

92.3% (40+68)/117

Figure 11. Results for POC readers with 1-color 1-pot LAMP reactions. A. Amplification
results of 38 blinded clinical samples run with pipetting to the reaction tube. B. Full results from
117 total subject’s saliva, all blinded. The gold standard comparator used in this analysis are
results from the Fluidigm saliva assay as well as NP swab RT-qPCR results when available.
Discussion
The current reporting delays and supply chain limitations in COVID-19 diagnostics experienced
by centralized laboratory testing platforms demonstrates the need for distributed, accessible,
and more rapid testing solutions. Antigen tests provide one alternative to meet these criteria,
however, while offering both a cost savings and turnaround speed advantage, they suffer from
lower sensitivity and specificity. Here we present a distributed extraction-free saliva-based
molecular testing platform with a less than 30-minute run time. This solution consists of an
isothermal LAMP reaction coupled with a low cost, heated fluorescence reader. The results of
this are a one-pot, genetic, real time, point of care platform technology for pathogen detection.
The development of this reader was driven by the idea of creating a platform
technology that could be readily and rapidly deployed across a wide range of use cases. As a
result, the reader only occupies a small footprint and is compatible with both AC and battery
power. Battery power allows the user to perform field testing and deploy the solution in underresourced environments. The AC power option allows for repetitive testing in areas where
central laboratory-based testing is insufficient or unavailable. To achieve a simple reader
design, the chemistry constituting the reaction needed to require little to no sample manipulation
as well as minimally invasive conditions. As a result, the isothermal nature of RT-LAMP
provided an adequate solution. Significant development was needed to modify RT-LAMP
reactions to overcome the reaction inhibitors present in saliva. The key modifications that allow
direct saliva addition are believed to be the larger reaction volume (25 to 40 µL) coupled with
the additional BST 2.0 added to the reaction. Volumetric inoculating loop sample delivery is also
a unique advantage of this solution, as it allows for sample self-collection and eliminates several
supply chain vulnerabilities of more complex sample collection methods. Under simulated
conditions, the reaction can accommodate up to 3 microliters, allowing for alternatives such as
disposable dental micro brushes to be used. The result is a one-pot, RT-LAMP driven platform
that is easy to assemble and widely deployable. However, several drawbacks are present in the
current state of this platform. Regarding the reaction chemistry, the three primary issues are

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

nucleic acid contaminants, cold chain limitations, and single-color design. The first,
contamination, was observed during the production of the reaction chemistry. The result was
amplification in negative controls as well as false positive results. Additionally, post reaction
positive controls have the potential to themselves be contaminants if not discarded properly.
The second issue, cold chain, refers to the current constitution of the reaction chemistry.
Currently, the reaction is room temperature stable for up to 4 hours, 4C stable for 2 days, and 20C stable for several months. This limits the usage of the reaction in areas where cold chain
cannot be maintained. It also adds complexity to reagent storage. A proposed solution to
address this is the development of a lyophilized version of the reaction in which the reaction is
reconstituted in a shelf stable buffer prior to use. This would increase the field deployability of
the technology. Lastly, the one-color nature of the reaction limits the ability to determine proper
sample addition. The use of a general nucleic acid binding dye in the current format reduces
specificity and cannot work to ensure sample addition. A two-color system using targeted
probes allows for the use of an extraction control such as RNAse P (Figure 12). Several
approaches were evaluated in the ongoing effort to develop a two-color compatible system. The
approaches evaluated included OSD (Bhadra, Riedel, Lakhotia, Tran, & Ellington, 2020), loss of
fluorescence probes (Hardinge & Murray, 2019) and MERT LAMP (Wang et al., 2015).
Promising results in both simulated and clinical scenarios using both loss of fluorescence and
the MERT LAMP approaches have been achieved. The reader can be modified to become a
two-color system through the addition of a second set of LED lights and photoresistors with an
appropriate filter. The limitations of the reader primarily surround the manual assembly. The first
is the ability for components to shift or become dislodged. This is true of both the breadboard,
due to it being solderless, and the heating element. A solution for the breadboard issue is
through using printed PCB boards instead of solderless breadboards. Additionally, a machined
heat block that accommodates the lights and sensors can be used to replace the heating
resistors. A prototype is currently being tested and is showing promising results. A final
observation regarding the reader is the impact of electrical noise on the sensors. The signal
trace observed varies depending on where the reader is used. In areas with more AC-powered
equipment, a noisier signal is observed. One possible solution would be the addition of low pass
filters to the electronics build to reduce the overall electrical noise.
The platform laid out in this manuscript provides a guide and performance evaluation of a rapid,
one-color, genetic, point-of-care diagnostic detection system for SARS-CoV-2. This system is
composed of a one-pot, RT-LAMP reaction from a crude saliva sample coupled with a low-cost
digital reader. The results of this diagnostic are monitored real-time and interpreted
automatically by the associated software. As a result, this system provides a viable option for
self-testing for laboratory personnel or used in laboratories to run LAMP reactions with minimal
equipment.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 12. Proposed 2-color, 1-pot reaction, and interpretation schema.
On Site Trials: Emergency Room
In addition to testing these POC readers in the laboratory, we also sought to test them in the
‘field’. Initially, we placed two readers in the emergency department of BJC Hospital. There,
research coordinators would collect saliva from COVID-19 suspects by placing the sterile loop
under a patient’s tongue and dipping the loop into a reaction tube. The coordinator would then
return to a different location with the readers, insert the tube, and run a test. Many subtle design
and software changes were made based on feedback from the coordinators during this test.
Two very important findings were made during this evaluation. First, we realized that since the
instruments were left on for 12+ hours at a time, that the water-based thermistors would
evaporate, throwing off the heating. This caused us to move to an oil-based system. We also
realized that subtle shifts in the heating element resistors could cause the heating of tubes 1 or
3 to be different than the heating of the thermistor tube as well as create heating discrepancy
between T1 and T3. The second in-holder thermistor was added to address that. Finally, some

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

readers we constructed were less stable than others, and we learned that we needed to
constantly run controls to ensure that everything was behaving normally. The current version of
the software requires controls to be run throughout the day, ensuring proper reader functionality.
On Site Trials: Nursing Home
We also took four readers to a local nursing home where research coordinators took samples
from residents who had previously contracted, but have now recovered, from COVID-19. One of
the important lessons learned at this location was that the loop-mediated saliva collection was
superior for several reasons. Both a standard saliva sample (spit-in-tube), and a loop-based
saliva sample were taken from the residents. Many residents could not give the standard
sample, either because they were too dehydrated, or because they had trouble expectorating.
All residents were able to give saliva by the loop, and much preferred this method to the nasal
swab or to spitting. The results from these 22 patients were analyzed and the readers correctly
called 20/21 (95.2%) as negative. One sample was called positive by our reader, but not by
nasal swab, and we were unable to obtain a larger spit sample to replicate on a Fluidigm
platform. The one resident that was still positive by NP swab was not detected in this saliva test.
The NP Swab result was near LOD on the Roche Cobas system, and the subject had been
symptom free for several weeks.
Point of care testing for highly infectious agents with molecular accuracy remains an important
feature of epidemiologic control. The proposed system elaborates a solution that is currently
patent-pending and research-use-only, since it has not gone through FDA approval.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Catrina Fronick for all her help throughout our clinical sample testing,
Seiler Instruments & Manufacturing for machining prototype heat blocks. Thanks to NHC
Healthcare in Maryland Heights for allowing the IRB saliva testing and Adriana Rauseo
Acevedo, the Emergency Care Research Core including, Aaron Day, Kristin Stansfield, Kate
Smith, Bronson Flint, Eric Raines, Jamie Rolando, Michelle Stezovsky, Misty Tribout for
coordinating sample collection. We also thank Zander Meitus, James, and Margaret PlewsOgan for their input on design, UI, and implementation improvements. Chad Storer, Ethan
Storer, and Kyle Kniepkamp performed all the 3D printing and slicing. Josh Langmade and
Xuhua Chen also assisted on the many aspects of the chemistry improvements.
These studies were supported by donations to the WUSM COVID Research fund, the
Department of Genetics, and the McDonnell Genome Institute. We thank Barnes-Jewish
Hospital, the Institute of Clinical and Translational Sciences (ICTS), and the Tissue
Procurement Core, which provided saliva samples.
Citations
Augustine, R., Hasan, A., Das, S., Ahmed, R., Mori, Y., Notomi, T., … Thakor, A. S. (2020,
August). Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (Lamp): A rapid, sensitive, specific, and
cost-effective point-of-care test for coronaviruses in the context of covid-19 pandemic.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Biology. MDPI AG. https://doi.org/10.3390/biology9080182
Becker, D., Sandoval, E., Amin, A., De Hoff, P., Diets, A., Leonetti, N., … Lu, J. (2020). Saliva is
less sensitive than nasopharyngeal swabs for COVID-19 detection in the community
setting. MedRxiv, 2020.05.11.20092338. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.11.20092338
Bhadra, S., Riedel, T., Lakhotia, S., Tran, N., & Ellington, A. (2020). High-surety isothermal
amplification and detection of SARS-CoV-2, including with crude enzymes. BioRxiv,
2020.04.13.039941. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.13.039941
Chotiwan, N., Brewster, C. D., Magalhaes, T., Weger-Lucarelli, J., Duggal, N. K., Rückert, C., …
Rovnak, J. (2017). Rapid and specific detection of Asian- and African-lineage Zika viruses.
Science Translational Medicine, 9(388). https://doi.org/10.1126/scitranslmed.aag0538
Das, A., Babiuk, S., & McIntosh, M. T. (2012). Development of a loop-mediated isothermal
amplification assay for rapid detection of capripoxviruses. Journal of Clinical Microbiology,
50(5), 1613–1620. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.06796-11
Hardinge, P., & Murray, J. A. H. (2019). Reduced False Positives and Improved Reporting of
Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification using Quenched Fluorescent Primers. Scientific
Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-43817-z
Kaneko, H., Kawana, T., Fukushima, E., & Suzutani, T. (2007). Tolerance of loop-mediated
isothermal amplification to a culture medium and biological substances. Journal of
Biochemical and Biophysical Methods, 70(3), 499–501.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbbm.2006.08.008
La Scola, B., Le Bideau, M., Andreani, J., Hoang, V. T., Grimaldier, C., Colson, P., … Raoult, D.
(2020). Viral RNA load as determined by cell culture as a management tool for discharge of
SARS-CoV-2 patients from infectious disease wards. European Journal of Clinical
Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, 39(6), 1059–1061. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096020-03913-9
Lalli, M. A. A., Chen, X., Langmade, S. J. J., Fronick, C. C. C., Sawyer, C. S. S., Burcea, L. C.
C., … Milbrandt, J. (2020). Rapid and extraction-free detection of SARS-CoV-2 from saliva
with colorimetric LAMP. MedRxiv : The Preprint Server for Health Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093542
Lalli, M. A., Chen, X., Langmade, S. J., Fronick, C. C., Sawyer, C. S., Burcea, L. C., …
Milbrandt, J. (2020). Rapid and extraction-free detection of SARS-CoV-2 from saliva with
colorimetric LAMP. MedRxiv : The Preprint Server for Health Sciences.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.07.20093542
Quicke, K., Gallichote, E., Sexton, N., Young, M., Janich, A., Gahm, G., … Ebel, G. D. (2020).
Longitudinal Surveillance for SARS-CoV-2 RNA Among Asymptomatic Staff in Five
Colorado Skilled Nursing Facilities: Epidemiologic, Virologic and Sequence Analysis.
MedRxiv : The Preprint Server for Health Sciences, 2020.06.08.20125989.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.08.20125989
Wang, Y., Wang, Y., Lan, R., Xu, H., Ma, A., Li, D., … Ye, C. (2015). Multiple endonuclease
restriction real-time loop-mediated isothermal amplification: A novel analytically rapid,
sensitive, multiplex loop-mediated isothermal amplification detection technique. Journal of
Molecular Diagnostics, 17(4), 392–401. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoldx.2015.03.002
Wölfel, R., Corman, V. M., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M., Zange, S., Müller, M. A., … Wendtner,
C. (2020). Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature,
581(7809), 465–469. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
Yu, L., Wu, S., Hao, X., Li, X., Liu, X., Ye, S., … Yin, X. (2020). Rapid colorimetric detection of
COVID-19 coronavirus using a reverse tran-scriptional loop-mediated isothermal
amplification (RT-LAMP) diagnostic plat-form: iLACO. MedRxiv, 2020.02.20.20025874.
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025874
Zhang, Y., Ren, G., Buss, J., Barry, A. J., Patton, G. C., & Tanner, N. A. (2020). Enhancing
colorimetric loop-mediated isothermal amplification speed and sensitivity with guanidine

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.19.20215319; this version posted October 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

chloride. BioTechniques. https://doi.org/10.2144/btn-2020-0078

