medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Mitigating COVID-19 outbreaks in workplaces and schools by
hybrid telecommuting
Simon Maurasa,1 , Vincent Cohen-Addadb , Guillaume Dubocc , Max Dupré la Toura , Paolo
Frascad , Claire Mathieue,2 , Lulla Opatowskif , and Laurent Viennotg
a

IRIF, Université de Paris, Paris 75013, France
Sorbonne Universite, UPMC Univ Paris 06, CNRS, LIP6, Paris 75005, France
c
Département Informatique ENS de Lyon Lyon 69007, France
d
Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Inria, Grenoble INP, Gipsa-lab, F-38000 Grenoble, France
e
CNRS, IRIF, Université de Paris, Paris 75013, France
f
Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, Univ. Paris-Sud, Inserm, CESP, Anti-infective evasion and
pharmacoepidemiology team, Montigny-Le-Bretonneux 78180, France; Institut Pasteur,
Epidemiology and Modelling of Antibiotic Evasion unit, Paris 75015, France.
g
INRIA, IRIF, Université de Paris, Paris 75013, France
b

This manuscript was compiled on November 27, 2020

Abstract
The COVID-19 outbreak has forced most countries to impose new contact-limiting restrictions at workplaces,
universities, schools, and more broadly in our societies. Yet, the power and limitations of these unprecedented
strategies for containing virus spread within the populations remain unquantified. Here, we develop a
simulation study to analyze COVID-19 outbreak magnitudes on three real-life contact networks stemming
from a workplace, a primary school and a high school in France.
Our study provides the first fine-grained analysis of the impact of contact-limiting strategies at workplaces, schools and high schools, including (1) Rotating, in which workers are evenly split into two shifts that
alternate on a daily or weekly basis; and (2) On-Off, where the whole group alternates periods of normal
work interactions with complete telecommuting. We model epidemics spread in these different setups using
an SEIR transmission model enriched with the coronavirus most salient specificities: super-spreaders, infectious asymptomatic individuals, and pre-symptomatic infectious periods. Our study yields clear results: The
ranking of the strategies based on their ability to mitigate epidemic propagation in the network from a first
index case is the same for all network topologies (work place, primary school and high school). Namely, from
best to worst: Rotating week-by-week, Rotating day-by-day, On-Off week-by-week, and On-Off day-by-day.
Moreover, our results show that when the baseline reproduction number R0 within the network is < 1.38,
all four strategies efficiently control outbreak by decreasing effective Re to ¡1. These results can support
public health decisions and telecommuting organization locally.
L.O. has received research funding from Pfizer (through her research unit) on research related to meningococcal epidemiology
and antimicrobial resistance.
S.M., G.D., M.D., L.V. ran the simulations and performed the research. All authors participated in the research design,
discussions, and writing.

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Significance statement
We take advantage of available individual-level contact data for school and workplace social networks,
to simulate COVID-19 epidemics on real-life networks. This framework enable us to compare and rank
natural prevention strategies that require hybrid telecommuting, either for everyone synchronously (OnOff) or periodically switching between two groups of people (Rotating): weekly or daily Rotating, weekly
or daily On-Off, and full telecommuting. All strategies have a significant impact when the reproduction
number within the network is moderately high (< 1.3). These results can inform public health decisions
and telecommuting organization at the local scale.
While the world awaits a vaccine or an effective cure, the COVID-19 pandemics must be contained by
the deployment of suitable Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions (NPIs), so as not to overwhelm the healthcare systems. So far, besides mask wearing and hygiene, governments have largely resorted to generalized
lockdown orders, which have severe adverse effects on economy and society, as well as to milder restrictions
such as partial school closures, curfews, and restricting access to non-essential businesses such as gyms and
restaurants. Such NPIs and organizational adaptations have to balance the competing goals of limiting
contagion and maintaining an adequate level of social and economic activity. Assessing the performance of
containment and mitigation strategies with respect to the propagation of the epidemic is therefore critical
to making the right policy choices and has attracted an immense research effort from many disciplines, from
medical science to economics, engineering, and social, computer and statistical sciences [21, 26, 12, 8, 10, 16].
Within this broad policy and research question, our work concentrates on the role of telecommuting
and how to effectively include telecommuting in the schedules of schools, workplaces or other organizations.
Our purpose is to assess and compare several telecommuting strategies in workplaces and schools in terms
of their effectiveness in mitigating possible epidemic outbreaks. This comparison is obtained from a finegrained simulation study on actual contact networks for populations of few hundreds individuals in these
environments.
Coming up with a precise assessment of the effects on the epidemic of these strategies indeed requires
a precise understanding of the spreading of contagion in different environments [35, 33]. To achieve this
objective, two main ingredients are needed: (1) fine-grained information about contacts between individuals
in different environments; and (2) the specific behavior of SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The former ingredient
will take the form of graphs that encode daily contact networks (Fig. 1). The latter ingredient is a full
transmission model for SARS-CoV-2 virus (Fig. 2) that includes the rates of contamination by individuals
in different conditions, such as asymptomatic or symptomatic, as well as the possible presence of “superspreaders” [25]. Equipped with this information, one can then simulate the behavior of the coronavirus
epidemic in the different work environments and evaluate the effectiveness of various mitigation strategies.
Regarding the contact networks, we notice that most previous work on computational simulation of epidemics
has focused on synthetically generated populations and on very large scales (e.g. a whole country [9, 27]).
Here, instead, we build our simulations on (publicly available) empirical data collected in schools and workplaces [19]. Simulations on real small-scale networks enable visualizing the detailed evolution of the epidemics
in these environments (see Figure 5) and, leveraging this fine understanding, yield explicit recommendations
about the effectiveness of the strategies.

Results
Using detailed data describing person-to-person interactions that can be vehicle of disease transmission in
schools and workplaces, we evaluate how the virus spreads within these specific settings and assess which
kind of hybrid telecommuting strategy is the most effective in preventing its dissemination.
We explored three contact networks representing close contacts collected in a primary school, a high
school, and a workplace in France (Figure 1) over 2 to 10 days. We simulate the transmission of the
virus over the network by implementing a stochastic transmission model of SARS-CoV-2 (Figure 2) that
captures the virus clinical and transmissibility characteristics, including asymptomatic individuals, super-

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(b)

(a)

(d)

(c)

Figure 1: Contact graphs. (a-c) Three one-day contact networks in (a) a primary school with 242 students,
(b) a workplace with 217 workers, (c) a high school with 327 students. Node colors correspond to known
groups (classes or department). We see that the majority of contacts happen within groups. (d) A synthetic
random graph with 9 groups selected randomly.
spreading events, etc.. Several metrics are used to characterize SARS-CoV-2 transmission level following
the introduction of the virus through an index case in the network in simulations: the probability that
an outbreak occurs (defined here as ≥ 5 secondary cases), the delay until such outbreak starts, and the
expected total number of infected patients in case of outbreak. Assuming a baseline reproduction number
of 1.25 and no specific telecommuting measure implemented, the importation of the virus in the network
leads to frequent outbreak (27%, in the baseline case for a high school) and a large number of infections, no
matter the size of the studied network (34 students on average, in a high school of size 327).
In order to assess to which extent telecommuting can help mitigating the dissemination risk, five containment strategies were implemented and assessed here. Two ”On-Off” strategies that consist in allowing
the whole group of individuals (pupils/workers) on site (1) every other day, or (2) every other week. We also
consider two ”Rotating” strategies which consist in allowing half the individuals on (1) odd days, while the
other half is allowed on even days, or (2) odd weeks, while the other is allowed on even weeks. Finally, we
additionally consider the case of full-time telecommuting as a benchmark. In all these scenarios, we allow
the individuals to maintain a small fraction of their original interactions even while telecommuting (thereby
modeling the case of imperfect compliance by the individuals).
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: The infection model for SARS-CoV-2. The incubation (Exposed, green) lasts on average 3.7 days
and is followed by an infectious period (Infectious, orange) of mean 9.5 days. For symptomatic patients,
symptoms appear 1.5 days after the beginning of infectiousness on average, and we assume that these patients
self-isolate after one day of symptoms. Asymptomatic individuals do not isolate.
Our results are clear: No matter which contact network they are tested on, no matter the underlying
comparison metric (probability of outbreak, delay until outbreak, or expected total number of infected
patients), the rankings of the four strategies are consistent (see Figure 3): the Rotating strategies significantly
dominate the On-Off strategies which in turns largely dominate the absence of any policy. As expected, the
full-time telecommuting (with persistent contacts only) dominates all strategies. The figure also shows that
weekly and daily alternations are very similar in terms of the probability of outbreak and of duration until
outbreak, because these quantities depend on the beginning of the epidemic only; but the total number of
infected people presented on the bottom panel shows that in the long run weekly alternation is a little bit
better than daily alternation, both for On-Off (15.6 vs 17.4) and for Rotating (12.0 vs. 12.4) strategies.
The robustness of our findings is confirmed by the extensive sensitivity analysis that we performed both
on the graph structures and on the parameters of the epidemics, such as the dispersion of transmission
probability and the fraction of asymptomatic patients. For simplicity, we only present in the main text
results associated with the high school contact graph: the corresponding results for the other graphs are
presented in Figures S6, S7 and S8 in the Supplementary Information.
To provide more precise insights, we study the impact of the strategies on the effective reproductive
number. If R0 denotes the baseline reproductive number in the absence of strategy, what is the actual
effective reproductive number Reffective if some strategy is in place? The answer is given in Fig. 4. We
observe that, if R0 is too high (larger than 1.7), then none of these strategies, except from the full-time
telecommuting, suffices to prevent the epidemic spread, which will result in a large number of infections,
irrespective of the chosen strategy. Instead, for R0 that are between 1 and 1.38, we show that all four of
these strategies are satisfactory and manage to curb the epidemic. Moreover, the ranking of the strategies
described above is consistent with the effectiveness of the strategies regarding the reduction of the effective
reproductive number. Namely, the Rotating strategies outperform the On-Off strategies, and the full-time
telecommuting outperforms the Rotating strategies.
Figure 5 illustrates the transmission chains resulting from the various strategies. Due to the randomness,
the introduction from an infected index case within the workplace or school results in a variety of propagation
trees (see Figures S18, S20, S19, S21). We first observe that transmissions often occur between nodes of
the same color (86% of all transmissions for high school, for the baseline values of model parameters), i.e.
within groups (classes in school and departments at work), reflecting the higher density of contacts within
groups (93% of all contacts for high school, see Table 1 and Figures 1, S2, S3, S4). Second, a large share
of transmissions (56%) are due to asymptomatic cases, because symptomatic cases isolate themselves after
a day whereas asymptomatic cases do not. Third, a few super-spreading events are visible; e.g. on the top
panel of Figure 5, which is sampled with no telecommuting strategy, a super-spreader event on week 4 is at
the origin of 7 new branches accumulating in total 47 cases. Comparing the different trees highlights how the
strategies avoid this super-spreading event and, therefore, the transmission. Indeed, for the baseline values

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.03

P[Outbreak]
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.4

0.5

17.5

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Figure 3: Comparison of the effects on SARS-CoV-2 outbreak of containment strategies implemented in
the contact graph of a high school when R0 = 1.25. The three panels respectively correspond to three
relevant metrics: (top) the probability that at least 5 people are infected besides patient 0 (which we define
as ’Outbreak’ event); (middle) the average number of days until 5 people are infected besides patient 0;
(bottom) the average total number of people infected in the population in case of outbreak. That number is
a random variable that has a large standard deviation, but with probability 95% its expectation lies within
the error bars.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2.5

2.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

Re

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

Figure 4: Impact of the strategies for the high school contact graph. The x-coordinate gives the value of
the baseline reproduction number R0 (mean number of persons infected by index case). For each strategy
the y-coordinate gives the mean value of the effective reproduction number as a result of using the strategy.
Thus, for our baseline value R0 = 1.25 (dotted vertical line), doing nothing leads to Re = 1.25 > 1, whereas,
as long as R0 < 1.38, all strategies lead to Re < 1. For each curve, the shaded areas correspond to 95%
confidence intervals on the estimate of R0 (calculated as a function of the model parameters: horizontal
error bar) and on the estimate of Re (as a function of p and of the strategy: vertical error bar).

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Contact networks
Primary school
High school
Workplace
Synthetic graph

nb days
2
5
10
1

nodes
242
327
217
327

degree
68.7
35.6
39.4
35.6

cont./pers./day
519.7
230.6
72.1
230.6

nb. grp.
10
9
12
9

perc. intra
72.6%
93.0%
76.3%
10.6%

Table 1: Contact graphs characteristics. The three studied Sociopatterns contact networks and the synthetic
random graph are detailed in the table. Averaging over the days on which the data was gathered, the high
school, in which data was gathered over 5 school days, comprised 327 individuals (students and teachers),
each of which was in contact with 35 persons on average (degree), and the student had 230 20-second contacts
per day on average (cont./pers./day). The primary school has the highest number of contacts per person in
a day, followed by the high school, and finally by the workplace. All graphs have around 10 groups (classes
or work departments). The percentage of intra-group contacts (perc. intra) is at least 70% in real networks
while it is around 10% in a random graph with close to ten groups.
of the parameters, averaging over all executions, in the high school contact network 15% of the tree nodes
have degree at least 3 and those nodes are responsible for 61% of all infections.

Materials and Methods
Key elements in constructing our simulations are the choice of the contact networks and the definition of
the disease transmission model, which we describe below.
Contact networks. We use traces for three different places, that are available from the SocioPatterns
project (http://www.sociopatterns.org). The project collected longitudinal data on physical proximity
and face-to-face contacts between individuals in several real-world environments.
1. A primary school (see [18, 32]) where 242 persons participated in 2009 over 2 days (coverage of 96%
among children and 100% among teachers).
2. A workplace Institut de Veille Sanitaire (see [19]) where 232 employees participated in 2015 over
two weeks (10 working days, coverage around 70% of the employees according to a previous deployment [20]).
3. A high school (see [15]) where 329 individuals (students) participated in 2013 over 5 days (coverage of
86% of the students in the 9 participating classes).
For each day on which data was gathered we extract a graph aggregating the data for that day: a node
corresponds to an individual, an edge corresponds to a face to face contact within 1.5 meters within a 20
seconds time interval (interactions were measured using active radio-frequency identification devices (RFID)),
and the weight of the edge is the number of such short contacts during the day.
For comparison, we also generate a synthetic random graph, calibrated so that its main parameters (total
number of nodes, of edges, and of contacts) match those of the high school contact network: more precisely,
each edge is generated by selecting uniformly at random two nodes with one associated contact (rejecting
loops and already generated pairs) and each of the remaining contacts is associated to an edge selected
uniformly at random among the previously generated edges. Table 1 lists the main parameters of the graphs
obtained by averaging over all days on which data was gathered.
Figure 1 displays the three contact graphs on their first day, together with the synthetic random graph
obtained. The node colors correspond to groups (classes or work departments) for the real-world contact
graphs, and are chosen uniformly at random among 9 colors for the synthetic random graph. All other
graphs and average graphs are depicted in Figures S2, S3, S4 and S5.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

SARS-CoV-2 transmission model. We model the introduction of the virus in a network by randomly
sampling an index case uniformly among all the nodes to determine the patient initially infected. We assume
[21] a natural history derivating from the classical SEIR transmission model (see Figure 2): initially individuals are susceptible (S); once contaminated, having been exposed (E), they go through an incubation period,
after which they become infectious (I) after which they are assumed to recover (R) and develop immunity. An
individual may be symptomatic or asymptomatic. In the former case, before developing symptoms she/he
goes through a pre-symptomatic phase that is already infectious. We assume that transmission between
an infectious and a susceptible individual happens through proximity contacts as the ones recorded in the
contact network. To every 20-second contact is associated an independent small risk of transmission, p, so
that the transmission risk increases with the duration of contact. The time step of the simulation is one
day, which is consistent with the time scale of the SEIR model: if an infectious person is in contact with
a susceptible person for 15 minutes during the day, then the probability of transmission during that day
equals 1 − (1 − p)45 , which for p = 0.001 approximates 4.4%. The rate of instantaneous transmission from
infectious to susceptible individuals is calibrated so that, without mitigation strategies, the expected number
R of individuals infected by the first case equals 1.25.
The model parameters are summarized in Table S1. For each infected individual, the duration of the
incubation period is randomly drawn into a Gamma distribution with mean 5.2 days and shape 5 [24, 14].
The duration of the pre-symptomatic period is then uniformly drawn in {1; 2} days, consistently to published
studies [11] (Table S1 p.20). The remaining duration of infectiousness follows a gamma distribution with
mean 8 [7] and shape 10. We assume that the fraction of asymptomatic individuals equals 40%, within
the range of [29, 28]. Symptomatic individuals are assumed to self-isolate after one day of symptoms and
therefore do not cause further contamination; on the contrary, asymptomatic individuals stay in the system
and potentially transmit the virus throughout their infectious period.
Persistent contacts. All simulations are initialized with an index case in the graph assumed to have
been contaminated by the outside world. Importantly, we then focus on transmissions occurring within the
contact graph. Since our proposed strategies act on the school or work place social networks and aims at
limiting transmission clusters occurring in these specific locations, we do not model contagion of/from people
who are not in the contact network. This choice is consistent with studies with similar focus [12].
Nevertheless, contacts with friends or colleagues who belong to the same social network may also happen
outside the direct school/workplace environment. To model such interactions, we assume that there exists
a background external graph Gext of persistent contacts that take place every day, whether workday or
weekend, whether telecommuting or not. We define this external graph from the contact network by applying
a dampening factor of 25% to all contacts. This factor stems from imagining a scenario in which someone
would invite colleagues or fellow students to come and interact for roughly two hours during the day instead
of eight hours of interaction at work (hence the 25%); and those persons would be selected from among their
usual school/work colleagues, proportionally to their contacts.
Super-spreaders. In the COVID-19 epidemic, the number of persons contaminated by an infectious
person has been suggested to show a large variance [25, 6, 13, 3, 30, 5]: several studies have shown that many
infected individuals do not contaminate anyone, whereas a small fraction of the infected population, termed
’super-spreaders’, are responsible for the majority of the contaminations. Such super-spreading events may
be due to several factors including a higher viral load or infectiousness of the super-spreader, a particularly
high number of contacts, and whether those contacts occur in a confined space with poor ventilation [23].
Here, we model super-spreading as follows: on each day, and for each infectious individual i, a random superspreading factor psuper is chosen independently from a Gamma distribution where E[psuper ] = 1. Then, the
transmission probability for each short contact with a susceptible individual on that day, is p0 psuper if i is
symptomatic and p0 psuper /2 if i is asymptomatic, where p0 is the baseline transmission parameter.
Calibration of the transmission parameter. The contamination parameter p0 is calibrated so that the
baseline reproduction number R0 , defined as the average number of persons infected by the index case, equals
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1.25, a value chosen to implicitly take into account implementation of barrier measures including social and
physical distancing, mask usage and hand hygiene. The idea of inferring p0 from the model is inspired
by [34]. We find that p0 = 0.001 in the primary school contact graph, p0 = 0.004 in the high school contact
graph, and p0 = 0.010 in the workplace contact graph. Several values of R0 were investigated, ranging from
0.5 to 2.5, corresponding (for high schools) to p ranging from 0.001 to 0.010.
Strategies. Several non-pharmaceutical strategies were used or recommended across the world depending on activity type (school, workplace, university) or country. Here we concentrate on strategies at the
level of the work/school environment which focuses on presence-sheet organization and promotion of hybrid
telecommuting with partial use or partial closure of school or work environments. First, we consider on-off
strategies, in which alternatively, either 100% of employees or students do face-to-face work, or 100% do
telecommuting (distance learning). Such a strategy has, for example, been recommended as a way to exit
the lockdown by alternating 4 days on and 10 days off [22]. Venezuela had for example a temporary exit
strategy in which businesses were allowed to reopen on a week-on-week-off basis [2]. Second, we consider
Rotating strategies, in which 50% of employees or students do face-to-face while the other 50% do distance
learning, periodically switching between the two groups. Organizing work with Rotating shifts was for example one of the actions recommended by the CDC [1]. We implement both types of strategies with different
alternations: daily alternation (even day, odd day, not counting weekends) and weekly alternation (even
week, odd week). Finally, we consider a full telecommuting strategy. This results in five strategies, which
we compare in their ability to reduce the likelihood and intensity of epidemic outbreaks.
Evaluation criteria. More precisely, strategies are evaluated based on three criteria: the probability of
outbreak, defined as the percentage of simulations for which at least 5 secondary cases were infected besides
the index case; the velocity of outbreak (average delay until five persons are infected); and the average
cumulative number of infections until extinction of the epidemics, within outbreaks.

Discussion
Summary. By simulating SARS-CoV-2 transmission over a diversity of contact networks, we showed how
(hybrid) telecommuting reduces the virus transmission in schools and workplaces. We focused on three types
of strategies: On-Off, Rotating, and Full telecommuting. Our results highlight that, whatever the contact
network, these measures significantly reduce the risk of outbreak, delay the time when the outbreak occurs,
and reduce the overall attack rate. This conclusion holds even though we assume some persistent contacts
between individuals and a fraction of their workplace contacts, when they are not at the work location
(for example, colleagues meeting outside work). The rankings of the strategies are consistent (Figure 3):
Full telecommuting (maintaining persistent contacts) significantly dominates the Rotating strategies which
significantly dominate the On-Off strategies which in turns significantly dominate the absence of any policy.
These results can be intuitively explained. Indeed, Rotating strategies always induce fewer contacts
overall than On-Off strategies, because they involve the presence of smaller groups. Indeed, one can observe
that the curves of Figure 4 plotting Re as a function of R0 are almost linear. Indeed, a back-of-the-envelope
calculation suggests that the strategies reduce the average number of contacts, for each individual over a
2-week period, by the following ratios: On-off 63%; Rotating 44%; Full Telecommuting 26%. These ratios do
not suffice to determine the ranking, because of nonlinear effects: a person with 500 contacts with 500 different
people will infect more people on average (namely, 500p if the probability of transmission for one contact is
p) than another person, also with 500 contacts, but all with the same person (namely, 1 − (1 − p)500 < 500p).
Non-linearity is a reason to recommend a reduction in degree, i.e., concentrating one’s contacts over a small
number of individuals: if one only has 3 neighbors, then, even if there are many contacts with them, at
most 3 persons will be infected. This argument is even more relevant to cope with potential super-spreaders,
whose presence is also a source of nonlinearity. Note that the advantage of Rotating strategies has also been
argued previously [12, 4] based on mathematical arguments that use deterministic compartmental models.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

No strategy

prevalence (%)

4
3
2
1
0

prevalence (%)

4

On/Off 1 day in 2

3
2
1
0

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 week in 2
3
2
1

prevalence (%)

2

prevalence (%)

0

2

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1

prevalence (%)

0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

20

40

day

60

80

Figure 5: Epidemic propagation in the high school contact graph for different strategies: each panel corresponds to an example simulation for a given strategy; strategies are sorted as by their effectiveness, from no
strategy to full telecommuting. In each panel, the horizontal axis corresponds to time (day of infection) and
each white or gray column corresponds to one week. The vertical axis shows the prevalence (percentage of
infectious persons in the workplace), its evolution is plotted in grey The epidemic propagation is shown as a
tree, where each node represents an infected person and points to the persons it infects. Nodes corresponding
to symptomatic (resp. asymptomatic) persons are circled in blue (resp. red). Similarly a blue (resp. red)
arrow corresponds to a contamination by a symptomatic (resp. asymptomatic) person. The thickness of
arrows indicates the super-spreading factor. The node color corresponds to the group of the person (class
or department). The node size is linear in its degree in the graph. All the propagation trees are generated
using the same realizations of the probabilistic events (run 15978 in our simulations), so that the differences
between the trees are not artifacts of their randomness, but solely depend on the different strategies in place.
Compared with the daily alternation, the weekly alternation is naturally in phase with the duration of
the incubation period and generation time of the disease. As a consequence, one can expect that it more

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

effectively breaks the contact chains. Consistently, Figure 3 (as well as Figures S8 and S14) show that
weekly alternations are better than daily alternations. As illustration, let’s consider a susceptible individual
who gets infected during his/her five days of in-person work/school. That person will become contagious
after 3.7 days on average, and will be therefore likely to be telecommuting during his/her infectious period.
This intuition has already been discussed in [12] and has been elaborated through various mathematical and
simulation arguments [4, 16]. The effect is not very visible for short-term events such as the probability of
an outbreak (Figure 4) but is enough to somewhat reduce the attack rate, since the latter accumulates over
a longer time.
A key feature of the COVID-19 pandemic is the role played by asymptomatic cases in the transmission.
From the transmission trees shown on Figures 5, S18, S20, S19 and S21, one can note that an important
proportion of the transmissions arise from asymptomatic cases. Indeed, in our baseline simulations over the
high school contact network, we estimate that 56% of transmissions are due to asymptomatic individuals
on average. Compared to symptomatic individuals, asymptomatic individuals are less infectious but do not
self-isolate, so they have a reduced rate of transmission but over a longer period of time. The assumption that
symptomatic cases would isolate relatively quickly is consistent with current recommendations in school and
workplaces where individuals are asked to stay at home when they have any suspect symptoms. Imperfect
compliance with isolation recommendations would result in an increased risk of outbreak in all settings (see
Figure S15 (c)).
Validity of the model and robustness of the results. A lot of uncertainty exists regarding SARS-CoV2 epidemiology and natural history and our choice of parameters, despite based on published data, deserves
to be discussed. From the analysis of our simulations, we show below that our estimates are consistent with
other studies.
We calibrated the baseline probability of transmission to ensure a baseline R0 = 1.25. Our estimates
strongly varied according to the analysed graph: p = 0.001, 0.004, 0.010 for the three graphs analysed here.
Limited data is available regarding the transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in such environments. However, previous
study on influenza transmission estimating the transmission risk from an infectious to a susceptible individual
in similar contact records of 20 seconds [31] found consistent values, p = 0.003. The baseline value R0 = 1.25
was set to correspond to estimates in France at the date of October 15, 20201 . This value is much lower
than previous estimates from a few months earlier, probably due to the generalized deployment of NPIs as
frequent hand washing, mask wearing and social distancing. Nevertheless, we ran simulations for values of
R0 ranging 0-2.5. Higher R0 values led to higher risks of outbreaks and bigger outbreak sizes (reaching 135
for R0 = 2), but simulations confirm that the investigated strategies reduce the global risk compared with
no strategy. As shown in Figure 4, all investigated strategies are able to reduce R below 1 for R0 < 1.38.
Overall, our results for Re (Figure 4) were comparable to [22]. Indeed, if we set R0 ∼ 1.15, assuming people
go to work 7 days a week yields RW = 1.48; we then obtain that for full telecommuting RL = Re ∼ 0.53, and
simulating the “4 days on, 10 days off” On-Off strategy from [22] yields Re ∼ 0.82. Thus, this is consistent
with the findings from [22]: for RW = 1.5 and RL = 0.6 they find that Re = 0.86. We also note that from the
above calculation, our baseline intensity set at 25% for persistent contacts happens to yield a ratio RW /RL
that is almost the same as in [22], further confirming our choice of 25%.
Another key characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 dynamics is the generation time, that is, the average number
of days until the secondary generation of cases are infected by the index case. Here, the effective generation
time, recovered from baseline simulations of our model, is 7.3 days: this value is a weighted average of the
generation times resulting from transmissions from asymptomatic individuals (8.8 days) and transmissions
from symptomatic individuals (5.5 days). The latter is consistent with an estimate of 5.2 for the Singapore
cluster (and a little higher than for the Tianjin cluster) [17].
Several recent studies have stressed the high heterogeneity in transmissions across individuals, suggesting
that about 80% of transmission events are caused by only about 10% of the total cases (see [13] for example).
We therefore integrated the possibility of super-spreading events in our model: even though we do not reach
1 The weekly report of Santé Publique France at that date estimated for the effective reproduction number to be 1.35 or 1.20
or 1.13, depending on which type of data the estimate was based on.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

such high levels of dispersion, our baseline model for high schools already shows much dispersion: among all
simulations, the 20% with the most secondary infections accounted for 68% of secondary infections (see SI
discussion and Figure S14).
Besides the above consistency checks, extensive sensitivity analyses were carried out to assess the robustness of our results with respect to model assumptions and parameter values: graph of persistent contacts,
asymptomatic probability, 20-second mean transmission probability, asymptomatic relative infectiousness,
super-spreading transmission factor, length and dispersion of exposed period, of presymptomatic period, or
symptomatic period, and number of days of symptoms before isolation. They are presented in Figures S14
through S17. These sensitivity analyses show that although the evolution of the epidemic varies greatly with
the parameters, corresponding variations are smooth and the ranking of the strategies is always respected.
We observe that the duration of the epidemic until outbreak is the least sensitive measure, whereas the most
sensitive measure is the total number of infected people when there is an outbreak (attack rate). This quantity increases when the graph of persistent contacts is replaced by a (calibrated) complete graph (Figure S10;
when R0 increases (Figure S8); and when the shape parameter of the transmission probability distribution
increases, due to super-spreaders S14). Interestingly, the attack rate also becomes much larger when the
contact graph is replaced by a (calibrated) homogeneous graph (Figure S6;
Limitations of our study. The results presented here should be interpreted in the light of our rather
simple assumptions.
Firstly, virus transmission is assumed to occur within the contact network only, thereby neglecting potential acquisitions through external contacts, such as family members or friends. However, our objective
was not to provide predictions about the expected prevalence in schools or workplaces but rather to evaluate the virus dissemination risk within the network: we therefore focused on the quantification of this risk
following a single introduction of the virus by an index case. Similarly, infected people within the social
network might in turn infect members of other social groups, but those are outside the reach of the proposed
strategies: this effect was not analyzed here. Nevertheless, in order to more realistically model contact
patterns in a situation where telecommuting recommendations are not strictly enforced or complied with,
we assumed that telecommuting individuals maintain a fraction of their in-network contacts.In a case of a
strict lockdown or curfew, individuals would have no contacts over their telecommuting periods. In terms of
modelling, this scenario simply requires removing persistent contacts and leads to a lower risk of outbreak
than the one presented in our baseline model. The top left panel of Figure S10 shows that when a strict
lockdown removes all persistent contacts (that situation is obtained in the simulation by multiplying the
external contact graph by a factor of 0%), the outbreak probability drops from 27% to 17%. Moreover, in
that case, all of our strategies cause the reproduction factor to drop below 1 for all values of R0 < 1.6 and
for all contact networks (see Figures S12 and S13). Thus, adding a curfew on top of a hybrid telecommuting
strategy leads to significant improvements.
Secondly, we performed our simulations on a small set of empirical contact graphs that were built from
publicly available data about just three schools and workplaces. Extrapolating from such a small set should
be done cautiously. However, we are comforted by two facts. First, the main features of those networks,
such as their degree distribution and their community structure (more than 70% of contacts within classes or
departments; see Table 1), are representative of the social groups that we are interested in. These features are
indeed key to shaping the progression of the epidemics: our simulations therefore allow studying mitigation in
networks with such community structure. Second, despite significant differences between the three empirical
graphs, our results are consistent across all of them and are robust to variations in the simulation parameters.
Furthermore, our qualitative conclusions also extend to synthetic random graphs as described in Materials
and Methods. However, quantitative results for the random graph are rather different from the original graph
that has been used to tune its parameters (see Figure S6): for instance, estimated risks were significantly
worse in terms of total attack rate but better in terms of outbreak explosion. This discrepancy cautions
against deriving quantitative predictions from homogeneous random models and highlights the importance of
using empirical data and heterogeneous graphs that take into account real contact structures when assessing
virus transmission.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Implementation and choice in practice. Of course, the choice of strategies also crucially depends on
criteria such as the feasibility in practice, ease of implementation, etc. For example, hybrid teaching, in which
teachers have to manage distance-teaching for half their group and onsite-teaching for the other half, has
been used in many French universities since the beginning of the epidemic, but it may be more convenient for
an instructor to teach on and off, having the full group either online or onsite. On the other hand, in sectors
such as manufacturing a minimum of workers on site may be essential to maintain production, and then
Rotating will be the most appealing strategy. We note that the main ingredient differentiating Rotating
from On-Off is the breaking of connections between groups (except for the persistent contacts described
above). A strategy in a school that would, for example, bring in all students of one level on even weeks and
all students of another level on odd weeks would resemble On-Off more than Rotating, because it would not
break the groups of students who are in contact.
It is also important to note that modifications in the implementation of the proposed strategies could
result in potentially different dynamics. Let’s discuss possible consequences of two natural variations of
the proposed strategies. In the first one, a daily Rotating strategy is implemented but schedule is set such
that every employee meets each colleague at least once a week. This strategy generates leaky isolation of
subgroups, and is therefore expected to limit control efficiency. In the second one, Rotating is planned so that
collaborators are grouped in the same group of the colleagues with whom they interact the most. It is likely
that such a partition would erase the advantage of Rotating over On-Off, as compared to our simulations
where individuals are randomly partitioned.
Conclusion. In this paper, we simulated SARS-CoV-2 transmission and assess the epidemiological impact
of various telecommuting strategies. Our study goes beyond previous work by modeling the fine-grained
spreading effects of Sars-Cov2, using real-world contact networks at a workplace, a primary school and
a high school. To summarize, our results highlight that (1) when R0 is moderately high, all the hybrid
telecommuting strategies considered reduce it to less than 1, and the choice between them should primarily
be done on the basis of practical considerations. (2) To help prevent dissemination of the disease, it is
preferable to alternate over longer periods (weekly rather than daily), but the difference is so slight that
practical, psychological, and other considerations should determine the alternation time. In future work,
it might be interesting to incorporate the real-life networks as blocks within larger synthetic networks for
simulations at larger scales of society.

Data availability
The code for reproducing our simulations and analysis is available at the following gitlab repository hosted
by Inria https://gitlab.inria.fr/miticov/mitigating-covid19-outbreaks.

Aknowledgments
We wish to thank the coordinators of the MODCOV19 project for providing interesting references and
contacts, and Simon Cauchemez for an inspiring discussion about modeling super-spreaders.

References
[1] CDC Activities and Initiatives Supporting the COVID-19 Response and the President’s Plan
for Opening America Up Again. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/downloads/php/
CDC-Activities-Initiatives-for-COVID-19-Response.pdf, 2020. Accessed: 2020-11-15.
[2] Venezuela Tightens Quarantine in COVID-19 Hotspots amid Record Daily Case Count. https://
venezuelanalysis.com/news/14924, 2020. Accessed: 2020-11-15.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[3] D. Adam, P. Wu, J. Wong, E. Lau, T. Tsang, S. Cauchemez, G. Leung, and B. Cowling. Clustering
and superspreading potential of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (sars-cov-2) infections
in Hong Kong. Nature Medicine, , 2020.
[4] U. Alon, T. Baron, Y. Bar-On, O. Cornfeld, R. Milo, E. Yashiv, and L. CfM. COVID-19: Looking for
the exit. Technical report, working paper, 2020.
[5] B. M. Althouse, E. A. Wenger, J. C. Miller, S. V. Scarpino, A. Allard, L. Hébert-Dufresne, and
H. Hu. Stochasticity and heterogeneity in the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2005.13689, , 2020.
[6] Q. Bi, Y. Wu, S. Mei, C. Ye, X. Zou, Z. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Wei, S. A. Truelove, T. Zhang, et al.
Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in Shenzhen,
China: a retrospective cohort study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, , 2020.
[7] A. W. Byrne, D. McEvoy, A. Collins, K. Hunt, M. Casey, A. Barber, F. Butler, J. Griffin, E. Lane,
C. McAloon, K. O’Brien, P. Wall, K. Walsh, and S. More. Inferred duration of infectious period of SARSCoV-2: rapid scoping review and analysis of available evidence for asymptomatic and symptomatic
COVID-19 cases. BMJ Open, 10(8), Aug. 2020.
[8] F. Casella. Can the COVID-19 epidemic be controlled on the basis of daily test reports? IEEE Control
Systems Letters, 5(3):1079–1084, 2021.
[9] S. L. Chang, N. Harding, C. Zachreson, O. M. Cliff, and M. Prokopenko. Modelling transmission and
control of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia, 2020.
[10] F. Della Rossa, D. Salzano, A. Di Meglio, F. De Lellis, M. Coraggio, C. Calabrese, A. Guarino,
R. Cardona-Rivera, P. De Lellis, D. Liuzza, et al. A network model of Italy shows that intermittent
regional strategies can alleviate the COVID-19 epidemic. Nature Communications, 11(1):1–9, 2020.
[11] L. Di Domenico, G. Pullano, C. Sabbatini, and et al. Impact of lockdown on COVID-19 epidemic in
Ile-de-France and possible exit strategies. BMC Med, 18(240), 2020.
[12] J. Ely, A. Galeotti, and J. Steiner. Rotation as contagion mitigation. , , 2020.
[13] A. Endo, S. Abbott, A. Kucharski, and S. Funk. Estimating the overdispersion in COVID-19 transmission using outbreak sizes outside China. Wellcome Open Research, 5(67), 2020. [version 3; peer review:
2 approved].
[14] S. Flaxman, S. Mishra, A. Gandy, and et al. Estimating the number of infections and the impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions on covid-19 in 11 European countries. Imperial College London
(30-03-2020), .
[15] J. Fournet and A. Barrat. Contact patterns among high school students. PLoS ONE, 9(9):e107878, 09
2014.
[16] A. Gandolfi. Planning of school teaching during Covid-19.
415:132753, 2021.

Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena,

[17] T. Ganyani, C. Kremer, D. Chen, A. Torneri, C. Faes, J. Wallinga, and N. Hens. Estimating the
generation interval for coronavirus disease (covid-19) based on symptom onset data, March 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(17):2000257, 2020.
[18] V. Gemmetto, A. Barrat, and C. Cattuto. Mitigation of infectious disease at school: targeted class
closure vs school closure. BMC infectious diseases, 14(1):695, Dec. 2014.
[19] M. Génois and A. Barrat. Can co-location be used as a proxy for face-to-face contacts? EPJ Data
Science, 7(1):11, May 2018.
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[20] M. Génois, C. L. VESTERGAARD, J. FOURNET, A. PANISSON, I. BONMARIN, and A. BARRAT.
Data on face-to-face contacts in an office building suggest a low-cost vaccination strategy based on
community linkers. Network Science, 3:326–347, 9 2015.
[21] G. Giordano, F. Blanchini, R. Bruno, P. Colaneri, A. Di Filippo, A. Di Matteo, and M. Colaneri.
Modelling the COVID-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Nature
Medicine, :1–6, 2020.
[22] O. Karin, Y. M. Bar-On, T. Milo, I. Katzir, A. Mayo, Y. Korem, B. Dudovich, E. Yashiv, A. J.
Zehavi, N. Davidovich, R. Milo, and U. Alon. Adaptive cyclic exit strategies from lockdown to suppress
COVID-19 and allow economic activity. medRxiv, , 2020.
[23] K. Kupferschmidt. Why do some COVID-19 patients infect many others, whereas most don’t spread
the virus at all. Science, 10, 2020.
[24] S. A. Lauer, K. H. Grantz, Q. Bi, F. K. Jones, Q. Zheng, H. Meredith, A. S. Azman, N. G. Reich, and
J. Lessler. The incubation period of 2019-nCoV from publicly reported confirmed cases: estimation and
application. medRxiv, , 2020.
[25] R. Laxminarayan, B. Wahl, S. R. Dudala, K. Gopal, C. Mohan, S. Neelima, K. S. Jawahar Reddy,
J. Radhakrishnan, and J. A. Lewnard. Epidemiology and transmission dynamics of COVID-19 in two
Indian states. Science, , 2020.
[26] A. Malani, S. Soman, S. Asher, P. Novosad, C. Imbert, V. Tandel, A. Agarwal, A. Alomar, A. Sarker,
D. Shah, et al. Adaptive control of COVID-19 outbreaks in india: Local, gradual, and trigger-based
exit paths from lockdown. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
[27] A. Nishi, G. Dewey, A. Endo, S. Neman, S. K. Iwamoto, M. Y. Ni, Y. Tsugawa, G. Iosifidis, J. D. Smith,
and S. D. Young. Network interventions for managing the covid-19 pandemic and sustaining economy.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, , 2020.
[28] H. Nishiura, T. Kobayashi, T. Miyama, A. Suzuki, S.-m. Jung, K. Hayashi, R. Kinoshita, Y. Yang,
B. Yuan, A. R. Akhmetzhanov, et al. Estimation of the asymptomatic ratio of novel coronavirus
infections (covid-19). International journal of infectious diseases, 94:154, 2020.
[29] D. P. Oran and E. J. Topol. Prevalence of asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection: A narrative review.
Annals of Internal Medicine, , 2020.
[30] J. Riou and C. L. Althaus. Pattern of early human-to-human transmission of Wuhan 2019 novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV), December 2019 to January 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(4), 2020.
[31] M. Salathé, M. Kazandjieva, J. W. Lee, P. Levis, M. W. Feldman, and J. H. Jones. A high-resolution
human contact network for infectious disease transmission. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 107(51):22020–22025, 2010.
[32] J. Stehlé, N. Voirin, A. Barrat, C. Cattuto, L. Isella, J. Pinton, M. Quaggiotto, W. Van den Broeck,
C. Régis, B. Lina, and P. Vanhems. High-resolution measurements of face-to-face contact patterns in a
primary school. PLOS ONE, 6(8):e23176, 08 2011.
[33] C. Stein-Zamir, N. Abramson, H. Shoob, E. Libal, M. Bitan, T. Cardash, R. Cayam, and I. Miskin. A
large COVID-19 outbreak in a high school 10 days after schools’ reopening, Israel, May 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(29), 2020.
[34] L. Temime, M. Gustin, A. Duval, and et al. A conceptual discussion about R0 of SARS-COV-2 in
healthcare settings. Clin Infect Dis., , 2020.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[35] R. M. Viner, S. J. Russell, H. Croker, J. Packer, J. Ward, C. Stansfield, O. Mytton, C. Bonell, and
R. Booy. School closure and management practices during coronavirus outbreaks including COVID-19:
a rapid systematic review. The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health, 4(5):397 – 404, 2020.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Information for
Mitigating COVID-19 outbreaks in workplaces and schools
by hybrid telecommuting
This PDF file includes:
Supplementary text
Figs. S1 to S21

Other supplementary materials for this manuscript include the following:
The code for reproducing our simulations and analysis is available at https://gitlab.inria.fr/
miticov/mitigating-covid19-outbreaks.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Information Text
Color coding of measures studied For added readability, in Figures S6, S7 and S8, just like in Figure 3,
the color of the background encodes the parameter studied: probability of outbreak in blue, duration until
outbreak in green, and final total number of people infected when there is an outbreak in red.
Error bars. The error bars represent the 95% confidence interval. More specifically, most of our measures
are averages of values, with one value for each run of the simulation (e.g. the probability of outbreak is an
average of 0-1 values). The standard deviation of the estimate of the mean is approximately equal to the
(estimated) standard deviation of the values, divided by the square root of the number of samples. Error
bars are set to be 5 times this standard deviation. Because of Chebyshev’s inequality, this corresponds to a
1 − 52 = 96% confidence interval.

Details about the networks
See Figures S2, S3, S4 and S5.

Results for all contact networks
See Figures S6, S7, S8 and S9

Technical details about the simulation
Rounding reals to integers while preserving the mean of the distribution Since the process
is discrete, with one discrete step equal to one day, time steps should be defined as integers. To round
real random variables drawn from Gamma distributions into integers without changing the mean of the
distribution, we used randomized rounding. For example, if X = 5.4 then with probability 40% it is rounded
to 6 and with the complementary probability 60% it is rounded to 5, ensuring the average rounded value
equals 5.4.
Number of executions performed The simulations presented here were performed as follows: for each
possible index case of the graph nodes, for each possible day when that person gets infected, do 20 random
executions. Because the the On-Off and Rotating strategies have a period of 2 weeks, there are 14 possibilities
for the starting day. Consequently, for the high school contact graph, all the results are obtained by averaging
over 327 × 14 × 20 = 91560 random executions. For the workplace contact graph, the results are obtained by
averaging over 60760 simulations, and for primary schools, the results are obtained by averaging over 67760
simulations.
Probabilistic coupling of executions For easier qualitative comparison of simulation results for different
strategies, we used a probabilistic coupling of the random executions. In each run, the following values are
coupled: patient initially infected, day of the initial infection, apparition of symptoms for each person, length
of each exposed and infectious period for each person, super-spreading transmission factor for each day and
each person. Moreover, to decide whether a transmission occurs, we compare the transmission probability
with a uniformly random value between 0 and 1. For each (directed) edge of the contact graph, a random
value is sampled whenever the origin is infectious and the other endpoint is susceptible; we couple the
sequence of those random values. With these choices, we couple six executions: one for each strategy and
the one when there is no strategy.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Reproducibility of the simulations Our simulation code uses a fixed seed for the random generator so
that all simulations can be reproduced. Each simulation run
by its index. More precisely, the
k
j is identified
k
k-th simulation run (run k for short) concerns person i = 14×20 (persons are sorted by increasing id) and
starts at day j = k mod 14.

Systematic sensitivity analysis of model parameters
Parameters are described in Figure S1
Graph of persistent contacts See Figures S10, S11, S12 and S13.
Quantifying the heterogeneity of transmissions. In the high school contact graph, the number X
of persons infected by the index case follows a negative binomial distribution with mean R0 = 1.25 and
dispersion K ∼ 0.5 (See Figure S1; those values are obtained by suitable calibration of parameters p0 and
psuper ). In particular, X equals 0 with probability ∼ 0.5, equals 1 with probability ∼ 0.2, and equals 2
with probability ∼ 0.1. Thus, with the complementary probability 20%, we have X ≥ 3. Thus, 20% of the
situations lead to a fraction of (1.25 − 0.5 × 0 − 0.2 × 1 − 0.1 × 2)/1.25 = 68% of the infections by the case
index. See Figure S14 for a sensitivity analysis w.r.t. p0 and psuper .
Surprisingly, in panel (b) of Figure S14 we observe that, the more dispersion in the shape of superspreaders, the less the probability of outbreak and the fewer people get infected. This can be explained
intuitively by thinking about an extreme case of dispersion. Imagine that with probability 1/1000, there
is a super-spreading factor of 1000, and with the complementary probability 999/1000, the super-spreading
factor equals 0. Then, for most executions, the index case is not a super-spreader and infects no one. In
0.1% of the cases, the index case is a super-spreader and infects all of its neighbors, however none of them
will be a super-spreader and propagate the infection. The event that the index case and at least one of its
neighbors are both superspreaders has probability about equal to the number of neighbors times 0.000001,
too small to ever occur in the simulations.
Symptoms See Figure S15.
Durations of each period See Figures S16 and S17.

Selected transmission trees
See Figures S18, S20, S19, S21.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Notation
Gd
Gext
v0
d0
q
p
p0
psympt
psuper

Description
graph of contacts between people that are at work on day d
graph of persistent contacts between people
patient initially infected
day of infection of v0
probability of being symptomatic
probability of transmission during a 20-second contact
mean transmission probability
asymptomatic relative transmission factor
super-spreading transmission factor, for each day and each person
length of exposed period
length of presymptomatic period
length of symptomatic period
number of days of symptoms before isolation

Notation
R0
K
d1
d1 − d0

Hypothesis
sociopattern graph, or random graph
1/4 scaling of the average ”at-work” graph
random uniform
random uniform
60%
p ← p0 · psympt · psuper
calibrated for each graph such that R0 = 1.25
1/2 when asymptomatic, 1 otherwise
mean=1, Gamma(shape=0.1)
mean=3.7, Gamma(shape=5)
mean=1.5, uniformly 1 or 2 days
mean=8, Gamma(shape=10)
1

Description
average number of individuals infected by v0
dispersion of the number of individuals infected by v0
the average date of infection of the persons infected by v0
generation interval

Reference
Sociopatterns project [20, 32, 15]
Fraction of outside contacts
null hypothesis
null hypothesis
35 to 60% [29][28]

[17]
[11, 24, 14]
mean from [11]
[7]

Sanity check
1.25
0.5
5.5 when v0 is symptomatic

Figure S1: The first table gives the reference values of the parameters used in our simulations, with the
supporting references. The second table summarizes other notations.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Day 1

(b) Day 2

(c) Average

(d) Groups and their sizes
1A: 24

1B: 26

2A: 24

2B: 27

4A: 22

4B: 24

5A: 23

5B: 25

3A: 24

3B: 23

Figure S2: Primary school graphs extracted from http://www.sociopatterns.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/09/primaryschool.csv.gz. The two days of the trace correspond to Thursday and Friday. Each
day is represented by a graph where a node corresponds to an individual, and an edge corresponds one or
several face contacts. Edge width corresponds to the number of contacts. Node sizes correspond to weighted
degrees. Node colors correspond to known groups which are classes. There size vary between 22 and 27. We
observe many contacts between classes of the same grade (e.g. 5A and 5B).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Day 1

(b) Day 2

(c) Day 3

(d) Day 4

(e) Day 5

(f) Day 8

(g) Day 9

(h) Day 10

(i) Day 11

(j) Day 12

(k) Average

(l) Groups and their sizes
DCAR: 13

DG: 2

DISQ: 18

DMCT: 31

DMI: 57

DSE: 32

DST: 23

SCOM: 7

SDOC: 4

SFLE: 14

SRH: 9

SSI: 7

Figure S3: Workplace graphs extracted from http://www.sociopatterns.org/wp-content/uploads/
2018/12/tij_InVS15.dat_.gz. The trace lasts over two weeks and contains contacts only during working days. Each day is represented by a graph where a node corresponds to an individual, and an edge
corresponds one or several face contacts. Edge width corresponds to the number of contacts. Node sizes
correspond to weighted degrees. Node colors correspond to known groups which are departments. Their size
vary from 2 to 57, most of them contain at most 32 persons.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Day 1

(b) Day 2

(c) Day 3

(d) Day 4

(e) Day 5

(k) Average

(l) Groups and their sizes
2BIO1: 37

2BIO2: 33

2BIO3: 40

PC: 44

PC*: 39

PSI*: 34

MP: 33

MP*1: 29

MP*2: 38

Figure S4: Highschool graphs extracted from http://www.sociopatterns.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/07/High-School_data_2013.csv.gz. The trace lasts during the 5 working days of a week. Each
day is represented by a graph where a node corresponds to an individual, and an edge corresponds one or
several face contacts. Edge width corresponds to the number of contacts. Node sizes correspond to weighted
degrees. Node colors correspond to known groups which are classes. Their size vary from 29 to 44.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Day 1

(b) Groups and their sizes
0: 32

1: 36

2: 30

6: 33

7: 30

8: 48

3: 41

4: 38

5: 39

Figure S5: Random uniform graph. The trace lasts one day (average graph is identical to Day 1). It is
represented by a graph where a node corresponds to an individual, and an edge corresponds one or several
face contacts. The graph is calibrated so that its main parameters (total number of nodes, of edges, and of
contacts) match those of the high-school average graph: more precisely, each edge is generated by selecting
uniformly at random two nodes with one associated contact (rejecting loops and already generated pairs) and
each of the remaining contacts is associated to an edge selected uniformly at random among the previously
generated edges. Edge width corresponds to the number of contacts that were associated to it. Node sizes
correspond to weighted degrees. Node colors correspond to groups which were selected uniformly at random
for each node within 9 fixed groups. Their size vary from 30 to 48.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Primary school
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

(b) Workplace

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.04

P[Outbreak]

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.4

15.0

17.5

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.04

P[Outbreak]

0.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.4

15.0

0.5

17.5

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0

20

40

60

80

(c) Highschool

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

120

0

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.4

17.5

20

40

60

80

(d) Random uniform

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.03

P[Outbreak]
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

100

P[Outbreak]

0.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.1

2.5

0.2

100

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.04

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

120

15.0

0.4

0.5

17.5

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Figure S6: Sensitivity of the results to the choice of contact graph. Panel (c) is identical to Figure 3. We
see that regardless of the contact graph, the ranking of the strategies by effectiveness is the same, thus
the qualitative results are robust. Note that the quantitative results are also similar from graph to graph,
with the exception of the total number of infected people: for the high school contact graph (c), it equals
34.8, whereas for the synthetic random graph (d), it equals 72.3. That happens in spite of the fact that the
random graph is calibrated to be the same as the high school graph in terms of number of nodes, edges, and
contacts: thus, the difference is due to the expansion of the random graph, which contrasts with the high
school group structure.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Primary school
2.5

2.0

(b) Workplace
2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

2.0

Re

1.5

Re

1.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

(c) Highschool
2.5

2.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

2.0

2.5

(d) Random uniform
2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

2.0

Re

1.5

Re

1.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

Figure S7: Sensitivity of the results to the choice of contact graph. Panel (c) is identical to Figure 4.
Qualitatively, we see that the order between the curves is the same for all contact graphs and all values
of R0 , so that result is robust. The weekly and daily alternations are indistinguishable for this measure.
Quantitatively, if we focus on the largest R0 such that On-Off leads to Re < 1, we see that it depends
significantly on the underlying contact graph: R0 = 1.52 for primary schools, 1.30 for the workplace, 1.38
for the high school, and 1.55 for the random graph.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.1

P[Outbreak]

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

150

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.3

0.2

0.1

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

P[Outbreak]

0.4

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.5

P[Outbreak]

0.4

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

25

R0

1.5

2.0

0
0.0

2.5

15.0

150

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

0
0.0

2.5

150

12.5
10.0
7.5
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.5

1.0

R0

2.0

2.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

75
50
25

R0

1.5

2.0

0
0.0

2.5

200
175

15.0

150

12.5
10.0
7.5
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
1.0

1.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

100

17.5

0.5

2.5

125

20.0

0.0
0.0

2.0

25

15.0

5.0

1.5

50

175

1.0

R0

75

200

0.5

1.0

100

17.5

5.0

0.5

125

20.0

2.5
0.0
0.0

50

175

0.0
0.0

2.5

1.0

75

17.5

2.5
0.0
0.0

0.5

100

200

0.0
0.0

2.5

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.5

0.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

125

20.0

2.5
0.0
0.0

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

(b) Workplace

0.5

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.0
0.0

0.4

(c) Highschool

175

2.5

0.5

(d) Random uniform

17.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.2

200

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.3

20.0

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

(a) Primary school

0.4

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.5

0.5

1.0

R0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

125
100
75
50
25

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

Figure S8: Sensitivity of the results to the choice of contact graph. For all contact networks, we performed
a sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure S6 w.r.t. R0 (or equivalently, to the parameter p.) We see that
the probability of an outbreak is sensitive to the value of R0 : for example, for On-Off, as R0 varies from 1 to
1.5, it goes from 21% to 33%. However, it is not so sensitive to the choice of contact graph: when there is no
strategy, for the base case R0 = 1.25 it is around .2511
for all graphs. The number of days until an outbreak,
around two weeks, is fairly robust and shows little sensitivity to either R0 or the choice of contact graph.
The final number of people infected conditioned on an outbreak is the most sensitive quantity, both to the
value of R0 and to the choice of contact graph.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

average of transmission probability = 0.000898

(a) Primary school
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.25 ± 0.04

24.5 ± 0.8

12.7 ± 0.3

50.0 ± 1.6

On-Off Daily

0.81 ± 0.03

13.8 ± 0.7

13.6 ± 0.4

19.2 ± 0.9

On-Off Weekly

0.82 ± 0.03

13.2 ± 0.7

13.4 ± 0.4

16.8 ± 0.7

Rotating Daily

0.61 ± 0.02

9.3 ± 0.6

14.5 ± 0.5

12.7 ± 0.6

Rotating Weekly

0.61 ± 0.02

8.9 ± 0.5

14.6 ± 0.5

11.9 ± 0.6

Full Telecommuting

0.38 ± 0.02

3.8 ± 0.4

16.0 ± 0.8

8.3 ± 0.4

average of transmission probability = 0.010091

(b) Workplace
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.25 ± 0.04

26.2 ± 0.9

12.8 ± 0.3

52.4 ± 1.6

On-Off Daily

0.95 ± 0.04

18.4 ± 0.8

13.5 ± 0.3

28.3 ± 1.2

On-Off Weekly

0.94 ± 0.04

17.8 ± 0.8

13.5 ± 0.3

23.7 ± 1.0

Rotating Daily

0.71 ± 0.03

13.1 ± 0.7

14.4 ± 0.4

15.6 ± 0.7

Rotating Weekly

0.71 ± 0.03

12.7 ± 0.7

14.4 ± 0.4

14.8 ± 0.7

Full Telecommuting

0.54 ± 0.02

8.1 ± 0.6

15.0 ± 0.5

10.9 ± 0.5

average of transmission probability = 0.003491

(c) Highschool
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.25 ± 0.03

27.3 ± 0.7

13.1 ± 0.2

34.8 ± 1.0

On-Off Daily

0.90 ± 0.03

17.3 ± 0.6

13.9 ± 0.3

17.4 ± 0.5

On-Off Weekly

0.89 ± 0.03

16.6 ± 0.6

14.0 ± 0.3

15.6 ± 0.5

Rotating Daily

0.70 ± 0.02

12.3 ± 0.5

14.9 ± 0.3

12.4 ± 0.4

Rotating Weekly

0.70 ± 0.02

12.0 ± 0.5

14.9 ± 0.4

12.0 ± 0.4

Full Telecommuting

0.52 ± 0.02

6.9 ± 0.4

15.6 ± 0.5

9.1 ± 0.3

average of transmission probability = 0.001757

(d) Random uniform
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.25 ± 0.04

24.1 ± 0.7

12.9 ± 0.2

72.3 ± 2.2

On-Off Daily

0.80 ± 0.03

12.9 ± 0.6

13.6 ± 0.3

20.6 ± 1.0

On-Off Weekly

0.80 ± 0.03

12.1 ± 0.5

13.6 ± 0.4

16.0 ± 0.7

Rotating Daily

0.57 ± 0.02

7.8 ± 0.4

14.7 ± 0.5

11.3 ± 0.5

Rotating Weekly

0.57 ± 0.02

7.5 ± 0.4

14.7 ± 0.5

10.4 ± 0.4

Full Telecommuting

0.34 ± 0.01

2.6 ± 0.3

16.3 ± 0.8

7.5 ± 0.3

Figure S9: Sensitivity of the results to the choice of contact graph. Numerical data of figures S6, S7, and S8
when R0 = 1.25.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Sensitivity w.r.t. scaling parameter
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

P[Outbreak]

0.25

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.30

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

18

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

17

50

16
15
14
13

0.0

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
coefficient external graph

0.5

0.0

0.1

(b) Best friends graph

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

0.2
0.3
0.4
coefficient external graph

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.5

0.4

17.5

0.5

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0.1

0.2
0.3
0.4
coefficient external graph

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.5

(d) Complete graph

0.4

17.5

R0 = 1.60 ± 0.04

P[Outbreak]

0.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0

20

R0 = 1.25 ± 0.03

P[Outbreak]
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

30

0.0

(c) Baseline graph

R0 = 1.09 ± 0.03

P[Outbreak]
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

40

10

12

0.00

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

60

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.35

0.1

2.5

0.2

0.3

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

5.0

7.5

10.0

12.5

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

15.0

0.4

0.5

17.5

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Figure S10: Sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure 3, for the high school contact network, w.r.t. graph
of persistent contacts. In part (a), we do a sensitivity analysis when we vary the intensity of persistent
contacts (baseline: 25%). The baseline case in (a) corresponds to the vertical dotted line, whose intersection
with the curves of the strategies gives the values of Figure 3. We see that, the more persistent contacts
there are, the worse it is for the epidemic, but that the variation is smooth. Parts (b),(c) and (d) we do a
sensitivity analysis in which we vary the structure of the persistent contacts graph, while keeping the total
number of contacts unchanged. Part (c) is the baseline case and is an identical copy of Figure 3, for ease of
comparison. Part (d) takes a complete homogeneous graph for the persistent contacts graph. Part (b) is a
construction of what we call a best friends graph, constructed in the following two steps: First, each person
lists their neighbor by order of decreasing number of contacts, stopping as soon as they reach 25% or their
total number of contacts. This creates a directed graph in which many arcs carry 0 contacts. Second, we
make it symmetric by putting on each edge {u, v} the average of the number of contacts on arc(u, v) and
on arc (v, u). We observe that the results are sensitive to the structure. The best friends graph propagates
the epidemic the least, the complete graph propagates it the most, and the baseline graph is intermediate.
For example, regarding the probability of outbreak, when there is no strategy the probability is 33% for
the complete graph, 27% for the baseline graph, and1323% for the best friends graph. Regarding the total
number of persons infected when there is an outbreak, when there is no strategy we have 151.8 for the
complete graph (the bar actually goes beyond the figure), 34.8 for the baseline graph, and 23.1 for the best
friends graph. When the daily On-Off strategy is used, the numbers are 59.7 for the complete graph, 17.4
for the baseline graph, and just 11.8 for the best friends graph. We see that the structure of contacts in the
high school, that mostly happen within well-separated groups, results in a much smaller number of infected

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

coefficient external graph = 0.0

(a) No persistent contacts
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

0.91 ± 0.03

17.4 ± 0.6

13.5 ± 0.3

18.3 ± 0.6

On-Off Daily

0.48 ± 0.02

5.8 ± 0.4

12.9 ± 0.5

9.9 ± 0.4

On-Off Weekly

0.47 ± 0.02

4.1 ± 0.3

12.4 ± 0.7

8.0 ± 0.3

Rotating Daily

0.23 ± 0.01

1.2 ± 0.2

14.8 ± 1.2

6.5 ± 0.3

Rotating Weekly

0.23 ± 0.01

0.7 ± 0.1

14.2 ± 1.7

6.1 ± 0.3

Full Telecommuting

nan ± 0.00

nan ± 0.0

nan ± 0.0

nan ± 0.0

coefficient external graph = 0.25

(b) Best friends
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.09 ± 0.03

23.0 ± 0.7

13.6 ± 0.2

23.1 ± 0.7

On-Off Daily

0.73 ± 0.02

11.3 ± 0.5

14.5 ± 0.4

11.8 ± 0.4

On-Off Weekly

0.72 ± 0.02

10.2 ± 0.5

14.6 ± 0.4

10.2 ± 0.3

Rotating Daily

0.53 ± 0.02

5.4 ± 0.4

16.3 ± 0.6

8.0 ± 0.3

Rotating Weekly

0.52 ± 0.02

4.9 ± 0.4

16.5 ± 0.6

7.6 ± 0.2

Full Telecommuting

0.34 ± 0.01

0.5 ± 0.1

17.7 ± 1.8

5.6 ± 0.3

coefficient external graph = 0.25

(c) Baseline
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.25 ± 0.03

27.3 ± 0.7

13.1 ± 0.2

34.8 ± 1.0

On-Off Daily

0.90 ± 0.03

17.3 ± 0.6

13.9 ± 0.3

17.4 ± 0.5

On-Off Weekly

0.89 ± 0.03

16.6 ± 0.6

14.0 ± 0.3

15.6 ± 0.5

Rotating Daily

0.70 ± 0.02

12.3 ± 0.5

14.9 ± 0.3

12.4 ± 0.4

Rotating Weekly

0.70 ± 0.02

12.0 ± 0.5

14.9 ± 0.4

12.0 ± 0.4

Full Telecommuting

0.52 ± 0.02

6.9 ± 0.4

15.6 ± 0.5

9.1 ± 0.3

coefficient external graph = 0.25

(d) Complete
Strategy

R

E[Nb days until Outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

No Strategy

1.60 ± 0.04

33.3 ± 0.8

12.4 ± 0.2

151.8 ± 2.5

On-Off Daily

1.17 ± 0.03

23.2 ± 0.7

13.3 ± 0.2

59.7 ± 2.0

On-Off Weekly

1.16 ± 0.03

22.4 ± 0.7

13.3 ± 0.2

48.7 ± 1.7

Rotating Daily

0.92 ± 0.03

17.8 ± 0.6

14.1 ± 0.3

27.7 ± 1.1

Rotating Weekly

0.92 ± 0.03

17.4 ± 0.6

14.2 ± 0.3

25.6 ± 1.1

Full Telecommuting

0.69 ± 0.02

11.3 ± 0.5

14.8 ± 0.4

14.7 ± 0.6

Figure S11: Numerical data of Figure S10 for different types of persistent contacts, in the high school contact
graph, with a transmission parameter set to have R0 = 1.25 in baseline. Thus, for the high school contact
network, compared to having no strategy, Daily On-Off reduces the reproduction number by 1 − 0.48/0.91 =
47% and Daily Rotation reduces it by 1 − 0.23/0.91 = 75%. The improvement of weekly strategies over their
daily analog is less than 2%.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Primary school
2.5

2.0

(b) Workplace
2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

2.0

Re

1.5

Re

1.5

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

(c) Highschool
2.5

2.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

2.0

2.5

(d) Random uniform
2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

2.0

Re

1.5

Re

1.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0.0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

Figure S12: Sensitivity of Figure S7 if we remove the graph of persistent contacts, which corresponds to a
strict curfew.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.3

0.2

0.1

150

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

1.0

R0

1.5

P[Outbreak]

2.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

0.5

1.0

R0

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.2

0.1

1.5

2.0

15.0

1.5

2.0

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

0.5

2.5

0.5

1.0

R0

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.2

0.1

1.5

2.0

175

15.0

150

12.5
10.0
7.5
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

5.0

0.5

1.0

R0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

1.5

2.0

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

125
100
75
50
25
0
0.0

2.5

200

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

15.0

175
150

12.5
10.0
7.5
5.0

0.0
0.0

2.5

50

0
0.0

2.5

2.5
0.0
0.0

2.0

75

17.5

17.5

0.3

1.5

100

200

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.4

P[Outbreak]

2.0

R0

125

20.0

0.0
0.0

1.0

25

2.5
0.0
0.0

0.5

150

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

R0

50

175

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

0.4

1.0

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.5

0.5

75

200

2.5
0.0
0.0

100

0
0.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

17.5

0.3

125

25

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.5

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.0
0.0

0.4

(b) Workplace

15.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

175

2.5

0.5

(c) Highschool

200

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

17.5
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

(a) Primary school

0.4

(d) Random uniform

20.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.5

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

1.5

2.0

2.5

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

125
100
75
50
25

0.5

1.0

R0

1.5

2.0

2.5

0
0.0

0.5

1.0

R0

Figure S13: Sensitivity of Figure S8 if we remove the graph of persistent contacts, which corresponds to a
strict curfew.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distributions

distributions
Gamma(mean=0.001, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.002, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.003, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.004, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.005, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.006, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.007, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.008, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.009, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.01, k=0.1)

600
500
400
300

1500
1250
1000
750

200

500

100

250
0
0.0050

0.0075

0.0100

0.0125

0.0150

0.5

0.2
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.1
0.0
0.002

(a)

0.004
0.006
0.008
average of transmission probability

0.000

0.5

18

14

0.2
0.1

0.003

0.004

0.005

0.006

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

200
175
150
125
100
75
50

12

25
0.002

0.004
0.006
0.008
average of transmission probability

19

0

0.010

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

20

0.3

0.002

16

21

0.4

0.001

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.010

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.6

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.3

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

0.0200

20

0.4

P[Outbreak]

0.0175

0.002

0.004
0.006
0.008
average of transmission probability

0.010

100
E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.0025

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0
0.0000

18
17
16
15
14

80

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

60
40
20

13
10

(b)

Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=0.2)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=0.5)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=1.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=2.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=20.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=50.0)
Gamma(mean=0.003491, k=100.0)

1750

1

101
100
shape of transmission probability

102

10

1

101
100
shape of transmission probability

102

10

1

101
100
shape of transmission probability

102

Figure S14: Sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure 3, for the high school contact network. In (a), we look
at the parameters as a function of R0 , which varies by changing the value of the probability p of symptomatic
transmission (baseline R0 = 1.25 corresponding to p = 0.0035, and R0 = 1 corresponds to p = 0.025). We
do not observe a phase transition in which the number of infected people would explode when R0 becomes
greater than 1, but instead, we observe a smooth increase. This is probably due to the small size of the graph
(327 nodes), too small to see the theoretical asymptotic behavior as the number of nodes goes to infinity. In
(b), we look at the parameters by changing the shape of the super-spreading distribution (gamma of mean
1, baseline shape value 0.1). The baseline case corresponds to the vertical dotted line at R0 = 1.25, whose
intersection with the curves of the strategies gives the values of Figure 3.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

120

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.1

0.0

0.4
0.6
proba asymptomatic

0.8

1.0

0.25

0.0

0.2

0.4
0.6
proba asymptomatic

0.15
0.10
0.05

(b)

12

10

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting
0.0

0.3
0.2

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
dampening factor asymptomatic

16

14

1
2
3
4
number of day at work with symptoms

5

0.4
0.6
proba asymptomatic

0.8

1.0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
dampening factor asymptomatic

1.0

50
40
30
20
10
0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

100
80
60
40
20

13
0

60

120

15

0.2

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

140

0.1

(c)

0.0

1.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

17
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.4

20

1.0

14

1.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.5

40

80

8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
dampening factor asymptomatic

60

70

0.20

0.0

0.8

80

16
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.30

P[Outbreak]

0.2

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.35

P[Outbreak]

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

12
10

(a)

0.00

14

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.2

16

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

P[Outbreak]

0.3

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

100

18

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.4

20
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.5

0

1
2
3
4
number of day at work with symptoms

5

0

1
2
3
4
number of day at work with symptoms

5

Figure S15: Sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure 3, for the high school contact network, w.r.t. : (a) the
probability that an infected person is asymptomatic (baseline: 40%); as expected given that symptomatic
indviduals isolate, the higher the fraction of asymptomatic persons, the worse it is; (b) the difference of
infectiousness of an asymptomatic person compared to that of a symptomatic person (baseline: 1/2); here
there is a tradeoff in the duration until outbreak, conditioning on existence of an outbreak: when asymptomatic persons are almost not infectious, the epidemic evolution is driven by symptomatic persons, who are
only able to contaminate others in the first few days before they isolate, so when outbreaks do happen, they
happen more quickly; at the other end of the scale, when most asymptomatic people are just as infectious
as symptomatic people, they are infectious for many days but because they are more contagious, they infect
people earlier on. (c) the number of days during which a symptomatic individuals continues going to school
or work after developing symptoms (baseline: 1 day). The baseline case corresponds to the vertical dotted
line, whose intersection with the curves of the strategies gives the values of Figure 3. Part (c) suggests that
changing behavior so that a person self-isolates as soon as she develops symptoms is very effective to reduce
the dissemination of the epidemic in her contact network.
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distributions

0.5

distributions
Gamma(mean=2.0, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=2.5, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=3.0, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=3.5, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=4.0, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=4.5, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=5.0, k=5.0)

0.4

0.3

Gamma(mean=3.7, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=0.2)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=0.5)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=1.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=2.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=20.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=50.0)
Gamma(mean=3.7, k=100.0)

1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8

0.2

0.6
0.4

0.1

0.2
2

6

8

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.25

P[Outbreak]

4

0.15

0.10

0

1

2

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

18

0.20

0.0

10

16

3

14
12

3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
average of exposed period

5.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

2.0

2.5

3.0
3.5
4.0
average of exposed period

0.20

0.15

0.10

4.5

17
16
15
14
13

10

(b)

1

101
100
shape of exposed period

102

7

30
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

25
20

5.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

18
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.25

P[Outbreak]

2.5

6

10
2.0

2.5

3.0
3.5
4.0
average of exposed period

4.5

5.0

35
30
E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

2.0

5

15

10

(a)

4

35

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0

E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

25
20
15
10

10

1

101
100
shape of exposed period

102

10

1

101
100
shape of exposed period

102

Figure S16: Sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure 3, for the high school contact network, w.r.t. the
SEIR model parameters: (a) the mean length of the exposed period (baseline: 3.7 days); (b) the shape of
the distribution of the exposed period (baseline: 5). The baseline case corresponds to the vertical dotted
line, whose intersection with the curves of the strategies gives the values of Figure 3. Unsurprisingly, the
longer the exposed period, the more time it takes before 5 people are infected; otherwise the distribution of
the exposed period has little impact on the results.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distributions

0.20

distributions

0.8

Gamma(mean=5.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=6.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=7.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=9.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=10.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=11.0, k=10.0)

0.25

Gamma(mean=8.0, k=0.1)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=0.2)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=0.5)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=1.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=2.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=5.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=10.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=20.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=50.0)
Gamma(mean=8.0, k=100.0)

0.7
0.6
0.5

0.15

0.4
0.3

0.10

0.2
0.05

0.1
2.5

7.5

10.0

12.5

15.0

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.25

17.5

0.20
0.15
0.10

0.0

20.0

0

2

4

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

18
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.30

P[Outbreak]

5.0

17

6

16
15
14
13
12

7

(a)

8
9
10
11
average of infectious period

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

0.20
P[Outbreak]

7

8
9
10
11
average of infectious period

0.15
0.10

24
22
20
18
16
14

(b)

1

101
100
shape of symptomatic period

102

40

14

16

30

20

7

8
9
10
11
average of infectious period

12

35
30
No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

25
20
15
10

0.05
10

12

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

12

No Strategy
On-Off Daily
On-Off Weekly
Rotating Daily
Rotating Weekly
Full Telecommuting

26
E[Nb days until outbreak | Outbreak]

0.25

10

10

11

12

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.05

8

50

E[Nb infected | Outbreak]

0.00
0.0

10

1

101
100
shape of symptomatic period

102

10

1

101
100
shape of symptomatic period

102

Figure S17: Sensitivity analysis of the results of Figure 3, for the high school contact network, w.r.t. the
SEIR model parameters: (a) the mean length of the infectious period (baseline: 9.5 days); (b) the shape of
the distribution of the remaining of the infectious period after the first 1.5 days (baseline: 10). The baseline
case corresponds to the vertical dotted line, whose intersection with the curves of the strategies gives the
values of Figure 3. The variations are monotone and smooth.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(b) Run 1801

(a) Run 893
7

No strategy

6
5

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

5
4
3
2

4
3
2

1

1

0

0

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

30

day

40

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

No strategy

7

6

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

50

0

10

20

day

30

40

50

(d) Run 2634
No strategy

7

(c) Run 1932

6

prevalence (%)

No strategy

2
1

prevalence (%)

5
3

2

1

On/Off 1 day in 2

1

0

0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

20

40

day

60

80

100

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

3
2

0

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

4

2

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0
2

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0
2

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0
2

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0
2

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

5

10

15

20
day

25

30

35

40

Figure S18: Four simulation runs of epidemic propagation inside the primary school network (similarly to
Figure 5). Among the runs producing an outbreak under no strategy, we selected the first four that produce
a median number of infections when we do not implement a strategy, that is 37.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(a) Run 890
No strategy

12

(c) Run 1431

10

No strategy
8

6

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

8

6

4

4
2

2
0

0

prevalence (%)

3

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 day in 2

4

2

1

prevalence (%)

3
2
1

On/Off 1 week in 2

5

On/Off 1 week in 2

4
3
2
1

0
4

Rotation 1 day in 2

0

3

prevalence (%)

2
1
0

4

prevalence (%)

3
2
1

Rotation 1 day in 2

3
2
1
0
3

Rotation 1 week in 2

Rotation 1 week in 2

2
1
0

0
4

Full telecommuting

3

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

4

prevalence (%)

2

6

0

prevalence (%)

3

0

1

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 day in 2

4

5

2

Full telecommuting

2
1
0

0

10

20

day

1

30

40

50

0

0

5

10

15

day

20

25

30

35

(d) Run 2166

(b) Run 1332

No strategy

No strategy

7

8

5

6

4

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

6

3
2

4

1

2

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

prevalence (%)

3

Rotation 1 day in 2

2
1
0

prevalence (%)

3

Rotation 1 week in 2

2
1

prevalence (%)

0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

30
day

40

50

60

0

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

0

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0

2

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

day

30

40

Figure S19: Four simulation runs of epidemic propagation inside the workplace network (similarly to Figure 5). Among the runs producing an outbreak under no strategy, we selected the first four that produce a
median number of infections, that is 43.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(b) Run 423
8

No strategy

7

7

No strategy

prevalence (%)

6

(a) Run 397
6

prevalence (%)

4
3
2

5

1

4

0

3

4

prevalence (%)

2
1
0
7

On/Off 1 day in 2

3
2
1

On/Off 1 day in 2
0

6

4

prevalence (%)

5

prevalence (%)

5

4
3
2

On/Off 1 week in 2

3
2
1
0

1

1
0

2

Rotation 1 day in 2

4

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 week in 2

1

3
2
1

0

0
4

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

10

20

30

day

40

Rotation 1 week in 2

3
2
1
0

prevalence (%)

0

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

Rotation 1 day in 2

5

0

Full telecommuting

2
1
0

0

5

10

day

15

20

25

(c) Run 497
No strategy

prevalence (%)

4
3

(d) Run 573

2
1

3
2

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 week in 2

prevalence (%)

1

On/Off 1 day in 2

2
1
0

2
1
0
3

Rotation 1 day in 2

2
1
0
3

Rotation 1 week in 2

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

0
3

2
1

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0
1

Rotation 1 day in 2

0

2

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0
1

Full telecommuting

0

0

0

prevalence (%)

No strategy

2

0

1

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 day in 2

prevalence (%)

3

0

10

20

30

day

40

50

60

70

Full telecommuting

2
1
0

0

10

20

day

30

40

50

Figure S20: Four simulation runs of epidemic propagation inside the highschool network (similarly to Figure 5). Among the runs producing an outbreak under no strategy, we selected the first four that produce a
median number of infections, that is 26.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228007; this version posted December 1, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(b) Run 1098
(a) Run 422

No strategy
10

10

No strategy
8

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

8

6

4

4

2

2

0

3

On/Off 1 day in 2

2
1
0

2

On/Off 1 week in 2

0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1

prevalence (%)

3

1

0

2
1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

day

30

40

50

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

On/Off 1 day in 2

prevalence (%)

0
4

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

6

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

day

30

40

(c) Run 1428
No strategy

8
7

prevalence (%)

6
5
4
3

(d) Run 2727

2
1

On/Off 1 day in 2

2

prevalence (%)

prevalence (%)

3

1

On/Off 1 week in 2

4
3
2
1
0
4

Rotation 1 day in 2

3
2

prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%) prevalence (%)

5

prevalence (%)

3
2
1
0

0

prevalence (%)

No strategy

4

0

On/Off 1 day in 2

1
0

On/Off 1 week in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 day in 2

1
0

Rotation 1 week in 2

1
0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

1

20

40

60
day

80

100

120

0

prevalence (%)

3

Rotation 1 week in 2

2
1

prevalence (%)

0

Full telecommuting

1
0

0

10

20

day

30

40

Figure S21: Four simulation runs of epidemic propagation inside the random uniform graph (similarly to
Figure 5). Among the runs producing an outbreak under no strategy, we selected the first four that produce
a median number of infections, that is 47.

24

