medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.21.20208728; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Decrease in Hospitalizations for COVID-19 after Mask Mandates in 1083 U.S. Counties
Dhaval Adjodah, 1Karthik Dinakar, 3Samuel P. Fraiberger, 4George W. Rutherford, 4David V. Glidden,
Monica Gandhi

1,2
5

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Media Lab, Cambridge, MA

1

Center of Complex Interventions, Inc., Boston, MA

2

Development Data Group, World Bank, Washington, DC

3

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)

4

Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases, and Global Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco (UCSF)

5

Withdrawal: The authors have withdrawn this manuscript because there are increased rates of SARSCoV-2 cases in the areas that we originally analyzed in this study. New analyses in the context of the
third surge in the United States are therefore needed and will be undertaken directly in conjunction with
the creators of the publicly-available databases on cases, hospitalizations, testing rates. Etc. We will be
performing this in conjunction with machine learning experts at UCSF. Therefore, the authors do not
wish this work to be cited as reference for the project. We hope to have an updated analysis using data
from the 2nd and now 3rd wave of SARS-CoV-2 in this country soon. If you have any questions, please
contact the corresponding author.

Conflict of interests: The authors have no financial conflicts of interest to report

Corresponding author:
Monica Gandhi MD, MPH
Professor of Medicine, Division of HIV, Infectious Diseases and Global Medicine
Medical Director, Ward 86 HIV Clinic
995 Potrero Avenue, 4th floor
San Francisco, CA 94110
Monica.gandhi@ucsf.edu
Key words: Universal masking, mask mandates, SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, viral inoculum, hospitalization
rates, U.S. counties

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

