medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The Response of Pakistani Social Workers amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Qualitative
Analysis of the Main Challenges
Dr Kiran Abbas1*, Dr Muhammad Inam Ul Haq2, Dr Wareesha Afaq Zaidi2, Dr Ahmed
Kaleem2, Dr Hamza Sohail3, Moiz Ahmed1
Affiliations
1. Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre
2. Shifa College of Medicine
3. Jinnah Sindh Medical University
Correspondence: Dr Kiran Abbas, kiranabbas2020@gmail.com
Abstract
The study aimed to highlight the main challenges faced by the social workers amid the
pandemic. A qualitative study was conducted between March 2020 to May 2020 in Karachi,
Pakistan. All participants who belonged to a non-profit organization were eligible to participate.
Open-ended questions were asked by the participants. The mean age of the participants was 24.8
+ 5.9 years. The main challenges faced by the social workers were: i) resistance from the family
and friends, ii) lack of personal protective equipment, iii) mistrust from public, iv) uncooperative
government/authorities.
Keywords: COVID-19, coronavirus, pandemic, social workers
Introduction

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

As the Covid-19 pandemic rages on, the burden on social workers has immensely increased.1
The most prominent of these responsibilities include caring for the diagnosed Covid-19 patients
in isolation camps, providing them food and water, making burial arrangements for the patients
who died of COVID-19, and providing relief health and food packages to the residents of poor
socioeconomic localities in Pakistan.2
Not only the social workers are at high-risk of contracting the virus themselves, but their families
are also exposed.2-3 These unsung heroes are also at risk of mental health issues due to stress,
anxiety, and work-related exhaustion.4-5 The situation is worse in developing countries including
Pakistan, India, Nepal, among others. These countries do not have enough resources to take care
of the rapidly increasing demands as more cases of Covid-19 are reported. The health-care sector
in Pakistan, is already supersaturated lacking sufficient “resources” including the machines,
drugs, facilities, supplies and workforce.5 Many hospitals refuse to admit patients of Covid-19 as
they are not equipped to handle them. There is a shortage of personal protective equipment in
many hospitals and doctors are rendered exposed to this dangerous virus.6 Many households are
now facing food shortages as the majority of the Pakistani people are daily wage earners. Due to
the lockdown, they are facing unemployment for the past sixty to ninety days.7 This is where
social workers play a huge and impeccable role in our society. From collecting the donations
from the privileged sector of the community, to bulk-buying personal protective equipments,
groceries, and clothes, to distributing them to the health-care workers who are battling the Covid19 pandemic at the frontlines and ensuring adequate distribution of groceries (rations) and other
essentials to families in need, social workers are continuously and relentlessly serving our global
communities.5-8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Social work is as equally important as health-care work, and both work in synergy. Nevertheless,
many studies have highlighted the impact of pandemic solely on the health-care practitioners2-4,
however, the problems faced by the social workers remained unexplored till now. In this brief
study, we highlighted the main issues concerning the social workers and how they are dealt with
in Pakistan amid the Covid-19 pandemic.
Methods and Materials
A qualitative study was conducted between March 2020 to May 2020 in Karachi, Pakistan. After
obtaining clearance from the institutional ethics review committee, the participants were enrolled
using non-probability, convenience sampling. A total of twenty participants were interviewed
using call-based short surveys. All participants who belonged to a non-profit organization falling
within the definition of social work as previously mentioned were eligible to participate. All
participants not willing to participate in the call-based interviews were excluded from the study.
Qualitative data was based on a brief interview which took place over a phone call or video call
as per feasibility of the participant. The call was recorded after taking verbal and electronic
consent from the participants. The interview was focused on evaluating the main challenges
faced by the social workers amid the COVID-19 pandemic and they dealt effectively with those
challenges. Open-ended questions were asked. The entire discussion was recorded and then
transcribed verbatim. The discussion was conducted in English and transcripts were produced in
English language.
Statistical Analysis
The age of the participant, length of the interview, and the work hours were presented as mean
plus standard deviation while gender was presented as frequency/percentage.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Microsoft Excel sheet was used for data analysis. Qualitative data was analyzed using an
inductive approach. The transcribed data was organised, main themes were identified, data was
labelled and finally coding was done. The codes and themes were then analysed and presented.
Ethics
All participants gave informed verbal and electronic consent prior to the interview. Participants
were ensured that complete anonymity and confidentiality would be maintained. The participants
were given pseudonyms for transcription purposes to ensure their anonymity. Apart from the
principal investigator Abbas K, no one had access to the original interviews.
Results and Discussion
We interviewed twenty social workers randomly selected from different organizations currently,
active and functional. The mean + SD interview time was 21.4 + 10.5 minutes. There were 6
(30%) female while 14 (70%) were male social workers. The mean age of the participants was
24.8 + 5.9 years. The main themes explored are listed in Table 1.
Psychological Impact on Social Workers amid COVID-19 pandemic
Apart from the challenges faced by the social workers, many experienced psychological effects
as a result of the pandemic. The mean hours the participants worked were 7.9 + 5.6 hours per
day. This amounted to approximately forty hours a week excluding the weekends. The
participants claimed that they were constantly terrified of contracting the virus themselves and
also the fear of infecting their family members takes a toll on their mental health. 19 out of 20
(95%) participants claimed that they were more stressed out than usual, 8 (40%) self-reported

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

insomnia and sleep disturbances, while 14 (70%) claimed they were fatigued after working long
hours.
Coping mechanism to deal with Challenges
The majority of the participants who were interviewed agreed that in spite of the apparent
challenges faced by social workers, they would continue to help others. The one single-most
important driving force was the thought of helping the less-privileged community during the
pandemic. They realized that many daily wage earners were out of employment hence,they had
no means to put bread on the table. Therefore, social workers must play their parts in helping out
the community in these awful times. One participant claimed, “The fact that I am able to help
others by providing them with groceries and clothes is enough for me - I do not expect any
reward for my social work.” Another social worker claimed that, “I am not wasting my time
binge-watching TV series on netflix like others but actually doing something useful. It gives me
motivation.”
As it was previously pointed out that the long work hours lead to fatigue and burn-out among
social workers therefore, many recommended taking mini-breaks in between work hours to
prevent burn out. One young social worker claimed, “We are prone to fatigue as we are fasting
during the holy month of Ramadan - therefore we take short breaks of 10-15 minutes to prevent
full-fledged burn-out - it helps keep us productive.”
Another main concern reported by the social workers was the fear of infecting the family
members. Therefore, it was found that 12 (60%) social workers were not directly in contact with
their family members. They were restricted to their own rooms - to keeping their family
members safe from the viral pandemic.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Challenges faced by Social Workers amid COVID-19 Pandemic
The first theme was “Challenges faced by Social Workers”. As many as 13 out of 20 participants
divulged that their family members were not in support of them going out in the field and
exposing themselves and their families to the virus. The family members were concerned about
the safety of their loved ones. However, some participants also remarked that despite the fear and
associated anxiety, their family members fully supported their cause and encouraged them. One
social worker said, “I believe that without the support and encouragement of my family, I would
not be able to perform my duties. I owe them so much.” Another participant claimed, “My
family was terrified in the beginning - they made me wear all sorts of protective equipment
before I could go out in the field, but with time they realized that the work I did was so important
- I was helping other families during these unpredictable awful times. With time, they started
supporting me and I am grateful for that.”
The second challenging aspect that was faced by the social workers was the non-availability of
personal protective equipment (PPE). Over 10 (50%), participants claimed that they do not wear
any personal protective equipment during work hours. The main reasons divulged by the
participants were: shortage of PPEs and unnecessary financial burden on organization. The
interviewee explained that since the inception of lockdown, prices of these essential PPEs have
drastically increased. Hence, the small student-based organizations were unable to provide their
workforce with basic PPE. 14 participants used only surgical masks, 3 participants used both
surgical masks and gloves, while two participants worked without any PPE in the field. Upon
asking one social worker said, “We tried to follow the standard operating procedures as laid by
the Government of Pakistan but eventually we were unable to sustain the availability of PPE for

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

our volunteers. However, even then these remarkable people volunteered and risked their lives
for the sake of humanity.”
Another social worker claimed, “We take all necessary precautions - wash our hands, use
sanitizers, avoid contact as much as possible, follow respiratory hygiene among other preventive
measures - but we also know that if we do not go out to supply food bags to these poor people,
they may die of hunger or commit a crime.”
Many social workers were young and inexperienced, but their spirit was commendable. They
were all highly motivated to help their fellow citizens. The female social workers claimed that
their main role was to do public marketing and were responsible for the packaging of the
donations (PPE, food/ration bags/clothes, etc.). The main challenge for these young social
workers was the mistrust of the public. Since the start of the pandemic, the participants revealed
that some fraudulent illegitimate organizations have surfaced which collect money from the
public in the name of helping the less unfortunate and then disappear. One person claimed, “At
the start of our donation drive, many people did not trust us. It felt bad. So, we used social media
i.e. Instagram, facebook, Whatsapp, among other softwares to spread the word across the nation.
People started appreciating the work we did and the rate of donations increased tremendously
ever since.”
Incorporating the use of media to build-up trust among the general public was one of the
strategies employed by the social workers to ensure steady supply of donations. Another strategy
was to offer a pick-up service to the person who was interested in donating in cash. Since, many
people were scared of being scammed online.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

None of the social workers faced shortage of manpower. There were enough willing participants
and volunteers who also shared the same vision as the organization they were associated with i.e.
to help the deserving people of the country. One person said, “We always had enough people on
board to help others, we were never short of volunteers.”
Another main hindrance faced during the social work was differentiating the families who were
really deserving and those who were not. “Many times, we were contacted by elite/well-off
families to donate them groceries at their doorsteps, it was disgusting to see this kind of behavior
from people.” It was necessary to verify whether the person or family was actually
underprivileged or not. For that, many non-profit organizations did a background search or asked
for some justification.
The social workers were discouraged by the non-cooperative stance of the government and
politicians. One social worker reported, “We tried to contact one MNA, to ask for donation but
he did not pick-up his call.” (MNA is short for ‘Member of the National Assembly)
Not many social workers were concerned about the security. Since the female workers did not
participate in the field work, it was not a big challenge. However, the social workers claimed that
the Pakistan Rangers (Sindh) provided them security upon request. Pakistan Rangers are a
respectable force which has earned a great repute among people.
The ministry of health and services, Pakistan has published guidelines on the proper use of
disposable face masks/surgical face mask/medical face mask which is one of the basic PPE. It is
often used by the patient in healthcare settings to protect others from a communicable infection.
New developments regarding COVID-19 have shown that a patient may be infected with
COVID-19 virus and still appear well or asymptomatic for a certain period before experiencing

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the symptoms. Meanwhile, is completely capable of shedding virus during sneezing, coughing
and while speaking. Therefore, it is prudent for the public to wear face masks with an intention
to protect others and themselves from droplets of saliva/sputum particularly when entering
closed or congested areas. Many countries have adopted this as a national guideline.9-11
In our study, the social workers explained that the prices of even the basic PPE including
surgical masks or gloves have accelerated by many times hence, it became impossible for small
student-based organizations to keep supplying their volunteers with these facilities.12 According
to a CNN report, the cost of PPE is continuously skyrocketing, in some cases by over a 1000
percent.13 Some social workers, mainly focused on distributing PPEs to health-care practitioners
including the N95 respirator, gowns, gloves, medical mask, and eye protection equipment.14-15
The main objective of these organizations was to ensure that the poor and the underprivileged
sector of the community were provided with groceries and other essential items. Hence, these
organizations targeted the low-socioeconomic areas including the shanty towns, villages, and
nursing homes all across the country.
This is the first report which highlighted the new emerging challenges during COVID-19
pandemic faced by the social workers in Pakistan. The government and concerned authorities
must cooperate with these social workers so that they can help their country in the times of need.
Conclusion
The majority of the social workers were young and inexperienced, but their spirit was
commendable. They were all highly motivated to help their fellow citizens. We found that with
the help of the government and health authorities, they could achieve more success in helping
their fellow citizens.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements (if any)
We would like to acknowledge the social workers in Pakistan who participated in this study and
are serving the country amid the crisis.
References
1. World Health Organization. COVID-19 and violence against women: what the health
sector/system can do, 7 April 2020. World Health Organization; 2020.
2. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) [Internet]. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention2020 [cited 2020 Jun 8];Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/daily-life-coping/funeral-guidance.html
3. Wilkinson A. Local response in health emergencies: key considerations for addressing
the COVID-19 pandemic in informal urban settlements. Environment and Urbanization.
2020 Jan 1:0956247820922843.
4. Ng K, Poon BH, Kiat Puar TH, Shan Quah JL, Loh WJ, Wong YJ, Tan TY, Raghuram J.
COVID-19 and the risk to health care workers: a case report. Annals of internal medicine.
2020 Mar 16.
5. Sood S. Psychological effects of the Coronavirus disease-2019 pandemic. Research &
Humanities in Medical Education. 2020 Apr 1;7:23-6.
6. Sultana A, Sharma R, Hossain MM, Bhattacharya S, Purohit N. Burnout among
healthcare providers during COVID-19 pandemic: Challenges and evidence-based
interventions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.18.20214601; this version posted October 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7. Saqlain M, Munir MM, Ahmed A, Tahir AH, Kamran S. Is Pakistan prepared to tackle
the coronavirus epidemic?. Drugs & Therapy Perspectives. 2020 Mar 20:1-2.
8. Chohan UW. Forecasting the Economic Impact of Coronavirus on Developing Countries:
Case of Pakistan.
9. Use of Cloth Face Coverings to Help Slow the Spread of COVID-19, CDC,
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/prevent-getting-sick/diy-cloth-facecoverings.html
10. Rational use of personal protective equipment (PPE) for coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
by WHO
11. Interim recommendations for the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) during
hospital care of people with Coronavirus disease (COVID-19).].
12. Mirchandani P. Health Care Supply Chains: COVID-19 Challenges and Pressing Actions.
13. Diaz D. Cost of protective equipment rises amid competition and surge in demand
[Internet]. CNN2020 [cited 2020 Jun 8];Available from:
https://edition.cnn.com/2020/04/16/politics/ppe-price-costs-rising-economy-personalprotective-equipment/index.html
14. World Health Organization. Rational use of personal protective equipment (PPE) for
coronavirus disease (COVID-19): interim guidance, 19 March 2020. World Health
Organization; 2020.
15. Ranney ML, Griffeth V, Jha AK. Critical supply shortages—the need for ventilators and
personal protective equipment during the Covid-19 pandemic. New England Journal of
Medicine. 2020 Mar 25.

