medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Extending the range of COVID-19 risk factors in
a Bayesian network model for personalised risk
assessment

Georgina Prodhan
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
g.m.prodhan@se19.qmul.ac.uk
Abstract— A need is emerging for individuals to gauge their
own risks of coronavirus infection as it becomes apparent that
contact tracing to contain the spread of the virus is not working
in many societies. This paper presents an extension of an existing
Bayesian network model for an application in which people can
add their own personal risk factors to calculate their probability
of exposure to the virus and likely severity if they do catch the
illness. The data need not be shared with any central authority.
In this way, people can become more aware of their individual
risks and adjust their behaviour accordingly, as many countries
prepare for a second wave of infections or a prolonged
pandemic. This has the advantage not only of preserving privacy
but also of containing the virus more effectively by allowing
users to act without the time lag of waiting to be informed that
a contact has been tested and confirmed COVID-19 positive.
Through a nuanced assessment of individual risk, it could also
release many people from isolation who are judged highly
vulnerable using cruder measures, helping to boost economic
activity and decrease social isolation without unduly increasing
transmission risk. Although much has been written and
reported about single risk factors, little has been done to bring
these factors together in a user-friendly way to give an overall
risk rating. The causal probabilistic model presented here shows
the power of Bayesian networks to represent the interplay of
multiple, dependent variables and to predict outcomes. The
network, designed for use in the UK, is built using detailed data
from government and health authorities and the latest research,
and is capable of dynamic updates as new information becomes
available. The focus of the paper is on the extended set of risk
factors.
Keywords—coronavirus, COVID-19, contact tracing, app,
risk, privacy, second wave

Supervisor: Professor Norman Fenton
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London, UK
n.fenton@qmul.ac.uk

identified simply by collecting data on users’ location (via
GPS, not the more invasive Bluetooth) and likelihood of
infection.
This approach to containing the virus relies largely on
individuals taking responsibility for their own health and that
of those around them. This may be thought to be a weakness.
But in fact, in all but the most authoritarian regimes, a sense
of social responsibility is essential if rules on social distancing,
face masks, hand-washing and other measures are to be
effective. Globally, experience of past pan- and epidemics
including the 2009 swine flu, SARS, the 2014-2016 Ebola
outbreak and various outbreaks of bird flu have shown that
people’s behaviour – based on risk perception - can have a
profound influence on the spread of infectious diseases (Funk,
et al., 2009).
There is evidence that the model presented here could be
effective in Britain (although it is, of course, adaptable to any
country in the world). A study in 10 countries that was
published in May (Dryhurst, et al., 2020) found that the UK
had the highest public risk perception of COVID-19 in the
group. The COVID Symptom Study, an epidemiological
research app that invites users to report any symptoms and
share details of their health lifestyle, has more than 4 million
contributors, mostly in the UK (Zoe, 2020). And, according to
a poll of 2,254 UK residents carried out in in May by King’s
College and Ipsos MORI (Allington, et al., 2020), the majority
have been going beyond compliance with government advice,
for example by staying at home for long periods. The poll also
found that most people would obey a contact-tracing app’s
recommendation to self-isolate – showing the potential utility
of an app that relies on voluntary participation. However, the
majority did not trust the government to keep their data safe,
and almost half were sceptical about the ability of such an app
to limit the spread of coronavirus.

I. INTRODUCTION
Like many countries, Britain is bracing for a second wave
of coronavirus. Local lockdowns are being reimposed in areas
of England, which suffered the highest levels of excess
mortality in Europe (Office for National Statistics, 2020),
This paper is part of a set of studies conducted by a
even as business are encouraged to stay open, individuals
multidisciplinary team of researchers who argue that contact
urged to go back to work in offices, and schools go back for
tracing alone is unlikely to contain a high-prevalence,
the new academic year. Mitigating measures such as the
contagious disease such as COVID-19. It builds on the work
compulsory wearing of face masks in confined public spaces
most recently of (Fenton, et al., 2020), which describes details
have recently been imposed. But a digital contact-tracing
of a Bayesian model to compute the probability that an
system that was supposed to be the basis for a lifting of
individual has COVID-19 – whether symptomatic or
restrictions on movement and social activity has yet to prove
asymptomatic – or is likely to catch it. The model presented
itself effective. The UK government has just launched a
here expands substantially on that web of relevant risk factors,
revamped version of its coronavirus app. It has also been
bringing in ethnicity, religion, occupation and housing
reported to be considering a feature that allows people to use
conditions, and refining other factors such as age, obesity and
personal information to calculate their own risk score (Smyth
underlying medical conditions. It also incorporates concurrent
& Wright, 2020). The model presented here could be the basis
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
for just such an app. The location of new outbreaks could be

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

work on an extended set of symptoms described in (Butcher,
2020).
Results of running the model are consistent with what is
known about the prevalence and severity of COVID-19, and
the vulnerability of different groups. This demonstrates its
ability to predict risks for individuals, even if relatively little
is known about them. For example:
•

II.

Entering the observation that someone is Black or
non-Chinese Asian results in a raised probability of
having severe COVID-19 in the 55-64 age group and
an equal probability in every other age group. This is
consistent with observed data (Office for National
Statistics, 2020). The opposite is true, however, when
comparing ethnic groups without conditioning on age
- an interesting paradox that will be discussed below.

•

Entering the observation that someone is aged under
16 reduces the probability of having severe COVID19 to virtually zero but raises the probability of having
the disease asymptomatically. This is consistent with
observed data and an important factor to watch as
schools reopen (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2020). Adding the observation
“student/pupil” raises the probability of eventual
COVID-19.

•

The probability of infection takes precedence over
background risks – living in an overcrowded
household is more dangerous than being obese. This
is logical, since nobody can have COVID-19 without
becoming infected, no matter what their
vulnerabilities. It shows the power of mitigating
measures, and cautions against overemphasising
personal risks such as obesity or smoking.

CONTEXT AND RELATED WORK

Countries around the world have introduced contacttracing apps in attempts to contain a second wave of
coronavirus as lockdowns are eased. Contact tracing using
mobile technology has become a particular focus during the
current epidemic because COVID-19 presents the challenge
that the majority of transmission is believed to occur before
symptoms of the disease show. This differentiates it from
ebola, smallpox or the 2002 SARS-CoV-1, and makes it vital
to reduce the time from symptoms appearing in a person to
isolation of that person’s contacts. Recent studies including
(Ferretti, et al., 2020) and (Kretzschmar, et al., 2020) suggest
that the time from confirmation of a COVID-19 case to
quarantining of contacts needs to be under three days to bring
the rate of reproduction below 1, thus containing the virus’s
spread. Such a time frame is generally beyond the capabilities
of manual tracers, especially for an epidemic of the current
scale. The (Ferretti, et al., 2020) study, which examined early
epidemic data from China, Singapore and the Diamond
Princess cruise ship, concluded that near-instantaneous
contact tracing via a mobile phone app, in conjunction with
other measures, could contain the virus.
While adoption of mobile contact-tracing apps has been
relatively high and has been credited with helping to flatten
the curve in some East Asian countries, the same conditions
do not apply in much of the West (Huang, et al., 2020). In
China, using a traffic-light health-code system embedded in

the extremely popular WeChat and Alipay platforms is
practically mandatory for freedom of movement. In South
Korea, which swiftly contained the first outbreak (although it
is now battling a second), authority had already been given to
disease-prevention authorities to override some privacy laws
during the 2015 MERS outbreak (Park, et al., 2020).
Crucially, the country also quickly developed large-scale
testing infrastructure. In Singapore, the first country to deploy
a national coronavirus-tracing app, a wearable token is being
rolled out to address weaknesses in the existing mobile-phone
technology – and has sparked a rare backlash against the
government, with accusations it is on the way to becoming a
surveillance state (Asher, 2020).
Among Western countries, adoption of governmentendorsed mobile contract-tracing apps has been relatively
high in Australia, Germany and Italy, with rates of around
22%, 14% and 7% respectively by mid-July (Chan, 2020).
But none of these countries can show or is willing to claim
the effectiveness of the app in limiting the spread of the virus.
And even the countries with the highest adoption are still well
below the threshold of 56% of the population, or 80% of
smartphone users, that experts consider the minimum for the
technology to have a chance of being effective (Hinch, et al.,
2020). Privacy concerns are largely to blame, along with
technical glitches and discomfort with digital technology
among some groups, especially older people.
Some privacy-preserving contact-tracing apps are already
on the market or in development. A few stand out:
• Private Kit: Safe Paths, developed at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. This is an open-source
technology that that provides individual users
information on their interaction with COVID-19, and
allows them to share their location trails with health
officials if they test positive for the disease (Rasker, et
al., 2020). The app is available for iOS and Android.
• COVID-19 Watch from Stanford University. This is an
early-warning system using Bluetooth, which allows
an infected person to send an anonymous alert to others
they may have infected, if they are also users of the app
(Abate, 2020). It is currently in testing.
• CoEpi. This is a community-based epidemiological
tool that uses Bluetooth technology and is based on
voluntary symptom-sharing, including before
confirmed test results (CoEpi, 2020). It is currently in
development.
All of these apps and proposed apps address privacy
concerns, and CoEpi also potentially collapses the time from
infection to isolation of a contact by promoting symptomsharing before test results. They all deal exclusively with
infection risks, however, and none incorporates background
risk to give a personalised risk assessment in the way that the
model presented here does.
I searched the preprint servers medRxiv, bioRxiv and
arXiv as well as Google Scholar and LitCovid for Bayesian
approaches to risk assessment and contact tracing. I found
several interesting papers on transmission dynamics and
mitigation measures such as physical distancing, face masks
and eye coverings. An early study of Chinese data formulated
an equation to determine personal risk based on age, sex and
comorbidities (Caramelo, et al., 2020). It used a naïve
Bayesian approach, assuming that all the risk variables were

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 1. A simplified version of the Bayesian network for COVID-19 risk assessment

independent of one another. An interesting French study
modelled individual risk as a potential decision-making aid to
relaxing lockdown restrictions on low-risk populations
(Evgeniou, et al., 2020). It used standard statistical and
machine-learning methods such as logistic regression and
random forest. Another, Italian, paper aimed to develop a
personal risk score for infection (Orlando, et al., 2020).
However, it only measured association, not causality, which
was evident in its finding that underlying medical conditions
could influence the risk of infection. In causal Bayesian terms,
this would be a category mistake as the most vulnerable
person in the world could not become infected with
coronavirus if they did not come into contact with it. I found
nothing that used a Bayesian analysis for personal risk
prediction and containment, apart from the work on which this
project is based (Fenton, et al., 2020).
III.

METHODOLOGY

The model presented is a Bayesian Network, a causal
probabilistic model that predicts outcomes – in this case,
current and projected COVID-19 status and severity of disease
– using a combination of actual observations and expert
calculations. It is built on AgenaRisk Bayesian network
software. A simplified schema of the network is shown in Fig.
1, and a more detailed version can be found in the Appendix.
The model, named “CombinedModelForContactTracing” can
be
accessed
using
this
link
http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/~norman/Models/ and can be run
using trial software from agenarisk.com.

The network is initially populated with prior probabilities
for the general population – e.g., a person in the UK has a
49.4% chance of being male, a 23.4% chance of being obese
and a 16% chance of being a smoker. Together with other
factors including infection opportunities, and immunity
possibility, these resulted in a 0.2% chance of eventually
having COVID-19, at the time of writing.
Bayesian networks are known to be able to solve problems
that traditional statistics cannot, notably cases of confounders
and colliders – in which associated variables are causally
related only through a common cause or a common effect. A
Bayesian approach is well-suited for the current situation, in
which it is crucial to understand the relationships of multiple
dependent variables, and where observational data have to be
gleaned opportunistically as controlled experimentation is
impossible.
Prime examples of confounding variables surround the
issue of ethnicity. Several large studies including (The
OpenSAFELY Collaborative, 2020) and (Office for National
Statistics, 2020) found a significantly higher risk of death
from COVID-19 among Black or South Asian people than
among White people. But by looking only at association or
correlation, their methods were by definition unable to
discover the mechanisms by which this occurred. Even after it
said it had adjusted for age, region, population density, area
deprivation, household composition, socio-economic
position, education, household tenure, multigenerational
households and occupation, the ONS still found that Black

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 2. The variable “frontline healthcare worker”
confounds the relationship between ethnicity and COVID19 outcome

males had twice the risk of White males, which it found to be
“unexplained”.
In the Bayesian network presented here, it can be clearly
seen that the relationship between ethnicity and COVID-19
death is in fact confounded by multiple variables: Black and
South Asian people are more likely to be frontline healthcare
workers, live in overcrowded households or have sickle cell
disease, for example, than White people. The healthcare
worker case is illustrated in Fig. 2. All of these are factors that
increase the risk of catching COVID-19 or may lead to a more
severe form of the disease. They confound the relationship
between ethnicity and COVID-19 outcomes.
Potential collider variables are also abundant in the current
COVID-19 situation because of the nature of the studies that
have been carried out. Observational data cannot be randomly
sampled and controlled experiments cannot be done so almost
all the data available come from hospital populations,
individuals who have been tested or people voluntarily taking
part in studies. These are not representative of the population:
hospital patients are already frail, tested individuals are
already exposed or symptomatic, and voluntary participants
may tend to be health-conscious, well-educated, tech-savvy or
hypochondriac. As such, any study conducted on one of these
populations is already conditioned on a collider variable such
as “frail”, “vulnerable” (e.g. frontline healthcare worker) or
“tech-savvy” (i.e. likely to be younger). A UK government
community infection pilot study (Office for National
Statistics, 2020), which conducts regular tests on a large
number of randomly selected participants, is beginning to
redress this situation to some extent.
Observing associations between other factors in such preselected conditions can result in misleading conclusions.
Many of the underlying medical conditions associated with
more severe COVID-19 may bear no causal relation to
severity of COVID-19 but simply have been observed in
hospitalized patients with severe COVID-19 because those
conditions make them more likely to be hospitalised in the
first place. For example, it is not completely clear how heart
disease may influence COVID-19 outcome, but by
conditioning studies on the collider variable “hospitalised” we
are confining our observations to a population already more
likely to have heart disease or a whole range of other comorbidities, and ignoring people who have those conditions
combined with mild COVID-19 but remain out of hospital. In
this way, an exaggerated or even a false association can appear
between the variables “heart disease” and “severe COVID19”, as seen in Fig. 3. The U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention has noted that only 6% of the COVID-19
deaths so far have mentioned COVID-19 as the sole cause of
death (National Center for Health Statistics, 2020).
In the current version of the model, I have included the
underlying medical conditions that best expert advice

Fig. 3. Heart disease and severe COVID-19 collide on
the variable “hospitalization”

considers linked with higher risk of severe COVID-19
because of a lack of further evidence to causally explain them
or explain them away. But the list has changed many times
during the making of the model and may change again.
It is worth noting that even though male sex is widely
observed and accepted as being associated with higher risk,
this has not yet been convincingly explained in a causal way
and may yet turn out to be a relationship that is confounded
by other factors. It has been suggested that the hormone
oestrogen (which men have in smaller amounts) is a
protective factor. A new study argues that females may mount
a more robust immune response than males, even in older age
(Takahashi, et al., 2020). But research is still at an early stage.
Again, a Bayesian model can easily adapt to new knowledge,
for example by creating a new node “oestrogen level” and
drawing edges connecting this to both males and females,
with different prior probabilities.
IV.

MODEL ARCHITECTURE

The Bayesian network is an acyclic directed graph that
consists of probability nodes connected by edges representing
conditional dependencies. Inside each probability node is a
probability table. Some of these are simple, e.g. for sex or for
age, which are not conditioned on any other factors – the
nodes have no “parents” – as seen in Fig. 4. In other cases,
they are more complex, e.g. the diabetes node probability
table is conditioned on underlying medical condition and
ethnicity – as seen in Fig. 5.
The structure of the network, inherited from (Fenton, et
al., 2020), consists of four main areas that feed into the
calculation of probability of COVID-19: background risk
factors, infection possibility, immunity possibility, and
symptoms. I developed the areas of background risk factors
and infection possibility. My colleague Rachel Butcher
developed the symptoms area.
Entering an observation in any of the nodes will change
the probabilities of all the variables that are connected to it,
whether in the direction of influence or by backward
inference. For example, entering an observation that a person
is aged 75 or older will raise the probability of currently
having severe COVID-19 from 0.01% to 0.02% and of
eventual severe COVID-19 from 0.03% to 0.06%. But it will
also raise the probability of being White from 84.8% to
95.9% (because White people live longer), it will raise the
probability of being Christian from 58.7% to 62.6% (because
more White people are Christian) and it will decrease the
probability of being morbidly obese from 2.8% to 1.5%
(because some of the morbidly obese will have died by that
age, and elderly people tend to eat less). As many facts as are
known can be entered - the more observations, the more
accurate the prediction.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“underlying medical condition” and also of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).

Fig. 4. Node probability table for “sex”

A few of these nodes and how their probability tables were
arrived at will be discussed below. Details of all the node
probability tables that I developed are in the Appendix, along
with their data sources.
A. Background risk factors
At the time of writing, there was broad consensus that age,
sex, obesity and certain underlying medical conditions were
important risk factors for developing more severe forms or
dying of COVID-19 (Verity, et al., 2020) (Gebhard, et al.,
2020) (Petrakis, et al., 2020) (Clark, et al., 2020) (Blackshaw,
et al., 2020). The main difficulty arose in how to represent the
interplay of the various factors, given that age, sex and obesity
were themselves interrelated and in addition could all
influence the probability of underlying medical conditions. It
would be impossible to give accurate probabilities for each
combination of these (e.g. probability of having an underlying
medical condition for an overweight woman aged 35-54, and
then the probability of an underlying medical condition for
that same woman if she were normal/underweight, obese or
morbidly obese, and so on). In fact, for seven age categories,
two sex categories and four obesity categories there would be
56 combinations of factors that could each lead to a high,
medium or low probability of having an underlying medical
condition. Clearly, it would be over-engineering the model to
give a value to each of these.
Instead, I drew links between nodes where I did have
accurate figures. For example, there were reliable data for
obesity by age group and sex so I made age and sex parent
nodes of obesity. I made particular underlying medical
conditions child nodes of the general underlying medical
conditions node, with age, obesity and sex as parent nodes of
those individual conditions where their influence was known
to be strong.
To capture the complexity of the influence of ethnicity on
COVID-19 risk, the node “ethnicity” was placed outside the
background factors section of the model as a parent of other
factors such as age, underlying medical condition and
overcrowded housing (an infection factor).
Despite a flurry of excitement around a French study
released in June that proposed smoking may have a protective
effect against developing COVID-19 symptoms (Miyara, et
al., 2020), this was soon dismissed by expert consensus, and
the direct effects of smoking on COVID-19, if any, are still
unknown (Zyl-Smit, et al., 2020) (Fenton, 2020). Smoking
was therefore included in the model as a parent node of

B. Infection possibility
Occupation was the single most important factor in
determining the probability of exposure to the virus, with
frontline healthcare workers clearly the most exposed. South
Asian and Black people are overrepresented in the UK’s
National Health Service and therefore especially in early
COVID-19 deaths, when personal protective equipment
(PPE) was scarce.
Living in multi-generational households is also a risk
factor, especially in cases where a middle generation goes out
to work and lives with elderly relatives and with children who
may socialise more outside the home. This is more common
in South Asian communities but is also becoming generally
more popular as elderly people move in with their children,
while adult offspring move back or stay in their parental home
for economic reasons. I drew a link from ethnicity to
overcrowded household, as data exist for overcrowding by
ethnicity. I also drew a link from religion to overcrowded
household, mainly to account for the large multi-generational
households of Britain’s strictly Orthodox Haredi population,
which was not captured by ethnicity (Judah, 2020).
V.

SELECTED PROBABILITY NODES

A. Ethnicity
The modelling of ethnicity was one of the most complex
parts of building the network. A whirlwind of media and
statistical reports was published in Britain and the United
States regarding the higher vulnerability of non-White ethnic
groups to severe COVID-19 symptoms, hospitalisation and
death in the wake of the killing of George Floyd and
subsequent surge in support for the Black Lives Matter
movement that occurred while I was working on the model.
No substantial evidence has as yet emerged of genetic factors
that would explain a racial bias in the spread of the disease.
Genomics England and the University of Edinburgh have
launched a nationwide study to understand how a person’s
genetic makeup could influence how they react to the virus.
(Genomics England, 2020). This is still in progress.
The media and political storm did cause a lot of data to be
published analysing COVID-19 statistics by ethnicity, which
was very useful in the building of this model. Therefore, I was
able to represent the relationship between ethnicity and
severity of COVID-19 risks with some accuracy through a
greater tendency of ethnic minorities in the UK to live in
overcrowded housing, suffer from certain health conditions
such as diabetes, and work on the healthcare frontline. I have
reproduced below a visualization of the complexity of the
situation by (Pareek, et al., 2020) in Fig. 6.
Even with only a few of these important factors captured,
the model is capable of assessing that a White, female nurse
of normal weight living in shared accommodation is at higher
risk than a Black, obese male office clerk working from

Fig. 5. Node probability table for “diabetes”

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
TABLE 1. PROBABILITY OF EVENTUAL SEVERE COVID-19
ILLNESS BY ETHNICITY AND AGE

Fig. 6. The potential interaction of ethnicity-related factors on
SARS-CoV-2 infection likelihood and COVID-19 outcomes (Pareek,
et al., 2020)

home, where he lives with his nuclear family – even though
being Black and obese may overall be likely to make for
higher risk in the absence of other knowledge. A fragment of
the model showing the edges connecting ethnicity to other
nodes is shown in Fig. 7. Note that some of these factors –
short lifespan, overcrowded household, risky occupation –
allow for interventions to make matters more equitable.
Ethnicity is of course not a variable that can be changed.
The connection between age and ethnicity is an important
one. It explains the paradoxical situation that Black and nonChinese Asian people have a lower risk of developing severe
COVID-19 when considered as whole populations – in
apparent contradiction of the news headlines – but they do
have an equal or increased risk when considered age group
by age group. This is an example of Simpson’s Paradox, in
which a characteristic of a larger group can disappear or be
reversed when considering subgroups one by one. The
situation is summarized in Table 1.
The reason for this is simply that White people, who make
up the majority of the UK’s population, tend to live longer
than other ethnic groups. Age is also the single most
important determinant of COVID-19 severity. Taken overall,
the UK’s Black and non-Chinese Asian populations are
relatively young, with only a small proportion living long
enough to fall into higher-risk age categories. Considering the
sub-categories of age group rather than the whole population
is therefore the right way to analyse the situation, comparing
like with like. This is a good validation of the model. The
effect is similar but more pronounced in the United States,
where infection rates are still significantly higher than in
Britain (Mackenzie, 2020).

Fig. 7. Model fragment “ethnicity”

AGE
White
Unobserved 0.03%
75+
0.06%
65-74
0.05%
55-64
0.03%
35-54
0.02%
25-34
0.02%
16-24
0.01%
<16
0.01%
*excluding Chinese

Asian*
0.02%
0.06%
0.05%
0.04%
0.02%
0.02%
0.01%
0.01%

Black
0.02%
0.06%
0.05%
0.04%
0.02%
0.02%
0.01%
0.01%

B. Obesity
Certain underlying medical conditions are widely
believed by experts to contribute to the risk of developing
more severe COVID-19 symptoms or dying of the disease.
Some large-cohort studies of hospital patients have analysed
factors associated with COVID-19 death (The OpenSAFELY
Collaborative, 2020) (Emami, et al., 2020) (Docherty, et al.,
2020). These are observational studies and, as such, do not
establish causal relationships. Nonetheless, they represent
best expert opinion at the time of writing. Many experts
believe that, broadly, underlying medical conditions weaken
the immune system and thus limit the body’s ability to fight
off infection or illness.
One such condition is obesity, and in late July the UK
government launched a campaign to fight it, arguing that
people could make themselves less vulnerable to a second
wave of coronavirus by losing weight. Public Health England
published a long report on the topic, which synthesised a
large amount of useful information but was flawed in many
ways. For example, it argued:
“Evidence suggests excess weight is associated with
an increased risk of the following for COVID-19: a
positive test, hospitalisation, advanced levels of
treatment (including mechanical ventilation or
admission to intensive or critical care) and death.”
(Blackshaw, et al., 2020)
It is unclear why it would be worth noting that excess
weight is associated with a positive test since, as the report
itself acknowledges, obesity does not increase the chance of
infection. Secondly, the report highlighted the fact that 31.3%
of patients critically ill in intensive care units (ICUs) were
obese, with a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or over, compared
with 28.9% of the population, while 7.9% were morbidly
obese, with a BMI of 40 or over, compared with 2.9% of the
general population. Both were adjusted for age and sex in
unspecified ways. Aside from the fact that the difference in
the case of simple obesity is very small, this gives a
misleading impression of the risks of obesity when reading
the results in the causal direction – from obesity to intensive
care. In my model, entering the observation “severe” in the
“current COVID status” node also raises the probabilities of
being morbidly obese or obese, as seen in Table 2. (The data
used differ slightly from those in the PHE report.)
However, reading the data in the direction of influence by
clearing the observation “severe COVID-19” and observing
obesity and morbid obesity in turn has no perceptible effect
on COVID-19 status measured to two decimal places, as seen
in Table 3.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

TABLE 2. PROBABILITY OF OBESITY GIVEN SEVERE COVID-19

Prior
probability

Morbidly obese
Obese
Overweight
Normal/underweight

2.846%
23.353%
31.05%
42.75%

Observe
current
COVID-19
status severe
3.465%
27.836%
33.947%
34.752%

TABLE 3. PROBABILITY OF EVENTUAL COVID-19 GIVEN OBESITY

COVID-19
status severe
COVID-19
status mild
COVID-19
status
asymptomatic
COVID-19
status none

Prior
probability

Observe
obese

0.03%

0.03%

Observe
morbidly
obese
0.03%

0.11%

0.11%

0.11%

0.07%

0.06%

0.06%

99.8%

99.8%

99.8%

This shows that backward inference is not a guide to
effectiveness of intervention and, while losing weight is
certainly good health advice for many people, an anti-obesity
drive may be a waste of public time and money as a measure
to fight the effects of any second coronavirus wave.
I included obesity in the model as a parent of “underlying
medical condition” as, like smoking, it is a predictor of several
conditions. I did not include it as a parent of “risk factors” in
its own right.
C. Occupation
Occupation is a key determinant of exposure to
coronavirus. Frontline healthcare workers are at significantly
higher risk because they are exposed to many people, and
those people are far more likely than the general population
to be ill with COVID-19. Other essential workers who have
contact with others at work or who have to travel to their
place of work on public transport are also significantly more
exposed than the general population. The UK’s Office for
National Statistics has analysed occupations with the highest
potential exposure (Office for National Statistics, 2020). In
some cases, numbers are small and so this is a work in
progress. Risky occupations outside healthcare included bus
drivers, care home workers and home carers, security guards,
primary and nursery teachers, police officers, opticians and
pharmacists, plumbers, vets and undertakers. I included
students/pupils as an occupational category in their own right,
as COVID-19 outbreaks began to appear on campuses and in
schools at the start of the new academic term.
It is envisaged that users of the app would have a multiplechoice question about their occupation, which would yield a
high, low or medium risk category. The actual list of risky
occupations could be adjusted as more research became
available.

The ONS analysed those employed in these areas by sex
and ethnicity. Some occupations were skewed towards
women (carers and teachers), some towards South Asians
(pharmacists and opticians) and some towards white males
(police officers and plumbers). Overall, there seemed no great
imbalance in the chances of belonging to one of these
medium-risk occupational groups so I did not consider
ethnicity or sex as parents of those.
I did, however, do so for frontline health workers, using
data from the NHS, which has critical mass with 1.24 million
employees, making it the biggest employer in the UK, and
where Black and south Asian employees are overrepresented.
VI.

SCENARIOS

A few fictional cases illustrate the power of this model
over simple contact-tracing exposure models, and also its
ability to give a risk assessment far more useful to individuals
than the general government guidance.
A. The unemployed White male
Fred is a 55-year-old unemployed White man. He is obese
and he smokes but he has no known medical conditions. He
lives alone and has minimal interactions with people outside
the home. He describes his religion as “none”. He has not
knowingly had any contact with people with COVID-19 or
COVID-19 symptoms. He worries about his weight and his
smoking but in fact, the model predicts, his risk of eventual
severe COVID-19 is lower than average and he is strongly
predicted not to get COVID-19 at all, with a probability of
99.85%.
B. The retired female country-dweller
Katie is a 79-year-old, white, retired lawyer. She has a
touch of Parkinson’s Disease but is of a healthy weight and
has never smoked. She lives in a small village with her
husband and has had minimal contact with other people since
the lockdown. She is Catholic and goes once a week to
church, where she socially distances. Katie is worried about
her vulnerability, mainly because of her age, and follows
government advice to shield at home, not even venturing out
for walks. The model calculates her probability of eventual
severe COVID-19 if she gets it as above average at 0.07%,
but also a 99.85% chance she will not become infected at all.
C. The urban Asian bus driver
Rajiv is a 35-year-old London bus driver of Indian origin.
He is a fitness enthusiast and takes care to maintain a healthy
weight. Despite that, he has type 1 diabetes. He gave up
smoking last year. Rajiv does not observe any religion, and
he lives in a comfortable home with no overcrowding. He
takes care not to mix with other people too much outside of
work, and he feels confident he will not become too ill even
if he does catch COVID-19 because of his youth and his
commitment to fitness. The model predicts his probability of
eventually contracting severe COVID-19 at 0.04%, slightly
higher than that of the general population. He is more likely
than the average person to contract some degree of COVID19, with a 99.73% chance of not contracting it at all.
D. The African hospital orderly
Victor is a 29-year-old Oxford hospital orderly, Black, of
Ghanaian origin. His weight is normal, he has never smoked
and has no known medical conditions. He goes regularly to
an evangelical church but otherwise avoids other people at
the moment, although he has to use public transport to travel

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

to work. He lives with a flatmate who works from home. He VIII. FUTURE WORK
has been in contact with patients with COVID-19 symptoms
The revised complete BN model, which includes both the
at work although he does not work in a COVID-19 ward and
extended background risks and infection possibility
has not knowingly been in close contact with a confirmed
described in this report together with the extended set of
COVID-19 patient. The model predicts a 0.2% chance of
symptoms described in (Butcher 2020), can be seen in the
severe COVID-19 – 10 times that of the general population Appendix.
and only an 97.64% chance of not contracting the disease at
More work needs to be done on immunity possibility, test
all.
types and results, and prevalence and infectiousness of
E. The Chinese schoolgirl
asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic COVID-19 as more
Yun Chee is an 11-year-old Chinese schoolgirl living in
evidence becomes available. In general, the model needs to
London. She is of normal weight, has no underlying medical
be constantly updated to keep up with the fast-developing
conditions, and is not religious. She had only been to school
state of scientific knowledge.
a few times in the past months until her school reopened in
The power of the Bayesian model could be more
September. She has also started going on playdates and
explicitly
leveraged by including interventions such as “go to
sleepovers with her friends. She lives in a small house with
school”, “wear a mask” or “take public transport”.
her parents and grandparents, with one bathroom and one
kitchen. Yun Chee has a lower-than-average probability of
If the network were to be used for policy-making rather
0.01% of contracting severe COVID-19, the model predicts,
than personal risk assessment, counterfactuals such as “close
but almost double the average probability of eventually
international borders”, “shut down pubs” or “postpone
having it asymptomatically, at 0.13%. This is a risk that
exams” could be added, taking advantage of another
should be monitored closely and may need to be adjusted
characteristic of Bayesian networks. Utility nodes could also
according to observational data as schools remain open.
be added - for example, to model the positive utility of
recommencing education against the negative utility of
VII. CONCLUSION
increasing infection risks.
A Bayesian network such as the one presented here could
be a powerful tool for evaluating individual risk as countries
around the world seek to lift lockdown measures without
REFERENCES
releasing a second wave of coronavirus. It is more nuanced
Abate, T., 2020. Stanford researchers help develop
than current health advice and more comprehensive than
privacy-focused coronavirus alert app. Stanford(California):
other privacy-preserving contact-tracing apps that have been
s.n.
proposed. Its efficacy does depend on a sense of social
responsibility but it can also help breed that responsibility by
Allington, D. et al., 2020. Getting used to life under
heightening risk awareness.
lockdown? Coronavirus in the UK, London: s.n.
Testing the network presents several challenges, and
mainly consists of running numerous scenarios to validate the
model against what data there is:
•

•
•
•

There are as yet very few general-population studies
of COVID-19, meaning that almost all the
knowledge we have so far is based on hospital
patients.
The studies that do exist are observational, not
experimental.
Little is known about how many people have
COVID-19 without symptoms, as has been noted in
(Neil, et al., 2020).
As soon as an observation is entered into the model,
it no longer represents general population data.

However, the first three of these problems are relevant for
any predictive model. In the circumstances, a causal
probabilistic model that uses expert knowledge is likely to be
a better tool than other types of statistical analysis.
There are a few studies emerging that, while still not
general-population surveys, do include people who are not ill
or infected and provide valuable material for cross-checking
probabilities. One such example is (Poletti, et al., 2020), a
study of 64,252 close contacts of 21,410 COVID-19 cases in
Lombardy, Italy who were tested between February and April
2020. This study was aimed at discovering the probability of
developing symptoms given infection, and was conditioned
on age and sex. As testing becomes more prevalent and more
such studies are possible, the Bayesian model can be further
adjusted to reflect the latest state of knowledge.

Asher, S., 2020. Coronavirus: Why Singapore turned to
wearable
contact-tracing
tech.
[Online]
Available at: https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology53146360
[Accessed 8 August 2020].
Blackshaw, J. et al., 2020. Excess Weight and COVID-19
Insights from new evidence, London: s.n.
British Medical Association, 2020. British Medical
Association.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.bma.org.uk/bma-mediacentre/bma-calls-for-tangible-and-urgent-action-inresponse-to-public-health-england-s-latest-review-intocovid-19-impact-on-bame-communities
[Accessed 9 August 2020].
Butcher R. 2020. Extending the range of symptoms in a
Bayesian Network for the Predictive Diagnosis of COVID19, Queen Mary University of London prep-print
Caramelo, F., Ferreira, N. & Oliveiros, B., 2020.
Estimation of risk factors for COVID-19 mortality preliminary results. s.l.:s.n.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2020. Care
for
Children.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/hcp/pediatrichcp.html#:~:text=A%20recent%20systematic%20review%2
0estimated,of%20pediatric%20infections%20are%20asympt

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

omatic.
[Accessed 21 August 2020].
Chan, S., 2020. COVID-19 Contact Tracing Apps Reach
9% Adoption In Most Populous Countries. [Online]
Available at: https://sensortower.com/blog/contact-tracingapp-adoption
[Accessed 21 August 2020].
Clark, A. et al., 2020. Global, regional and national
estimates of the population at increased risk of severe
COVID-19 due to underlying health conditions in 2020: a
modelling study. The Lancet, 8(8), pp. E1003-E1017.
CoEpi, 2020. CoEpi: Community Epidemiology in Action.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.coepi.org/
[Accessed 21 August 2020].
Docherty, A. B. et al., 2020. Features of 20 133 patients
in hospital with covid-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical
Characterisation Protocol: prospective observational cohort
study. The BMJ, 22 May.
Dryhurst, S. et al., 2020. Risk perceptions of COVID-19
around the world. Journal of Risk Research, 5 May.
Emami, A., Jayanmardi, F., Pirbonyeh, N. & Akbari, A.,
2020. Prevalence of Underlying Diseases in Hospitalized
Patients with COVID-19: a Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis. Archives of Academic Emergency Medicine, 24
March.
Evgeniou, T. et al., 2020. Presonalised COVID-19
Isolation and Exit Policies Using Clinical Risk Predictions.
s.l.:s.n.
Fenton, N., 2020. A note on 'Collider bias undermines our
understanding of COVID-19 disease risk and severity' and
how causal Bayesian networks both expose and resolve the
problem, London: arXiv.
Fenton, N. E. et al., 2020. A privacy-preserving Bayesian
network model for personalised COVID19 risk assessment
and contact tracing. London: medRxiv.
Ferretti, L. et al., 2020. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2
transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact
tracing. Science, 8 May.368(6491).
Funk, S., Gilad, E., Watkins, C. & Jansen, V. A. A., 2009.
The spread of awareness and its impact on epidemic
outbreaks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 21 April, 106(16), pp. 67826877.
Gebhard, C. et al., 2020. Impact of sex and gender on
COVID-19 outcomes in Europe. Biology of Sex Differences,
25 May.Volume 11.

Judah, J., 2020. After N.Y.C. Outbreak, Fearful British
ultra-Orthodox Fight to Stave Off Coronavirus, London:
Haaretz.
Kretzschmar, M. E. et al., 2020. Impact of delays on
effectiveness of contact tracing strategies for COVID-19: a
modelling study. The Lancet, 16 July, 5(8), pp. E452-E459.
Mackenzie, D., 2020. Race, COVID Mortality, and
Simpson's Paradox. Los Angeles(California): UCLA.
Miyara, M. et al., 2020. Low rate of daily smokers in
patients with symptomatic COVID-19, Paris: medRxiv.
National Center for Health Statistics, 2020. CDC.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/vsrr/covid_weekly/index.ht
m?fbclid=IwAR3-wrg3tTKK59tOHPGAHWFVO3DfslkJ0KsDEPQpWmPbKtp6EsoVV2
Qs1Q#ExcessDeaths
[Accessed 1 September 2020].
Neil, M., Fenton, N., Osman, M. & McLachlan, S., 2020.
Bayesian network analysis of Covid-19 data reveals higher
infection prevalence rates and lower fatality rates than widely
reported. Journal of Risk Research, 29 June.
Office for National Statistics, 2020. Comparisons of allcause mortality between European countries and regions:
January to June 2020, London: UK government.
Office for National Statistics, 2020. Coronavirus
(COVID-19)
Infection
Survey
Pilot.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/he
althandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronavir
uscovid19infectionsurveypilot/englandwalesandnorthernirel
and2october2020
[Accessed 5 October 2020].
Office for National Statistics, 2020. ons.gov.uk. [Online]
Available
at:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/bir
thsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/coronaviruscovid19re
lateddeathsbyethnicgroupenglandandwales/2march2020to15
may2020
[Accessed 20 August 2020].
Office for National Statistics, 2020. Which occupations
have the highest potential exposure to the coronavirus
(COVID-19)?.
[Online]
Available
at:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopl
einwork/employmentandemployeetypes/articles/whichoccup
ationshavethehighestpotentialexposuretothecoronaviruscovi
d19/2020-05-11
[Accessed 9 August 2020].

Genomics England, 2020. Genomics England. [Online]
Available
at:
https://www.genomicsengland.co.uk/genomics-englandgenomicc-nhs-covid-19/
[Accessed 9 August 2020].

Orlando, V. et al., 2020. Development and validation of a
clinical risk score to predict the risk of SARS-CoV-2 infection
from administrative data: a population-based cohort study
from Italy. s.l.:s.n.

Hinch, R. et al., 2020. Effective Configurations of a
Digital Contact Tracing App: A report to NHSX, s.l.: s.n.

Pareek, M. et al., 2020. Ethnicity and COVID-19: an
urgent public health research priority. The Lancet,
395(10234), pp. 1421-1422.

Huang, Y., Sun, M. & Sui, Y., 2020. How Digital Contact
Tracing Slowed Covid-19 in East Asia. Harvard Business
Review, 15 April.

Park, S., Choi, G. J. & Ko, H., 2020. Information
Technology-Based Tracing in Response to COVID-19 in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

South Korea - Privacy Controversies. JAMA Network, 23
April.
Petrakis, D. et al., 2020. Obesity - a risk factor for
increased COVID-19 prevalence, severity and lethality.
Molecular Medicine Reports, 22(1), pp. 9-19.
Poletti, P. et al., 2020. Probability of symptoms and
critical disease after SARS-CoV-2 infection, Ithaca: s.n.
Rasker, R. et al., 2020. Apps Gone Rogue: Maintaining
Personal Privacy in an Epidemic. Boston(Massachusetts):
arXiv.org.
Rhodes, J. et al., 2020. Prespective: Vitamin D deficiency
and COVID-19 severity - plausibly linked by latitude,
ethnicity, impacts on cytokines, ACE2 and thrombosis.
Journal of Internet Medicine, 2 July.
Smyth, C. & Wright, O., 2020. [Online]
Available
at:
https://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/coronavirus-failedtracing-app-repackaged-to-tell-users-their-risk-ratingsl88n3zhnx
[Accessed 6 August 2020].

Takahashi, T. et al., 2020. Sex differences in immune
responses that underlie COVID-19 disease outcomes. Nature,
26 August.
The OpenSAFELY Collaborative,
associated
with
COVID-19-related
OpenSAFELY. Nature, 1 July.

2020. Factors
death
using

Verity, R. et al., 2020. Estimates of the severity of
coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. The
Lancet, 1 June, 20(6), pp. 669-677.
Zoe, 2020. COVID Symptom Study. [Online]
Available
at:
https://covid.joinzoe.com/
[Accessed 30 August 2020].
Zyl-Smit, R. N. v., Richards, G. & Leone, F. T., 2020.
Tobacco Smoking and COVID-19 infection. The Lancet, 25
May, 8(7), pp. 664-665.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

APPENDIX
This appendix shows the full model, followed by the nodes on which I worked and details how I arrived at their probability
tables.

A. FULL MODEL

The model, entitled “CombinedModelForContactTracing.cmpx” can be downloaded at Norman Fenton’s home page
http://www.eecs.qmul.ac.uk/~norman/Models/ and can be run using trial software from agenarisk.com.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

B. NODES
The nodes are presented in the following sections:
1. Ethnicity
2. Religion
3. Other major background risk factors
4. Underlying medical conditions
5. Risk factors (combined)
6. Risk conditioned on age
7. Infection risks
8. Outcomes
Other nodes were either inherited from an earlier version of the model or were worked on by my
colleague Rachel Butcher.
1. ETHNICITY

These data were taken from the latest population estimates (2019) by the Office for National Statistics.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/articles/researchreport
onpopulationestimatesbyethnicgroupandreligion/2019-12-04.
They are only for England and Wales but I decided that extrapolating the proportions to the rest of the UK was preferable
to taking the 2011 Census statistics for the whole of the UK.
I supplemented this with government statistics on the Chinese ethnic group. https://www.ethnicity-factsfigures.service.gov.uk/summaries/chinese-ethnic-group.
It seemed important to separate Chinese from other Asian groups because of the very different health and cultural profiles
of Chinese and South Asian.
It would also have been useful to separate Black African and Black Caribbean, for the same reasons.
2. RELIGION

These data came from the ONS via a 2015 Freedom of Information request.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/aboutus/transparencyandgovernance/freedomofinformationfoi/ethnicityandreligionbyage
The absolute numbers in the xls file are normalised by the AgenaRisk software to add up to 1 in each column.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3. BACKGROUND RISK FACTORS
3.a. AGE

I used data from the same FOI request as for the Religion node above.
The numbers needed some rearranging into the age groupings I had chosen. Here and in other similar situations I used this
population-distribution calculator from the ONS to weight the results:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/articles/overviewof
theukpopulation/august2019
3.b. SEX

Data
source:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/bulletins/annualmidye
arpopulationestimates/mid2019estimates
3.c. OBESITY

These data were taken from the NHS Health Survey for England 2017. (I could not find such detailed data in more recent
surveys.)
https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/health-survey-for-england/2017
There were separate government figures available on obesity by ethnicity:
https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/health/diet-and-exercise/overweight-adults/latest
But I was unable to find data on obesity by all three factors. I decided in favour of age and sex because a quick Excel
analysis suggested they were bigger influencers of obesity than ethnicity. I was also able to capture some of the relationship
between ethnicity and obesity by conditioning diabetes on ethnicity (see Diabetes section below).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3.d. SMOKING

Data
are
from
here:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/healthandlifeexpectancies/bulletins/adultsmoki
nghabitsingreatbritain/2019#data-on-smokers-who-have-quit-and-smokers-who-intend-to-quit-great-britain-1974-to-2019
The numbers are for adults aged 16 and above. I decided to assume there were no smokers aged below 16, given that
numbers would be small and risks at that age, in terms of indicating an underlying health condition, would be minimal.
3.e. UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITION

These are rough approximations conditioned on smoking and obesity status. The probabilities are altered by backward
inference when an observation is made for any specific medical condition.

4. UNDERLYING CONDITIONS:
I took the risk classification from here: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coronavirus-covid-19/people-at-higher-risk/whosat-higher-risk-from-coronavirus/
For each underlying condition, I first took the classification of high- or medium-risk, summed the total high-risk and
medium-risk patients, and then calculated how probable this particular condition was given an overall rating of high or medium
for “underlying medical condition”.
HIGH RISK
organ
cancer cystic
sickle
TOTAL HIGH
number of cases
53000 2900000
10500
15000
2978500
% of population
0%
4%
0%
% of high risk
1.80% 97.30%
0.40%
0.50%
% of all underlying
MODERATE RISK
asthma COPD heart
diabetes kidney
liver
Parkinson's motor MS
cerebral pregnant TOTAL MODERATE
number of cases
5400000 1500000 2300000 4700000
3000000
9300
145000
5000 130000 30000 549000 17768300
% of population
8%
2%
4%
7%
5%
0%
0%
0%
0%
0%
1%
% of moderate risk
30.39% 8.44% 12.94% 26.45%
16.88%
0.05%
0.82%
0.03% 0.73% 0.17%
3.09%
% of all underlying
26% 7.23% 11.10% 22.70%
14.50%
0.04%
0.70%
0.02% 0.63% 0.14%
2.65%

4.a. ORGAN TRANSPLANT

https://www.organdonation.nhs.uk/get-involved/news/more-than-50-000-now-alive-thanks-to-organ-donations/
4.b. CANCER

https://www.macmillan.org.uk/_images/cancer-statistics-factsheet_tcm9-260514.pdf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.c. CYSTIC FIBROSIS

https://www.cysticfibrosis.org.uk/what-is-cysticfibrosis/faqs#:~:text=Around%2010%2C500%20people%20in%20the,100%2C000%20people%20in%20the%20world.
4.d. SICKLE CELL DISEASE

https://www.sicklecellsociety.org/about-sicklecell/#:~:text=4%20Approximately%2015%2C000%20people%20in,in%20the%20UK%20every%20year.&text=7%20Childr
en%20with%20SCD%20are,ages%20of%202%20and%2016
4.e. ASTHMA

https://www.asthma.org.uk/about/media/facts-and-statistics/
4.f. HEART DISEASE

https://www.bhf.org.uk/what-we-do/our-research/heart-statistics

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.g. DIABETES

https://www.diabetes.org.uk/resources-s3/2017-11/diabetes_in_the_uk_2010.pdf
4.h. COPD

https://www.hse.gov.uk/statistics/causdis/copd.pdf
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-copd/causes/
4.i. LIVER DISEASE

https://www.statista.com/statistics/1036415/prevalence-of-cirrhosis-in-the-uk-by-gender/
4.j. PARKINSON’S DISEASE

https://www.parkinsons.org.uk/professionals/news/parkinsons-diagnoses-riseuk#:~:text=The%20number%20of%20people%20diagnosed,350%20adults%20in%20the%20UK

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.k. CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE

https://www.renalreg.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/06-Chap-06.pdf
4.l. CEREBRAL PALSY

https://thepacecentre.org/information-centre/stats-facts/
4.m. MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/multiple-sclerosis-prevalence-incidence-and-smoking-status/multiplesclerosis-prevalence-incidence-and-smoking-status-data-briefing
4.n. MOTOR NEURONE DISEASE

https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/brain-nerves-and-spinal-cord/motor-neurone-diseasemnd#:~:text=Motor%20neurone%20disease%20is%20a%20rare%20condition%20that%20affects%20around,although%20th
is%20is%20extremely%20rare.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.o. PREGNANCY

https://www.statista.com/statistics/297718/conception-rate-per-thousand-women-in-england-and-wales-by-age/
5. RISK FACTORS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6. RISK CONDITIONED ON AGE

7. INFECTION RISKS
7.a. OCCUPATION

https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/workforce-and-business/workforce-diversity/nhs-workforce/latest
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/908434/Disparities_in_t
he_risk_and_outcomes_of_COVID_August_2020_update.pdf
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/812539/Schools_Pupils
_and_their_Characteristics_2019_Main_Text.pdf
https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/cbp7857/#:~:text=In%20academic%20year%202018%2F19,at%20UK%20higher%20education%20institutions.&text=There%2
0were%20just%20over%20700%2C000,2019%20and%20541%2C000%20were%20accepted.
7.b. OVERCROWDED HOUSEHOLD

https://www.ethnicity-facts-figures.service.gov.uk/housing/housing-conditions/overcrowded-households/latest
https://www.jpr.org.uk/documents/JPR_Census_Jewish_families_and_Jewish_households_report_March_2015.pdf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7.c. CONTACT WITH SYMPTOMATIC COVID-19 PERSON

7.d. CONTACT WITH CONFIRMED COVID-19 PERSON

https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/nhs-test-and-trace-england-and-coronavirus-testing-uk-statistics-6-augustto-12-august-2020/weekly-statistics-for-nhs-test-and-trace-england-and-coronavirus-testing-uk-6-august-to-12-august
7.e. INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER PEOPLE

7.f. AMOUNT OF CONTACT WITH VIRUS

8. OUTCOMES
8.a. INFECTED WITH COVID-19

Government community infection survey pilot:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronavirus
covid19infectionsurveypilot/englandandwales21august2020
8.b. CURRENT TIME SINCE INFECTION IF INFECTED

This on how long COVID-19 remains infectious: https://covid.joinzoe.com/post/covid-long-term
And this on incubation period: https://www.acpjournals.org/doi/10.7326/M20-0504

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8.c. CURRENT COVID-19 STATUS

https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsanddiseases/bulletins/coronavirus
covid19infectionsurveypilot/englandandwales21august2020
8.d. EVENTUAL COVID-19 STATUS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.20.20215814; this version posted October 21, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

