medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Digital contact-tracing during the Covid-19 pandemic: an analysis of
newspaper coverage in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland
Short title:
Newspaper coverage of Covid-19 digital contact-tracing apps in Germany, Austria and
Switzerland
Julia Amann1*, Joanna Sleigh1, Effy Vayena1
1 Chair

of Bioethics, ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland

* Corresponding

author

E-Mail: julia.amann@hest.ethz.ch

Abstract
Governments around the globe have started to develop and deploy digital contact
tracing apps to gain control over the spread of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19). The
appropriateness and usefulness of these technologies as a containment measure have since
sparked political and academic discussions globally. The present paper contributes to this
debate through an exploration of how the national daily newspapers in Germany, Austria, and
Switzerland reported on the development and adoption of digital contact-tracing apps during
early and after stages of the lockdown. These countries were among the first in Europe to
develop apps and were critical voices in the debate of decentralized vs. centralized data
processing. We conducted thematic analysis on news coverage published between January and
May 2020 in high-circulation national daily newspapers (print) from Germany, Austria, and
Switzerland. A total of 148 newspaper articles were included in the final analysis. From our
analysis emerged six core themes of the development and adoption of digital contact tracing
apps: 1) data governance; 2) role of IT giants; 3) scientific rigor; 4) voluntariness; 5) functional
efficacy; 6) role of the app. These results shed light on the different facets of discussion
regarding digital contact tracing as portrayed in German-speaking media. As news coverage
can serve as a proxy for public perception, this study complements emerging survey data on
public perceptions of digital contact tracing apps by identifying potential issues of public
concern.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Covid19 outbreak and pandemic
The novel coronavirus (Covid-19), first detected late 2019 in China, quickly reached
global proportions, leading the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare a pandemic on
March 11, 2020. Researchers found the virus to be highly contagious with cases ranging from
asymptomatic to severe respiratory infections.[1] To control the outbreak, several countries
went into lockdown, an approach that restricted individual freedom of movement, hurt the
economy, and abruptly halted international travel. While such draconic measures succeeded in
containing the virus and reducing transmission rates [2, 3], their full economic and societal
impact remains unclear. As governments then began to restart economic and social life post
lockdown, the need grew for suitable exit strategies to prevent a second wave of infections that
would overwhelm healthcare systems.[3-5] To this end, many lands and states introduced
several non-pharmaceutical interventions, including social distancing and hygiene policies.
Among such interventions, the identification and isolation of positive cases through contact
tracing plays an instrumental role.[6]

Digital contact tracing
Since the Covid-19 outbreak began, digital contact tracing’s usefulness as a
containment measure has sparked political discussions globally.[7] As one of the oldest public
health disease methods, contact tracing works by public health experts identifying infected
individuals, isolating them and then finding out with whom they came in contact. Digital
contact tracing expands on this by harnessing mobile technologies such as GPS, Bluetooth or
QR codes, to digitally track and notify users about their interactions with potentially infected

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

individuals.[8] This automated and digital approach thus offers governments a more costeffective and easily scalable method than traditional contact tracing.[9]
Given such advantages, several countries have or are in the process of developing
Covid-19 digital contact tracing mobile applications. Asian countries with previous experience
of SARS, in particular China and Singapore, quickly took on a pioneering role, capitalizing on
their well-developed digital infrastructures to deploy contact tracing apps amongst other digital
disease surveillance methods. Concurrently, researchers in Europe formed collaborations to
work on contact-tracing solutions, with one of the first being the Pan-European PrivacyPreserving Proximity Tracing (PEPP-PT) consortium. Austria was then among the first
countries in Europe to deploy a digital contact-tracing app. Their “Stopp Corona-App”,
launched by the Austrian Red Cross, was available for download from March 25, 2020. In
Germany, the Robert Koch Institute launched its “Corona-Warn-App” on June 16, 2020.
Switzerland's “SwissCovid-App”, jointly developed by the two Swiss federal institutes of
technology (EPFL and ETH), then followed on June 25th. These German speaking countries
use digital contact tracing as a tool solely to support mitigation and containment, contrasting
to other countries (like Taiwan, Singapore and Poland) that use digital contact tracing apps to
enforce quarantine measures.

Challenges and opportunities of digital contact tracing
The academic community rapidly responded to this surge in digital contact-tracing
solutions. Critics argued that such apps bring to the fore several ethical and technical
challenges. To begin, scholars questioned the approach’s accuracy. Experts highlighted the low
data quality and Bluetooth technology’s inaccuracy for proximity tracing, and that including
citizen’s self-diagnosis along with official validated tests propagates false positives.[7, 10]
Furthermore, although a significant percent of the population needs to participate for efficacy,
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in countries like Singapore the adoption rate has been below 20%.[11] The opt-in approach can
thus undermine effectiveness through lack of critical mass, however making it mandatory
would sacrifice autonomy.[12, 13] Furthermore, there are short and long-term surveillance and
privacy concerns.[8] Critics highlight that digital contact tracing operationalizes a large-scale
surveillance system that could outlive the pandemic.[14] Others draw attention to potential
privacy breaches, the questionable reliability of anonymization, the national differences in data
protection and privacy regulations, as well as the weaknesses of centralized report
processing.[15, 16] Despite this myriad of concerns and challenges, proponents maintain that
digital contact tracing, when combined with other measures, careful oversight, and abidance to
data protection regulations and protocols through privacy preserving technological options, can
reduce transmission rates and allow for a relaxation of measures.[13]

Public perceptions of digital contact tracing
Despite a rapidly growing body of official recommendations and academic literature,
to date, evidence on end-users perceptions and adoption behavior of digital contact tracing apps
is only starting to emerge.[17, 18] Many studies on the topics use online surveys to collect data
on public perceptions. For example, one survey of the Swiss public in April and May found
that almost three-quarters of the Swiss population (72%) said that they would be willing to
install such an app if it could help slow down the spread of the corona virus and shorten the
length of the lockdown.[19] Yet, a July survey of the Swiss public indicated that only 1 out of
3 citizens downloaded the SwissCovid app, with the main reasons against being not having a
suitable smartphone (28%), perceiving it as not useful (26%) and privacy concerns (24%).[12]
These studies start to reveal differences between declared download intentions and actual
download and usage behavior, a phenomenon known as the intention-behavior gap.[20]

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

However, while several surveys are currently underway, to date, evidence on public
perceptions and usage intentions remains scarce and inconclusive.
Another way to explore public views on digital contact tracing apps is by looking at
how the media frame these technologies. News media represent an important source of
information through which the public learns about health issues and new technologies. Despite
the decline in print and move towards digitalization, newspapers still serve as useful proxies
for reporting across other channels.[21] Evidenced by earlier work, news media can shape
public perceptions of a given topic in different ways, namely through: the amount of coverage
of a particular topic during a given time; the specific content of media messages; and the tone
of coverage.[22] In the field of crisis and risk communication, research also shows that news
coverage influences public risk perception and can impact community health behaviors and
practices.[23-26]

Study Aims
Building on this literature this study aims to investigate how national daily newspapers
in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland report on the development and adoption of digital
contact-tracing apps during early and after stages of the lockdown. Findings of this study are
timely and can inform the rapidly evolving technical and political work on digital contact
tracing apps. By understanding how the media frame digital contact-tracing apps, government
and health departments can more strategically communicate with the public. The identification
of what information and issues are most prevalent in the media can further help to direct efforts
that address public concerns to support public acceptance and uptake of digital contact tracing
apps.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Materials and Methods
We conducted a thematic analysis [27] of newspaper articles from Germany, Austria,
and Switzerland published between January and May 2020 reporting on the development and
adoption of smartphone apps for digital contact-tracing during the Covid-19 pandemic. In
contrast to qualitative content analysis, which uses a descriptive approach to coding and
interpreting quantitative counts of the codes, thematic analysis seeks to present a purely
qualitative, detailed, and nuanced account of the data analyzed.[28]

Data collection
For this study, we focused on news coverage of digital contact-tracing apps in highcirculation national daily newspapers (print) from Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. We
chose to focus on these countries, as they were among the first in Europe to develop digital
contact tracing apps, and were key voices in the debate of decentralized vs. centralized data
processing. In our selection, we included broadsheet and tabloid press to cover a wide sample
of newspapers with various readership profiles.[29] We retrieved newspaper articles from the
Factiva global news monitoring and search engine on May 29, 2020, using the search strategy
displayed in Textbox 1. We chose to focus our search on the first months of the pandemic (JanMay 2020) to cover periods pre-lockdown, during lockdown, and the beginnings of post
lockdown. The search yielded a total of 459 news articles. As part of an initial full-text
screening, we filtered out duplicates and news items that did not, or, only briefly mentioned
digital contact-tracing apps.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

-

Time period: 01.01.2020-29.05.2020

-

Search terms: “contact-tracing” OR “corona-app” OR “proximity-tracing”

-

Language: German

- Source: national daily newspapers (print) in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland
o D: Süddeutsche Zeitung, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Die Welt, Bild
o A: Der Standard, Die Presse, Kurier (Krone Zeitung: not available)
o CH: Tages Anzeiger, NZZ, Blick
Textbox 1. Search strategy.

Data analysis
Eligibility screening led to the inclusion of 153 news articles which we imported into
MAXQDA (VERBI Software, 2019), a qualitative data analysis software. After an additional
round of full-text screening, 5 articles were removed because they did not fully meet the
inclusion criteria. A total of 148 news articles were included in the final analysis.
To develop a draft coding scheme, the research team first deductively identified content
areas of interest based on digital contact tracing’s political and academic discourse. In a first
coding phase, the researchers extended this preliminary codebook through an additional round
of full-text screening, following an inductive approach. During this stage, the researchers used
memos to document coding category descriptions and instructions about their use.[30] In the
next step, two researchers (JA, JS) independently applied the preliminary codebook to a subsample of the articles (N=30). During this process, new coding categories were added, and
others merged, modified, or removed. Codes were assigned to text written directly by the
journalist as well as quotes from interviews. The two researchers iteratively compared their
coding and refined the codebook. The refined codebook was then again applied to a sub-sample
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

of the articles (N=10) by both researchers independently. Intercoder reliability corrected for
agreement by chance (Cohen’s Kappa) indicated an average reliability of 0.97. One researcher
(JA) coded the remaining articles. During regular meetings, we finally gathered and collated
codes into overarching themes in an iterative process guided by the study aim. Exemplary
extracts are provided to illustrate our findings.

Results
In the search period (Jan-May 2020), we identified a total of 148 articles that focused
on digital contact tracing. These were published between March 19 and May 29, 2020 and
came from nine newspapers. The majority of articles (69 articles, 46.6%) were Austrian, from
the newspapers: Der Standard (17 articles), Die Presse (30 articles), and Kurier (22 articles).
Germany had 26 articles (17.6%) from Bild (2 articles), Die Welt (13 articles), and the
Süddeutsche Zeitung (11 articles). From Switzerland were 53 articles (35.6% articles) from
Blick (12 articles), Neue Zürcher Zeitung (23 articles), and Tages Anzeiger (18 articles). Fig 1
shows the distribution of articles over time alongside key events in each region during the
investigated period. Note, Fig 1 only reports Austria’s launch of a contact tracing app, as
Germany and Switzerland had not released their apps during the time this research was carried
out.

Fig 1. Distribution of analyzed articles published between March 19 and May 29, 2020.
Colors represent regions represented. Important events are also plotted.

Based on our analysis, we identified six core themes in the news coverage on the
development and adoption of digital contact tracing apps: 1) data governance; 2) role of IT
giants; 3) scientific rigor; 4) voluntariness; 5) functional efficacy; 6) role of the app. An
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

overview of the themes is presented in Fig 2. As well, we observed no apparent regional
differences in the occurrence of themes in the news coverage. Fig 3, however, highlights how
discussions of app development and app adoption went hand in hand, with app adoption themes
slightly more present.

Fig 2. Results of the thematic analysis.

Fig 3. Theme occurrences per article over time.

App development
Data Governance
Data governance was a central theme in news coverage on digital contact tracing apps.
It encompasses discussions surrounding the collection, storage, and access to data generated
by digital contact tracing apps, covering also related issues of data protection, privacy, and
anonymity. A primary point of debate was whether apps should store data centrally or
decentralized, with arguments for both approaches being acknowledged. One article indicated
that with a centralized approach “only an anonymized code is centrally recorded from infected
persons” (Tages Anzeiger, 11 May) and that the aggregated data might help authorities “to
better understand the virus and its spread and the effectiveness of their containment measures.”
(NZZ, 17 April). Several other articles, in contrast, warned against central solutions for reasons
of data protection. One article explained, “even if the technology only stores anonymous
numbers instead of names, a reconstruction or de-anonymization would be possible based on
the data.” (Die Welt, 21 April). Bolstering support for decentralized approaches was then an
open letter from 300 researchers pleading not to “create a tool that would make it possible,
now or in the future, to collect data on the population on a large scale,” (Tages Anzeiger, 22
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

April). This letter marked the escalation of a dispute amongst the Pan-European PrivacyPreserving Proximity Tracing (Pepp-PT) consortium.
Linked to data governance, data protection was another key subtheme. To start, some
articles detailed how, unless carefully developed, contact tracing apps would undermine
privacy, meaning the ability to control who can access or use ones’ data. Several articles thus
called for ‘privacy by design’, reasoning that “we are not a flock of sheep, but lead our own
lives, red lines must not be crossed in tracking tools.” (Die Presse, 28 April). Even though one
article indicated that “experts largely agree on the criteria an app and its underlying software
must meet to ensure that data and privacy are protected” (NZZ, 14 April), the dispute around
centralized vs. decentralized approaches suggests otherwise.
Articles also stressed the importance of ensuring anonymity, meaning “that the data is
secure and anonymous and that no one, especially not the state, will access it.” (Die Presse, 3
May). In regards to the Austrian app, one article explained that to protect privacy, an integrated
statistics function was removed “because it would have allowed users to be identified and
traced.” (Die Presse, 17 May). Also in Germany, articles discussed how exactly data would be
collected “solely to let users know whether they have been in close contact with other, already
infected users - without revealing their identity” (Süddeutsche Zeitung, 16 May). Several
articles went further into technical details regarding how anonymized IDs and decentralized
systems could mask user identities (e.g. NZZ, 18 April).
Articles also contextualized privacy trade-offs in terms of western vs. eastern values
and cultures. Some articles used Eastern countries as warning examples - “in contrast to tracing
apps, such as those used in Asian countries, the privacy of users should therefore be protected
according to European standards.” (NZZ, 16 April). South Korea’s “surveillance state”
approach (NZZ, 28 March), and China’s extensive data collection (Süddeutsche Zeitung, 16
May) repeatedly came up in such discussions.
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Role of IT giants
The theme “Role of IT giants” covered aspects related to the role of technology
companies in the app development phase. When reporting on the role of IT giants, Apple and
Google were most frequently named. On the one hand, several articles portrayed these
companies as supportive collaborators who joined forces to help governments and the global
community fight covid-19 through the development of contact tracing technologies. “The
companies are working together to pave the way for Corona apps on the software side.” (Die
Presse, 28 April).
On the other hand, many articles portrayed the companies as dominant and powerful
decision-makers, questioning Europe’s dependency on US corporations and infrastructures.
For example, one article reported that the German government’s pivot from a centralised to
decentralized approach was motivated mainly because Google and Apple did not support a
centralized approach. Another article went so far as to say that the big IT players would “force
governments to save and analyze corona data in a certain way” thereby “disempowering
democratically legitimized decision makers” (Süddeutsche Zeitung, May 27). Highlighted was
also how the big tech players were gatekeepers that “dominate the market for mobile operating
systems” (Süddeutsche Zeitung, April 27). As one article stated “the app will only achieve
wide dissemination once it is possible to download it in the Google and Apple app stores (Blick,
May 8).
In addition to power dynamic concerns, some articles questioned Apple & Google’s
trustworthiness and commitment to data protection. One article emphasized that “these
companies are not democratically legitimized” and that “they have often proven that they care
about general public interest as little as they care about European laws” (Die Welt, April 28).

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Another article quoted an Austrian politician voicing concerns that “data might flow to giant
companies like Google and Microsoft.” (Kurier, April 15).

Scientific Rigor
The theme “Scientific rigor” encompasses those instances where articles discussed
issues relating to transparency and testing in the app development process. Several articles
discussed the importance of disclosing the source code, “the holy grail of a program” (Die
Presse, May 3). Many of the articles asserted that this disclosure represents an important control
mechanism and that only code subjected to public scrutiny could be officially recommended.
As one article put it: “That means that the source code of the program is publicly accessible,
so that no one can implement a loophole in the software unnoticed” (Tages Anzeiger, April
22). In this context, newspapers also referred to audits by external experts, including hacker
communities and data protection specialists.
Another aspect was communication with the public. In some articles, governments or
politicians were criticized for their lack of transparent communication about the purpose and
functioning of contact tracing apps. One article, for instance, highlighted the need to go beyond
conventional “marketing efforts to calm down the public” and to instead explain “in detail
what data is needed and how the Stopp-Corona-App system works” (Die Presse, April 28).
Similarly, other articles emphasized the need to be transparent “about the integration of
measures into the overall strategy” and to “inform and clearly communicate when and under
which circumstances they will no longer be used” (NZZ, May 5).
Pertinent to the theme of Scientific Rigor, we also identified several articles reporting
on digital contact tracing apps’ pilot or testing phases. In contrast to the disclosure of source
code and communication to the public, pilot phase reports were mostly neutral. In this sense,
articles mainly outlined the setting, and who was involved in pilot-testing. Only a few articles
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

explicitly stated the pilot phase’s purpose, acknowledging that it “can be used to detect
potential flaws of the app and to strengthen its acceptance” (Blick, May 7).

App adoption
Voluntariness
Voluntariness was a recurring theme of app adoption in our analysis. Several articles
addressed the question of whether digital contact tracing apps should be voluntary or
mandatory. Voluntariness was stressed as “an important point when it comes to being in line
with data protection regulations” (NZZ, April 16). Yet, other articles queried whether a
voluntary app could achieve a wide enough adoption to fulfill its purpose, leading to questions
like: “Will the corona-app become mandatory?” (Blick, April 23), “Can it work out with
voluntariness?” (Die Presse, April 28), “Is participation voluntary?” (Die Welt, May 7). In
this context, the issue of proportionality was raised. One article quoted an Austrian data
protection expert stating that a mandatory app would be possible “if the alternative would be
the complete prohibition of many activities” meaning “the corona-app would represent the
lesser of two evils” (Die Presse, April 28). This view was echoed in a Swiss news article, which
outlined the benefits of a mandatory approach, describing it as an “alternative to a lockdown”
whilst acknowledging that “the legal basis is not clarified” (Tages Anzeiger, April 23). In
contrast, another Swiss article quoted a Swiss data protection officer stating that voluntariness
was non-negotiable and that “an obligation would be an unproportionate infringement of
citizen’s self-determination” (NZZ, May 2).
Unsurprisingly, the discourse surrounding the question of voluntariness also evoked
political debate, with parties voicing concerns that the app “would de facto become an entry
ticket to events” and thereby create “an indirect obligation to use the app, at least for those
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

that do not want to be excluded” (Der Standard, April 27). The Austrian government’s
considerations to make the app mandatory led to outrage from the opposition who warned that
the app would become an “electronic ankle monitoring device” (Der Standard, April 6).
Similarly, other articles reported political concerns that even if proclaimed voluntary, the app
could still be “forced based on economic and moral grounds” (Blick, April 30) or subject
individuals to “a great degree of social pressure” (Die Welt, April 2). These articles hinted at
the risk of pressuring conformity, “a soft obligation” (NZZ, April 16), and thereby
discrimination for those unwilling or unable to use the app. As in the case of data protection
and privacy issues, articles often cited warning examples of other particularly Asian countries
where app usage was mandatory.

Functional efficacy
The theme “functional efficacy” captured descriptions on how digital contact tracing
apps function, their technological limitations, and societal aspects related to app download and
usage as prerequisites for successful deployment. Specifically, articles explained in various
levels of detail the technological and logistical workings of app-based contact tracing. For
example, while some articles precisely reported how the apps measured duration and distance,
others would simply refer to “the use of Bluetooth technology to determine which people were
in close contact” (Tages Anzeiger, May 11). Regarding logistics, some articles explained what
users should do if tested positive or receiving the app’s contact-warning message. However,
the information provided wasn’t always clear, with many questionings: “What happens after
receiving a warning via the app?” (Die Welt, April 21). Some articles quoted politicians'
suggestions to favor app users for virus testing and to incentivize quarantine to users who
receive warnings, yet, no information was provided on how such a system would or could be
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

implemented. In an interview, a Swiss epidemiologist acknowledged that “there is a need for
clearly defined processes which still need to be developed” (Tages Anzeiger, April 15). Even
when the Austrian app was already available, open questions remained, such as “What do I do
if someone gives notification about having corona symptoms but did not test yet?” (Die Presse,
April 28).
Within the theme of functional efficacy, we also identified articles that acknowledged
the technological limitations of Bluetooth based apps (the designated technology used in all
three countries). These articles raised important questions as to how to ensure effectiveness
while minimizing the risk of false positives and negatives. One article, for example, explained
there are “hundreds of different smartphones with technically different Bluetooth chips,
antennas with different sending characteristics, smartphone cases with different levels of
damping” (Die Welt, May 7). According to the article, these factors, and that smartphones
might be in a bag could lead to exposure risk underestimation. On the other hand, another
article suggested the overestimation of exposure risk because “the app can only measure
distances, thus also detecting contacts in cases where there is only little risk of infection due to
protective measures, like face masks or glass panels” (NZZ, May 26). Also, the question of
interoperability between different national digital contact tracing apps remained unanswered.
Two frequently addressed aspects were app download and usage intentions. Here,
several articles stated that correct app usage was critical to success and simultaneously the
greatest hurdle. As one article wrote: “The app only makes sense, if it’s used correctly by as
many Austrians as possible” (Kurier, March 24). While some articles reported the actual app
download numbers and users, others provided information on the required download and usage
rates for efficacy. In terms of the needed level of adoption, several articles provided unspecific
numbers, such as “as many people as possible” (Süddeutsche Zeitung, April 28), “millions of
people” (NZZ, April 16), or “enough people” (Die Welt, April 2). Others instead, reported
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

concrete percentages ranging from 20% to 60% of required adoption rates. However, for the
most part, it remained unclear how and by whom these estimates were derived.
Articles also reported surveys on public acceptance and download intentions (e.g. NZZ,
May 26; Bild, May 25; Tages Anzeiger, May 5), and speculated factors promoting or impeding
app adoption. One article, for instance, noted that “centralized data storage could become a
problem as it would most likely undermine public trust and acceptance of the corona-app”
(Die Welt, April 21). Another questioned whether digital contact tracing apps could be
successful “in a county where people worry more about data protection than in Singapore”
(Die Welt, April 24). Yet, other articles were more optimistic. One article quoted a Swiss
politician: “It is about the wider public. They have adhered to the rules in the past weeks - they
will also use the app.” (Blick, May 11). The need of fostering public trust was also frequently
mentioned in relation to public acceptance. Aptly, one article noted that "a question arises not
only technically, but also politically and socially: Who do we trust?" (Die Welt, 28 April).
Others acknowledged that “we are giving the government more and more power to monitor
us.” (Kurier, 15 May) and that “without the trust of citizens voluntary apps will not work”
(NZZ, April 17).

Role of the app
The theme “role of the app” encompasses those instances where articles referred to the
potential role digital contact tracing apps could take on. Although the media’s portrayal of
digital contact tracing apps ranged between positive/optimistic to negative/pessimistic, the
majority of articles took a positive stance. Whereby articles emphasized digital contact tracing
apps as a necessary means to return to normality whilst “avoiding a second wave” (Blick, May
7). They described digital contact tracing apps as “digital helpers that should play a decisive
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

role on the way back to normality after the coronavirus pandemic” (NZZ, April 17) or as a
“necessity for the slow exit from the lockdown” (Die Welt, April 21).
Digital contact tracing apps were also frequently depicted as an important tool that “can
warn individuals when they have had contact with someone who later turns out to be infected”
(Blick, April 30). Similarly, articles reported apps as a means to gain control over the virus i.e.
“keeping reproduction number of the virus below 1” (Tages Anzeiger, May 26); “to slow down
the spread of the virus” (Süddeutsche Zeitung, April 28); “to break the chain of infection”
(Kurier, March 25). Some articles also portrayed the app as a tool to foster self-determination,
responsibility, and solidarity, referring to it as “an instrument for exercising self-determination
and personal responsibility.” (NZZ, May 28).
Despite the predominantly positive coverage, several articles also acknowledged that
digital contact tracing apps are “not a panacea but at best one of many building blocks in the
fight against the virus” (Die Welt, May 27). Along these lines, articles emphasized that digital
contact tracing apps “will not stop the coronavirus on their own.” (Der Standard, April 10) and
that “in the fight against Covid-19, technical solutions are not the most important thing but
people are” (Die Welt, April 24). As such, digital contact tracing was portrayed as “one
instrument of many” (Die Presse, April 28) in the fight against the virus. Articles particularly
emphasized its complementary role to traditional contact tracing: “The planned app is not a
replacement but ‘just’ an addition to conventional contact tracing” (NZZ, May 27).
Finally, there were also articles highlighting the potential dangers of apps as a “lowthreshold entry into a nasty monitoring tool that records movement profiles” (Süddeutsche
Zeitung, April 28) leading to the “installation of a surveillance state” (Kurier, April 15). One
article even referred to the digital contact tracing practices of autocratic regimes as warning
examples that “hollow out their citizens’ privacy via smartphone in favor of the common

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

good”, yet acknowledging that also “western democracies are preparing to have direct access
to data collected via smartphones, in case of emergency” (NZZ, April 14).

Discussion
Scientific evidence, political debates, and media coverage surrounding digital contact
tracing apps continuously evolve in real time and shape public perceptions. In recognition of
this flux, this work documents how in the early stages of the pandemic national daily
newspapers in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland reported on the development and adoption
of digital contact-tracing apps. Being among the first countries in Europe to develop and deploy
digital contact tracing apps, these three German-speaking countries took on a pioneering role
and were key voices in the centralized vs decentralized debate. The news media coverage in
these countries thus presented a particularly rich setting to study. While we did not assess public
response to news coverage, findings of this study can complement emerging survey data on
public perceptions of digital contact tracing apps by identifying potential issues of public
concern.
Our findings indicate that the media discourse was characterized by conflicting views
on the role and modalities of digital contact tracing apps. In particular, debates surrounding
data protection, privacy, and voluntariness were featured prominently in our sample, reflecting
also the academic discourse.[12] When expert controversies occur, the public relies on the
authority of researchers and health professionals as communicated in the media, yet, the
difficulty of judging competing expert claims leads to confusion, for if experts cannot agree,
who should the public trust and follow?[31] Research has shown that conflicting messages can
create skepticism and lead to decreasing public trust in governments’ ability to manage a public
health crisis.[32] Moreover, presenting conflicting expert statements or contradictory data can
decrease an individual's adherence to recommended measures.[33, 34]. The media’s
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

presentation of digital contact tracing apps as controversial could have, therefore, led the public
to be cautious and reluctant to use the app.
Interestingly, the results of our analysis also mirror a growing resistance to
governmental measures and restrictions as demonstrated by Covid-19 protests in European
cities.[35] This anti-establishment sentiment emerged, to a certain extent, in the articles
analyzed. For example, many articles raised questions of whether authorities could be trusted
to uphold data protection and privacy. As well, several articles raised doubts about the
trustworthiness of Google and Apple as dominating US players in contact tracing app
development. Discussing Europe’s dependency on US infrastructures, along with the
questionable data protection practices of these companies could have also spurred mistrust in
governmental efforts. In Switzerland, however, this doesn’t seem to be the case. While a
representative survey carried out at the end of June 2020 indicated that the majority of the
Swiss public would not be willing to install the app mainly due to concerns of data
protection,[36] findings of more recent surveys paint a different picture. One survey conducted
by the University of Zurich, for example, showed that more than half of the respondents (54%)
were willing to download a digital contact tracing app if it were launched by the Swiss Federal
Council, about a third (33%) would do so if the app were launched by the Swiss Federal office
of Public Health, 28% if the publisher was a cantonal government. Fewer respondents would
install an app launched by other organizations (e.g. universities, or international / non-profit
organizations) or technology companies.[19] Findings of the survey further indicated that
limiting the spread of the virus and shortening the duration of the lockdown were main drivers
for willingness to download the app.[19] In line with these findings, a national representative
survey conducted at the end of July found that solidarity was the most important reason for
activating the SwissCovid App.[37] Findings of a German study similarly suggest that app
users perceive the benefits of using the app outweigh potential risks, and they trust that the app
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

can help to slow down the pandemic.[38] These findings mirror the results of our analysis,
which showed that newspapers adopted a predominantly positive stance towards digital contact
tracing apps, highlighting their role to gain control over the virus and facilitate a return to
normality.
A recurrent theme in our analysis related to functional efficacy and the potential
technical and logistical challenges of digital contact tracing apps. Raising awareness to these
issues may have led the public to question the overall effectiveness and usefulness of these
technologies in the fight against the pandemic. Yet, contrary to these issues of functional
efficacy we identified in our analysis, findings of a Swiss national representative survey
indicate that app users are satisfied with the app, judging the installation and functioning of the
app as simple and comprehensible.[37] Only few respondents reported error messages or
unclear notifications. This may indicate that some of the initial problems that were covered by
the news media were resolved. At the time of writing this article, the SwissCovid-App
Monitoring website reported a total of 2’373’287 app downloads and a fairly steady number of
active users ranging between 1’630’000 and 1’600’000 in the period from Sept 9 - Sept 15,
2020.[39] Even though not all downloads convert into active app users, the steady number of
active users does indicate at least some public support. In contrast to these survey results, there
are emerging media reports on technical and logistic issues for the digital contact tracing
apps.[40-42]
According to recent numbers published by the Robert-Koch-Institute, the German
Corona-Warn-App counted 18.2 Mio downloads (as of Sept 15 2020) and an average 1’390
calls to the Corona-Warn-App hotline in the period from Sept 7 - Sept 14, 2020.[43] While no
official data on active app users is available for the Austrian Stopp-Corona-App,[44] findings
of a recently published marketing survey suggest that uptake of the app remains lower in
Austria compared to Germany and Switzerland.[45] Overall, these numbers indicate that app
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

adoption rates remain low - a concern that was already identified by the news media in the
early stages of the pandemic, as shown by our analysis. Thinking of individuals as “conditional
contributors” to the public good, we would expect that they partake in activities they see others
partaking in.[46, 47] This would mean that if the public is given the impression that only few
people are following recommendations to use the app, they may find it fair to also refrain from
using the app themselves. Based on this, the publication of low or stagnating app adoption rates
could undermine the contact tracing app approach.

Limitations
One of the limitations of this study was that the time it was carried out, only Austria
had introduced a digital contact tracing app. This might explain why the majority of included
articles were Austrian. Extending the period of data collection may have resulted in a more
even distribution of samples. Despite this limitation, our analysis captured a wide breadth of
themes that can serve as a basis for identifying public concerns of digital contact tracing apps.
Another limitation was that we focused on daily print newspapers as opposed to popular online
sources of information like social media. However, as outlined by earlier work, newspapers
remain an important source of information that can serve as a proxy for reporting across other
channels.[21] Meaning, that although our findings may not comprehensively portray the public
discourse, they provide a useful overview of how news media depict digital contact tracing
apps.

Conclusion
To be successful, governmental measures, like digital contact tracing apps, need to be
accepted and actively supported by the wider public. Yet, as with other controversial topics,
like vaccination, and as evidenced by the growing number of demonstrations against
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

governmental measures, achieving public consensus on digital contact tracing apps currently
seems unlikely. To foster public trust and acceptance authorities thus need to develop clear and
coherent communication strategies that listens to and addresses public concerns. In times of
uncertainty, with new and sometimes contradicting evidence emerging almost on a daily basis,
this is, however, not an easy task. As news reporting can serve as a proxy to public perception,
findings of this study in complementation to emerging survey data can serve as a basis for
identifying public concerns.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.

Sanche S, Lin YT, Xu C, Romero-Severson E, Hengartner NW, Ke R. The novel
coronavirus, 2019-nCoV, is highly contagious and more infectious than initially
estimated. arXiv preprint arXiv:200203268. 2020.

2. Lau H, Khosrawipour V, Kocbach P, Mikolajczyk A, Schubert J, Bania J, et al. The
positive impact of lockdown in Wuhan on containing the COVID-19 outbreak in
China. Journal of travel medicine. 2020;27(3):taaa037.
3.

Di LD, Pullano G, Sabbatini C, Boëlle P, Colizza V. Impact of lockdown on
COVID-19 epidemic in Île-de-France and possible exit strategies. BMC medicine.
2020;18(1):240-.

4.

Roques L, Klein EK, Papaïx J, Sar A, Soubeyrand S. Impact of Lockdown on the
Epidemic Dynamics of COVID-19 in France. Frontiers in Medicine. 2020;7:274.

5.

Ruktanonchai NW, Floyd J, Lai S, Ruktanonchai CW, Sadilek A, Rente-Lourenco
P, et al. Assessing the impact of coordinated COVID-19 exit strategies across
Europe. Science. 2020;369(6510):1465-70.

6.

Hellewell J, Abbott S, Gimma A, Bosse NI, Jarvis CI, Russell TW, et al. Feasibility
of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet
Global Health. 2020.

7.

Sharon T. Blind-sided by privacy? Digital contact tracing, the Apple/Google API
and big tech’s newfound role as global health policy makers. Ethics and
Information Technology. 2020:1-13.

8.

Gasser U, Ienca M, Scheibner J, Sleigh J, Vayena E. Digital tools against COVID19: taxonomy, ethical challenges, and navigation aid. The Lancet Digital Health.
2020.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9.

Troncoso C, Payer M, Hubaux J-P, Salathé M, Larus J, Bugnion E, et al.
Decentralized

privacy-preserving

proximity

tracing.

arXiv

preprint

arXiv:200512273. 2020.
10. Kelion L. Coronavirus: Why are there doubts over contact-tracing apps. BBC.
2020.
11. Thorneloe R, Epton T, Fynn W, Daly M, Stanulewicz N, Kassianos A, et al.
Scoping review of mobile phone app uptake and engagement to inform digital
contact tracing tools for COVID-19S. psyarxiv preprint. 2020.
12. von Wyl V, Bonhoeffer S, Bugnion E, Puhan MA, Salathé M, Stadler T, et al. A
research agenda for digital proximity tracing apps. Swiss Medical Weekly.
2020;150:w20324.
13. Ferretti L, Wymant C, Kendall M, Zhao L, Nurtay A, Abeler-Dörner L, et al.
Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital
contact tracing. Science. 2020;368(6491).
14. Calvo RA, Deterding S, Ryan RM. Health surveillance during covid-19 pandemic.
British Medical Journal Publishing Group; 2020.
15. Ienca M, Vayena E. On the responsible use of digital data to tackle the COVID-19
pandemic. Nature medicine. 2020;26(4):463-4.
16. Rowe F. Contact tracing apps and values dilemmas: A privacy paradox in a neoliberal world. International Journal of Information Management. 2020:102178.
17. Kaptchuk G, Hargittai E, Redmiles EM. How good is good enough for COVID19
apps? The influence of benefits, accuracy, and privacy on willingness to adopt.
arXiv preprint arXiv:200504343. 2020.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18. Becker S, Degeling M, Dürmuth M, Farke FM, Schaewitz L, Schnitzler T, et al.
Akzeptanz von Corona-Apps in Deutschland vor der Einführung der CoronaWarn-App.
19. Hargittai E, Thouvenin F. Weite Teile der Bevölkerung sind bereit, eine TrackingApp zu nutzen – wenn diese von Bund und Kantonen herausgegeben wird. Neue
Züricher Zeitung. 2020.
20. Sheeran P, Webb TL. The intention–behavior gap. Social and personality
psychology compass. 2016;10(9):503-18.
21. Rooke C, Amos A. News media representations of electronic cigarettes: an analysis
of newspaper coverage in the UK and Scotland. Tobacco Control. 2014;23(6):50712.
22. Klemm C, Das E, Hartmann T. Swine flu and hype: a systematic review of media
dramatization of the H1N1 influenza pandemic. Journal of Risk Research.
2016;19(1):1-20.
23. Saxon B, Bass SB, Wright T, Panick J. Ebola and the rhetoric of US newspapers:
assessing quality risk communication in public health emergencies. Journal of Risk
Research. 2019;22(10):1309-22.
24. Albert SM. Methods for community public health research: integrated and engaged
approaches: Springer Publishing Company; 2014.
25. Lin CA, Lagoe C. Effects of news media and interpersonal interactions on H1N1
risk perception and vaccination intent. Communication Research Reports.
2013;30(2):127-36.
26. Coleman C-L. The influence of mass media and interpersonal communication on
societal and personal risk judgments. Communication Research. 1993;20(4):61128.
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

27. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative research in
psychology. 2006;3(2):77-101.
28. Vaismoradi M, Turunen H, Bondas T. Content analysis and thematic analysis:
Implications for conducting a qualitative descriptive study. Nursing & health
sciences. 2013;15(3):398-405.
29. Wood K, Patterson C, Katikireddi SV, Hilton S. Harms to ‘others’ from alcohol
consumption in the minimum unit pricing policy debate: a qualitative content
analysis of UK newspapers (2005–12). Addiction. 2014;109(4):578-84.
30. Kuckartz U, Rädiker S. Analyzing qualitative data with MAXQDA: Springer;
2019.
31. Munnichs G. Whom to trust? Public concerns, late modern risks, and expert
trustworthiness.

Journal

of

Agricultural

and

Environmental

Ethics.

2004;17(2):113-30.
32. van der Weerd W, Timmermans DR, Beaujean DJ, Oudhoff J, van Steenbergen JE.
Monitoring the level of government trust, risk perception and intention of the
general public to adopt protective measures during the influenza A (H1N1)
pandemic in the Netherlands. BMC public health. 2011;11(1):575.
33. Markon M-PL, Lemyre L. Public reactions to risk messages communicating
different sources of uncertainty: An experimental test. Human and Ecological Risk
Assessment: An International Journal. 2013;19(4):1102-26.
34. Siegrist M, Earle TC, Gutscher H. Test of a trust and confidence model in the
applied context of electromagnetic field (EMF) risks. Risk Analysis: An
International Journal. 2003;23(4):705-16.
35. Pleitgen F. Thousands gather in Berlin to protest against Covid-19 restrictions.
CNN. 2020.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

36. Bally G. Umfrage: Mehrheit der Schweizer Bevölkerung will Corona-Warn-App
nicht installieren. Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 2020.
37. BAG BfG. SwissCovid App: positives Fazit nach erstem Monat Swizterland:
Schweizerische

Eidgenossenschaft;

2020

[Available

from:

https://www.bag.admin.ch/bag/de/home/das-bag/aktuell/news/news-28-082020.html.
38. Horstmann KT, Buecker S, Krasko J, Kritzler S, Terwiel S. Who does or does not
use the “Corona-Warn-App” and why? psyarxiv preprint. 2020.
39. Statistik

Bf.

SwissCovid-App

Eidgenossenschaft;

Monitoring

2020

Swizterland:

Schweizerische

[Available

from:

https://www.experimental.bfs.admin.ch/expstat/de/home/innovativemethoden/swisscovid-app-monitoring.html.
40. Renner A, Kohler A, Thier J, Skinner B. Bis Infizierungen in der SwissCovid-App
gemeldet werden, ist es oft zu spät. Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 2020.
41. Thier J. Die «beste Corona-App» ist auf dem Boden der Realität angekommen.
Neue Zürcher Zeitung. 2020.
42. Studie: Stopp-Corona-Apps funktionieren in öffentlichen Verkehrsmitteln nicht
richtig. Der Standard. 2020.
43. Institute RK. Kennzahlen zur Coronawarnapp. In: Institute RK, editor. 2020.
44. Cross AR. Datenschutzinformation zur Stopp Corona App Roteskreuz; 2020
[Available

from:

https://www.roteskreuz.at/site/faq-app-stopp-

corona/datenschutzinformation-zur-stopp-corona-app/.
45. Institut F. Stopp corona-App Austria: Marketing Research Ges.m.b.; 2020
[Available from: https://www.focusmr.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/stoppcorona-app-focus-august-2020-1.pdf.
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.22.20216788; this version posted October 26, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

46. Camerer CF. Behavioral game theory: Experiments in strategic interaction:
Princeton University Press; 2011.
47. Cappelen A, Mæstad O, Tungodden B, editors. Demand for childhood vaccination–
insights from behavioral economics. Forum for development studies; 2010: Taylor
& Francis.

27

Fig. 1 Distribution of analyzed articles published between 201 March 19 and May 29, 2020

Fig. 2 Results of the thematic analysis

1

Fig. 3 Theme occurrences per article over time

2

