medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

What is the efficacy and safety of
rapid exercise tests for exertional
desaturation in Covid-19: A rapid
review protocol
Asli Kalin, Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of Oxford,
asli.kalin@phc.ox.ac.uk
Babak Javid, Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California
babak.javid@ucsf.edu
Matthew Knight, West Hertfordshire Hospitals NHS Trust, matthewknight@nhs.net
Matt Inada-Kim, Hampshire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, matthew.inada-

kim@nhs.net
Trisha Greenhalgh, Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of Oxford,
trish.greenhalgh@phc.ox.ac.uk
Correspondence to trish.greenhalgh@phc.ox.ac.uk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Background
Even when resting pulse oximetry is normal in the patient with acute Covid-19, hypoxia can
manifest on exertion. We sought to summarise the literature on the performance of different
rapid tests for exertional desaturation.

Research question
What tests have been formally evaluated for the rapid assessment of exertional hypoxia?
What is the evidence for their accuracy, practicability and safety in the context of suspected
acute Covid-19? To what extent will these tests help identify patients with evidence of either
silent or hidden hypoxia leading to earlier recognition of those at risk of severe outcomes?

Method
We aim to review three independent searches of AMED, CINAHL, EMBASE MEDLINE,
Cochrane and PubMed using LitCovid, Scholar and Google databases until 24th September
2020. Screening, data abstraction, and quality appraisal of full-text papers will be completed
independently by two reviewers including a topic expert and a review expert. Studies will be
tabulated and assessed for risk of bias using QUADAS 2 tool.

Discussion
This rapid review aims to produce key findings relevant to the assessment of exertional
desaturation in patients with suspected Covid-19. Establishing a validated tool to assess
exertional desaturation will help to ensure that future research on this topic can be undertaken
in a consistent way. An exertional desaturation test should be used in combination with a
comprehensive clinical evaluation and only on patients whose resting oximetry reading is
96% or above unless in a supervised care setting. It should be terminated if the patient
experiences adverse effects.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Background
A substantial proportion of patients with acute coronavirus 19 (Covid-19) develop a
potentially critical form of the illness requiring intensive care unit admission [1]. The degree
of lung involvement in acute Covid-19 is variable, producing a spectrum of illness from mild
upper respiratory tract symptoms to acute respiratory distress syndrome [2]. Patients with
mild initial symptoms can rapidly deteriorate to severe or critical cases. In hospitalised
patients, hypoxaemia and the need for oxygen are independent predictors of severe outcomes
[3, 4]. The usual time from symptom onset to the development of severe hypoxemia is
between 7 and 12 days [5, 6]. Recent prognostic tools such as the 4C score have emphasised
the importance of identifying hypoxia early [3, 7] and there are physiological reasons for
managing this hypoxia actively [8, 9].

The poor correlation between both subjective feeling of shortness of breath (dyspnoea) and
objective measures of breathlessness and hypoxia in patients with Covid-19 has resulted in
UK guidelines recommending that the assessment of the breathless, unwell or high-risk
patient should include oximetry [5]. For example, a retrospective cohort study of 64 Covid-19
patients considered eligible for home oximetry monitoring showed that the presence of
dyspnoea had a positive predictive value of only 42% for hypoxemia and absence of
dyspnoea had a negative predictive value of 86% for excluding it [10].

Indeed, the mismatch between relatively mild subjective respiratory distress and objective
evidence of peripheral hypoxia is now recognised as a feature of Covid-19 and has been
termed “silent” or “happy” hypoxemia [11, 12]. This mismatch has been attributed to
moderate to severe ventilation-perfusion mismatch [11]. Whereas many common lung
diseases (such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) produce mainly
ventilation defects where air does not reach the alveoli, some (such as interstitial lung
disease, sarcoidosis and pulmonary embolism) produce defects of perfusion in which gas
transfer across the alveolar-capillary barrier is impaired. Several mechanisms for the
perfusion defect in Covid-19, including intra-pulmonary shunting, loss of lung perfusion
regulation, intravascular microthrombi or reduced lung compliance, have been proposed [12,
13].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hypoxia is common in acute severe Covid-19. Richardson et al found that 28% of 5700
patients admitted to hospital with acute Covid-19 in New York City were sufficiently
hypoxemic to need supplemental oxygen on admission [14]. Yet dyspnoea was reported in
only 18.7% of 1099 hospitalized Covid-19 patients, despite low PaO2/FiO2 ratios and
requirement for supplemental oxygen in 41% [15]. In a study of the 19 worst-affected
countries worldwide, Goyal et al reported that rates of mortality were significantly higher in
those countries where policies recommended lower oxygen saturations before administering
supplemental oxygen than in those that aimed to normalised saturations, though there may
have been other explanations for these differences including different degrees of
preparedness for a pandemic and different incidence rates [16].

It is widely reported that some patients with acute Covid-19 have normal pulse oximetry at
rest but their readings deteriorate on exertion (unpublished data). UK national guidance, for
example, recommends the use of exertional desaturation tests to detect early deterioration of
patients with COVID-19 in community and emergency settings [17-19]. In consensus
exercises, front-line clinicians have identified the late transfer of patients with exertional
desaturation (i.e. a fall of 3% or more in pulse oximetry reading on exercise) as a possibly
remediable cause of poor outcome [20]. In other words, if we could better identify those with
exertional desaturation and escalate their care more promptly, we could potentially reduce
mortality. The question then becomes: which test should we use to confirm or exclude
exertional desaturation?

Several publications recommend or suggest the use of exertional tests in the assessment of
COVID-19 patients. Mantha et al discuss the use of a modified 6-minute walk test (6MWT),
wearing masks and only in those under 70, on day 4 or 5 of clinical illness to risk-stratify
patients [6]. This suggestion is echoed by Noormohammadpour and Abolhasani, who
propose that deterioration in the 6MWT test can be used to identify those who need referral
to hospital [21]. Pandit et al recommend the 6MWT for those under 60 who are not short of
breath at rest and a 3-minute walk test (3MWT) for those over 60 who are unable to complete
the longer test, but warn that the test is contra-indicated in patients who are hypoxic at rest
(SpO2 < 94%), short of breath at rest, not able to walk unassisted, have Eisenmenger’s
syndrome, severe anaemia, unstable angina or valvular heart disease [2]. They suggest that
the 6MWT or 3MWT test can be performed at home or in hospital under the supervision of
either a family member or a healthcare professional. These authors define exertional hypoxia

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

as an absolute drop in oximeter reading by 3% or more from baseline, and recommend
escalation of care for all such patients.

In sum, consensus guidance and editorials recommend tests for exertional hypoxia in Covid19, but the evidence base for these tests has not previously been formally reviewed. Indeed,
the prognostic utility of exertional desaturation remains unknown. Another unknown is the
safety of such tests in patients with suspected Covid-19, especially when used remotely
without a clinician physically present. Establishing a validated tool to assess exertional
desaturation will help to ensure that future research on this topic can be undertaken in a
consistent way.

Review objective and research questions
The overall objective of this rapid review is to examine the published evidence base for the
use of rapid exercise tests to confirm or exclude exertional hypoxia in patients with Covid-19.
We are particularly interested in tests that could be used outside of the clinical setting, since
the reality of acute Covid-19 often involves a remote assessment (with the patient at home at
a distance from the clinician) or one in a bespoke ambulatory setting such as a “hot hub”
(where exercise tests may be performed outside in car parks, for example, for infection
control reasons).

The research questions are:
1. What exercise tests have been used to assess exertional hypoxia at home or in an
ambulatory setting in the context of Covid-19 and to what extent have they been
validated?
2. What exercise tests have been used to assess exertional hypoxia in other lung
conditions and to what extent have they been validated?

Methods
We are going to follow Cochrane Rapid Review guidelines [22]. Our team includs
experienced health librarians as well as systematic reviewers and clinicians (including a

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

general practitioner, general physician, respiratory consultant and emergency medicine
consultant with experience of undertaking exercise tests). References will be downloaded to
Endnote (version 9.0) to maintain and manage citations and facilitate the review process.

Search strategy and selection criteria
Three independent searches will be conducted. The first will search LitCovid, Scholar and
Google using the terms ‘step test or field test’ and ‘hypoxia or exertional desaturation’. From
these results, promising articles will then be used to find additional documents via two
methods – forward and backward citation matching, and searching for related articles (also
using Microsoft Academic Search).

The second search will covered the following databases: AMED, CINAHL, EMBASE
MEDLINE, and PubMed using the over-arching question ‘Very short exercise desaturation
tests for use in the emergency department’. Search terms are:
(quick OR short) AND oxygen) AND exercise) AND (desaturation OR saturation))
AND test*("emergency department*" AND oxygen) AND exercise) AND
desaturation) AND test*)
("emergency department*" AND oxygen) AND exercise) AND saturation) AND
test*)
("emergency department*" AND oxygen) AND exercise) AND desaturation)
("emergency department*" AND oxygen) AND exercise) AND saturation)
(1-min sit-to-stand test) or ("1 min sit to stand test") or ("one-minute sit to stand")

The third search will involve searching the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
(CDSR), the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL) and the Cochrane
COVID-19 study register.

Search strings for different searches are listed below.

Search of Cochrane Library - Issue 10 of 12, October 2020:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

#1 (("step test" OR "walk test" OR "field test" OR "chair rise" OR "sit to stand" OR
"exercise test" OR "exercise testing")):ti,ab,kw OR (exertional NEAR/2 (desaturation
OR hypoxia)):ti,ab,kw
#2 MeSH descriptor: [Coronavirus Infections] this term only
#3 (coronavirus OR covid*):ti,ab,kw
#4 #2 or #3
#5 #1 AND #4

Search of Cochrane COVID-19 study register:

"step test" OR "walk test" OR "field test" OR "chair rise" OR "sit to stand" OR
"exercise test" OR "exercise testing"

Our inclusion criteria used the PICOS/T frameworks as follows:
Population: Individuals with Covid-19 or another lung disease with or without
symptoms.
Interventions: Any form of rapid exercise test performed at home or in a healthcare
setting.
Comparator: 6MWT or cardiopulmonary exercise test, CPET (both of which are used
as gold standard in exercise testing), or a diagnostic test to diagnose the disease in
question (eg bronchoalveolar lavage to diagnose pneumocystis carinii pneumonia).
Study designs: clinical practice guidelines and systematic reviews addressing
desaturation in exercise tests in lung disease, using the Cochrane definition of a
Systematic Review. Primary human studies of all designs (e.g. experimental studies,
quasi-experimental studies, diagnostic accuracy studies, and observational studies),
excluding case series, that involved patients with COVID-19 or a lung disease
undergoing rapid exercise testing were included. Editorials and letters around the
subject of Covid-19 and rapid exercise testing were included to provide background
and surface hypotheses on this new disease.
Outcome. Pulse oximetry or arterial blood gas measurement, and association with any
adverse outcome e.g. hospital admission, need for organ support, death.
Time periods: All periods of time and duration of follow up.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

No other limitations are imposed on the search or study selection process. Both peerreviewed and preprint papers will potentially be eligible for inclusion. We plan to seek
translation of any relevant papers published in languages other than English.

Risk of bias appraisal
The risk of bias in individual studies will be assessed using the QUADAS 2 tool. Using the
signalling questions, we will rate each potential source of bias as high, low, or unclear.

Synthesis
The evidence synthetised from the search will be analysed through a formal statistical
synthesis where possible. If the data is too heterogeneous for formal statistical analysis, it
will be tabulated in summary tables of origins, methods and results, and then summarized
narratively.

Discussion
Covid-19 may cause an unusual form of acute lung disease characterised by a tendency to
desaturate on minimal exertion. This rapid review aims to produce key findings relevant to
the assessment of exertional desaturation in patients with suspected Covid-19. Establishing a
validated tool to assess exertional desaturation will help to ensure that future research on this
topic can be undertaken in a consistent way and that services can be planned to allow for
appropriate planning of services to allow remote assessment (with the patient at home at a
distance from the clinician) or assessment in an ambulatory setting such as a “hot hub”
(where exercise tests may be performed outside in car parks, for example, for infection
control reasons).

Risk to the patient from exercise tests should also be considered. Patients should be advised
to terminate promptly if they develop any adverse symptoms (severe breathlessness, chest
pain, dizziness) [23]. Tests involving climbing a flight of stairs should be avoided, since a
staircase is a dangerous place to collapse.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable (desk research)

Consent for publication
Not applicable (desk research)

Availability of data and materials
All sources cited in this review are publicly available.

Competing interests
Authors declare no competing interests.

Funding
AK is funded by an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship. TG’s research is funded from the
following sources: National Institute for Health Research (BRC-1215-20008), ESRC
(ES/V010069/1), and Wellcome Trust (WT104830MA).

Authors' contributions
The conception of the work: TG, BJ, MK and MI-K. Designed the protocol and wrote the
paper: AK, TG, BJ, MK and MI-K.

Acknowledgements
We thank health informaticians and librarians: Helen F Williams, Jon Brassey and Nia
Roberts.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References

1.

To KK-W, Tsang OT-Y, Leung W-S, Tam AR, Wu T-C, Lung DC, Yip CC-Y, Cai J-P, Chan JM-C,
Chik TS-H: Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum
antibody responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2: an observational cohort study. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 2020.

2.

Pandit R, Vaity C, Mulakavalupil B, Matthew A, Sabnis K, Joshi S: Unmasking Hypoxia in COVID
19 - Six Minute Walk Test. J Assoc Physicians India 2020:50-51.

3.

Knight SR, Ho A, Pius R, Buchan I, Carson G, Drake TM, Dunning J, Fairfield CJ, Gamble C, Green
CA et al: Risk stratification of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19 using the ISARIC
WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: development and validation of the 4C Mortality Score.
BMJ 2020, 370(6490):m3339.

4.

Xie J, Covassin N, Fan Z, Singh P, Gao W, Li G, Kara T, Somers VK: Association between
hypoxemia and mortality in patients with COVID-19. In: Mayo Clinic Proceedings: 2020: Elsevier;
2020.

5.

National Institute for Health and Clincial Excellence: COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing
suspected or confirmed pneumonia in adults in the community. London: NICE; 2020. Accessed
30th October 2020 at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng165.

6.

Mantha S, Tripuraneni SL, Roizen MF, Fleisher LA: Proposed Modifications in the 6-Minute Walk
Test for Potential Application in Patients With Mild COVID-19: A Step to Optimize Triage
Guidelines. Anesthesia and Analgesia 2020.

7.

Gupta RK, Harrison EM, Ho A, Docherty AB, Knight SR, van Smeden M, Abubakar I, Lipman M,
Quartagno M, Pius RB: Development and validation of the 4C Deterioration model for adults
hospitalised with COVID-19. medRxiv 2020.

8.

Shenoy N, Luchtel R, Gulani P: Considerations for target oxygen saturation in COVID-19
patients: are we under-shooting? BMC medicine 2020, 18(1):1-6.

9.

O'driscoll B, Howard L, Earis J, Mak V: BTS guideline for oxygen use in adults in healthcare and
emergency settings. Thorax 2017, 72(Suppl 1):ii1-ii90.

10.

Berezin L, Zhabokritsky A, Andany N, Chan AK, Gershon A, Lam PW, Leis JA, MacPhee S,
Mubareka S, Simor AE: The Diagnostic Accuracy of Subjective Dyspnea in Detecting Hypoxemia
Among Outpatients with COVID-19. medRxiv 2020.

11.

Dhont S, Derom E, Van Braeckel E, Depuydt P, Lambrecht BN: The pathophysiology of
‘happy’hypoxemia in COVID-19. Respiratory Research 2020, 21(1):1-9.

12.

Couzin-Frankel J: The mystery of the pandemic's 'happy hypoxia'. Science 2020, 368(6490):455456.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223453; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13.

Tobin MJ: Basing respiratory management of COVID-19 on physiological principles. In.:
American Thoracic Society; 2020.

14.

Richardson S, Hirsch JS, Narasimhan M, Crawford JM, McGinn T, Davidson KW, Barnaby DP,
Becker LB, Chelico JD, Cohen SL: Presenting characteristics, comorbidities, and outcomes among
5700 patients hospitalized with COVID-19 in the New York City area. Jama 2020.

15.

Guan W-j, Ni Z-y, Hu Y, Liang W-h, Ou C-q, He J-x, Liu L, Shan H, Lei C-l, Hui DS: Clinical
characteristics of coronavirus disease 2019 in China. New England Journal of Medicine 2020.

16.

Goyal D, Donnelly H, Kussner A, Neil J, Bhatti S, Mansab F: Oxygen and Mortality in COVID-19
Pneumonia: A Comparative Analysis of Supplemental Oxygen Policies and Health Outcomes
Across 26 Countries. Available at SSRN 3633151 2020.

17.

NHS England and NHS Improvement: Pulse oximetry to detect early deterioration of patients with
COVID-19 in primary and community care settings. London: NHSE/I. Accessed 17th October 2020
at https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/publication/pulse-oximetry-to-detect-early-deterioration-ofpatients-with-covid-19-in-primary-and-community-care-settings/; 2020 (updated 7th October).

18.

NHS England: Reference guide for emergency medicine. London: NHS England. Accessed 17th
October 2020 at https://www.england.nhs.uk/coronavirus/wp-content/uploads/sites/52/2020/03/C0261specialty-guide-emergency-medicine-v5-22-April.pdf; 2020 (20th April).

19.

NHS England: Principles of safe video consulting in general practice during COVID-19. London:
NHS England. Accessed 27th October 2020 at https://www.guidelines.co.uk/public-health/nhs-videoconsulting-guideline/455510.article; 2020.

20.

Greenhalgh T, Thompson P, Wieringa S, Neves Al, Husain L, Dunlop M, Rushforth A, Nunan D, de
Lusignan S, Delaney B: Remote Covid-19 Assessment in Primary Care (RECAP) early warning
score: item development. BMJ Open (under review) 2020.

21.

Noormohammadpour P, Abolhasani M: Besides other Signs, Can a 6-min Walk Test be Applied as
a Criterion for Going to the Hospital with a Diagnosis of COVID-19? Advanced Journal of
Emergency Medicine 2020, 4(2s):e42-e42.

22.

Garritty C GG, Kamel C, King VJ, Nussbaumer-Streit B, Stevens A, Hamel C, Affengruber L:
Cochrane Rapid Reviews. Interim Guidance from the Cochrane Rapid Reviews Methods Group.
March 2020.: Cochrane 2020. Accessed 15th April at
https://methods.cochrane.org/rapidreviews/sites/methods.cochrane.org.rapidreviews/files/public/upload
s/cochrane_rr_-_guidance-23mar2020-v1.pdf.

23.

Laviolette L, Laveneziana P: Exercise testing in the prognostic evaluation of patients with lung and
heart diseases. Clinical Exercise Testing (ERS Monograph) Sheffield, European Respiratory Society
2018:222-234.

