medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

MODELLING PRESYMPTOMATIC INFECTIOUSNESS IN COVID-19

Dr. Russell Cheng

Dr. Christopher Dye

University of Southampton
Highfield, SO17 5BJ
United Kingdom
cheng@btinternet.com

University of Oxford
Mansfield Road, OX1 3SZ,
United Kingdom
Chrisdye56@gmail.com

Dr. John Dagpunar
University of Southampton
Highfield, SO17 1BJ
United Kingdom
jdagpunar@hotmail.com

Dr. Brian Williams
SACEMA
Stellenbosch University
South Africa
williamsbg@me.com

ABSTRACT
This paper considers SEPIR, the extension of an existing parametric SEIR continuous simulation
compartment model. Both models can be fitted to real data as they include parameters that can simply
be estimated from the data. However SEPIR deploys an additional presymptomatic (also called
asymptomatic) infectious stage that is not included in SEIR but which is known to exist in COVID19. This stage is also parametrised and so can be fitted to data. Both SEPIR and the existing SEIR
model assume a homogeneous mixing population, an idealisation that is unrealistic in practice when
dynamically varying control strategies are deployed against virus. This means that if either model is to
represent more than just a single period in the behaviour of the epidemic, then the parameters of the
model will have to be time dependent. This issue is also discussed in this paper.

Keywords: Differential equation epidemic models, Parametric models, Effective Reproduction
Number, Asymptomatic transmission
1

INTRODUCTION

A parametric SEIR model has been used by the authors in Dye et al. (2020) to compare the first wave
of the COVID-19 epidemics in different European countries. In Dye et al. (2020) this model is fitted
to data using the method of maximum likelihood estimation rather than perhaps the more popular
Bayesian Markov-chain. The compartmental structure of the SEIR model is standard which means
that it does not include a specific compartment to represent the presymptomatic (also asymptomatic)
infectiousness stage known to occur in those infected by COVID-19. We describe the SEIR and
SEPIR models in Sections 2 and 3, focusing on the models themselves rather than on the effect of the
epidemics on the countries it has affected. We discuss the fitting of these models to data, focusing on
use of the maximum-likelihood method of estimation which produces (point) estimation of parameter
values, as this gives an unequivocal specific model representation of the epidemic. In Section 4 we
give a numerical example based on the first wave stage of the COVID-19 epidemic in Switzerland.
An important aspect of the basic maximum-likelihood method is that the parameters values are
assumed not only to be unknown but to be fixed in value. Similarly, in the Bayesian case, the
distributions of the parameters are not only unknown, but are assumed to be fixed. However different
strategies varying over time have to be deployed in trying to contain in a fast moving epidemic like
that produced by COVID-19. This means that the model parameters do not remain constant, so but
have to be time dependent if the trajectory of the epidemic is to be correctly reproduced. Note that

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

use of the models based on SEIR can be used in examining more than one wave, see for example
Dagpunar (2020).
For reasons of space and simplicity we discuss in this paper only ‘first wave’ model behaviour,
leaving for elsewhere discussion of situations where time-varying parameters might be used.
We do however discuss how progress of an epidemic is summarised by the effective reproduction
number Rt, a dynamically varying version of R0, the (basic) reproduction number. Theoretically, R0 is
unequivocally defined in terms of the idealized epidemic infecting a population in a homogeneously
mixing manner. However when monitoring the progress of an epidemic Rt is more useful, and in lay
terms seems to be what is called the reproduction number. It can still be defined to be the expected
number of persons infected by an infected individually, but should be time dependent because of
changes in the management of the epidemic and in the susceptible population. The calculation should
thus hold whether the infection is homogeneously mixing or not. We consider this in Section 5
2

THE SEIR MODEL

The SEIR model has been described in the Supplementary Materials of Dye et al. (2020), but for ease
of comparison with SEPIR model we give the description again here. The model is of a
homogeneously mixing population with four compartments representing those who are susceptible,
exposed, infectious and recovered or died (SEIR), as shown in Figure 1.

S

SI

E

E

I

I

R

Figure 1. The SEIR model. The compartments denote those in the
population that are Susceptible, Exposed, Infected and Recovered.
The variables S, E, I and R satisfy the ordinary differential equations:










  
  


(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)

A convenient recent reference is Ma (3) who uses a slightly different notation. Also, to highlight
deaths due to the virus we divide those that recover well and those that die due to the virus. Thus the
infectious are divided into two compartments as illustrated Figure 2.




I

1   I

R\Z
Z
Z

Figure 2. Adjustment of the SEIR model where R is divided into two compartments, R
\ Z, those that recover and Z, those that die; where  is the proportion that recover.
More elaborate models can and have been developed. For example, see Dagpunar (4) who extends
R into additional compartments representing different outcomes of hospitalization
The SEIR model of Figures 1 and 2 are assumed to depend on certain parameters, initially
assumed unknown. Fitting the model to data, is simply the process of estimating the parameters, either
directly using data obtained from observing the epidemic, or from information obtained from other
sources. Once the parameter values are estimated, the behaviour of the SEIR model is completely

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

specified. The parameters are defined in Dye et al. (2020). To avoid repetition and avoid confusion
they are not discussed directly here as we shall be discussing the SEPIR model where a very similar
set of parameters will be fully defined.
However we do point out here the time-delay parameter  used to modify equation (4) to:



  .

(5)

We denote by  1, 2, … ,  , the vector of parameters, where m is the number of parameters. In
Dye et al. (2020),  9. In the SEPIR model of Section 3,  11. With  given, the four
differential equations (1), (2), (3) and (5) can be solved by numerical integration to give the
trajectories

, , , , , , , , , 

for

 1,2, … , 

(6)

where t is the day and N is the number of days of interest. We used the standard method of Maximum
Likelihood (ML), as given for example in Cheng (2017), to estimate parameter values.
Here we outline the approach used to estimate the parameters from a sample of observed daily deaths,
say. Let the sample of observed number of daily deaths be denoted by

    1,2,… !

(7)

where  is the number of deaths on day t and  is the number of days observed. If the observations
were made without error and if, with the right parameter values are correct for , then the death
trajectory  ,  1,2, … , ! would match the observed deaths Z in (7). So the model would
then be successful in explaining deaths.
To include statistical uncertainty in the model we assume instead


,  " #  1,2, … , 

where # is random error. For simplicity the
distributed (NID) with standard deviation $, i.e.

#)

∼

(8)

# are assumed to be normally and independently

NID(0, $ ²), so that



 , 

∼

NID(0, $ ²)

(9)

,,

(10)

The logarithm of the distribution of the sample is then

L|

–

/2ln2* ln$ +1/2$ , ∑ + 
–

–

–

where  is the random argument, and the parameters  are fixed. In ML estimation (MLE), this is
turned on its head so that Z is simply the known sample of observations now regarded as fixed and we
write L as L| L|) calling it the (log)likelihood to indicate that it is now treated as a
. is simply the value of  at which L(| ) is maximized. i.e.
function of . The ML estimator 

. = argmax {(L(| )}.

(11)

Nelder-Mead numerical search for the maximum was used. This goes through different  i=1, 2, 3,…
., the best .
comparing the different L ,|) to find 
To simplify description of the estimation process, only fitting to deaths data, Z as in (7) has been
described, but the method extends straightforwardly to include other data samples. For example

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

4 5  1,2,… , !

(12)

where 5 is the number of active cases on day t. Fitting simultaneously to both Y and Z can be carried
out by adding to the right-hand side of (10) a corresponding set of terms for Y.
Numerical solution of the differential equations requires initial values for S, E, I, R. These are
essentially scale invariant with  " "  "  constant and independent of t. So the numerical
integration can conveniently be done using S(0, ) = 1, E(0, ) some small quantity subsequently
adjustable as its initial value # is a parameter; with I and R initially zero. The size of the exposed
population, parameter s0, is only needed to provide scaled values S, E, I, R at each step for comparison
with the data Y and Z.
3

SEPIR MODEL

3.1 Structure of the SEPIR Model
In the SEPIR model we introduce an extra compartment to the SEIR model in Fig. 1 changing it to
Fig 3:

S

7 " 6

P

E

87

I



R

Figure 3. The SEPIR model. The compartment P denotes those who are infectious but
are presymptomatic whilst I denotes that are infectious and symptomatic.
The original I compartment is now split into two with its first compartment, P, comprising those
infectious who are pre, i.e. asymptomatic, and the second, I, comprising those infectious who display
symptoms. The ordinary differential equations (1), (2) and (3) in the SEIR model are replaced by the
differential equations (13), (14), (15) and (16), with (4) and (5) remaining unchanged. There are two
terms in going from S to E: comprising those infected by someone in P with transmission rate  , and
those infected by someone in I with transmission rate 6. The reciprocal  is the mean period
someone spends in state (compartment) P whilst  is the mean period spent in I.









7  6
 " 6  
  87
87   

(13)
(14)
(15)
(16)

We treat the quantities , 6, , 8, as parameters to be estimated. However we include six further
parameters  , # ,9 , $ ,  and . These are all listed and defined in columns 1 and 2 of Table 1.
There is flexibility in fitting of the model to data. Some of the parameters can be given fixed
predetermined values with the others fitted to data by Maximum Likelihood as described in the SEIR
model is Section2.
3.2 Switzerland: A Numerical Example
Column 3 gives the parameter values when SEPIR was fitted estimating all 11 parameters by
maximum likelihood using N = 109 days of data based on daily observations starting on 15 Feb 2020.
Two series: Daily New Cases and Daily Deaths were used. The values of all the parameters are of
interest. The parameter values for Switzerland are given in Table 1. We highlight two aspects.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Firstly consider the population size. In a standard the SEIR because the differential equations are
scale invariant, one can assume a notional standard population size of 1. However in our model we
allow the population size to be variable with a size estimated by allowing rescaling to maximize the
likelihood. The estimated population size of 36,700 is remarkably small suggesting that can be
interpreted as the size of the homogeneously mixing population actually ‘seen’ by the virus compared
with the actual population size of 8.2 million. Moreover without examining unavailable regional
records it may be that the outbreak in Switzerland was mainly confined to parts nearest Italy the latter
being the first European country to be badly affected by COVID.
Table 1. Parameters of the SEPIR model with estimates for Switzerland.
Symbol


6
8







#
9
$




Definition
Presymptomatic transmission rate
Symptomatic transmission rate
mean latent period in compartment E
mean presymptomatic period
mean symptomatic period
number of days from start of epidemic
before observations began
initial number of individuals exposed
initial size of exposed population (to scale
the epidemic)
standard deviation of observational error
probability of someone infected recovering
well
mean time between the end of
infectiousness and recovering well or death

Estimated value and 95%
confidence interval
0.44 (0.435– 0.454)
0.137 (0.128– 0.147)
1.19 (1.13– 1.26)
4.40 (4.00– 4.62)
14.0 (13.8– 14.3) days
30 days (too small to
measure)
6.6 (5.6– 8.2) E-07
3.67 (3.60 – 3.74) E+04
103 (82 – 106)
0.943 (0.942 – 0.945)
3.0 (2.8 – 4.0) days

Secondly we examine whether the SEPIR model gives any indication of the extent of the
presymptomatic stage.
First we summarize what is already known about this stage by reporting the findings of He at al.
(2020) who investigated the case histories of 77 infector-infectee pairs in each of which an infectious
person, the infector, goes on to infect a susceptible person, the infectee.
Citing the mean incubation period as 5.2 days, He et al, (2020) estimate the serial interval

to be 5.8 days. From this they infer that infectiousness starts 2.3 days after the onset of
infection and peaks just 0.7 days before symptom onset, giving an estimated proportion of
infections of 44% as occurring before the onset of infector symptoms. Infectiousness then
declined within 7 days. Figure 4 is a schematic showing the infector-infectee relationship.
The estimate of He et al. (2020) that the proportion of individuals infected presymptomatically is
44% means, in our case, that the proportion (8  )/(8  " 6  ) should therefore be this value at
least approximately. From Table 1, the value is 50.4%.
This is very much in accord with the higher presymptomatic infection proportions given by

Tapiwa et al (2020): 48% in Singapore and 62% in Tianjin.
The practical consequences of this finding is evident, with elaborate track and tracing
required to identify presymptomatic infections.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Serial
Interval
Probability
Distribution of a Secondary
Infection

Figure 4: Infector-Infectee Relationship as described by He et al (2020).
The quality of the fit achieved by the SEPIR model is illustrated in Figure 5 where the Active Cases
and Cumulative Deaths curves obtained by fitting the model to both data sets simultaneously are
plotted with their corresponding data.

Figure 5: SEPIR Active Cases and Cumulative Deaths fitted to Swiss
Data. Horizontal axis is days with day #1 = 15th February 2020.
The SEPIR model was then repeatedly fitted to independent parametric bootstrap replications of
the actual observed active cases and cumulative deaths data. As described in Subsection 4.1.3 of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Cheng (2017) confidence intervals for the parameters can be obtained from the bootstrap parameter
estimates. For illustration, the resulting 95% confidence intervals for each of the fitted parameter
estimates are reported in Column 3 of Table 1, using 500 bootstraps.
Charts of fitted SEPIR trajectories provide an easily understood way to display results. For
example the fitted SEPIR cumulative deaths trajectory (red) is displayed in Figure 6 together with the
observations (black). The method described in Section 4.3 of Cheng (2017) can be used to provide a
confidence band for any model trajectory. For example we have a bootstrap cumulative deaths
trajectory corresponding to each bootstrap sample. These are plotted (in grey) in Figure 6 giving a
bundle of trajectories, with 95% confidence limits (green and blue). Only 250 bootstrap are depicted.

Figure 6: SEPIR Fitted Cumulative deaths trajectory (red) for Swiss data
obtained from 109 observations (black). Upper (green) and lower
(blue) confidence limits are also depicted.

4

RT THE EFFECTIVE REPRODUCTION NUMBER

In the SEIR model, the Reproduction Number R0 is simply, but precisely, defined as the number of
susceptible individuals that an infectious person will go onto infect when the epidemic first starts,
assuming that the population is homogeneously mixing. In the SEIR model R0 can be obtained, see for
example Dagpunar (2020), from the biological transmission rate of the virus β and mean period of
infectiousness μ -1 as
R0 = /μ.

(17)

As mentioned in the Introduction, in practice Rt, the effective reproduction number, is more
useful as, throughout the epidemic, it can be continually used to gauge how well control strategies are
working. The theoretical basis underlying the calculation Rt is well described by Ma (2020). We have




,
బಮ  

(18)

where c(t) is the incidence curve of new cases at time t and w(u) is the serial interval probability
distribution of a secondary infection; so that w(u)du is the probability that an infectious individual
(the infector)) infects someone else (the infectee) in the time period (u, u+du). This probability
distribution is depicted in Figure 4.
The denominator in Equation (18) measures how the new cases at time t arise from those infected
prior to time t. The epidemic clearly is rising or falling depending on whether the numerator is larger
or small than the denominator, with equilibrium when they are equal. Thus Rt has the critical

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

reproduction property of R0 but moreover is dynamic, so that it can be used to gauge the progress of
the epidemic as this develops.
It turns out that the formula (18) is quite robust so that the serial interval distribution does not
have to be estimated all that accurately. In fact Germany, early during its first COVID-19 epidemic
wave, used the simple denominator c(t-4). Cori et al. (2013), though using a Bayesian approach,
examined various empirically obtained serial interval distributions drawn from different epidemics. In
Dye et al. (2020) the authors used a discretized and shifted gamma distribution :,  1,2,… ,12 to
represent the serial interval distribution w(u) that is shown as the red curve in Figure 4, calculating the
denominator as

; ∑ <  =:=.

(19)

Figure 7 depicts  calculated using this formula for Switzerland when c(t) is a daily 7-day moving
average of new cases.

Figure 7: Chart of the effective Rt calculated using the formula in Equation (19)
for Switzerland where < is the 7-day moving average of new cases.
5

CLOSING REMARKS

In conclusion the SEPIR model is more flexible than one with parameters both given and fixed. For
example, our model estimates an initial susceptible proportion rather than taking it as a given (for
example the country’s actual population). However on the other hand our transmission rates, though
estimated, are supposed constant rather than time dependent which would be needed to model
changing management of the epidemic. These two things could explain why the estimates of some of
the biological parameters are rather different from those observed in some other studies.
We end with two warnings.
Regarding just model fitting alone, this is of academic interest in its own right. We have not
examined in detail the robustness of maximum likelihood optimization. In our numerical example we
chose the first wave of the epidemic in Switzerland because the data corresponded well to the
characteristics of the SEPIR model. However even in this example alternative good fits can be
achieved with combinations of parameter values different from those reported in Table 1. Thus, in
practice, comparison with parameter estimates obtained in other ways should always be made where
possible to assess when our estimates can be relied on.
More generally the simplicity of models such as SEIR or SEPIR. means that the practical
usefulness of using them on their own, in isolation, is limited. The models are idealizations of the way

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.01.20224014; this version posted November 4, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

the epidemic behaves and of population behaviour. This latter is particularly important and will
depend on control policies and their timing. Lack of homogeneity of population behaviour is an
important factor in implementing control policies because these have to recognize the political issues
they give rise to for the population as a whole to be willing to follow them. To make a national
control policy fair, a detailed model allowing for regional differences may well be needed.
REFERENCES
Cheng R C H (2017). Non-Standard Parametric Statistical Inference. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Cori A, Ferguson N M, Fraser C and Cauchernez S (2013). A new framework and software to
estimate time-varying reproduction numbers during epidemics.
American Journal of
Epidemiology 178(9): 1505-1512.
Dagpunar J S (2020). Sensitivity of UK Covid-19 deaths to the timing of
suppression
measures
and
their
relaxation.
Infectious
Disease
Modelling
5:
525-535
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.07.002

Dye C, Cheng R C H, Dagpunar J and Williams B G (2020). The scale and dynamics of COVID-19
epidemics across Europe. medRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.26.20131144.
He L, Lau E H Y, […], Leung G M (2020). Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility
of COVID-19. Nature Medicine 26: 672-675.
Ma J (2020). Estimating epidemic exponential growth rate and basic reproduction number. Infectious
Disease Modelling 5: 129-141.
Tapiwa G, Kremer C, Chen D, Torner A, Faes C, Wallinga J and Hens N (2020). Estimating the
gerneration interval for coronavirus disease (COVID-19) based on symptom onset, March 2020.
Euro Surveill. 25(17): pii=2000257.
AUTHOR BIOGRAPHIES
RUSSELL CHENG retired from the University of Southampton in 2007 where he had been Head of
the Operational Research Group, having held previous positions at Cardiff University and the
University of Kent at Canterbury. https://www.southampton.ac.uk/maths/about/staff/rchc.page
CHRISTOPHER DYE FRS, FMedSci, has held positions at the London School of Hygiene and
Tropical Medicine, the World Health Organization, Gresham College London. He has been Visiting
Professor of Zoology at Oxford since 2009, and became a Visiting Fellow at the Oxford Martin
School in 2019. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christopher_Dye
JOHN DAGPUNAR retired from Edinburgh University in 2008. He is Visiting Research Fellow in
Mathematical Sciences at the University of Southampton. His research interests are in simulation,
financial
mathematics,
health
studies,
and
reliability.
https://www.southampton.ac.uk/maths/about/staff/jd2y15.page
BRIAN WILLIAMS is Senior Research Fellow at the South African Centre for Epidemiological
Modelling and Analysis (SACEMA) having held the position of Epidemiologist at the World Health
Organisation from which he retired in 2008.

