medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

COVID-19 Pandemic Among Immigrant Latinx Farmworker and Non-farmworker Families: A
Rural-Urban Comparison of Economic, Educational, Healthcare, and Immigration Concerns

Sara A. Quandt,1 Natalie J. LaMonto,2 Dana C. Mora,3 Jennifer W. Talton,4
Paul J. Laurienti,5 Thomas A. Arcury,3

1

Department of Epidemiology and Prevention, Wake Forest School of Medicine, WinstonSalem, NC, USA
2

Department of Anthropology, Lawrence University, Appleton, WI, USA

3

Department of Family and Community Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, WinstonSalem, NC, USA
4

Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, Wake Forest School of Medicine, WinstonSalem, NC, USA
5

Department of Radiology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA

Running Title: COVID-19 in Farmworker and Non-farmworker Families
Corresponding Author:
Sara A. Quandt, PhD
Department of Epidemiology and Prevention
Division of Public Health Sciences
Wake Forest School of Medicine
Medical Center Boulevard
Winston-Salem, NC 27157
Telephone: 336.716.6015
Fax: 336.713.4300
squandt@wakehealth.edu
Acknowledgements: This research was funded by a grant from the National Institute of
Environmental Health Science, Grant Number R01 ES08739.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the
design of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the
manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results.

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
COVID-19 has highlighted social and health injustices in the US. Structural inequalities have
increased the likelihood of immigrants contracting COVID-19, by being essential workers and
through poverty that forces this population to continue working. Rural and urban immigrant
families may face different concerns. Using a telephone survey in May 2020 of 105 Latinx
families in an existing study, quantitative and qualitative data were gathered on work and
household economics, childcare and education, healthcare, and community climate. Analyses
show that, although rural and urban groups experienced substantial economic effects, impacts
were more acute for urban families. Rural workers reported fewer workplace protective
measures for COVID-19. For both groups, fear and worry, particularly about finances and
children, dominated reports of their situations with numerous reports of experiencing stress and
anxiety. The experience of the pandemic is interpreted as an example of contextual vulnerability
of a population already experiencing structural violence through social injustice.

Keywords
Coronavirus
Structural violence
Contextual vulnerability
Mixed methods

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted social and health injustices in the United States
(US) population.1 Both case rates and mortality are higher among people of color than among
white individuals.2,3 Immigrants of color and their families are among those groups at the
highest risk for contracting COVID-19.4,5
Immigrants’ particular vulnerability to both acquiring the coronavirus and then developing
severe COVID-19 appears to lie in structural inequalities.6 Many work in occupations and
industries deemed essential, so that they have been exempted from protective stay-at-home or
work-from-home orders.7-9 In addition, many immigrants live in crowded housing and multifamily dwellings that do not permit social distancing.10 These risk factors for exposure to
COVID-19 are exacerbated by the fact that many immigrants have low incomes, cannot
communicate well in English, and lack documentation status to be in the US and to access health
and income safety net programs.11,12 For many immigrants, even if their particular job is not
deemed essential, their low incomes and limited savings force them to continue working.13 Most
have received no benefits from the special allocations in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief and
Economic Security (CARES) Act distributed in spring and summer of 2020.14
The industry sectors where immigrants predominate and are deemed essential include farm
work in agriculture and meat and poultry processing in manufacturing.4,7,8,15-17 As both of these
industry sectors are crucial to the food system, there is considerable pressure for production to
keep food availability at normal levels. Numerous outbreaks have been reported throughout the
pandemic among these workers.18-22 These workers are particularly vulnerable because, in
addition to not being able to work from home, their jobs usually prevent them from maintaining
physical distancing in the workplace. Farm work, for example, often entails transportation in

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

crowded vehicles to the fields and working side-by-side on equipment for planting or harvesting.
Meat processing requires workers to be side-by-side on crowded production lines, without
barriers. In all cases, communication is frequently by shouting or loud talking over machine
noise, which is known to expel more virus-containing droplets or aerosols than speaking
normally.23
Immigrant workers share the concerns of other US residents about the threats of the
COVID-19 pandemic to their health and that of their families.10 However, their concerns may
extend to anticipated outcomes in other aspects of life. Clark et al.4 suggest that anticipated
outcomes may fall into three domains in addition to health and medical: economic (including
fewer days or hours of work, job loss, and inability to pay bills including rent); legal (lack of
eligibility for unemployment and other benefits), and social (including food insecurity, children’s
difficulty with obtaining quality education, and worsening political and community climate
surrounding immigration).
In research to date about fears in the pandemic among immigrant workers, health has been
emphasized (e.g., 10). Less attention has been paid to concerns of immigrant workers in these
other domains. In particular, few studies attempted to document these concerns during the early,
confusing days of the pandemic and to do so in the words of these immigrants. In addition, there
has been little comparison of the experiences of Latinx immigrants during the pandemic in rural
and urban environments. It is likely that the experiences differ, based on differences between
rural and urban situations in resources, in the demand for immigrant labor, and in the availability
of public health messaging about the pandemic.
This paper reports findings from a telephone survey collected in May 2020. The
respondents were participants in an existing study that had developed trust and lines of

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

communication with mothers in a sample of rural Latinx farmworker families and a comparison
group of urban Latinx non-farmworker families in North Carolina, USA. The survey gathered
both quantitative and qualitative data from these mothers. In this paper, we describe the
experiences of these workers’ families in four domains: work and household economics,
childcare and education, healthcare, and community social climate concerning discrimination
and racism. Throughout this description, we compare the experience of rural and urban
immigrant Latinx families, and we use qualitative responses of the women to highlight the
quantitative findings. We interpret our findings with a view to the social injustices these workers
face as immigrants to the US.

Methods
Research design
The study reported here is part of a larger two-group, prospective study examining the health
and cognitive effects of pesticide exposure in children in farmworker families. The larger study
uses a comparative design, with a sample of families of Latinx farmworkers with children and a
sample of similar families, but without any farmworker members. Additional details of the larger
study can be found elsewhere.24 The current study used a telephone survey to reach the mother
of the children in these families in May, 2020, when no face-to-face contact between study staff
and study participants was permitted by the Institutional Review Board due to COVID-19-related
health concerns for research participants. All procedures, including the telephone survey, were
approved by the Wake Forest University Institutional Review Board. The study received a
Certificate of Confidentiality from the National Institutes of Health.
Inclusion criteria and participant recruitment

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Inclusion criteria for the families were similar in both samples when recruited from March,
2018, to December, 2019; they reflect the purpose of the larger study. Each family had to have
a child aged 8 years at baseline, who had completed the first grade in the US. All children had to
be from families that self-identified as Latino or Hispanic, and with household incomes below
200% of the US federal poverty guideline. In the farmworker sample, the mother or her spouse
must have been employed in farm work on non-organic farms during the past three years. In the
non-farmworker sample, adults could not have been employed in any industry that involves
routine exposure to pesticides (e.g., farm work, landscaping, pest control) in the previous three
years. Families in the non-farmworker sample could not have lived adjacent to agricultural
fields in the previous three years.
Exclusion criteria for both samples included children having life threatening illnesses, prior
history of neurological conditions, physical condition or development disorder that would not
allow them to complete or would interfere with the results of neurobehavioral tests or MRIs
(used in the larger main study), primary language other than Spanish or English spoken in the
home, or refusal of mother/guardian to complete the questionnaires.
In the larger study, a total of 76 children were recruited for the farmworker sample and 65
children for the non-farmworker sample. For the recruitment of the original sample, the North
Carolina Farmworkers Project developed a list of farmworker families with an 8 year old child,
and the locations where they lived. In addition, other community organizations that served
farmworker families in the recruitment area were contacted. Study personnel contacted the
mothers. Similarly, for the original non-farmworker sample, local recruiters in Winston-Salem,
NC, and community members developed a list. For both samples, mothers were contacted by a
bilingual staff member who explained the overall study procedures, answered questions, and, if

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the mother agreed to participate, obtained signed informed consent from the mother and assent
from the child. As recruitment progressed, community partners worked with the study team to
balance the two samples on gender of the child.
Prior to the telephone survey, 5 children in the farmworker sample and 17 in the nonfarmworker sample withdrew, moved away from the study area, or were lost to follow-up. The
remaining children represented 67 farmworker families and 45 non-farmworker families,
because some families had more than one child enrolled. For the telephone sample, 2 families
refused to participate and 5 could not be reached, all in the non-farmworker sample. A total of
67 farmworker families and 38 non-farmworker families could be reached and agreed to
participate. This sample of 105 is used in this paper.
Data collection
Details of data collection can be found elsewhere.10 Briefly, data for this study were
gathered from May 1, 2020, to June 5, 2020, using a telephone survey. Only two interviews
were conducted in June. Interviewers were members of the larger study team who had usual
interview contact with the mothers. Interviewers received individualized televideo training and
completed practice interviews. To recruit participants, interviewers called the last known
telephone number for the mother in each family, explained the purpose and procedures for the
study, and told the mother that she would receive a $10 incentive for completing it. The
interviewers attempted calls at different times of day until the participant was reached or at least
3 unsuccessful calls had been made.
If the mother agreed to participate, her informed consent was noted, and the interviewer
proceeded to conduct a standardized interviewer-administered questionnaire in the language of
her choice. Data were entered in real time during the interviews using Research Electronic Data

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Capture (REDCap). The REDCap system provides secure, web-based applications for a variety
of types of research.25 Data from this interview were later merged with selected personal,
family, and household variables collected in the main study questionnaires.
Variables and measures
Variables from the main study baseline questionnaire were used to create measures to
describe the sample. These included the following measures for the mother: age, preferred
language, country of origin, educational attainment for mother and spouse, and assignment of the
family to the farm work or non-farm work sample.
Work and household economics. Employment status of the mother was obtained by asking
what statement best reflected her current employment status relative to her primary job before
the pandemic. Response options were: did not have a primary job before the pandemic, still
working in the same job as before the pandemic, working in a different job from that at the start
of the pandemic, lost her primary job and was looking for work, temporarily laid off from
primary job, or on sick leave or other leave from primary job. These were collapsed to create a
measure of current work status which included the category no primary job before pandemic (not
in the labor force), same job as before pandemic, working a different job than before the
pandemic, and currently out of work (laid off, on leave).
Participants were also asked about current work compared to the start of the pandemic.
Response options were that hours were fewer than usual, more than usual, or about the same. To
gauge protections from the coronavirus at work, participants were asked which of a series of
protective measures her employer had implemented: provided masks, gloves, other personal
protective equipment (PPE), and hand sanitizer; had instituted more frequent cleaning of
workplace floor and other surfaces than usual; had erected partitions between workers; had

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

moved desks or workstations farther apart; established daily health checks; and closed break or
eating spaces. The same questions were asked for the spouse’s employment and workplace
situation.
Open-ended questions were asked to ascertain whether there were any specific circumstances
at the participant’s or her spouse’s work that made them worry about the coronavirus. Responses
were recorded verbatim.
To measure expected economic status, participants were asked what the chance was that their
family would run out of money in the next three months. Response options were very likely,
somewhat likely, possible, unlikely, and very unlikely.
Three questions ordered from least to most severe were used to obtain a measure of
household food security. These questions were based on a Spanish-language adaptation26 of the
US Household Food Security Survey Module.27 Each specified “in the last seven days” and
behavior “because of a lack of money or other resources”. These were (1) were you worried you
would run out of food? (2) did anyone in the family eat less than they thought they should? (3)
did anyone in the family go without eating for a whole day? A food security score was
calculated based on the number of statements affirmed, ranging from 0 (food secure) to 3 (lowest
food security).
Six situations unrelated to money that made it difficult to obtain food were queried: grocery
stores open fewer hours, grocery stores make you wait in line to enter the store, grocery stores do
not have the food you want, children are not getting school breakfast or lunch, or restaurants
where you usually eat are closed. Those not affirming any of these options were classified as
having no problems getting food.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Childcare and education. To assess how families accommodated school closures, mothers
were asked how their children were being cared for when they were at work. Response options
were: spouses work at different times (or one or both parents do not work), leave children at
home alone (including having an older sibling care for young siblings), friend or relative
provides childcare, or children attend licensed daycare center.
Two questions were used to obtain information on how education was provided while
schools were closed. These questions were (1) did any of your children receive books or
assignments from their teachers when they were sent home? and (2) have any of your children
been receiving instruction over the internet? For both questions, response options were yes or no.
Participants were also asked to list their concerns about their child’s education while they
were out of school. Responses were coded into the following options: children will fall below
their grade level, children will not graduate or be promoted to the next grade, children will do
poorly on the state end-of-grade tests, children can not take the ACT, SAT, or other college tests.
If the mother had no concerns, this was noted. For additional information on mothers’ concerns
about school closures, participants were asked to respond to three statements using a 5-point
Likert-type scale: (1) school closures have made it difficult for me to work or do other household
tasks, (2) I am satisfied with the communication from my children’s schools to support learning,
and (3) my children will be prepared for school in the next school year. Response options were
strongly disagree, disagree, neutral, agree, or strongly agree. The first two and last two response
options were collapsed to create a measure with three response options: disagree, neutral, agree.
Healthcare. To gauge how the pandemic has altered families’ use of healthcare services, the
participants were asked a series of three questions that looked at their actions within the past two
weeks. Response options for all questions were no or yes. The first question asked if they or a or

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

a family member had visited a doctor or clinic. The second question asked participants if they or
a family member had canceled a planned doctor or clinic visit. If participants replied yes, they
were asked two follow up questions: (1) did you cancel it because of the coronavirus?, and (2)
did you cancel it because of the cost or lack of insurance? If participants answered yes to either
question, they were asked to explain why. The third question asked participants if they or a
family member had made any other change in medical care due to the coronavirus.
Community attitudes. Two questions were asked to assess current community attitudes on
political and social issues: (1) do you think community members are more worried than usual
about discrimination and racism?, and (2) do you think community members are more worried
than usual about immigration issues? Response options for both questions were no, yes, and
don’t know. If participants answered yes, they were asked to explain their answer and their
responses were recorded verbatim.
To obtain measures on mother’s concerns during the COVID-19 pandemic, outside of the
ones addressed in the questionnaire, participants were asked an open-ended question: is there
anything else you want to tell us about your situation now in the pandemic? Responses were
recorded verbatim.
Data analysis
Frequencies and percents were calculated to examine the variables of interest by farmworker
status and significant differences were examined using Chi-Square or Fisher’s Exact tests as
appropriate. All analyses were done using SAS v 9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC) and p-values <
.05 are considered statistically significant.
Answers to open-ended questions about employment and economic concerns, about
community attitudes, and about overall concerns during the pandemic were translated to English.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

These were then reviewed by the authors and themes identified. A list of codes was developed
that included both themes and attitudes or emotions conveyed by the respondents through words
used. These codes were applied to the text segments. Those codes that occurred across a
number of participants were considered salient28,29 and were summarized for presentation.
Exemplary quotations were chosen for presentation.
Results
Description of the sample
The women interviewed ranged from 25 to 47 years of age (Table 1). Most in both samples
were born in Mexico; Spanish was the preferred language for almost all women. Years of formal
education completed by the respondents ranged from no formal education to college graduate,
with a median in both samples of ninth grade. Formal education of spouses was slightly less,
with medians of sixth grade for the farmworker sample and eighth grade for the non-farmworker
sample.
<<place Table 1 here>>
Medians for total household size were 5 (range 1 to 10) and 6 (range 3 to 13) in the
farmworker and non-farmworker samples, respectively. The number of adults in the household
for the farmworker sample ranged from 1 to 6, while the number of children ranged from 0 (for a
respondent currently separated from her family) to 7. For the non-farmworker sample, the
ranges were 1 to 4 for adults and 1 to 10 for children.
At baseline (March 2018 through December 2019), farmworker families reported that the
most common industry in which women worked was agriculture; for men, it was construction,
followed by agriculture. For non-farmworker families, most women were not in the labor force
and the majority of men worked in construction.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Comparison of Household Concerns
Work. About 40% of the women in both samples did not work in a regular job before the
pandemic (Table 2). The women in farmworker families appeared to have less job stability:
fewer were working in the same job at the time of the interview, and more were in a different
job. About the same proportion (about 16%) of both samples of women reported being out of
work. Among spouses in both samples, most were in the same primary job as before the
pandemic. About 5% were in a different job, and only a few were out of work. Overall, the
pandemic appears to have affected the employment of women in farmworker families more than
any other category. Among those women, only 13 (34.21%) of the 38 who reported being in the
labor force were working in the same job as prior to the pandemic, compared to 91.53% of their
spouses. However, 59.09% and 86.11% of the women and spouses, respectively, in nonfarmworker families, were in the same job.
<<place Table 2 here>>
Over half (59.29%) of the respondents from farmworker families reported working fewer
hours now compared to prior to the pandemic; those from non-farmworker families were mixed,
with only 43.75% reporting fewer hours and 12.50% reporting more hours. The difference
between those in farmworker and non-farmworker families was not significant (p=.1628). For
the spouses, most (66.67%) of those in farmworker families reported working about the same
hours; a majority (54.55%) of those in non-farmworker families worker fewer hours.
Differences for spouses were significant (p=.0430).
Significantly fewer respondents from farmworker families (51.85%) than non-farmworker
families (93.75%) reported that their employers had made any accommodations for COVID-19
in the workplace (p=.0063). Among their spouses, only 19.30% among farmworker families

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

reported accommodations, compared to 69.70% in non-farmworker families (p<.0001). The
most frequent accommodations made in each group were providing masks, gloves, or hand
sanitizer. Among workers from non-farmworker families, 60.00% of respondents and 26.09 of
spouses reported that employers had built partitions between workers. Most of the other possible
accommodations (e.g., conducting daily health checks, closing break or eating spaces, or telling
employees to work from home) were reported by few workers; in all cases, more respondents
from non-farmworker families reported accommodations for themselves and their spouses.
Concerns stated by women related to their own work differed in content and emphasis
between the farmworker and non-farmworker family respondents (Table 3). Among those from
farmworker families, the primary concerns had to do with the way their work was organized due
to machinery and the way fields are laid out, and the difficulties presented in maintaining
recommended physical distancing. Women were both planting and harvesting when interviewed
in the late spring. Planting requires two or more workers sitting close to each other on the back
of a mechanical planter pulled by a tractor and placing seedlings in revolving wheels that spaces
them into the rows below the tractor. Harvesting blueberries, in the case mentioned, involves
standing in narrow rows and working close to bushes, to be able to reach all around them to find
the ripe berries. The other concern for women from farmworker families was problems in mask
use. Comments suggested the women were not given proper masks, but used scarves to cover
their face, which had to be removed due to heat.
<<place Table 3 here>>
For non-farmworker family respondents, the primary concern was coming into contact with
infected individuals in the workplace. These women’s workplaces are more varied, so that is
reflected in concerns ranging from infected individuals being hired into factories to cleaning

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

houses where infected people may live, to encountering a variety of unknown people in offices
and stores. Difficulties in maintain appropriate physical distance was mentioned, but less
frequently than by women in farmworker families.
Concerns expressed by women for their spouses’ safety at work were more numerous, but
were similar to concerns for themselves (Table 4). Women in farmworker families reported
many concerns about mask use—that spouses did not use them in closed cars and while working.
Most cited heat as a reason masks were not used. Physical distancing was also listed as a
problem, particularly while doing farm work. There was also suspicion that co-workers might
not be taking precautions and that that could lead to contact with infected individuals.
<<place Table 4 here>>
Women in non-farmworker families had many of the same concerns. They were more direct
than women in farmworker families about the possibility that their spouses could be infected and
then bring infection home to the family.
Household economics. Most of both the farmworker and non-farmworker family respondents
thought it was very likely or somewhat likely that they would run out of money for food in the
coming three months (p+.0009) (Table 5). When current food security was compared,
farmworker families reported significantly better food security than did non-farmworker families
(p=.0062); 10.61% vs. 34.21%, respectively, reported some level of insecurity, with only nonfarmworker families reporting actual behavioral measures taken to deal with shortage of food.
<<place Table 5 here>>
Non-farmworker families cited numerous circumstances beyond money that made it difficult
to get the food the family needed during the pandemic. Over half cited grocery stores being open
fewer hours (57.89%) or making customers wait in line to enter the store (52.63%), as well as

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

usual restaurants being closed (57.89%). About half (47.37%) noted that grocery stores did not
have the food they needed, and a third (31.58%) noted that children not getting school breakfast
or lunch made it difficult to meet family food needs.
Childcare and educational concerns. In both samples, most families accommodated childcare
by having the parents work at different times (or a parent not work), so that one parent was
always available (Table 6). As the second most used childcare option, almost a third (31.34%)
of farmworker families reported leaving children home alone, while 21.05% of non-farmworker
families reported that a friend or relative provided childcare. There were no significant
differences in the use of different child care strategies, though twice as many farmworker
families reported children staying home alone than non-farmworker families (p=.0797).
<<place Table 6 here>>
All respondents for farmworker families reported that their children had received books or
assignments when school was dismissed for the pandemic at the end of March. All but 2 of the
non-farmworker families reported this, too. All respondents in both samples reported that at
least some of their children received instruction over the internet while school was closed.
The concern that children would fall below grade level was the most frequently endorsed fear
of parents, with over 95% in both groups expressing concern. Other concerns (that children
would not graduate or be promoted, that children would do poorly on end-of-grade test, and that
children could not take college tests) were endorsed more by non-farmworker families (p=.0980,
p<.0001, and p=.0032, respectively).
Overall, respondents from farmworker families were less satisfied with school closure than
those from non-farmworker families. They tended to agree that the school closure had made it
more difficult to work or do household tasks (p<.001) and they tended to be less satisfied with

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

communication from their children’s school to support learning (p<.001). They also tended to
disagree more with the idea that their children would be prepared for school next year (p<.001).
Healthcare. Four (5.97%) farmworker family respondents reported that a family member had
visited a doctor or clinic in the previous two weeks. None had canceled an appointment for any
reason. In contrast, 11 (28.95%) of non-farmworker family respondent reported a doctor or
clinic visit in the past two weeks. An additional 9 reported having had an appointment, but
canceled it due to worries about the coronavirus. One of these respondents reported that she was
afraid of getting infected and then infecting her family, if she went to the clinic.
Community attitudes. When asked about their community members’ current worries about
racism and discrimination, there were sharp contrasts between farmworker and non-farmworker
family responses (Table 7). For farmworker families, most (91.04%) responded that they did not
know if community members were more worried. In contrast, non-farmworker families gave
split responses: 42.11% reported more worry about racism and discrimination, while 57.68%
reported no more worry than previously. Similarly, when asked about worry concerning
immigration issues, most (89.55%) farmworker families responded that they did not know, and
the rest said no. Only 21.05% of non-farmworker families thought there had been an increase in
worry about immigration issues, while 78.95% said no.
<<place Table 7 here>>
Farmworker families had few further comments on community climate, In contrast, nonfarmworker families did express concerns. They noted that, as non-citizens, they were not being
provided with financial assistance that citizens were receiving. One woman noted, “There are
many people who have complained that we are not cared for the same [as citizens], and the
language barrier does not help. We lose at everything. The government does not help with the

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

relief from the President, who discriminates against those of us [even though we] pay taxes.”
Priority for assistance for citizens was noted by women in financial matters, particularly in
contrast for those without documents. Some believed that if they get sick, priority will be given
to Americans in medical care. Another noted a specific example, that the pharmacy has started
to be reluctant to give her child’s medicine to her without a US passport or US ID. Some
perceived increased racism in their interactions with non-Latinx individuals. “People stare at us
a lot in the grocery store,” one woman said. Another noted, “If you are in the US and Hispanic,
they always look at you different; they look down on you.” An attitude to blame them for illness
was noted: “I have heard people saying that Mexicans are going to get sick because they don’t
take care of themselves.” Another noted, “They think that, because we are not from here, we are
the ones that bring the diseases.”
Women in non-farmworker families also expressed fears related to immigration status that
continue or are exacerbated by the pandemic. One stated, “If the President does not stop doing
things, one is always at risk. There are many people deported, and people are still scared in this
pandemic.” Another worried, “I am scared that, if we go out, they can detain me for lack of
documentation.”
Overall concerns. Fear, worry, and anxiety characterized the concerns expressed by women
in rural farmworker families (Table 8). They were afraid of contracting COVID-19 and worried
about bringing the disease home to their families. They seemed acutely aware that contracting
COVID-19 might leave them unable to care for their children. Some had stopped work to care
for their children, often because the cost of childcare (necessary because schools had closed) was
more than they could afford with the low wages they earned. Economic concerns added to their
worries, particularly paying for basic needs such as food and, if needed, healthcare for COVID-

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

19. They were concerned for high-risk family members, and many knew someone who had been
sick or died from COVID-19. Despite their concerns, they stated that they did not use masks
when visiting households of relatives, either because they assumed that “family” would not be a
source of infection or because they thought it would not “look good” to wear masks around
relatives. One woman’s comment seemed to sum up those of the group: “This whole situation is
stressing me out and giving me anxiety.”
<<place Table 8 here>>
Women in urban non-farmworker families had concerns that reflected the lower rates of
employment in this group (Table 9). Like the women in rural farmworker families, worry and
fear characterized their responses. They also had a different worry about their children that was
not expressed by the rural women, that children were at home and could not go outside.
<<place Table 9 here>>

Discussion
This survey of rural farmworker families and urban non-farmworker families demonstrated
that these immigrants face a number of impacts of COVID-19 and that these impacts are sources
of concern. About 1 in 4 women, both rural and urban, was out of work several months into the
pandemic. Across both groups, many women and men were working fewer hours than before the
pandemic. Rural women reported fewer worksite accommodations for safety in the COVID-19
pandemic for themselves and their spouses than did urban women. Across the entire sample,
only one person (an urban spouse) had been told to work from home. These work-related issues
translated into economic concerns. These were more severe among the urban non-farmworker
families, among whom a much higher percentage viewed the likelihood of running out of money

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in the next three months as very likely. Similarly, urban women reported more food insecurity in
the previous week and reported that restrictions in grocery stores and restaurant closures made it
hard to get the food their families needed. Although almost all women reported children had
received school books and assignments, most had concerns about how their children would learn
at home. While urban women were generally satisfied with communications from the schools
and thought children would be prepared or the next school year, rural women did not share these
sentiments. Urban women expressed greater concern about community climate about racism and
immigration issues than did rural women.
These findings highlight the diversity of experience Latinx families report during the
pandemic, which likely reflect differences between the rural and urban environments as well as
between the two populations. The rural health literature has consistently shown that rural
populations have less access to quality medical care and greater age-adjusted mortality.30 Such
statistics are often linked to lower household incomes, less formal education, as well as distance
to both formal medical services (e.g., specialty care) and health-promotion services (e.g., healthy
food distribution). Environmentally, rural communities have consistently lower levels of
investment in the social determinants of health such as housing, emergency services, libraries,
parks, and other services than urban communities.31 Socially, rural communities are often
thought to provide stronger notions of community and support, based on a willingness to work
together and pride in place.30 These rural-urban differences observed in other situations are
reflected in this study. Even among these immigrants, the urban sample has higher levels of
education. Almost 29% of urban women were at least high school graduates, versus 16% of the
rural sample; among men the difference is almost 31% versus 9%. Workplace safety responses
also appear better in the urban setting. About 48% of rural women and 81% of their spouses

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

report no workplace COVID-19 accommodations, compared to only 6% of urban women and
30% of their spouses. The rural women had trouble answering questions about the impact
community attitudes toward them as immigrants, while over 40% of urban women reported they
were worrying more about racism and discrimination. As farmworkers are essential to rural
agriculture and its economic contribution to the community, it is not surprising that there were
fewer negative attitudes experienced.
Despite the differences between the rural and urban concerns, women in both samples
expressed similar emotions and resulting mental health effects. Fear and worry were expressed
by many women. They are afraid they will get sick and not be able to take care of their children.
They worry that they have to go to work, but do not know if they will be exposed to COVID-19
by co-workers or others they encounter in the workplace. They are afraid they will not have
enough money to pay bills. They worry about being exposed to the virus and bringing it home.
They express desperation, anxiety, and stress in reaction to this fear and worry. Mental health
data gathered nationally early in the pandemic show increased effects on mental health32 and
suggest that the effects will result in more mental health impairment in disadvantaged groups,
such as immigrants, as they cope with greater financial insecurity and grief caused by greater
pandemic morbidity and mortality.33 In addition, we have shown elsewhere10 that these women
are well informed about the causes of COVID-19 and recommended practices to prevent it.
Their comments here reflect this knowledge and their inability to practice some of the methods
to prevent COVID-19 in their families.
Understanding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on immigrants is aided by the use of a
social justice framework and the idea of structural violence.34-36 Scholars have noted that
exposure to social injustices results in effects over time on well-being, effects termed structural

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

violence. Generally, such effects are slow and, some34 would argue, silent, reflecting the
accumulation of exposure to risks over time, “slow violence”.37 However, events such as
environmental disasters (e.g., hurricanes, wildfires, pandemics) place those suffering from slow
violence at extreme risk, what has been termed “contextual vulnerability”.38-40 Both the long
term compromised well-being and the socioeconomic context in which the disaster occurs focus
risk on the immigrant Latinx population. In the current study, this structural vulnerability played
out in several ways, but economic effects are most evident. Because access to resources and the
ability to reduce exposure and recover from the effects of the pandemic are not uniformly
distributed, Latinx immigrants are forced to (in the case of women) reduce household income by
giving up low paying jobs to care for children receiving school instruction at home, while
spouses continue to experience disease exposure in their own low paying jobs that are either
deemed essential to society or are, in fact, essential to their household’s survival. While the
essential nature of some jobs, e.g., “first responders”, has been met with extra benefits from
public demonstrations of support to largescale donations of free goods and services to designated
grocery shopping hours. Few of these benefits filter down to immigrant workers whose work is
often as structurally essential to the work of first responders as it is to society at large.
Comparable rewards (like free meals) that support healthcare workers during the pandemic are
also needed and deserved by the very people doing the work to bring this food to the tables
across the nation. Unfortunately, rather than seeing these benefits, immigrants are actually
suffering from food insecurity.
This study has several limitations that should be considered. All behaviors were selfreported and not observed. The women interviewed also reported for their spouses. Data could
not be verified and may be inaccurate or distorted because of social desirability. Small sample

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sizes prevent more detailed analyses of quantitative data. There was greater uniformity in
occupations within the rural group, which makes their responses easier to interpret.
Nevertheless, this study has several strengths. One was the scheduling of data collection
within a short time (the month of May) during which changes in national information about
prevention and state regulations were relatively stable. By the time of data collection, emerging
research had established the importance of physical distancing and mask use over the initial
emphasis on hand hygiene and cleaning surfaces.41-43 Another strength was that all families in
this study would have been subject to the same North Carolina governmental orders.

Conclusions
Overall, this study represents a unique opportunity to document the concerns of Latinx
immigrants in the USA during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic. In particular,
farmworkers are often a hidden and difficult to reach population. This study demonstrates that
both rural and urban Latinx immigrants have substantial concerns about their families’
vulnerability in the COVID-19 pandemic. While the content of these worries differs some
between urban and rural, the emotional response is the same. The information provided by the
women in this study indicates that concerns are well founded. Workplaces are not providing
protections for workers, and the need to provide childcare has taken many women out of the
labor force. At least in the urban areas, families are encountering more overt racism and are
worried about immigration issues.
The results of this study illustrate the contextual vulnerability of Latinx immigrants in North
Carolina. Several policy reforms can help to alleviate this. First, immigration reform is needed
so that those immigrants doing essential work can access benefits available to other workers,

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

including sick leave, family leave, nutrition benefits, and healthcare. Second, work safety
culture and work organization need to be addressed so that workplaces are safer for all illnesses
and injuries, including infectious disease. Third, access to education and job training benefits
need to be made equitable so that the jobs held by this population can be higher paying and so
their children can make better use of school provided resources.

Funding
This research was funded by the National Institute of Environmental Health Science,
Grant/Award Number R01 ES08739.

Acknowledgments
The authors appreciate the support and participation of their community partner, the NC
Farmworkers Project, and of Student Action with Farmworkers. They also appreciate the
valuable contributions of our community field interviewers in carrying out participant
recruitment and data collection. They especially thank the mothers who participated in this study.

Declaration of conflict of interest
The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Reference Cited
1. Okonkwo NE, Aguwa UT, Jang M, et al. COVID-19 and the US response: accelerating
health inequities [published online ahead of print, 2020 Jun 3]. BMJ Evid Based Med. Epub
ahead of print 3 June 2020. doi:10.1136/bmjebm-2020-111426
2. Bui DP, McCaffrey K, Friedrichs M, et al. Racial and ethnic disparities among COVID-19
cases in workplace outbreaks by industry sector — Utah, March 6–June 5, 2020. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020;69:1133–1138.
3. Yancy CW. COVID-19 and African Americans. JAMA 2020; 323(19): 1891-1892.
4. Clark E, Fredricks K, Woc-Colburn L, et al. Disproportionate impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on immigrant communities in the United States. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 2020; 14: 19.
5. Langellier BA. Policy recommendations to address high risk of COVID-19 among
immigrants. Am J Public Health 2020; 110: 1137-1139.
6. Quesada J, Hart LK and Bourgois P. Structural vulnerability and health: Latino migrant
laborers in the United States. Med Anthropol 2011; 30(4): 339-362.
7. The Lancet. The plight of essential workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet 2020;
395: 1587.
8. Ramos AK, Lowe AE, Harrison JJ, et al. Invisible no more: The impact of COVID-19 on
essential food production workers. J Agromedicine. Epub ahead of print 18 September 2020.
doi: 10.1080/1059924X.2020.1814925.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9. ABC News. Essential farmworkers risk COVID-19 exposure to maintain food supply.
Available online: https://abcnews.go.com/Business/essential-farmworkers-risk-covid-19exposure-maintain-food/story?id=70365950 (accessed on 8 July 2020).
10. Quandt SA, LaMonto NJ, Mora DC, et al. COVID-19 Pandemic among Latinx farmworker
and non-farmworker families in North Carolina: Knowledge, risk perceptions, and preventive
behaviors. Int J Environ Res Public Health 2020; 17: 5786.
11. Arcury TA, Jensen A, Mann M, et al. Providing Health Information to Latino Farmworkers:
The Case of the Affordable Care Act. J Agromedicine 2017; 22: 275-281.
12. Page KR, Venkataramani M, Beyrer C, et al. Undocumented U.S. immigrants and Covid-19.
N Engl J Med 2020; 382: e62. doi:10.1056/NEJMp2005953
13. Baker MG. Nonrelocatable occupations at increased risk during pandemics: United States,
2018. Am J Public Health 2020; 110: 1126-1132.
14. Cholera R, Falusi OO and Linton JM. Sheltering in place in a xenophobic climate: COVID19 and children in immigrant families. Pediatrics 2020; 146: 1-6.
15. Alkon AH, Bowen S, Kato Y, et al. Unequally vulnerable: a food justice approach to racial
disparities in COVID-19 cases. Agric Hum Values 2020; 20: 1-2.
16. Farmworker Justice. 2020. https://www.farmworkerjustice.org/blog-post/statement-byfarmworker-advocates-on-covid-19-and-the-risks-to-farmworkers/. Accessed July 28, 2020.
17. Parks CA, Nugent NB, Fleischhacker SE, et al. Food system workers are the unexpected but
under protected COVID heroes. J Nutr 2020; 110: 1133-1134.
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18. Waltenburg MA, Victoroff T, Rose CE, et al. Update: COVID-19 among workers in meat
and poultry processing facilities ― United States, April–May 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 2020; 69: 887-892.
19. Donahue M, Sreenivasan N, Stover D, et al. Characteristics of meat processing facility
workers with confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection — Nebraska, April–May 2020. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2020; 69: 1020–1022.
20. Place L. Farmworker dies, 14 infected in COVID-19 outbreak at Santa Maria H-2A housing
sites. Santa Maria Times, July 15, 2020. https://santamariatimes.com/news/local/farmworkerdies-14-infected-in-covid-19-outbreak-at-santa-maria-h-2a-housing-sites/article_9037fb57167f-54ee-b597-4cc76625ff18.html Accessed 19 August 2020.
21. Sánchez-Guerra A. 112 workers test positive for coronavirus at Alleghany County Christmas
tree farm, News & Observer August 18, 2020.
https://www.newsobserver.com/news/coronavirus/article245019545.html. Accessed 19
August 2020.
22. Flocks J. The potential impact of COVID-19 on H-2A agricultural workers. J Agromedicine.
Epub ahead of print 28 Aug 2020. doi:10.1080/1059924X.2020.1814922
23. Stadnytskyi V, Bax CE, Bax A, et al. The airborne lifetime of small speech droplets and their
potential importance in SARS-CoV-2 transmission. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2020; 117: 1187511877.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

24. Quandt SA, Mora DC, Seering TL, et al. Using life history calendars to estimate in utero and
early life pesticide exposure of Latinx children in farmworker families. Int J Environ Res
Public Health 2020; 17: 3478.
25. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap)—A
metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational informatics
support. J Biomed Inf 2009; 42: 77–381.
26. Harrison GG, Stormer A, Herman DR, et al. Development of a Spanish-language version of
the US Household Food Security Survey module. J Nutr 2003; 133: 1192–1197.
27. Bickel G, Nord M, Price C, et al. Guide to Measuring Household Food Security: Revised
2000. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition Service, Office of Analysis,
Nutrition, and Evaluation; Washington, DC: 2000.
28. Buetow S. Thematic analysis and its reconceptualization as 'saliency analysis'. J Health Serv
Res Policy 2010; 15: 123-125.
29. Arcury TA, Quandt SA and Bell RA. Staying healthy: the salience and meaning of health
maintenance behaviors among rural older adults in North Carolina. Soc Sci Med 2001; 53:
1541-1556.
30. Meit M and Knudson A. Leveraging rural strengths to overcome population health
challenges. Am J Public Health 2020; 110: 1281-1282.
31. Leider JP, Meit M, McCullough JM, et al. The state of rural public health: Enduring needs in
a new decade. Am J Public Health 2020; 110: 1283-1290.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

32. Zhou Y, MacGeorge EL and Myrick JG. Mental health and its predictors during the early
months of the COVID-19 pandemic experience in the United States. Int J Environ Res Public
Health 2020;17(17):E6315.
33. Purtle J. COVID-19 and mental health equity in the United States. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol 2020; 55(8): 969-971.
34. Galtung J. Violence, peace, and peace research. J Peace Res 1969; 6: 167–191.
35. Farmer P. An anthropology of structural violence. Curr Anthropol 2004; 45: 305-325.
36. Scheper-Hughes N and Bourgois P. Introduction: making sense of violence. In ScheperHughes N and Bourgois P (eds) Violence in War and Peace: An Anthology. Madden, MA:
Blackwell. 2004; pp. 1-27.
37. Nixon R. Slow violence and the environmentalism of the poor. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. 2011.
38. Méndez M, Flores-Haro G and Zucker L. The (in)visible victims of disaster: Understanding
the vulnerability of undocumented Latino/a and indigenous immigrants. Geoforum 2020;
116: 50-62.
39. Davies T. Slow violence and toxic geographies: ‘out of sight’ to whom? Environment and
Planning C: Politics and Space. Epub ahead of print 10 April 2019.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2399654419841063
40. Hess K. Contextual vulnerability of the communal forests and population of Totonicapán,
Guatemala. Espacio y Desarrollo 2018; 31: 115-144
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

41. Davies NG, Kucharski AJ, Eggo RM, et al. Effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on
COVID-19 cases, deaths, and demand for hospital services in the UK: a modelling
study. Lancet Public Health 2020; 5: e375-e385.
42. Chu DK, Akl EA, Duda S, et al. Physical distancing, face masks, and eye protection to
prevent person-to-person transmission of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Lancet 2020; 395: 1973-1987.
43. van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, et al. Aerosol and surface stability of SARSCoV-2 compared to SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 1564-1567.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Individual and household characteristics of participants. Comparison of Latinx
farmworker and nonfarmworker adults in North Carolina, May 2020.
Farmworker
Non-Farmworker
n=67
n=38
n
%
n
%
Age
25 – 29 years
7
10.45
5
13.16
30 – 34 years
26
38.81
7
18.42
35 – 39 years
19
28.36
13
34.21
40 – 47 years
15
22.39
13
34.21
Country of birth (mother)
Mexico
54
80.60
30
78.95
El Salvador
7
10.45
0
0
Guatemala
2
2.99
1
2.63
Honduras
1
1.49
3
7.89
United States
3
4.48
2
5.26
Other
0
0
2
5.26
Language most comfortable for conversation
Spanish
65
97.01
35
92.11
English
1
1.49
3
7.89
An indigenous language
1
1.49
0
0
Highest level of education completed (mother)
Less than sixth grade
13
19.40
3
7.89
Sixth - eighth grade
18
26.87
8
21.05
Ninth – eleventh grade
25
37.31
16
42.11
High school or more
11
16.42
11
28.95
Highest level of education completed (spouse)1
Less than sixth grade
13
23.64
7
19.44
Sixth - eighth grade
17
30.91
11
30.56
Ninth – eleventh grade
20
36.36
7
19.44
High school or more
5
9.09
11
30.56
Household composition
Number of children
0-1
4
5.97
1
2.63
2-3
40
53.70
22
57.89
4 or more
23
34.33
15
39.47
Number of adults
1
7
10.45
2
5.26
2
45
67.16
24
63.16
3 or more
15
22.39
12
31.58
Total household size
1-3
6
8.96
1
2.63
4-6
49
73.13
25
65.79
7-13
12
17.91
12
31.58
1
Totals 55 and 36, respectively, due to missing values.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2. Comparison of employment status and COVID-19 accommodations for respondent
and spouse in farmworker and non-farmworker families.
Self
Spouse1
NonNonFarmworker
Farmworker
Farmworker
Farmworker
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
n (%)
Current employment status
No primary job before pandemic
29 (43.28)
16 (42.11)
0
0
Same job as before pandemic
13 (19.40)
13 (34.21)
54 (91.53)
31 (86.11)
Now working different job
14 (20.90)
3 (7.89)
3 (5.08)
2 (5.56)
Currently out of work2
11 (16.42)
6 (15.79)
2 (3.39)
3(8.33)
Hours worked3
Fewer than usual
16 (59.26)
7 (43.75)
17 (29.82)
18 (54.55)
About the same as usual
11 (40.74)
7 (43.75)
38 (66.67)
15 (45.45)
More than usual
0
2 (12.50)
2 (3.51)
0
Employer COVID accommodations3
Made no accommodations
13 (48.15)
1 (6.25)
46 (80.70)
10 (30.30)
Made any accommodation
14 (51.85)
15 (93.75)
11 (19.30)
23 (69.70)
4
Provided masks
12 (85.71)
14 (93.33)
10 (90.91)
21 (91.30)
Provided gloves4
12 (85.71)
14 (93.33)
7 (63.64)
18 (78.26)
4
Provided other PPE
2 (14.29)
1 (6.67)
3 (27.27)
1 (4.35)
Provided hand sanitizer4
11 (78.57)
13 (86.67)
5 (45.45)
17 (73.91)
Cleaned surfaces more than
4 (28.57)
11 (73.33)
3 (27.27)
7 (30.43)
4
usual
Build partitions between
0
9 (60.00)
0
6 (26.09)
4
workers
Separated workstations4
1 (7.14)
6 (40.00)
0
2 (8.70)
4
Conducting daily health checks
1 (7.14)
7 (46.67)
0
4 (17.39)
Closed break or eating spaces4
1 (7.14)
6 (40.00)
0
3 (13.04)
Told to work from home
0
0
0
1 (3.03)
Other4
1 (7.14)
1 (6.67)
1 (9.09)
1 (4.35)
1
59 spouses reported for farmworker families and 36 for non-farmworker families
2
Includes those who report having lost a job, being temporarily laid off, and on sick or other
leave
3
Based on number of individuals reported to be working
4
Based on number of individuals who report employer made accommodations

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3. Concerns expressed by respondents about their own employment and risks of COVID19, comparing respondents in farmworker and non-farmworker families.
Theme
Farmworker families
Difficulties maintaining
physical distancing

Representative Quotations








Problems with mask use




Non-farmworker families
Possible contact with
infected individuals







Difficulties maintaining
physical distancing




We work in groups, and we cannot keep the distance.
We work too close to each other when we are planting.
We are too close together when we work in the
blueberry, and there are a lot of us there.
We really work very closely when we plant the
tobacco.
We are planting tobacco, and we are working closely
together. There are several of us.
We are very close [in the fields], and it is all day.
We just work too close to each other when we are
planting.
We use scarves to cover our mouths, but sometimes we
sweat and take them off.
Even though we have bandanas to cover our mouths, I
worry I might get sick.
There are lots of people coming into the office where I
work.
[My employers] are hiring people from a factory that
had people who were infected.
[At my worksite] they have already found 5 positive
workers. They closed the factory on March 20 and
reopened on April 27. In that week they found 1
[positive case].
I worry about getting infected in the houses where I do
housecleaning.
I do customer service, [so see many people].
I work at a store and I worry that people are stubborn
and they don’t want to keep the required distance

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 4. Concerns expressed by respondents about their spouse’s employment and risks of
COVID-19, comparing respondents in farmworker and non-farmworker families.
Theme
Farmworker families
Problems with mask use

Representative Quotations








Difficulties maintaining
physical distancing






Concerns about others
taking precautions





Possible contact with
infected individuals
Non-farmworker families
Concerns about others
taking precautions






It worries me that he goes to work. There are several
people in the car, and they don’t use masks.
With the heat, they have to remove the mask because
they cannot stand the heat.
Barely anyone uses masks.
They don’t use masks because it is too not outside,
and they are outside all day.
Not everyone uses a mask. Even my husband takes it
off because he says he sweats a lot.
Nobody uses masks because they sweat a lot, and it
bothers them.
Despite the company rules, as soon as the foreman
leaves them alone, some people take off their masks
because they say it bothers them to work.
There are many people, and they are all very close.
He works on the blueberry.
There are several people, and, although they all wear
masks, they are together when they are cutting
cabbage. There is not much distance.
He is planting tobacco. Although they use masks,
they are very close.
They have to be in groups all the time, and
sometimes they are too close.
Well, nobody [at his work] takes precautions.
It does worry me not knowing if the co-workers take
precautions when they go to the grocery store
because at work they don’t use masks.
Not all his co-workers wash their hands or wear face
masks.
It is scary for him to be close to other people and not
know if he is going to get infected.
The employees don’t use masks, and the employers
don’t provide them with any to protect themselves.
My husband installs air conditioners, and they are not
using protection.
I worry because the employer should provide
protection, because without protection it is
dangerous.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Possible contact with
infected individuals




Difficulties maintaining
physical distancing




I worry there are people who are infected [at his job]
and they can infect us.
There are several people at the worksite, and I worry
he might get infected.
I worry that he is being exposed to getting sick.
The clients at his work don’t respect the distances

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 5. Economic and food security concerns. Latinx farmworker and non-farmworker
adults in North Carolina, May 2020.
Farmworker
Non-Farmworker
n=67
n=38
n
%
n
%
Likelihood family will run out of money in the next
three months1
Very likely
8
12.12
17
44.74
Somewhat likely
36
54.55
11
28.95
Possible
7
10.61
6
15.79
Unlikely
14
21.21
3
7.89
Very unlikely
1
1.52
1
2.63
Highest level of food insecurity reported, past 7 days1
No food insecurity
59
Worried that food would run out because of lack of
7
money
Anyone in the family ate less than they thought
0
they should because of lack of money
Anyone in family go for a whole day because of
0
lack of money
Conditions making it hard to get food family needs2
Grocery stores open fewer hours
Grocery stores make wait in line to enter
Grocery stores do not have food wanted
Children not getting school breakfast or lunch
Restaurants usually patronized are closed
Experiences no problems getting food
1
One missing farmworker observation.
2
Excludes problems related to money.

36

0
0
0
0
0
67

89.39

25

65.79

10.61

10

26.32

0

2

5.26

0

1

2.63

0
0
0
0
0
100.00

22
20
18
12
22
4

57.89
52.63
47.37
31.58
57.89
10.53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 6. Childcare and educational concerns. Latinx farmworker and nonfarmworker adults
in North Carolina, May 2020.
Farmworker
Non-Farmworker
n=67
n=38
n
%
n
%
1
Child care while parents work
Spouses work at different times
38
56.72
26
68.42
Leave children at home alone
21
31.34
6
15.79
Friend or relative provides childcare
8
11.94
8
21.05
Children attend licensed daycare center
0
0
0
0
Takes child to work
1
1.49
0
0
Education while school is closed
Received books or assignments
Received instruction over the internet

67
67

100
100

36
38

94.74
100

Concerns about children’s education
Will fall below grade level
Will not graduate or be promoted
Will do poorly on end-of-grade tests
Cannot take college tests (e.g., SAT, ACT)

64
23
10
1

95.52
34.33
14.93
1.49

37
20
22
7

97.37
52.63
57.89
18.42

School closure have made parent work difficult
Disagree
Neutral
Agree

0
45
22

0
67.16
32.84

9
13
16

23.68
34.21
42.11

Satisfied with communication from schools
Disagree
Neutral
Agree

43
22
2

64.18
32.84
2.99

5
5
28

13.16
13.16
73.68

80.60
19.40
0

11
9
18

28.95
23.68
47.37

Children will be prepared for school next year
Disagree
54
Neutral
13
Agree
0
1
Respondents could report more than one childcare option.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 7. Concerns about community climate. Respondents were asked if they thought
community members were more worried than usual about topics. Latinx farmworker and
nonfarmworker adults in North Carolina, May 2020.
Farmworker
Non-Farmworker
n=67
n=38
n
%
n
%
Discrimination and racism
Yes
2
2.99
16
42.11
No
4
5.97
22
57.89
Don’t know
61
91.04
0
Immigration issues
Yes
No
Don’t know

0
7
60

38

10.45
89.55

8
30
0

21.05
78.95
-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 8. Comments by respondents from farmworker families about their own situation during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Theme
Concerned about
contracting COVID-19

Financial and insurance
worries

Stopped working to care
for children

Visiting family without
precautions

Representative Quotations
 I work at a restaurant; I worry about getting infected and
bringing it home.
 I worry knowing the virus is everywhere and the fact that we
cannot see it is causing me anxiety. We are afraid that we
don’t know what day we are going to get sick.
 Who would take care of my children if my partner and I get
sick?
 I worry that I will get sick and then, who will take care of my
children?
 I worry that I have to work, but I am scared to be around
other people.
 It is becoming very difficult for me to pay my bills because I
am not working.
 I had to stop working to take care of my children. [Because
they are not in school,] I would not make enough to pay
$15/day/child for child care.
 I have to look for help with food from the pantry at the
Episcopal church.
 We are desperate with the situation. It worries me that if we
get sick, how are we going to pay for the bill if we come out
of the hospital alive?
 If we get sick, what are we going to do to get ahead?
 I am afraid of getting sick because I don’t have medical
insurance to pay the bills.
 [With closing of schools], now all my children are home and
I have more expenses for food.
 I stopped working so I could stay with my children at home
and not have anyone else taking care of them.
 I stopped working to take care of my three children [when
school closed] because I would have to pay someone to take
care of them and that is not feasible for me.
 I need to work, but I can’t. I have no one to leave my
children with, and I am afraid I will get sick.
 My mother, two sisters, and mother-in-law live close by. We
visit them without precautions because they are family.
 We only visit among family and they are not sick. That’s the
reason we don’t wear masks.
 The people we visit are our cousins. It does not look good if
we wear masks [when we visit them].

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

High risk family members






Knows someone with
COVID-19








Experiencing stress




One of my children has diabetes and I am worried about his
health. I need to work, but, if I do, I would always be
surrounded by people.
My partner and I have lost our jobs, but we have not looked
for others because he has a kidney disease and we are afraid
of getting sick.
I am worried when there will be a cure. My little daughter
has been ill since she was born, and, if she is infected with
the virus, her situation will be very critical.
I worry about the old lady who lives with us because, if she
gets sick, she will not be able to resist the disease.
My two nephews are with me now, in addition to my two
children, because my brother and his wife are sick with the
coronavirus.
A neighboring couple both tested positive. When I called
her on the phone, it was very sad to hear her voice because
she could hardly speak, and only cried, saying that she was
afraid for her future.
My neighbor died a few days ago from the virus. I am afraid
of getting sick, even if I take precautions. We did not visit
each other, but we went walking on the street that separates
our houses.
We were quarantined because [four neighbors] tested
positive, and they had visited before anyone showed
symptoms. Thank God we did not get sick, but we fear we
might.
This situation is causing me a lot of stress and I feel sad.
This whole situation is stressing me out and giving me
anxiety.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.30.20223156; this version posted November 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 9. Comments by respondents from non- farmworker families about their own situation
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Theme
Worries about children

Concerns about contracting
COVID-19

Financial and insurance
worries

Experiencing stress

Knows someone with
COVID-19

Representative Quotations
 I am worried that, because of the pandemic, the children are
not able to go out.
 This whole situation worries me and especially that the
children can’t go out.
 I am very concerned about my children because [the current
situation] is not that same as when they go to classes and are
taught by their teacher. It is very different at home.
 I am concerned about the children. They are not made to be
locked up, though it is for their safety that they cannot out.
 People don’t understand that they need to protect themselves
by wearing masks and staying home.
 I am worried that my daughters will get infected.
 We are scared of getting sick.
 Everyone is afraid of getting [COVID-19]. Some people are
not protecting themselves.
 I am worried because I don’t have work, and it is worse in
my country.
 I am worried for my family because my husband does not
have full time work.
 We don’t have work, so we need to be directed to places that
help pay rent.
 I am worried because something else new comes out every
day, and the numbers [of cases] are increasing.
 I am worried about everything.
 We had a visitor with a fever who tested positive, and he had
contact with my children

41

