medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Cell phone mobility data and manifold learning: Insights
into population behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic
Roman Levin1,∗ , Dennis L. Chao2,∗ , Edward A. Wenger2 , and Joshua L. Proctor2†
1

Department of Applied Mathematics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, United States
2
Institute for Disease Modeling, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, WA 98109, United States
∗
Joint first author, equal contribution
†
corresponding author

Abstract
As COVID-19 cases resurge in the United States, understanding the complex interplay between
human behavior, disease transmission, and non-pharmaceutical interventions during the pandemic could provide valuable insights to focus future public health efforts. Cell-phone mobility
data offers a modern measurement instrument to investigate human mobility and behavior at
an unprecedented scale. We investigate mobility data collected, aggregated, and anonymized
by SafeGraph Inc. which measures how populations at the census-block-group geographic scale
stayed at home in California, Georgia, Texas, and Washington since the beginning of the pandemic. Using manifold learning techniques, we find patterns of mobility behavior that align with
stay-at-home orders, correlate with socioeconomic factors, cluster geographically, and reveal subpopulations that likely migrated out of urban areas. The analysis and approach provides policy
makers a framework for interpreting mobility data and behavior to inform actions aimed at curbing the spread of COVID-19.

1

Introduction

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has had a devastating impact on mortality [1] and economic activity [2] leading to increased food insecurity, poverty, and gender inequity [3]. Most public health
interventions attempting to arrest or mitigate the spread of the disease caused by the Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 are non-pharmaceutical interventions aimed at decreasing
transmission by changing people’s behavior. For example, every state in the United States (US)
issued mandatory or advisory stay-at-home orders between March and May of 2020 [4]. However,
characterizing changes in behavior during the COVID-19 pandemic, whether due to adherence to
stay-at-home orders, loss of employment, or non-pandemic-related factors, is challenging. In this
article, we use cell-phone mobility data from SafeGraph Inc. to identify the heterogeneous mobility behaviors during COVID-19 in four states and reveal consistent motifs across states, within
a state, and even within urban centers. Moreover, the modeling and analyses also point to geographic areas with populations that are young and highly mobile. We believe the approach and
insights in the work could be leveraged by local public health officials to better target educational
campaigns by geographic area and socioeconomic status.
Cell phone location data is a relatively new but promising way to quantify human movement.

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The locations of cell phones can be tracked by service providers or applications installed on the
phones by users, but data that is shared with scientists is typically anonymized and aggregated to
protect the privacy of individuals [5, 6]. Mobility data offers a unique measurement instrument
to link public health statements and related legislative actions taken to reduce population mobility with an actual effect on population behavior. Cell-phone mobility data has provided early
evidence that these orders were indeed associated with reductions in movement [7, 8, 9, 10, 11];
moreover, adherence was not uniform and may be associated with factors such as socioeconomic
status and political leanings [7, 8, 9, 10, 11]. The keen interest in cell-phone mobility data to help
inform policy makers during the COVID-19 pandemic has been widely discussed [12], with strong
emphasis on the challenges facing data ascertainment bias, interpreting the link between mobility and behavior changes, and the lack of a single mathematical framework for analyzing this
data [5, 6]. To date, most investigations of mobility data during the COVID-19 pandemic have
compared summary statistics from mobility data, such as average cell-phone mobility within a
region, between regions with different demographics. Here, we leverage the mobility data at full
geographic and temporal resolution along with recently developed mathematical methods from
dynamical systems and machine learning to identify patterns of behavior that are consistent across
multiple geographic scales and provide insight into behavioral differences.
Analyzing and interpreting high-dimensional mobility time-series is a challenge. Model and
dimensionality reduction has a rich history in the analysis of dynamical systems, with early theoretical work on bifurcation analyses enabling the categorization of qualitatively different dynamic
regimes [13] to the more recent data-driven, equation-free approaches [14] enabled by advances
in machine-learning and pattern analysis [15]. The standard approach typically involves a linear
dimensionality reduction technique, such as the singular value decomposition (SVD) [16], in conjunction with a statistical clustering model to identify similarities across time series [17]. Despite
the broad success of this approach, substantial limitations have been identified due to the underlying assumptions associated with the SVD and the mismatch with characteristics of data collected
from a complex, temporally evolving system; this discrepancy has motivated the development of
a diverse set of nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques for time-series data [18]. Methods
such as diffusion maps and Laplacian eigenmaps, popular in statistical and computational analyses [19, 20] and contained in a class of machine-learning methodologies called manifold learning,
have been utilized by the dynamical systems community to identify nonlinear embeddings of the
dynamics directly from observational data from the system [18]. Success has been demonstrated
with these methods using data generated from simulation models [21]. Here, we leverage these
methodologies to identify a lower-dimensional embedding of the mobility time-series data providing a framework that highlights common mobility behaviors at the census-block-group scale,
identifies the geographic connectivity of behavior at different spatial scales, and reveals insights
into epidemiologically relevant subpopulations.
The outline of this article is as follows: the following section of the paper provides a description of the SafeGraph mobility time-series and US census data (§2) along with the mathematical
methods used for analysis §3. §4 highlights the heterogeneity and consistency of mobility patterns at the census block group level during the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, we show these
behaviors are correlated with socioeconomic indicators such as income and home ownership. We
also describe a highly mobile population with distinctly different behavior revealed from the analysis. The final section §5 offers a discussion on how these findings provide insight into the connection between mobility, behavior, and transmission and how local public health officials can use
this data to target information and education campaigns.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2 Data
2.1

SafeGraph mobility data

We obtained mobility data from SafeGraph, Inc. SafeGraph aggregates mobile device GPS data
from various sources and produces anonymized datasets aggregated at the census block group
(CBG) level. These data can be obtained free-of-charge for non-commercial use by joining their
COVID-19 Data Consortium1 . In this study, we estimate the number of people who stay at
home each day by dividing the number of mobile devices that do not leave their homes by the
total number of devices in each CBG (i.e., completely home device count divided by the
device count) [22]. We used data covering 117 days of mobility, starting from February 23,
2020.
We define the daily proportion of devices seen near their homes to be the number of devices
in each CBG detected in their home CBG (destination cbg = origin census block group)
divided by the number of devices associated with the CBG (device count). The proportion of devices that are only detected away from their homes each day is 1 minus this proportion. Figure 1B.
illustrates this daily stay-at-home fraction for five CBGs. We use the most recently released versions of the SafeGraph social distancing data, which is version 2.0 (“v2”) for dates before May 10,
2020 and version 2.1 (“v2.1”) for later dates [23]. Around May 17, SafeGraph began using “rolling
windows” to assign the home census block group of devices instead of batch-updating only at the
first of each month [24].

2.2 Census and geographic data
We obtained US population data from the 2018 American Community Survey (ACS) product of
the US Census Bureau, accessed using the R package tidycensus [25]. We used Table B01001 for
total population size and population by age estimates by CBG, Table B19013 for median household income, Table B14002 for number currently enrolled in college, Table B25008 for renter vs.
owner-occupied housing units, and Tables B07201, B07202, and B07203 for “geographic mobility”
(living in same house as last year). We computed a CBG’s population density by dividing the 2018
population estimate by the land area of the CBG as reported by the cartographic boundary files.
The US Census provides cartographic boundary files, which define simplified shapes of geographic entities designed for plotting. The 2019 shapefiles were downloaded from the US Census
Bureau website 2 . The detailed map of Seattle was generated using ESRI’s “world topo map” [26]
obtained using R’s OpenStreetMap package [27].

3

Methods

3.1 Linear dimensionality reduction: singular value decomposition
The singular value decomposition (SVD) is a standard linear matrix factorization technique that
can be used to reduce the dimensionality of a data matrix [28, 16]. Using the SafeGraph timeseries data (§2.1), we construct a mobility data matrix for each state. Each state’s data matrix has
117 columns (days of mobility data), but a different number of rows depending on the number of
1

https://www.safegraph.com/covid-19-data-consortium
https://www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/
cartographic-boundary.html
2

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

SafeGraph Mobility Data at the Census Block Group Level
A.) Illustration of Census Block Groups in WA

B.) Daily Stay-at-Home Fraction

Stay-at-Home Fraction

Data-Driven Analysis: Dimensionality Reduction and Clustering
D.) Dimensionality Reduction and Clustering
C.) Aggregate All the Time Series Data
Data
aggregation and nonlinear dimensionality
reduction for

Laplacian
Eigenmaps

…

n = 4764 CBGs

d = 117 Days

D = 14

Clusters Reveal Geographic and Temporal Structure of Mobility
F.) Average Time Series by Cluster
Stay-at-Home Fraction

E.) Spatial Distribution of Behavior

Figure 1: Data-driven analysis overview. A.) Example CBGs on the map of Washington.
B.) Mobility time-series of the example CBGs. C.) Mobility time series are aggregated in a
matrix form. D.) 3D visualization of the 14D Laplacian Eigenmaps embedding of the data
with clusters highlighted in color. Large dots represent the example CBGs. E.) Clusters
plotted on the Washington map. F.) Average mobility time-series for every cluster.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

census block groups (Table 1). Figure 1C. illustrates the aggregation of mobility time-series into a
data matrix for Washington state. For data matrix normalization, columns are mean subtracted.
We perform a standard SVD to find a reduced order set of singular vectors and values for dimensionality reduction; see Supplement §1 for more details. The computational code to generate all
results and figures in this article are publicly available [29].

3.2

Manifold learning and nonlinear dimensionality reduction: Laplacian eigenmaps

Laplacian eigenmaps are a nonlinear manifold learning method that can identify a low-dimensional
embedding which optimally preserves local structure of a high-dimensional data manifold [20]. To
construct an m-dimensional embedding, the method uses m eigenvectors of the nearest-neighbors
graph Laplacian corresponding to the smallest non-zero eigenvalues. The resulting embedding is
optimal in the sense that ”close” data points on the original manifold are represented by points
that are close in the m-dimensional Euclidean embedding space; see equation (3.1) in [20] for
more details. We also investigated a wide variety of other nonlinear dimensionality reduction
techniques (Supplement §2). The Laplacian Eigenmaps algorithm was implemented using the
SpectralEmbedding function from sklearn.manifold module of scikit-learn package
[30] in Python 3. In this work, we used 50 neighbors for the n neighbors parameter. Varying
the number of neighbors between 20 and 50 did not significantly change the Laplacian Eigenmap
embedding for Washington state (Supplement §2).
The optimal effective dimensionality of the embedding was identified using the trustworthiness metric [31] which captures the extent to which a dimensionality reduction technique retains
the local structure of the original data manifold from the higher-dimensional space. Trustworthiness was computed as a function of the Laplacian Eigenmap embedding dimensionality; a
knee-point detection algorithm was then used to identify the optimal number of dimensions. The
Supplement §2 provides a detailed description of this analysis for each state. To implement the
trustworthiness metric, we used the function trustworthiness from sklearn.manifold of
scikit-learn package [30] in Python 3 with default parameters (5 neighbors, to capture the
local structure). For the knee point detection, we used the Kneedle algorithm implemented in
kneed package [32].

3.3

Gaussian Mixture Model Clustering

To interpret the low-dimensional structure revealed by Laplacian Eigenmaps, we apply Gaussian
mixture model (GMM) clustering [33]. The GMM is a latent variable model which assumes that the
data has sub-populations or clusters which follow Gaussian distributions with parameters governing the centroid location and covariance structure of each cluster. GMMs were implemented
using the mclust [34] package of R (version 4.0 [35]). We leverage the probabilistic formulation
of the GMM model as a natural way to quantify uncertainty of the cluster assignment. A more
detailed description of the GMM model and uncertainty quantification is provided in Supplement
§4. We used Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) to identify the optimal number of GMM components [36, 37, 34]. We applied knee-point detection to the BIC curve using the Kneedle algorithm
implemented in kneed package [32]; see Supplement §5 for more details.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3.4

Statistical Testing

To test the difference of the socio-economic covariates distributions between clusters, we used the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov [38, 39] test as implemented in kstest function of scipy.stats package
in Python 3. To determine the significance of trends of covariates associated with CBGs in clusters identified by the GMM, we used jonckheere.test from clinfun package [40] in R using
1000 permutations and assuming decreasing trends from cluster A to cluster D (Table 1).

4

Results

4.1 Stay-at-home levels and trends vary across CBGs, but there are distinct motifs that are consistent across four states
The SafeGraph stay-at-home data offers insight into the levels and trends of human mobility at the
census block group (CBG) geographic scale during the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic in the United
States (Figure 1). Nonlinear dimensionality reduction of the time-series data from Washington
state revealed a low-dimensional embedding providing insight into the consistency of mobility
behavior across CBGs (Figure 1D.). Moreover, the embedding and stay-at-home behaviors for
Washington are qualitatively similar to those of Georgia, Texas, and California (Figure 2). The
optimal embedding dimension was 14 for all four states, determined by the trustworthiness metric
(§3.2, Supplement §2). A similar low-dimensional structure in the time-series data can be found
with a diversity of nonlinear dimensionality reduction methods; see §4.5 and Supplement §2 for
more details.
The low-dimensional embedding provides insight into the similarity of stay-at-home behavior
between CBGs. Figure 2 provides a visualization in three embedding dimensions of this coherent
structure; note that for each state, certain CBG time-series are more similar to each other and the
visualization indicates a large density of CBGs along a distinct, tubular data manifold. Fitting a
Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to the stay-at-home time-series in the 14-dimensional embedding
space identifies 4 clusters for California, Texas, and Washington and 5 clusters for Georgia (based
on knee-point detection in BIC, see Supplement §5). For subsequent analyses, we chose 5 as the
number of clusters for every state due to the optimal clustering for Georgia, comparisons across
the four states (Table 1), and the geometric structure of the data (§4.2). Figure 2 illustrates how
the clustering model groups CBGs in the embedding space (left column); the average mobility
time-series for each cluster (right column) highlight the difference in stay-at-home behavior by
cluster within a state and also the consistency across all four states. The cluster assignments were
robust to model initialization (§4.5, Supplement §3) and had low associated uncertainty values
(quantified in §4.5, Supplement §2, Supplement §4).

Table 1: Number of census block groups (CBGs) in each cluster.
state
California
Georgia
Texas
Washington

A
2672
1577
3154
1120

B
5457
1149
3960
1284

C
7053
1177
3687
1032

D
5319
960
3283
674

E
2470
647
1635
642

Total
22971
5510
15719
4752

One clear difference between the clusters is their average level of mobility. For example in

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Geographic Connectedness of Behavior Spans the United States
ii. State Map

iii. Average Time Series

California

Texas

Georgia

Observed Stay-at-Home Fraction

Washington

i. Laplacian Eigenmap Embedding

Figure 2: Results are consistent across four states. Column i. presents the 3D Laplacian
Eigenmap visualization of the data manifold. Column ii. shows geographic maps. Column iii. presents average mobility time series for each cluster. Clusters are highlighted in
color. It is noted that clusterig was done in 14D (optimal) embedding space.
Washington, the average staying-at-home level increases from the CBGs in the dark blue cluster
(cluster D) to the bright orange cluster (cluster A); see Figure 1F., representative CBG time-series
in each cluster in Figure 1B., and Figure 2. The order of the clusters along the dense data manifold in the embedding space is aligned with their mean staying-at-home fraction (Figure 2). The
average time series for clusters D through A do not intersect and are aligned in increasing order
on the y-axis. However, the purple cluster E does not follow a similar trend with respect to the
dense data manifold, nor the average time-series. For this cluster, we find that the fraction of the
devices staying at home increases sharply in May 2020. A similar motif consistently occurs across
each state (Figure 2); cluster E primarily captures outliers from the primary bulk trends that are
continuously distributed across clusters A, B, C, and D. Those outliers are linked to a variety of

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A. Urban centers of Washington state

B. Urban centers of Texas state

Figure 3: Clustering in metropolitan areas. Section A: clustering in Washington, Section
B: clustering in Texas.
important sub-populations, explored in more detail in §4.4.
The CBG clustering and average time-series by cluster also indicate that the change of behavior over time is different across clusters before April. The speed at which CBGs increased their
stay-at-home behavior during a transition period between March and April (quantified by the
slope of a linear fit of the CBG mobility time series during the transition period) is directly correlated with CBG cluster assignment (see Supplement §8). Moreover, the distributions of that speed
are statistically significantly different: for every pair of clusters, we were able to reject the null
hypothesis that the speed distributions were the same at the significance level α = 0.001 using
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. This is also directly evident by looking at this time period and the
average stay-at-home trends by cluster (Figure 2). For example, the CBGs from the least mobile
cluster A also increased their staying-at-home level the fastest.

4.2 CBGs with similar temporal mobility patterns are geographically
consistent
The CBGs within each mobility cluster (defined in §4.1) are geographically connected and have
consistent patterns across all four states. The second column of Figure 2 illustrates these broad
trends which are most visually evident in the distinction between urban, peri-urban, and rural

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

areas. For example in Washington, the Seattle area CBGs mostly belong to the bright orange
and light orange most-staying-at-home clusters A and B, the same is true for nearby Bellevue
and Redmond. Similarly, in Texas three large orange regions correspond to Dallas, Houston, and
Austin. In Georgia, the distinct orange area on the map corresponds to Atlanta and in California
we see orange colors around San Francisco, San Jose, and Los Angeles area. Likewise, blue colors
– clusters C and D with lower stay-at-home levels – form continuous regions in rural areas on the
state maps. CBGs that are close geographically tend to have similar mobility patterns.
Within each state, there is a stark contrast between urban and rural areas (Figure 2). For example in Washington, the large metropolitan areas around Seattle and Bellevue are colored orange
(clusters A and B) as opposed to larger rural CBGs which belong to blue clusters (C and D). Large
cities like Spokane or Yakima also have dense orange coloring (Figure 3) suggesting that changes
in behavior within urban centers are similar despite being geographically quite distant from each
other. The time series column of Figure 2 shows that urban areas (orange clusters A and B) stay
at home significantly more than rural areas (blue clusters C and D). This observation is consistent
across all four states.
This analysis also identifies heterogeneity within the geographic scale of urban centers and
rural areas. For example, in Dallas and Seattle there are urban CBGs that belong to blue clusters
C and D indicating that they stay at home less than the surrounding areas (Figure 3). Moreover,
populous cities such as Seattle, Atlanta, Austin and Dallas have distinct geographic groupings of
CBGs for clusters A and B within the urban area (Figure 3, see Supplement §7 for clustering in
Atlanta). The first column of Figure 2 clearly presents a smooth transition in the Laplacian Eigenmap embedding space between the bright orange cluster A that stays at home the most to the dark
blue cluster D that stays at home the least. Remarkably, we observe the same on the geographic
map. For example, there is a rough radial pattern around Dallas and Austin: bright orange CBGs
densely cover the city center and are replaced by light orange, then light blue and eventually dark
blue as the distance from the city center increases (see Figure 3). That is, the transition is quite
consistent – it covers the intermediate colors and the stay-at-home level gradually decreases as
distance from the city increases suggesting a more nuanced interpretation about the continuity of
behavior across CBGs within urban centers supported by the geometric structure of the data manifold. In the greater Seattle area, the transition is substantially less pronounced especially moving
eastward from downtown; note that both a large urban area (Bellevue) and suburb (Redmond, the
home to Microsoft) exist to the east of Seattle, both with a higher income population.
Despite the optimal number of clusters being 4 or 5 for each state (§4.1), relaxing this criteria and allowing for more clusters provides more granular information within and around urban
areas while maintaining consistency with the optimal GMM. This also follows the intuition provided by the illustrations of the nonlinear embedding in three dimensions (left column, Figure 2);
namely, the embedding is broken into finer grained clusters enabling higher resolution comparisons between CBGs. Supplement §6 provides details on altering the number of clusters. Further,
a continuous mapping of the data along the dense tubular structure of the data manifold shows
the smooth transition across urban, peri-urban, suburban, and rural areas; see Supplement §6 for
more details. In contrast, the purple cluster E is not wholly on the tubular structure and does
not exhibit the same geographically connected characteristics as the other clusters. More detail is
provided on this cluster and the possible difference in its subpopulation structure in §4.4.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.3

Income, population density, and behavioral data are correlated

Clusters A and B, which on average stayed home the most, included the most densely populated CBGs, while clusters C and D included the more sparsely populated ones (Figure 4). High
population density is generally an indication of urban populations and low density of rural areas (see maps in Figure 2). The CBGs in clusters A and B also had the highest median household incomes (Figure 4). In all states, the median stay-at-home fraction, population density, and
household income of CBGs had a consistently decreasing trend from clusters A to D, and the
Jonckheere–Terpstra test rejects the null hypothesis that these four clusters come from the same
distribution of values (p< 0.01). Cluster E did not follow these trends and appeared to cover a
wider range of values (Figure 4).
Cluster E has a higher proportion of people who we expect to have high “geographic mobility” (i.e., change residences frequently). Using 2018 ACS estimates, CBGs with a low proportion
living in the same house in the previous year or a high proportion of renters, people enrolled in
undergraduate or professional degree programs, or who are “young adults” (18 to 29 years old)
tended to be in cluster E (Figure 5). In California, the proportion of people with high geographic
mobility appears to be higher in cluster A than in cluster B.
Upon closer investigation of the location of clusters in the city of Seattle, Washington, the spatial distribution of clusters D and E is consistent with the associations described above (Figure 6).
The area surrounding the University of Washington, where a large number of undergraduate and
graduate students live, is in cluster E, while the University itself is in cluster D (Figure 6, center
of map). Cluster E also includes downtown and Lake Union, where a recent influx of young tech
workers fueled the development of new apartments. Interestingly, in addition to students and
young tech workers in Seattle, cluster E also indicates some very high median income populations on the waterfront of Bellevue and Kirkland that were also highly mobile during this period.
Cluster D includes “SODO”, the industrial area southwest of downtown, which is less affluent
than the populations to the west, east, and north.

4.4 Analysis reveals areas with likely population turnover early in the
pandemic
The available SafeGraph dataset does not allow one to track the movements of individuals, but
there are trends consistent with high population turnover. One can track the number of mobile
devices that are detected by SafeGraph each day but not in their “home” CBG on a given day,
which we call “never-near-home” devices. These devices could be on a trip away from home or
they could have moved away entirely.
In March, the fraction of never-near-home devices was highest in cluster E (Figure 7 and Supplement §8). On April 1 and again on May 1, the number of devices never near home drops sharply
in cluster E but not in the other clusters. This behavior is consistent with the owners of these devices moving to a new residence and SafeGraph re-assigning these devices to the new residence
on the first day of a subsequent month. SafeGraph defines a person’s “home” to be the location
where the mobile device is detected most at night (from 6pm to 7am) over a 6-week period [23].
If a person spends enough time in a new location, that new location can become the device’s
“home”. These home locations were updated by SafeGraph at the start of each month until midMay, when SafeGraph changed its procedure for assigning home locations to devices [24, 41]. The
high proportion who were never near their “homes” in March and April and the sharp drops in
these fractions on April 1 and May 1 in cluster E, and to a lesser extent in cluster D, are consistent with this population moving away. In California, cluster A also has a noticeable decline on

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: Distribution of stay-at-home behavior and demographic covariates by cluster.
The boxplots present the interquartile range (boxes) and median values (center horizontal
lines) of the covariate values for CBGs in each of the five clusters. Whiskers span the 95%
range. The “mean stay at home” fraction of a CBG is the mean of the daily percent of
mobile devices that stayed completely at home during the time period analyzed.
May 1 (Supplement §8), which could indicate a high-income group that is geographically mobile.
If a large number of people in a region move away, the devices will appear to be “away from
home” because their home locations are out-of-date. These clusters will appear to be staying at
home less than they really are. This batching artifact appears to be resolved in May 2020, and the
stay-at-home fraction in cluster E rises relative to the other clusters.

4.5 The nonlinear embedding and clustering results are robust
We investigated the sensitivity of our results to the methodological approach. The cluster assignment for the GMM in the 14 dimensional embedding space is robust. For every state, the

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5: Proportions of census block groups in each cluster by population characteristics associated with geographic mobility. The fraction of a CBG’s population associated
with the characteristic is plotted on the x-axis. CBGs are partitioned into 10 equallyspaced bins, defined by the proportion of each CBG’s population having the characteristic in 10% increments. The numbers of CBGs belonging to each bin are printed along the
top of each panel. The proportion of CBGs in each cluster is plotted as vertically stacked
bars for each bin (with cluster A in dark orange on the bottom through cluster E in purple
on top).
maximum uncertainty is below 50% while the third quartile of the cluster assignment uncertainty
is close to zero; at least 75% of the CBGs are well separated by a GMM in the 14-dimensional embedding space (see Supplement §2, Supplement §3). However, given the intrinsic structure of the
data (Figure 2), the quantification of uncertainty for clustering is consistent with the geometry of
the mobility data being more continuous than discrete across clusters A,B,C,D. For example, the

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6: Clusters in the Seattle metropolitan area. Census block group boundaries are
outlined. CBGs belonging to clusters D and E are highlighted in dark blue and purple,
respectively.
uncertain CBG assignments are linked to the boundaries of clusters on or near the tubular data
structure. The number of clusters and cluster assignments were optimized according to a standard approach which balances model fit and parsimony(§3.3), but the number of clusters could be
changed depending on a desired level of granularity or continuous colormap could be used (Supplement §6). It is worth noting in contrast that clustering in the linearly reduced space is highly
uncertain; for more details see Supplement §1.
We also found consistent results using alternative dimensionality reduction techniques such
as Locally Linear Embedding and Isomap. For both Isomap and Locally Linear Embedding, a
similar dense tubular data manifold was present in the lower dimensional embedding space (Supplement §2). Furthermore, the trustworthiness metric and knee point detection indicated that all
three manifold learning methods agreed that the effective dimensionality of the embedding was
between 14 and 16 (Supplement §2).

5 Discussion
Our results are consistent with other studies linking demographic characteristics to cellphone mobility data during the 2020 SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Two recent studies using data from SafeGraph
found mobile devices from areas with higher median household incomes stayed home more than
devices from lower-income areas [9, 11], and this trend occurs in other mobile device datasets [7].

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 7: The fraction of devices that are only away from their homes each day. The
medians and inter-quartile range of each day’s values are shown for each cluster in Washington State.
These studies hypothesize that the relationship between income and mobility is due in part to
the ability of people with high-paying jobs to work from home. A survey found that about half
of adults in Seattle switched to telework because of COVID, with high-income households making the change far more than lower-income (79.3% in households making >$150,000 per year and
23.5% among those making <$50,000) [42]. A recent study using another source of cell phone
mobility data found that mobility was reduced more in urban than rural England [10], indicating
that these trends could generalize beyond the United States.
Several related studies cluster mobility time series by a single demographic characteristic selected a priori, such as income [7, 9, 11] or population density [10] or party affiliation [8], to demonstrate behavioral differences with respect to that characteristic. Alternatively, one could reduce
the time series to a summary statistic, such as average stay-at-home level over a particular time
window, and study the relationship between that metric and several demographic covariates.
In contrast, our methodological approach is broader; we measure similarities between complete

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

time series, which allowed us to identify population clusters that had a distinct change in behavior, which would have been hidden if we had clustered by average behavior over time. Notably,
we have identified features in the SafeGraph stay-at-home data that strongly suggests a mass migration out of several major metropolitan areas, especially in CBGs that have high proportions
of young adults, renters, or students (§4.4). The closure of college of campuses and widespread
job losses in March and April led many, especially young adults, to move [43, 44]. Moreover, the
map presented in Figure 6 also matches our own intuition of where students of the University
of Washington live, both adjacent to the university as well as more distant rental housing along
bike and metro commuting lines (all authors of this manuscript live in the greater Seattle area).
Similarly, the high-migration census block groups identified near South Lake Union tends toward
a younger, professional population working at technology companies such as Amazon, and CBGs
on the waterfront with high income populations in nearby cities such as Bellevue and Kirkland
have a similar outward migration trend.
Identifying the population that moved early in the pandemic is a direct consequence of using a
data-driven, equation-free approach. The approach has been integral to revealing the heterogeneity, but also the consistency, of mobility patterns across California, Georgia, Texas, and California;
it has enabled a multi-scale geographic perspective on behavior allowing insights at the state,
urban-rural, peri-urban, and suburban scale. Recent efforts have also utilized clustering of mobility time-series data specifically for analyzing SafeGraph stay-at-home data in Atlanta [9]. Our
approach, though, is substantially broader in scope; identifying the low-dimensional embedding
of the data enables a characterization of the geometric structure and the relatedness of each CBG
mobility behavior. Moreover, we found utilizing a nonlinear dimensionality reduction techniques
such as Laplacian Eigenmaps for analyzing mobility time-series data is essential (Supplement §1)
mirroring recent developments from dynamical systems focused on the development of equationfree methods for analyzing measurement data collected from complex systems [18]. We have
also leveraged clustering as a tool to interpret the similarity of mobility behavior between CBGs
even in the reduced nonlinear embedding; we found that clusters allowed for comparisons of mobility characteristics (Figure 1), generalization across four states (Figure 2), and also correlation
with socioeconomic factors (Figure 4 and Figure 5). The nonlinear embedding, however, offers a
more nuanced perspective about the similarity of mobility behavior between CBGs. For example,
the visualization in three dimensions and the clustering results suggests a much smoother and
continuous geometric structure of relatedness for CBGs assigned to clusters A,B,C,D (Figure 2
and Supplement §6). This helps frame the clustering results and socioeconomic factor correlation
analysis. Further, the embedding provides a richer characterization of the underlying complexity
in mobility behavior.
We acknowledge several limitations of the mobility data and challenges in linking behavior
to demographic variables. SafeGraph aggregates mobility data from many uncoordinated sources
on the locations of millions of cell phones. These phones are not systematically tracked, and
the GPS data might not be precise. The data are then aggregated by census block group and
filtered to preserve the privacy of the mobile device owners. It is difficult to ascertain how well
a set of mobility data represents the general population [5, 6]. Different states, and segments of
the population, have different levels of coverage that are hard to correct for [45]. This is further
complicated by likely gaps in coverage for high-risk populations such as migrant agricultural
workers. However, the associations we found between mobility and other factors are consistent
with those found in other datasets and are quite plausible. We studied the fraction of mobile
devices that stayed at home each day, but this is just one metric than can be derived from the
mobility data. Other measures, such as the mean length of time spent outside the home, the

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distance traveled from the home, or even the number of trips to stores, could provide additional
insight into the population’s response to the pandemic. The demographic data in this study was
from the 2018 American Community Survey, which we believe generally reflects the population in
2020 but might not accurately characterize the demographics of the most rapidly changing areas.
We cannot establish the direct cause of the differential reductions in mobility using these data. We
use demographic and socioeconomic variables at the census block group level, which could lead
us to ecological fallacies, and many of these variables are tightly linked, thus, disentangling their
effects is not straightforward and could be counterproductive.
Despite these challenges, population mobility data and connections to behavior can inform
public health policy makers. Population behavior is a key component to understanding disease
transmission dynamics; mobility data and the methods contained in this article helps quantify the
change in population behavior during the pandemic. Policy makers can use this tool to assess
the impacts of policy, especially important as COVID-19 cases start to resurge in the United States
during a period of quarantine fatigue. We have also demonstrated that these data, analyses, and
setting-specific information can provide epidemiologically relevant insights such as we uncovered
around urban migration events. We believe the research in the article will provide insights for
policymakers as they consider more modern, optimized, and targeted intervention strategies.

Author contributions
DLC, EAW, and JLP conceived the study, DLC and RL conducted the analyses, DLC, RL, EAW,
and JLP wrote the manuscript, DLC, RL, and JLP wrote the supporting material.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Dr. Marita Zimmermann, Dr. Roy Burstein, and Dr. Mike Famulare for helpful conversations around COVID-19 case data, correlations with socioeconomic data,
and cell phone data.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
[1] World Health Organization and others.
Weekly operational update on COVID-19 9 October 2020 (2020).
https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/weekly-update-on-covid-19—2-october-2020.
[2] Fernandes, N.
Economic effects
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3557504.

of

coronavirus

outbreak

(COVID-19)

on

the

world

economy

(2020).

[3] Nicola, M. et al. The socio-economic implications of the coronavirus and COVID-19 pandemic: A review. Int J Surg 78, 185–193
(2020).
[4] Moreland, A. et al. Timing of state and territorial COVID-19 stay-at-home orders and changes in population movement – United
States, March 1–May 31, 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 69, 1198–1203 (2020).
[5] Kishore, N. et al. Measuring mobility to monitor travel and physical distancing interventions: a common framework for mobile
phone data analysis. Lancet Digit Health 2, e622–e628 (2020).
[6] Grantz, K. H. et al. The use of mobile phone data to inform analysis of COVID-19 pandemic epidemiology. Nat Commun 11, 4961
(2020).
[7] Weill, J. A., Stigler, M., Deschenes, O. & Springborn, M. R. Social distancing responses to COVID-19 emergency declarations
strongly differentiated by income. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 19658–19660 (2020).
[8] Allcott, H. et al. Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the coronavirus pandemic. J
Public Econ 191, 104254 (2020).
[9] Huang, X. et al. Time-series clustering for home dwell time during COVID-19: what can we learn from it? medRxiv (2020). URL
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.09.27.20202671v1.
[10] Jeffrey, B. et al. Anonymised and aggregated crowd level mobility data from mobile phones suggests that initial compliance
with COVID-19 social distancing interventions was high and geographically consistent across the UK. Wellcome Open Res 5, 170
(2020).
[11] Jay, J. et al. Neighbourhood income and physical distancing during the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States. Nature Human
Behaviour In press.
[12] Buckee, C. O. et al. Aggregated mobility data could help fight COVID-19. Science 368, 145–146 (2020).
[13] Guckenheimer, J. & Holmes, P. Nonlinear oscillations, dynamical systems, and bifurcations of vector fields, vol. 42 of Applied Mathematical Sciences (Springer, 1983).
[14] Proctor, J. L., Brunton, S. L., Brunton, B. W. & Kutz, J. Exploiting sparsity and equation-free architectures in complex systems.
The European Physical Journal Special Topics 223, 2665–2684 (2014).
[15] Brunton, S. L. & Kutz, J. N. Data-driven science and engineering: Machine learning, dynamical systems, and control (Cambridge
University Press, 2019).
[16] Eckart, C. & Young, G. The approximation of one matrix by another of lower rank. Psychometrika 1, 211–218 (1936).
[17] Kutz, J. N. Data-Driven Modeling & Scientific Computation: Methods for Complex Systems & Big Data (Oxford University Press, 2013).
[18] Coifman, R. R., Kevrekidis, I. G., Lafon, S., Maggioni, M. & Nadler, B. Diffusion maps, reduction coordinates, and low dimensional representation of stochastic systems. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation 7, 842–864 (2008).
[19] Coifman, R. R. & Lafon, S. Diffusion maps. Applied and computational harmonic analysis 21, 5–30 (2006).
[20] Belkin, M. & Niyogi, P. Laplacian eigenmaps for dimensionality reduction and data representation. Neural Computation 15,
1373–1396 (2003).
[21] Yair, O., Talmon, R., Coifman, R. R. & Kevrekidis, I. G. Reconstruction of normal forms by learning informed observation
geometries from data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 114, E7865–E7874 (2017).
[22] SafeGraph.
Data
analysis
methodology
for
the
SafeGraph
stay-at-home
index
(2020).
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1k 9LGQn95P5gHsSeuBdzgtEWGGCmzXdcOkcphWi0Cas/edit?usp=sharing.
[23] SafeGraph. Social distancing metrics (2020). URL https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/social-distancing-metrics.
Accessed on October 1, 2020.
[24] SafeGraph.
June-2020 release notes (2020).
june-2020-release-notes. Accessed on August 1, 2020.

17

URL

https://docs.safegraph.com/changelog/

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.31.20223776; this version posted November 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[25] Walker, K. tidycensus: Load US Census Boundary and Attribute Data as ’tidyverse’ and ’sf’-Ready Data Frames (2020). URL https:
//CRAN.R-project.org/package=tidycensus. R package version 0.9.9.2.
[26] Esri. World topographic map (2020). Downloaded on October 9, 2020.
[27] Fellows, I. & using the JMapViewer library by Jan Peter Stotz. OpenStreetMap: Access to Open Street Map Raster Images (2019).
URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=OpenStreetMap. R package version 0.3.4.
[28] Pearson, K. LIII. On lines and planes of closest fit to systems of points in space. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical
Magazine and Journal of Science 2, 559–572 (1901).
[29] Levin, R.
Covid mobility and behavior.
covid-mobility-and-behavior (2020).

https://github.com/InstituteforDiseaseModeling/

[30] Pedregosa, F. et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. Journal of Machine Learning Research 12, 2825–2830 (2011).
[31] Venna, J. & Kaski, S. Neighborhood preservation in nonlinear projection methods: An experimental study. In International
Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, 485–491 (Springer, 2001).
[32] Satopaa, V., Albrecht, J., Irwin, D. & Raghavan, B. Finding a ”kneedle“ in a haystack: Detecting knee points in system behavior.
In 2011 31st international conference on distributed computing systems workshops, 166–171 (IEEE, 2011).
[33] Murphy, K. P. Machine learning: a probabilistic perspective (MIT Press, 2012).
[34] Scrucca, L., Fop, M., Murphy, T. B. & Raftery, A. E. mclust 5: clustering, classification and density estimation using Gaussian
finite mixture models. The R Journal 8, 289–317 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.32614/RJ-2016-021.
[35] R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria
(2020). URL https://www.R-project.org.
[36] Schwarz, G. et al. Estimating the dimension of a model. The Annals of Statistics 6, 461–464 (1978).
[37] Fraley, C. & Raftery, A. E. How many clusters? Which clustering method? Answers via model-based cluster analysis. The
Computer Journal 41, 578–588 (1998).
[38] Kolmogorov, A. Sulla determinazione empirica di una legge di distribuzione. Inst. Ital. Attuari, Giorn. 4, 83–91 (1933).
[39] Smirnov, N. V. Estimate of deviation between empirical distribution functions in two independent samples. Bulletin Moscow
University 2, 3–16 (1939).
[40] Seshan, V. E. clinfun: Clinical Trial Design and Data Analysis Functions (2018). URL https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=
clinfun. R package version 1.0.15.
[41] SafeGraph.
Safegraph common nighttime location algorithm (2020).
URL https://docs.safegraph.com/docs/
places-manual#section-safe-graph-common-nighttime-location-algorithm. Accessed on October 1, 2020.
[42] Balk, G. Nearly half of Seattle-area adults working from home because of COVID – here’s who is and isn’t hitting the road. The
Seattle Times (2020). https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/data/nearly-half-of-seattle-area-adults-working-from-homebecause-of-pandemic/.
[43] Cohn, D.
About a fifth of U.S. adults moved due to COVID-19 or know someone who did (2020).
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/07/06/about-a-fifth-of-u-s-adults-moved-due-to-covid-19-or-know-someonewho-did/.
[44] Fry, R., Passel, J. S. & Cohn, D. A majority of young adults in the U.S. live with their parents for the first time since the Great Depression (2020). https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/09/04/a-majority-of-young-adults-in-the-u-s-live-with-theirparents-for-the-first-time-since-the-great-depression/.
[45] Squire, R. F. What about bias in the SafeGraph dataset? (2019). Https://www.safegraph.com/blog/what-about-bias-in-thesafegraph-dataset.

18

