medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

What support do frontline workers want? A qualitative study of health and
social care workers’ experiences and views of psychosocial support during
the COVID-19 pandemic.

Jo Billings1, Nada Abou Seif1, Siobhan Hegarty1, Tamara Ondruskova1, Emilia Soulios1,
Michael Bloomfield1,2,3,4, Talya Greene1,5

1

Division of Psychiatry, University College London, United Kingdom

2

Traumatic Stress Clinic, Camden & Islington NHS Foundation Trust, London, United
Kingdom

3

National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical
Research Centre, United Kingdom

4
5

University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, United Kingdom
Department of Community Mental Health, University of Haifa, Israel

Corresponding Author
Dr Jo Billings
UCL Division of Psychiatry
6th Floor, Maple House
149 Tottenham Court Road
London W1T 7NF
j.billings@ucl.ac.uk
+44 7967 605531

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Background. The COVID-19 pandemic has placed a significant burden on the mental health
and wellbeing of frontline health and social care workers. The need to support frontline staff
has been recognised. However, there is to date little research specifically on how best to
support the mental health needs of frontline workers, and none on their own experiences and
views about what might be most helpful.
Aims. We set out to redress this research gap by qualitatively exploring UK frontline health
and social care workers’ own experiences and views of psychosocial support during the
pandemic.
Method. Frontline health and social care workers were recruited purposively through social
media and by snowball sampling via healthcare colleagues. Workers who volunteered to take
part in the study were interviewed remotely following a semi-structured interview guide.
Transcripts of the interviews were analysed by the research team following the principles of
Reflexive Thematic Analysis.
Results. We conducted 25 interviews with frontline workers from a variety of professional
groups working in health and social care settings across the UK. Themes derived from our
analysis showed that workers’ experiences and views about psychosocial support were
complex. Peer support was many workers’ first line of support but could also be experienced
as a burden. Workers were ambivalent about support shown by organisations, media and the
public. Whilst workers valued psychological support services, there were many disparities in
provision and barriers to access.
Conclusions. The results of this study show that frontline health and social care workers are
likely to need a flexible system of support including peer, organisational and professional
support. More research is needed to fully unpack the structural, systemic and individual

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

barriers to accessing psychosocial support. Greater collaboration, consultation and coproduction of support services and their evaluation is warranted.

Keywords: health and social care workers, COVID-19, psychosocial support, experiences,
views, qualitative, thematic analysis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
On March 11th, 2020, the World Health Organisation declared severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the virus causing COVID-19, to be a worldwide
pandemic [1]. In the UK, healthcare workers braced themselves, as news from around the
world described healthcare workers overcome by the requirement to treat rapidly growing
numbers of patients affected by the virus. Many NHS services in the UK did subsequently
report themselves to be overwhelmed, whilst other services mobilised to respond to
additional demand never reached expected capacity. Other groups, such as care home staff,
were overwhelmed in ways never anticipated.
Early quantitative research emerging from around the world has demonstrated a
significant mental health burden experienced by frontline workers in response to COVID-19,
with elevated rates of depression, anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and
suicidality reported [2-5]. This is amongst a workforce already under considerable strain preCOVID-19, as evidenced by the growing incidence of stress, burnout, depression, drug and
alcohol dependence and suicide across all groups of health professionals, worldwide [6].
The need to support the mental health of frontline staff during COVID-19 has been
recognised [7]. However, this pandemic has also highlighted a paucity of research on the
mental health needs of frontline health and social care workers, and a lack of evidence-based
guidance about what psychosocial support might be most effective in helping them. What
guidance there has been issued during the COVID-19 crisis has tended to come from expert
opinion and be extrapolated from other professional groups, such as military personnel. In a
rapidly escalating pandemic, such top down ‘command and control’ guidance has been of
value. However, health and social care workers are a unique workforce, living alongside their
work, not deployed into time-limited situations of crisis, nor with any allocated time to
decompress [8]. We require specific evidence on how best to support the mental health needs

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

of this population, during a pandemic and beyond, and this evidence-base must necessarily be
underpinned by the workforce’s own views and preferences.
So far, there has been very little qualitative research exploring frontline workers own
experiences and views of working on COVID-19. What qualitative research has been
published so far has tended to be on small samples, limited to doctors and nurses, and of poor
to moderate quality [9]. No research to date has considered health and social care workers’
own opinions about psychosocial support. We set out to redress this gap by asking frontline
health and social care workers about their own experiences and views about psychosocial
support during the pandemic, and in so doing, aimed to amplify the voices and views of
frontline workers themselves. This collaborative contribution is vital as we face further waves
of COVID-19 in the UK and need to ensure that we can maintain the wellbeing of the health
and social care workforce and sustain the services they provide to the UK population.

Method
Study design, participants, and procedures
All procedures were approved by the University College London Research Ethics
Committee (Ref. 18341/001). We recruited frontline health and social care workers
purposively through social media (Twitter and Facebook) and by snowball sampling via
healthcare colleagues, asking them to pass on details of the study to potential participants. We
deliberately sought a wide range of participants, including different professional groups,
career stages and geographical locations, to access a diverse range of experiences and views.
Potential participants were invited to contact the first author via email. They were then sent
the study Participant Information Sheet and Consent Form by return email. As all interviews
took place remotely, participants were asked to return the electronically signed consent form

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

to the allocated interviewer in advance of the interview. All interviews were completed by
four graduate students in Clinical Mental Health who received training from the first author.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to taking part in the
interviews.
Interviews were arranged at a mutually convenient time between the interviewer and
the frontline worker and took place by telephone or online video call. The interview guide
(see supplementary materials) was drafted collaboratively by the research team, in
consultation with our Expert Reference Group, comprising NHS service leads, Wellbeing
officers, and clinicians with lived experience of mental health difficulties. All the interviews
were audio recorded and then transcribed verbatim by the interviewer who conducted the
interview. All potentially identifying information about the participant and their place of
work was removed from the interview transcripts to protect participants’ anonymity.
The wellbeing of our participants and our research team was of paramount importance
throughout this study. If any participant reported significant distress, they were signposted to
local and National sources of psychological support. The research team were supported by
regular supervision from the first author.
Analysis
We followed the principles of reflexive thematic analysis [10, 11], underpinned by a
critical realist epistemological stance, throughout this study. In keeping with thematic
analysis, we sought immersion in the data by reading and re-reading all the transcripts,
reflecting on the interviews and discussing emerging themes in research team meetings. JB
and the four interviewers independently coded two transcripts each, to derive an initial list of
potential codes. This coding frame was reviewed and agreed through discussion in the team.
All transcripts were then imported into NVivo Pro V12 and coded into the provisional coding

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

frame, which was further extended and refined with the coding of subsequent transcripts. All
coding was inductive, derived from the data, and not pre-determined by any pre-existing
theories. A final set of themes was then developed from the coded data and revised with
feedback from participants, health and social care worker colleagues and our Expert
Reference Group.
Reflexivity
Reflexivity is an important component of all qualitative research, enabling the reader
to consider the validity of the analysis by better understanding the research team who have
produced it. This team is made up of a diverse group of researchers, including different career
stages, clinical specialities, genders, and cultural groups. JB is a Consultant Clinical
Psychologist and Associate Clinical Professor with over 20 years of experience of working in
the NHS. She has particular expertise in the mental health and wellbeing of high-risk
occupational groups. NAS, SH, TO and ES are all MSc graduates in Clinical Mental Health
Sciences. All volunteered to work with the team during the COVID-19 pandemic. It is worth
noting that all the interviewers who conducted the interviews are female. MB is an Honorary
Consultant Psychiatrist and Principal Clinical Research Fellow. He has 19 years’ experience
of working clinically in the NHS. TG is a Senior Lecturer specialising in research on
psychological responses to mass traumatic events. The research team was an ethnically
diverse group, including White British, Arab, White Irish and White European backgrounds.
As a team we brought a range of different perspectives and experiences to this topic.
Quality and Validity
We have adhered to the highest standards for conducting and writing up qualitative
research throughout this study. We have drawn on existing frameworks for quality in
qualitative research: including the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research Framework
(SRQR) (12) and specific guidance for quality practice in reflexive thematic analysis [13].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In qualitative research, we are less concerned with reliability and generalisability but
attend more to validity, transferability and trustworthiness [14]. To increase the validity of
our results, we included multiple researchers in the processes of data collection, coding and
analysis; challenging our own assumptions and identifying potential ‘blind spots’ that any
one of us might have had with regards to this topic. We met regularly throughout the course
of the research to discuss emerging observations and all members of the research team were
actively involved in developing the written report of this study. We also presented our
preliminary findings to both mental health colleagues and health and social care workers in a
variety of forums to discuss the face validity of our emerging themes. Two healthcare
workers who took part in the interviews provided feedback on our analyses as a form of
member checking.
In this study, we have not sought to achieve a representative sample of participants
with the intention of generalising our results to all health and social care workers in the UK.
However, we deliberately tried to include as varied a group of participants as possible in
order to explore the diversity of experiences and views of support during the pandemic, to
increase the potential transferability of our findings.
To increase the trustworthiness of our interpretations, we have sought to be
transparent about the research team conducting the study and the lenses through which we
have viewed this data. Below we provide quotes from participants to illustrate and evidence
our analyses.

Results
Twenty-five frontline health and social care workers volunteered and took part in the
study. The gender, roles, settings and geographical locations of participants are shown in
Table 1.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Participant Characteristics
Gender
Female
17
Male
8
Role
Doctor
7
(Junior)
(4)
(Consultant)
(3)
Nurse
9
Healthcare assistant
2
Physiotherapist
3
Occupational Therapist (OT)
1
Paramedic
1
Care home worker
1
Mental health care worker
1
Setting*
Intensive Care Unit (ICU)
6
Accident & Emergency (A&E) Department
5
General hospital/COVID wards
8
Older adult wards
1
Nightingale Hospital
1
Ambulance Service
1
Care home
4
Psychiatric inpatient setting
1
Geographical location by UK region
London
9
South East England
3
South Central England
2
South West England
2
Midlands/Central England
3
North East England
5
Scotland
1
*Several participants worked across more than one setting during the peak of the pandemic.

Interviews took place between June 1st and July 23rd, 2020; and lasted between 30 and
77 minutes. Ethnic origin was not recorded at the point of recruitment, although several
participants described themselves as being from minority ethnic groups during the interview.
Experiences and views of psychosocial support during the pandemic were organised
into six domains according to potential sources of psychosocial support. These domains are
not themes per se but were areas identified by the workers when asked about what sources of
support were important to them. Within these domains, we identified a number of pertinent
inductive themes (see Table 2), which are described below and illustrated with quotations.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 2. Themes (Organised within domains of support)
1. Self
1.1 Just getting on with it
2. Family and friends
2.1 Competing demands
2.2 Separation and sacrifice
2.3 Not in our boat
3. Colleagues, peers and teams
3.1 In the same boat
3.2 Tensions and transitions
3.3 Burden of responsibility
4. Organisational Support
4.1 Practical needs
4.2 Information, communication, and consultation
5. Media and the wider public
5.1 Recognition and awareness
5.2 A double edged sword
5.3 Unhelpful heroic narratives
6. Psychological support services
6.1 Awareness
6.2 Accessibility
6.3 Not for me – reluctance and stigma
6.4 Value of expertise

1. Self
This category describes how workers sought to support themselves during the
pandemic.
1.1 Just getting on with it
The predominant narrative amongst the frontline workers when they spoke about how they
coped during the pandemic was one of “just getting on with it”. This mentality was attributed
to being a positive person, being part of the job, or simply not having a choice.
“yeah, you just get on with it”, it’s your job.” Ella, ICU nurse

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“I have to say, it was tough, yes. But there isn’t anything I could have done about
it really. I just had to get on with it.” Nick, Healthcare assistant
Finding purpose and meaning in the work they were doing helped many of the
frontline workers to cope and maintain motivation.
“I’d try and draw on the positives that were happening through this, people
being discharged, people surviving this against so much past medical history.
That was really positive and reassuring to hear”. Katerina, OT
This focus on “just getting on with it”, for some however, led to them failing to
recognise or subjugating their own needs. Yara, an A&E nurse told us:
“I cried a lot. Felt rubbish about going to work. But to be honest, I think I just
buried it all because I had to.”
Staff sought opportunities to engage in existing coping strategies where possible, such
as exercise or spending time with family, although several acknowledged that they were not
able to engage in previously enjoyable activities as much as before, due to working extra
hours, being too tired, or not being able to access them due to lockdown and social
restrictions. Many workers commented on not having been able to take time off work or use
annual leave during the pandemic and several acknowledged increasing alcohol consumption
in the absence of other mechanisms to relieve stress.
2. Family and Friends
Participants described how family and friends could be an important source of
support, but also engendered feelings of worry and responsibility. They also felt that family
and friends were often unable to relate to what they were going through.
2.1 Competing demands
Some participants commented on having the opportunity to spend more time together
at home with family during lockdown which they valued. For others, trying to manage the
competing demands of work and family commitments was a source of stress. Most

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

participants had additional caring responsibilities and talked about juggling childcare with
working spouses, not being able to use grandparents for support and often having to take on
extra tasks for vulnerable family members who were shielding. Amy, a physiotherapist in
ICU told us:
“Seeing the patients wasn’t the emotional bit- we’re used to seeing poorly
patients- actually having to then deal with your home life and the change to your
home life, I think that impacted on it hugely and that was probably more stressful
for me than actually working in the acute hospital”
Similarly, Daniella, a mental health worker described:
“On my days off I was getting more exhausted because the shopping was taking…
I was doing shopping for my household, my partner, my mother, his mother and
for work.”
2.2 Separation and sacrifice
Many workers expressed concerns about contaminating their families. Participants
talked about keeping their families away from other people, and even keeping themselves
away from their own families.
Katerina, an OT in London, told us about her fears of contaminating her vulnerable
partner who was shielding, leading her to live in a caravan on their driveway for 14 weeks
during the peak of the pandemic.
“It felt like that was the right thing for us to do to try and protect him, because if
he was going to get it, it would be only through me…and the thought that he
could’ve caught that from me was just overwhelming, so that was the thing that I
could do, was to help and keep working, but also protect him at the same time.”
As a result, several workers talked about feeling isolated, although perceived this as a
necessary precaution.
“I still don’t feel very comfortable going to visit my family or any of my friends
because I don’t want the risk of them having anything and giving it to me and me
passing it to the home, or anyone in the home having anything and then me
passing it to my family. I feel very – quite a bit, like, isolated from the world, and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

more isolated than people that aren’t working on the frontline, because we have a
lot of weight on our shoulders of the places where we have to be.” Joy, Carer,
Dementia Care Home.
2.3 Not in our boat
Many participants talked about the importance of keeping in touch with friends and
family, often online. Some valued having the opportunity to talk to people outside of health
and social care about things that were not work related. Workers valued the support of family
and friends, both emotional and practical.
Many participants, however, acknowledged that it was often hard to talk to friends
and family who might not be able to relate to what they were going through – who were “not
in the same boat”.
Olivia, a Physiotherapist told us:
“Nobody really understands what it was like. I can come home and kind of
explain it to my husband, but he doesn’t work in a hospital, he doesn’t really
know what it is like working in intensive care anyway, and so, you couldn’t really
come home and tell him what it was like, cause nobody ever really can accept
what it’s like unless you are working there as well.”
Workers also did not want to burden others. Ester, a Nurse, described trying to talk to
her daughter:
“I tried to talk to her once, but then she said she had her own anxieties and problems
with Uni work, and exams and things like that. So, I tried to talk to her once, but she got
so upset, that after that I can’t put this on her as well.”

3. Colleagues, Peers and Teams
For the most part, participants spoke positively about their experiences of support
from colleagues and peers, united through shared experience. However, this was not
straightforward, and peers were not always a source of support.
3.1 In the same boat

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Participants described a strong sense of camaraderie and peer support. In contrast to
family and friends, workers felt that colleagues could relate to their experiences.
“We all support each other, because we’re all in the same boat, we’re all sort of
going through the same emotions.” Joy, Carer, Dementia Care Home.
Workers valued being able to talk to someone who could understand and relate
to what they were going through. When asked who she found it most helpful to talk to,
Olivia a Physiotherapist said:
“definitely the colleagues that I worked with, being able to share that experience
with them and talk it through, was really, really helpful. Because, obviously, they
really understood how you felt, because 99% of them felt exactly the same way.”
Workers particularly valued colleagues knowing and understanding the unique
demands of their role and would often seek their support over more formal sources.
“I personally, I would probably rather, I’ve had a few colleagues that I’ve used as
confidants rather than speaking to somebody outside my circle. I know there are
well-being apps and things being rolled out to people free of charge which were
suggested to me, but I’ve not used them, in all honesty.” Michael, Doctor.
Workers appreciated colleagues for being able to normalise and validate emotional
responses and appreciated the opportunity to share decision making. They also particularly
valued support from colleagues and peers as it was usually easily accessible and timely at the
point of need.
3.2 Tensions and transitions
Relationships between colleagues were not, however, always straightforward or
supportive. Whilst many groups were brought closer together by shared experience, others
were separated, and divisions were observed between those perceived as doing more and
those perceived as doing less. Resentments brewed between those who accepted
redeployment and those who were not asked or who refused. As some groups bonded,
fractures were amplified between different teams, departments and wards.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Many staff were redeployed into new roles and/or new locations during the peak of
the pandemic and this was a particular source of frustration and tension.
“I got moved to a different team of people to work with that I didn’t know and
they didn’t really know me or my skills or my background or whatever… they
didn’t know what I was able to do and not do, and then I wasn’t being used
effectively. That was quite frustrating. Or you know, they would change the times
they’re having meetings and stuff and I wouldn’t really be updated…I felt like I
wasn’t being taken care of by their team. Particularly when like, I don’t normally
do this, I’m already out of my comfort zone a bit here…We were kind of the
outsiders, and it still is…I feel like an outsider.” Alice, Physiotherapist.
Several redeployed staff talked about being “outside of their comfort zone” leading
them to look for more support from new colleagues, but not always finding it.
“you go for a break you didn’t know anybody, so it was quite lonely on your
breaks. So, you kind of just sit there and saw people talking to each other and
ranting. But I did not have anybody, because I did not know anybody.” Ester,
Nurse.
On returning to previous teams, support was still not always necessarily forthcoming,
as Ester went on to tell us.
“The week I finished my redeployment, I came back to my normal role, and had a
bit of a breakdown, because there was nobody here. My colleague went home for
annual leave, I couldn’t find my managers.”

3.3 Burden of responsibility
Workers also described a sense of burden in caring for others. Several worried about
being a burden when they were working in a new role or environment. Some talked about
feeling burdened by colleagues. Others described feeling a burden of responsibility to look
after others.
Workers worried about whether they were doing the right thing and giving the right
advice to colleagues. They also noted how it was harder to support others when they
themselves were feeling depleted.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“You felt responsible for the nurses that were there on the first shift. On top of
everything, you had the added pressure of, you know, you felt responsible making
sure that they were okay, when you yourself were not 100%”. Ester, Nurse.
Similarly, Megan, an A&E nurse described how workers did not want to burden
colleagues further when everyone was going through the same stresses:
“We’re a really close team but because everybody is in it, there isn’t that support
around you because everybody needs to be for themselves. It is a time when
everybody needs to be quite selfish but that means that there isn’t anybody there
really asking how you are because everybody is asking themselves how they are.”
Later, Megan spoke about this as a barrier which prevented workers from seeking peer
support from designated colleagues:
“There are posters in changing rooms and things, saying like ‘if you need
someone to talk to…’ and there are the named people who have put themselves
forward for if you want to talk to them, but you almost feel like they are in this job
as well and I’m going to come to them with something they are doing as well and
it’s hard, you almost feel like I don’t want to bother them with a problem when
they are going through it as well.”

4. Organisational Support
4.1 Practical needs
Staff valued organisational responses which addressed their basic human needs during
the peak of the crisis. This support was appreciated both on a practical level but also in that it
conveyed value of the workers themselves. Workers spoke about free meals, access to free
parking and areas to rest and recover being important.
“They provided free parking which I think staff really valued and they also
provided free meals… and little things like that have really helped because it just
makes people feel more appreciated.” Amy, Physiotherapist.
This kind of practical support was prioritised by many during the peak of the
pandemic. As Anna, a Consultant in A&E said:
“We appreciate the basic things done well…making sure that we get our breaks,
that we have access to hot food in our department. Simple things like that are
actually really important…I don’t think that putting on meditation or resilience

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

training are necessarily the best way to help and support staff. I think that making
them feel like their basic needs are helped and they are valued, are probably the
most important things.”
Whilst this practical support was important, some pointed out inconsistencies in
messaging, for example, free food including many sugary and unhealthy snacks. And whilst
staff appreciated these resources, they often noted that in reality, having the time during their
busy shifts to access them was impracticable. A couple of participants also commented on
how resources were positioned, for example, how a rest area being labelled a “wobble room”,
could perpetuate stigma, as staff did not want to be seen as someone “having a wobble”.
Whilst these forms of additional support were appreciated by the workers, when they
were subsequently taken away, staff felt de-valued, which was reflected in lower morale.
“The free snacks and the free coffees go away and everyone’s sort of like oh, back
to business as usual, people have forgotten that actually, the rest of the time we’re
all trying to do a really good job and help people, I think that’s when everybody’s
going to need a bit of a morale boost.” Alice, physiotherapist
Workers appreciated flexibility in their working patterns, especially when they had
other caring responsibilities or were vulnerable members of staff who needed to shield. Staff
valued opportunities to take breaks, although many commented that they had not been able to
take time off work and use annual leave.
“I haven’t had a lot of time off. The whole annual leave situation [laughs] not to
bag on my trust and my hospital but that was non-existent for a period of time. I
haven’t had annual leave, I am due to have it so that is fine but I know that more
than ever in my life, I am hanging out for a bit of time off because I do feel
exceptionally burnt out.” Alyssa, Doctor, London
Workers also shared concerns about patients who were not being treated during the
peak of the pandemic and the burden of growing waiting lists. This as well as increasing rates
of COVID compounded the sense expressed by many of having had insufficient time to
recover.
4.2 Information, communication and consultation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Workers sought consistent information and clear guidance. They especially wanted
clear communication around PPE and safety procedures, but noted that recommendations
changed daily, leading to confusion and inconsistencies.
“The trust was very good in that they had their message that they were filtering
down but they didn’t filter it down consistently and that was a big level of
frustration so it was one day oh, you need to be doing it this way, the next day it
was some other way, and everyone interpreted what they meant differently.” Amy,
Physiotherapist
Workers talked about problems with communication within and between teams. They
noted that many methods of communication were problematic, with staff rarely having time
to check emails. Not all staff had equitable access to information, with agency and
contractual employees not having access to NHS email accounts, via which information was
often disseminated.
Workers wanted communication to be two-way and wanted to be consulted in the
process of decision making. Some gave examples of feeling listened to and involved, more
spoke about their views not being invited or taken into account.
“It has been a bit frustrating I think we feel from an A&E point of view that we
haven’t been that involved. There are these task force that we should we have
some representation at, and we haven’t been involved. So, I think that we have
been expected to respond to things but without being involved in the strategic
management.” Anna, Consultant, A&E
At worst, the workers felt like their views were silenced and invalidated by
organisational and governmental responses.
“They should listen to the people on the frontlines, that was the major problem
because there was a massive mismatch between what the government kept on
saying, what the NHS bosses kept on saying and the people on the front lines
saying ‘no, we don’t have that. We don’t have what we need to keep us safe’ and
the government were trying to silence the people who were working on the front
lines…they were treating us like we were stupid like making us doubt our
memory like ‘did this really happen? You’re saying we had all the equipment,
why is it we don’t have it then? Why are we getting ill?’” Alex, Agency Nurse.
5. Media and the wider public

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Participants described mixed feelings about support offered by the media and the
wider public. On the one hand, they appreciated the recognition and value of their work. On
the other, they felt such support was often short-lived and many-times unhelpful.
5.1 Recognition and awareness
Healthcare workers appreciated media coverage of their work when it raised
awareness of important issues in realistic ways. For example, participants from allied health
professions, such as physiotherapy and occupational therapy, valued coverage of their
professional roles in healthcare settings which they felt were previously poorly understood by
the public.
The media was also valued for its role in raising awareness of the challenges that
NHS workers were facing and advocating for resources such as personal protective
equipment (PPE).
“I think that what the media has done is a good thing because it has said look, we
need to have this recognition that the NHS as a whole, it can’t handle something
like this, and they do struggle, and this is going to be a massive knock back for the
NHS, like, they’re going to struggle to come back from it a lot. I just feel like the
media portrayed it well in saying, there needs to be more help, there needs to be
more PPE, stuff like that.” Will, Paramedic.
Participants did, however, also highlight groups of workers who they felt were
forgotten by the media and largely absent in their representations, but equally affected by the
pandemic, including care home workers, porters, cleaners and mortuary workers. Several
participants commented on resentment harboured towards healthcare staff by other
keyworkers or furloughed employees who felt overlooked by the media and public.
5.2 A double edged sword
Whilst workers appreciated positive media coverage and public gratitude, most
expected that this would be short-lived. Participants expected that they would soon be
“forgotten” or worse, anticipated that a “backlash” would inevitably follow.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Zahra, a junior doctor told us:
“I’m worried there’s gonna be a backlash when people are seeing that now we
have to put all the cancer treatment on hold, and all this stuff, all these really sick
people that haven’t been coming in, and GPs are gonna be completely on their
knees after this, and its already been impossible. So, then the backlash is gonna
be big because it’s gonna be OUR fault that nobody can be seen.”
Megan, an A&E nurse, captured the double-edged sword of the media portrayal of health care
workers:
“I think that we’re the heroes when people want us to be and we’re the villains
when people want us to be. We are the scapegoat for everything aren’t we so,
we’re the national treasure when we want to show off to the rest of the world but
it’s not long until we are back to being slated.”
Many workers also talked about the hypocrisy of public and media support.
“The clap for carers, I really liked it at the beginning, I felt it was something
really positive that the community felt they could do to show their
appreciation…but then, as time sort of went on, and we saw more and more
people out in the parks, it almost became a little bit of an insult. My team felt like
when we would go outside and see people just hanging around in groups, it was
just…are you the people that are clapping for us and then also going off to do
that? It really just seemed contradictory.” Katerina, OT, London
5.3 Unhelpful heroic narratives
Several participants commented that media portrayals were inaccurate, tending to
glorify healthcare workers’ roles and present a positive media story.
“It just showed the glory of things, you know, people ringing a bell as they left the
ward and things like that but it didn’t say how many nurses had to move out of
their own houses and how many had to cut contact with their children as some
people had to. I don’t know, I don’t think it showed maybe the weight on the
shoulders of all of us and yeah, I do feel like the clapping was widely broadcast
and showed how lovely everyone was being but I don’t think anybody is talking
about what it really means to support the NHS and frontline workers” Megan,
A&E Nurse
“I think most of the things that I’ve seen have tried to be a bit upbeat and I don’t
think all of the negatives have come through. I don’t think the fact that hospitals
were literally like war zones with all of the chaos that was going on has
necessarily come out in the media.” Michael, Doctor
Heroic narratives were seen as particularly unhelpful and were not welcomed by any
of the workers in our sample. Several described this as “over the top” when they perceived

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

themselves to just be doing their jobs; jobs they did all year round, not just during the
pandemic. Many participants felt that such narratives detracted from debates about adequate
pay and protection.
“It makes me feel really uncomfortable, with people clapping and all that stuff,
when really, you know, what would’ve been a lot more helpful is PPE and some
proper staffing to begin with.” Zahra, Junior Doctor
“The Thursday night clap was always very, really like, angering and made us just
so frustrated…made us feel like “ok, so you think that will be enough for us?
Don’t give us safe working conditions and hazard pay”, but instead, they brought
in this idea of heroes, like militarising the whole response, like our death would
be seen as a sacrifice rather than absolutely due to inadequate response from the
employer, from the government. That made us so angry. The glorification of the
NHS worker, instead of giving us what we need which is proper protection.” Alex,
Nurse
“Being called a hero or an angel is deemed to be sufficient reward for managing
down salaries…it is very easy to say you’re doing a fab job, you know…but it’s
about how you support your staff in a consistent and meaningful way. So, the
notion of heroes and angels, I don’t think is one that I have found particularly
valuable or helpful. Appreciation is nice, but it’s not heroism, it’s doing the job
that you are paid to do.” James, Nurse, Scotland.
Some workers also observed that such narratives devolved responsibility from the
public.
“Placing nurses as heroes devolves responsibility from others…we’re not heroes,
we’re all just doing our part...but everybody has their part to play in this.”
Katerina, OT.
6. Psychological support services
Support from psychological therapy services, when available, was largely valued, and
those who had accessed them, or knew others who had, spoke positively about them.
However, there were large disparities in what was available and significant barriers to access.
6.1 Awareness
There was a striking variety of experiences amongst the workers in our sample. Some
felt psychological support services were well advertised and available, although notably not

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

many of these participants felt that they themselves were in need of them. Several others were
unaware of what psychological support was available.
Some participants highlighted a lack of recognition of mental health issues in the first
place.
“I think firstly, there needs to be a way of recognising it because everyone has
been so involved that it has been hard to recognise that people are falling apart,
one of the people went off with an acute psychotic episode and actually in
retrospect we should have picked that up earlier and one of my other colleagues
has gone off with very bad depression in the last week and the signs were there
but it’s a matter of how you try and spot that.” Michael, Consultant.

A few participants who had received wellbeing or Psychological PPE training early on
in the pandemic valued this; some others thought this desirable, but for most, this was not
something they had experienced.
Communication about what psychological support services were available was often
unclear and inconsistent, leaving staff uncertain about what support was available and
confused about how to access it.
“There hasn’t been psychological support available. Or at least I didn’t have
time to look for it. And if it was there, I didn’t see it. It wasn’t made available, it
wasn’t visual...I certainly haven’t seen anything.” Grace, ICU Nurse
“Lip service is given to numbers you can call and things like that. But I wouldn’t
know how to access it. I don’t know their numbers; I wouldn’t know who to
contact.” Jasser, Consultant
6.2 Accessibility
Even when staff were aware of support being available, they often seemed to feel that
this were quite remote, irregular and not easily accessible. When asked what mental health
support was available, Ester, a redeployed nurse, told us “they just said that the wellbeing
team is available and to contact them if we had any need of it”. Anna, Consultant in A&E
also described:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“We didn’t have regular access to a psychologist in the department. They were
kind of infrequently coming and touching base with us. I don’t know how great the
uptake would be if they had come down regularly…I was hoping we would be able
to have some support on a regular basis.”
When staff did try to seek help, they were not always able to access it. Yara, an A&E
nurse told us:
“We were told if we wanted to speak to someone, we could phone occupational
health. But every time you tried to phone occupational health it was engaged.”
Similarly, Anna, Consultant in A&E, talked about problems accessing counselling
services in her hospital:
“People have tried to take up these interventions, but they haven’t managed to
actually get through to anybody. It’s just that the phone lines are busy, or they
have been unlucky in terms of when they are trying to call…So, although
technically the provision is there, I haven’t actually spoken to anyone who has
managed to speak to one of the counsellors.”
There were also many practical and structural barriers to accessing psychological
support services. Workers commented on services usually only being available in working
hours, Monday to Friday, which did not correspond with the shift patterns that most staff
worked during the pandemic. Many staff commented that they were too busy during their
shifts to be able to take time out for such appointments, and understandably did not want to
attend after the end of long shifts, or to come in to work on their time off.
“There were a couple of things set up like one was to drop in and have a cup of
tea and a chat about how people are feeling but I don’t think people ever realised
like we are not going to be able to just pop in and have a cup of tea in the middle
of the day. They were good ideas and people meant well but in reality, nobody
wants to stay at the end of a shift to talk…nobody is going to get to talking
because there just isn’t time when people are at work.” Megan, A&E Nurse
There also appeared to be striking inconsistencies in the provision of mental health
support across services, as noted by several workers when they moved between locations and
specialties. There were particular barriers to access for staff who were not employed by the
NHS, restricting access to many NHS based services for social care staff and agency staff not
on NHS contracts.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Redeployed staff also found it especially hard to access services when transitioning
between services and line managers, often key points of access to support services.
“I felt isolated and left on my own...and then my manager said: ‘Once you’re
redeployed, I’m not your manager anymore. It’s the COVID-19 centre that manages
you.’ It’s very difficult to navigate around the system and find who actually is
managing you.” Ester, redeployed nurse.
6.3 Not for me – reluctance and stigma
Most of the staff we interviewed had not accessed any psychological support services
themselves. For several participants, this was because they perceived that they did not need
this, or preferred to seek support from colleagues, friends and families. However, many of the
participants in this study did describe feeling very distressed by their experiences of working
during the pandemic. Strikingly, several commented that the interview was the first time they
had had the opportunity to talk about and reflect on their experiences and they found this
helpful. Some said that more mental health support would have been helpful for their teams
but tended to dismiss this for themselves. This highlights a potential gap between need and
engagement.
Some staff groups seemed to hold the perception that such services were not intended
for people like them. For example, some doctors and allied health professionals perceived the
services as only applicable to nurses. Others pointed to more explicit stigma as a barrier to
seeking help. Joseph, A&E Healthcare Assistant said:
“I think there’s a huge stigma with mental health. Maybe not as much as it used
to be. But I think there’s definitely still a stigma. Probably more so for
men…People feel that they can go but it might affect how people perceive them as
a person. How they’re perceived as being a strong individual or something like
that.”
Similarly, Nathan, a Junior Doctor told us:
“The problem with healthcare is that mental health is slightly stigmatised in
healthcare workers and people don’t want to admit that there is a problem…they
stress a culture of resilience and I don’t think anyone wants to be seen as being
unable to cope with anything.”

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6.4 Value of expertise
Whilst many of the workers in our sample sought support from colleagues and peers
who could relate directly to their experiences, others, at other times, valued the expertise,
neutrality and confidentiality of being able to speak to a mental health specialist.
Several participants commented that informal and reflective team sessions facilitated by
a mental health professional had been beneficial. Workers worried about saying the right
thing or giving appropriate advice, so seemed reassured when sessions were facilitated by
someone with psychological expertise. In a traditionally hierarchical health system, some
participants specifically desired advice from the experts most qualified to give it.
“My view…is that it [psychological support] should be a clinical psychologist.
Because that’s just, you know, I do the type of surgery I do because that’s what I
do, and no one else could do it. And you guys do what you do. So, I think it should
be a consultant clinical psychologist leading a service.” Jasser, Consultant.
Workers valued dedicated time to talk and be listened to, which they did not think they
could expect from colleagues and peers. The also particularly valued a confidential and nonjudgement space in which to talk, and several commented that they did not think it always
appropriate to speak to supervisors and line managers about how they were feeling.
“I think it’s important that the other person isn’t directly associated with your job
and then you can just have the opportunity to express really openly without
anything getting back to your team or you bosses about how you really feel.”
Nathan, Junior Doctor.
For most, accessing psychological support services in their own hospital was most
desirable and convenient. However, there were a couple of notable exceptions, where
mistrust in their organisation and management had been fostered, some workers preferred to
be able to access a service that was outside of their immediate organisation.
Several workers also talked about access to individual sessions being important, in
addition to group and team support, as they did not always feel able to talk openly in front of
colleagues or had experienced certain individuals in groups dominating.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“I just think it’s difficult to express how you really feel, if you are with peers you
might not want to open up or display any kind of sign of weakness.” Nathan,
junior doctor
Several participants in this study spoke about the benefits of formal mental health
support being appreciated after the peak of the crisis. Workers recognised that during the
peak of the pandemic they tended to focus on the work at hand and be “running on
adrenaline”. After the peak of the crisis had past, they acknowledged that they had more time
to reflect, and for many, this was when they recognised the greatest impact on their mental
health.
“Now is the time that people are developing some of the problems. At the time
when everybody was immersed and working, there were a few people developing
problems, but actually I think that the PTSD and the aftereffects are coming
now.” Michael, Consultant.
Several participants also commented on a longer-standing lack of psychological
support, and that such support should be made available in the longer-term, not just during
the crisis.

Discussion
In this study we sought to better understand frontline health and social care workers’
experiences and views about psychosocial support during the COVID-19 pandemic. We have
deliberately considered the full breadth of potential sources of psychosocial support in this
paper, including individual, team, organisational and societal aspects, as these were raised by
workers when asked about what sources of support were important to them.
The results of this qualitative thematic analysis found that workers’ experiences and
views about support were complex and nuanced. Workers for the most part tended to adopt a
“just get on with it” attitude which often led to them not recognising or subjugating their own
psychological wellbeing. They valued emotional and practical support from family and
friends but often worried about them and felt they could not relate to their experiences as they

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

were “not in the same boat”. They valued the shared experience with colleagues who were
“in the same boat” and often looked to peers as their first line of support. However, peer
relationships could also be complicated, and many staff did not want to burden, or be
burdened by, colleagues. Workers were ambivalent about support shown by organisations,
media and the public. Whilst they valued psychological support services, there were many
disparities in provision and barriers to access. These findings have important clinical
implications for supporting the psychological wellbeing and mental health of the frontline
health and social care workforce.
Mental health awareness and peer support
Colleagues and peers were most workers’ first line of support. They valued talking to
peers in the first instance as they could relate to each other’s experiences and support was
usually easily and immediately accessible. However, there were several caveats to this, and
peer support was certainly not straightforward. Staff often did not attend to the state of their
own, and their colleagues’, mental health, indicative of a lack of awareness of mental health
issues in some physical healthcare settings. Mental health awareness training could facilitate
better recognition and prioritisation of their own and others’ psychological wellbeing and has
a demonstrable impact on improving healthcare worker wellbeing and burnout [15].
Greenberg and Tracy [16] have advocated for supervisors to be trained in having
“psychologically savvy conversations”. This could certainly go some way to mitigating the
lack of awareness of mental health issues in the health and social care workforce. However,
the workers in this sample talked rarely about supervisors and managers as sources of
support. Several also talked about deliberately wanting to access support that was outside of
their line management structure. We cannot assume that this means supervisors are not

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

important, but nor does it mean that we can assume that they are. It may therefore be equally,
or even more important, for mental health awareness training to be made available to all staff.
Furthermore, awareness of mental health issues alone is unlikely to lead to behaviour
change and several participants in this study spoke about enduring stigma associated with
transparency around mental health difficulties. Stigma about mental illness amongst
healthcare professionals has previously been well-documented and noted as a workplace
culture issue and a barrier to help-seeking [17]. It is likely that top-down encouragement, role
modelling by senior staff and cultural change will be necessary to increase psychological
safety and subsequently workers’ willingness to talk about mental health in the health and
social care workplace.
Peer support was also sometimes experienced by workers as a burden. They worried
about burdening, and being burdened by, colleagues, who were by definition going through
the same stressors as they were. The mutuality of shared experience could bring workers
together, but empathy for others’ distress has also been well established as a risk factor for
vicarious traumatisation [18]. Therefore, whilst peer support may be an important component
of psychosocial support from health and social care workers, it is likely best embedded in a
wider system of support, including peers, organisations and mental health professionals, so as
not to place too much additional pressure on peers, at a time when their emotional resources
may already be depleted.
The results of this study also showed that whilst certain groups bonded through shared
experience, other teams and services experienced fractures and conflict. Social psychology
has made us aware that the strong formation of an “in-group” necessitates greater distancing
and rejection of the “out-group” [19]. This was particularly apparent during COVID-19 with
conflicts between wards, services and localities. This made it particularly difficult for staff

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

who were redeployed during the pandemic, who did not always feel included in their new
ingroup but were no longer part of their old ingroup and could be left without clear lines of
management support. Additional psychosocial support for redeployed staff is likely to be of
paramount importance.
Organisational, media and public behaviour
Workers appreciated public support and felt valued by gestures of media and
organisational support. However, heroic narratives were unhelpful and were in contradiction
to the professionalism of health and social care roles, detracted from debates about pay and
protection, and at worst, created a barrier to staff seeking support. After all, heroes do not
struggle; angels do not get PTSD.
Workers desired clear and consistent information from government and organisations,
and this appeared to mitigate anxiety and stress. They also wanted to be consulted and
collaborated with more, but few had experienced this. Consultation and co-production with
frontline staff about is going to be essential in establishing systems of support which are
likely to be most effective, acceptable, and sustainable.
Workers felt gestures of practical support conveyed value of the workers themselves.
However, when resources were taken away, this had a deleterious effect on mental health and
left workers feeling de-valued and demoralised. This has previously been seen when doctors’
messes; hubs for rest, refreshments and social interaction amongst physicians, were
discontinued, leading to demoralisation and disaffection amongst medical staff who felt that
one of the final vestiges of their wellbeing had been dismissed [20].
Several participants in this study acknowledged that staff morale after the peak of the
pandemic was very low. This is consistent with the findings of a recently published Royal
College of Nursing survey [21] of 42,000 nurses, which found that pay and feeling under-

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

valued were nurses’ primary concerns. Subsequently, 35% of the sample stated they were
considering leaving the profession.
Significant steps need to be taken to improve the psychological wellbeing and morale
of the UK health and social care workforce and to ensure that the services they deliver to the
UK population are sustainable, during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.
Resources for support need to be made consistently available, and easily accessible, to
all staff. However, systemic and cultural barriers to access need to be addressed to ensure that
accessing such resources is not inadvertently stigmatising. Access to resources also needs to
be equitable, within different teams and localities and across the health and social care
workplace.
Psychological Support Services
Workers valued psychological expertise and found sessions facilitated by mental
health experts reassuring, as they were often worried about saying the wrong thing. They
valued being able to access a confidential and independent space, with less burden placed on
health and social care peers. Any effective and acceptable mental health support for frontline
workers is therefore likely to need to be flexible and accommodate different preferences,
including group and individual support, peer and expert led interventions and in-house and
external support services.
There were however notable disparities in provision and barriers to access. Staff were
often uncertain about what psychological support was available and how to access it. When
support was available, it was often not easy to access or unavailable at convenient times. This
highlights that psychological support needs to be made available within working hours and
time protected to attend. To not do this communicates to staff that their mental health is not a
work priority.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

There also needs to be equitable access to support services for all staff, as many staff
groups are not employed directly by the NHS so have fallen outside of support being offered
by it. This risks perpetuating systemic injustice in support provision, as those from ethnic
minority groups, single parents and those on lower incomes are likely to be over-represented
in agency and contractual work [22, 23].
The findings of this study also suggest that communication about psychological
support needs to be more coherent and consistent. Mental health practitioners are likely to
have to more assertively engage health and social care staff to make them more aware of
services available and overcome stigma in attending.
Many psychological wellbeing services have focused on offering training in
“psychological resilience” to individuals. Whilst such primary prevention measures have
their virtues, we need to be cautious that such messages do not inadvertently perpetuate
stigma about mental ill-health and being seen as “not resilient”. We also need to make sure
that we do not place more burden on individual health and social care workers to “be more
resilient”, but rather need to address the culture, systems and structures identified in this
study which present very real barriers to their wellbeing.
There is emerging evidence that psychosocial support may be most acceptable and
effective when delivered in a phase-based way [8], although this warrants evaluation. Mental
health awareness training, health promotion and ill-health prevention are likely to be most
helpful in advance of crises with practical resources, peer support and informal psychological
support most valued at the peak. Formal mental health support is likely to be vital in the early
recovery and subsequent period, requiring more assertive follow up of workers, early
detection of mental health problems and signposting to evidence-based treatment. Effective
screen and treat programmes may be required to identify staff in greatest need.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Any psychological support services will need to be adequately resourced and
financed, in order to protect the mental health of the health and social care workforce in the
long run, and in so doing, maintain the health and wellbeing of the UK population.
Clinical Implications
There is a need to increase mental health awareness for all staff in health and social care settings
Top-down encouragement, role modelling by senior staff and culture change are needed to increase
willingness to talk about mental health in the health and social care workplace
Staff who are redeployed or who transition between teams and services are likely to need additional
support
A combination of peer, organisational and professional support, which accommodates flexibility and
personal preference is likely to be most acceptable and effective
Systems of support need to be coherent, consistently communicated and easily accessible
Staff need protected time during working hours to access wellbeing resources and psychological support
services
More assertive outreach is likely to be needed to engage staff with psychological support and identify
those most in need
Structural and systemic barriers to accessing support need to be addressed, not just individual resilience
Equity of access to support needs to be ensured between different teams, services and localities, as well
as across the health and social care sector.
Psychological support services need to be adequately and sustainably resourced and funded, and not just
made available during crises
More collaboration, consultation and co-production of support services, and their evaluation, with health
and social care staff is needed

Strengths and Limitations
The results of this study should necessarily be considered within the context of its
strength and limitations. The analysis of this qualitative data was rigorous, with all steps
taken to maximise the validity and trustworthiness of the findings. We deliberately sought to
include a varied group of participants from across the UK, including diverse professional
groups at different career stages, in order to explore the diversity of experiences and views of
support during the pandemic and increase the potential transferability of our findings. Our
research team was diverse with considerable clinical NHS experience. Health and social care
workers’ perspectives were included in the design, delivery, analysis and write up of this
paper.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Nevertheless, this study has a number of limitations. Despite our best efforts to
include them, we were only able to recruit one non-medical care home worker and no
participants from outside of a direct healthcare role, such as administrators, cleaners or
porters. More assertive outreach is needed to engage these groups in future research. We also
did not record the ethnic origins or ages of our participants. Whilst several workers identified
themselves in their interviews as from black and minority ethnic groups, and were from a
variety of career stages, this does limit the potential diversity of our sample. Only one
participant from Scotland took part and none from Wales. Workers in these settings might
have had different experiences in these different healthcare systems. Further research is
needed to extend these questions to these groups and allow their voices to be adequately
heard. This study took place over seven weeks in the early post-peak phase of the pandemic
in the UK. It is likely that workers’ needs change over time. Therefore, there needs to be
ongoing dialogue with health and social care workers about their needs and preferences.

Conclusions
This study provides an in-depth analysis of frontline health and social care workers’
views, which elucidates many complexities about their relationship with different domains of
psychosocial support which were hitherto poorly understood. The results of this study show
that a “one-size fits all” approach to providing support is unlikely to be helpful, and that
rather a systematic approach to support including peers, organisations and professional
support is warranted. Nevertheless, these systems of support need to be coherent, consistently
communicated and easily accessible. More research is needed to fully unpack the structural,
systemic and individual barriers to accessing psychosocial support. The views of workers
from minority professional and ethnic groups need to be assertively included in future
research. More collaboration, consultation and co-production of support services and their
evaluation is warranted.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All procedures were approved by the University College London Research Ethics Committee
(Ref. 18341/001). All participants gave written informed consent in advance of taking part in
the interviews.
Consent for publication
All participants gave written informed consent for their anonymised data to be published.
Availability of data and materials

The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author
(JB), upon reasonable request. The data have not been made publicly available due to the
personal and sensitive content of the frontline workers’ accounts.

Competing interests

The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
This research received no specific grant from any funding agency, commercial or not-forprofit sectors. Dr Bloomfield is funded by a UCL Excellence Fellowship and supported by
the National Institute for Health Research University College London Hospitals Biomedical
Research Centre.
Authors’ contributions
JB was the Principal Investigator on this project, led the research team and drafted the
manuscript for publication. NAS, SH, TO and ES conducted and transcribed the interviews

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

with the frontline workers and contributed to the coding and analysis of the data, with
supervision from JB. MB and TG were instrumental in the conceptualisation and design of
the study. All authors contributed to validity checks of the analyses, commented on drafts of
the paper, and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the frontline health and social care workers who gave up their
time to take part in this research. We would also like to thank our Expert Reference Group
and our health and social care colleagues who provided invaluable guidance on the design,
delivery and analysis of this study.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. WHO Press Release. WHO Director-General’s opening remarks at the media briefing
on COVID-19 – 11 March 2020. Available from: https://www.who.int/directorgeneral/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefingon-covid-19---11-march-2020 [Accessed 7th August 2020].
2. Greene T, Harju-Seppänen J, Adeniji M, Steel C, Grey N, Brewin CR et al. Predictors of
PTSD, depression and anxiety in UK frontline health and social care workers during
COVID-19. medRxiv 2020. Available from:
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.21.20216804. [Accessed 25th October 2020].
3. Gunnell D, Appleby L, Arensman E, Hawton K, John A, Kapur N et al. Suicide risk and
prevention during the COVID-19 pandemic. Lancet Psychiatry 2020; 7(6): 468-71.
4. Lai J, Ma S, Wang Y, Cai Z, Hu J, Wei N et al. Factors associated with mental health
outcomes among health care workers exposed to coronavirus disease 2019. JAMA
Network Open 2020; 3(3): e203976.
5. Rossi R, Socci V, Pacitti F, Di Lorenzo G, Di Marco A, Siracusano A et al. Mental
Health Outcomes Among Frontline and Second-Line Health Care Workers During the
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Pandemic in Italy. JAMA Netw Open 2020; 3(5):
e2010185.
6. Carrieri D, Briscoe S, Jackson M, Mattick K, Papoutsi C, Pearson M et al. ‘Care Under
Pressure’: a realist review of interventions to tackle doctors’ mental ill-health and its
impacts on the clinical workforce and patient care. BMJ Open 2018; 8(2): e021273.
7. Holmes EA, O'Connor RC, Perry VH, Tracey I, Wessely S, Arseneault L et al.
Multidisciplinary research priorities for the COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for
mental health science. Lancet Psychiatry 2020; 7(6): 547-60.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8. Billings J, Ching BC, Gkofa V, Greene T, Bloomfield M. Healthcare workers experiences
of working on the frontline and views about support during COVID-19 and comparable
pandemics: A rapid review and meta-synthesis. medRxiv 2020. Available from:
doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.21.20136705. [Accessed 7th August 2020]
9. Billings J, Greene T, Kember T, Grey N, El-Leithy S, Lee D et al. Supporting Hospital
Staff During COVID-19: Early Interventions. Occup Med (Lond); 70(5): 327-9.
10. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006; 3(2):
77-101.
11. Braun V, Clarke V. Novel insights into patients' life-worlds: the value of qualitative
research. Lancet Psychiatry 2019; 6(9): 720-1.
12. O’Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, Reed DA, Cook DA. Standards for reporting
qualitative research: a synthesis of recommendations. Acad Med 2014; 89(9): 1245-51.
13. Braun V, Clarke V. One size fits all? What counts as quality practice in (reflexive)
thematic analysis? Qual Res Psychol 2020; 14: 1-25.
14. Nowell LS, Norris JM, White DE, Moules NJ. Thematic analysis: Striving to meet the
trustworthiness criteria. Int J Qual Methods 2017; 16(1):1609406917733847.
15. West CP, Dyrbye LN, Erwin PJ, Shanafelt TD. Interventions to prevent and reduce
physician burnout: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet 2016;
388(10057):2272-81.
16. Greenberg N, Tracy D. What healthcare leaders need to do to protect the psychological
well-being of frontline staff in the COVID-19 pandemic. BMJ Leader 2020; 4:101-102.
17. Knaak S, Mantler E, Szeto A. Mental illness-related stigma in healthcare: Barriers to
access and care and evidence-based solutions. In Healthcare Management Forum.
Volume 30 (2). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications; 2017. P. 111-16.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.05.20226522; this version posted November 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18. McCann IL, Pearlman LA. Vicarious traumatization: A framework for understanding the
psychological effects of working with victims. J Traumatic Stress 1990; 3(1): 131-49.
19. Tajfel H, Turner JC, Austin WG, Worchel S. An integrative theory of intergroup conflict.
Organizational identity. In: Austin WG, Worchel S, editors. The Social Psychology of
Intergroup Relations. Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole; 1979. p.56-65.
20. Gopal DP, Lee C. Well-being Programs for Physicians and the Role of the “Doctors'
Mess”. JAMA Surg 2016; 151(4):394-5.
21. Townsend L. Poor pay and treatment leads to a sharp rise in nurses planning on leaving
the profession. Nursing Notes. 2020. Available from:
https://nursingnotes.co.uk/news/workforce/poor-pay-treatment-leads-sharp-rises-nursesplanning-leaving/. [Accessed 25th October 2020].
22. UK Gov. NHS Workforce. 2020. Available from: https://www.ethnicity-factsfigures.service.gov.uk/workforce-and-business/workforce-diversity/nhs-workforce/latest.
[Accessed on 25th October 2020].
23. Kings Fund. Overview of the health and social care workforce. 2020. Available from:
https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/time-think-differently/trends-workforce-overview.
[Accessed 25th October 2020].

