medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.06.20226894; this version posted November 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Synchronization in Epidemic Growth and the Impossibility of Selective Containment
Jan Carl Budich1∗ and Emil J. Bergholtz2†
1

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Technische Universität Dresden and
Würzburg-Dresden Cluster of Excellence ct.qmat, 01062 Dresden, Germany
2
Department of Physics, Stockholm University, AlbaNova University Center, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden
(Dated: November 5, 2020)
Containment, aiming to prevent the epidemic stage of community-spreading altogether, and mitigation, aiming to merely ’flatten the curve’ of a wide-ranged outbreak, constitute two qualitatively
different approaches to combating an epidemic through non-pharmaceutical interventions. Here, we
study a simple model of epidemic dynamics separating the population into two groups, namely a
low-risk group and a high-risk group, for which different strategies are pursued. Due to synchronization effects, we find that maintaining a slower epidemic growth behavior for the high-risk group is
unstable against any finite coupling between the two groups. More precisely, the density of infected
individuals in the two groups qualitatively evolves very similarly, apart from a small time delay and
an overall scaling factor quantifying the coupling between the groups. Hence, selective containment
of the epidemic in a targeted (high-risk) group is practically impossible whenever the surrounding
society implements a mitigated community-spreading. We relate our general findings to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic.

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic caused by the new
Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 is among the biggest global
challenges of our time [1], and its quantitative analysis
has thus been an intense focus of recent research [2–7].
A repeatedly debated [8, 9] mitigation strategy is based
on selectively protecting vulnerable individuals that are
at high risk to die or at least develop a severe condition when contracting the virus. Such a strategy, in the
following referred to as 2GROUPS, in practice amounts
to defining (at least) two groups of individuals, a lowrisk group (L) and a high-risk group (H), and then focusing most of the available resources to try and protect the group H from infection, while the larger low-risk
group basically does “business as usual”, possibly combined with moderate general mitigation measures aimed
at ’flattening the curve’ of infections for group L.
Here, we analyze the expected qualitative outcome of
such a 2GROUPS scenario [10]. Generally speaking,
there are two crucial ingredients to a 2GROUPS strategy: First, efficient criteria to identify the high-risk and
the low-risk individuals a priori. Regarding this aspect,
earlier studies indicated that a large fraction of anticipated severe cases may be concentrated in a relatively
small group H, even if only the single criterion of age is
used [2, 11]. Second, the isolation of the high-risk group
aimed at strongly containing the prevalence of the disease in group H. In this regard, we find that the selective
isolation of the risk group is largely stymied by synchronization effects in the equations governing the pandemic
dynamics (see Fig. 1 for an illustration). In particular, we
analytically demonstrate within a minimal mathematical
model that maintaining a qualitatively slower growth of
infections in the high-risk group is unstable against any
finite coupling between the two groups, and thus impractical. Instead, the overall exposure of the group H is
found to be proportional to that of group L, which may
allow for a certain degree of mitigation within H, but

FIG. 1: Syncronization of epidemic growth governed by Eq. 1.
Even if the high-risk group (H) isolates very efficiently, here
quantified by a small basic reproduction number R0LH = 0.5, a
significant fraction ρH
i (red) becomes infected if the low-risk
group (L) exhibits a mitigated ’flatten the curve’ scenario,
here at R0H = 1.5, as described by ρL
i (blue). We show that
this holds for any finite coupling between the groups due to
a synchronization effect taking place in exponential growth
phase of the epidemic. Specifically, during the synchronization the high and low-risk group infection rates are scaled
by a simple constant factor, m = R0L /R0LH and shifted by
one time-step (cf. the black dashed curve). After the synchronization the infection rate in the high-risk group remains
L
significant and bounded from below as mρH
i (t + 1) ≥ ρi (t).
H
L
−4
Initial conditions set to ρi (t = 0) = ρi (t = 0) = 10 .

largely rules out selective containment within the highrisk group.
Minimal mathematical model of 2GROUPS. – We analyze a simple two-component model of SIR type [12], in
which the qualitative synchronization between the epidemic curves of the two groups (cf. Fig. 1) may be readily understood analytically. The corresponding equations

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.06.20226894; this version posted November 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

for the low-risk group L read as
∆ρL
s
L
L L L
= −R0HL ρH
i ρs − R0 ρi ρs ,
∆t
∆ρL
i
H
L L L
L
= R0HL ρL
s ρi + R0 ρi ρs − ρi ,
∆t
∆ρL
r
= ρL
(1)
i .
∆t
Here, ρα
µ , µ = s, i, r, α = L, H stands for the density of
individuals within group α that are susceptible (µ = s),
infectious (µ = i), and recovered (µ = r), respectively.
The time-step of the discretized dynamics is denoted by
∆t and for SARS-CoV-2 roughly amounts to 5 days in
real time [13]. The parameter R0L is the reproduction rate
within group L, and the inter-group coupling R0HL quantifies the transfer of infections from group H to group L.
The corresponding equations for the high-risk group H
are identical to Eqs. (1) upon exchanging H and L in all
instances. The resulting parameters R0LH and R0H then
denote the transfer of infections from L to H, and the
effective reproduction rate within H, respectively. The
goal of 2GROUPs is of course to keep R0LH as low as
possible, but it will still be non-zero in any realistic implementation.
It is important to notice that the reproduction numbers scale with the relative size of the groups: R0L and
R0LH scale with the fraction of the population in the lowrisk group while R0H and R0HL scale with the population
fraction in the high-risk group. In a realistic scenario
with the low-risk group being about five times as large
as the high risk group this directly leads to a factor of
five between R0LH as compared to R0H and RHL , as reflected in the parameters used for the simulations shown
in Fig. 1. Moreover, in our example in Fig. 1, we use
RLH = 0.5 which corresponds to an additional three-fold
reduction of contacts involving individuals from group
H, compared to the already mitigated values (for SARSCoV-2) within group L of R0L = 1.5. This, for the highrisk group, amounts to a rather strict isolation at a level
of hard lockdowns in Europe during spring 2020, and
even similar to the level reached during the lockdown in
Wuhan [14].
To gain analytical insight, and motivated by the aforementioned scaling of parameters with relative group size,
within a first approximation we neglect both R0H and
R0HL , while keeping R0LH and R0L finite. This leads to a
uni-directional decoupling of the two groups (note that
H no longer appears in Eqs. (1) for the group L), which
allows us to get an intuitive feeling for the synchronization of the two groups (see Fig. 2(a)). Corrections arising
from restoring the neglected couplings are discussed further below. Roughly speaking, this only adds additional
channels of infection compared to the simplifying approximation, and at least does not make the situation more
favorable for the H group. Within our approximation,
we may first solve Eqs. (1) for group L and then plug

2

the time-dependent solution ρL
i (t) into the corresponding equations for H. Putting ∆t = 1, i.e. measuring
time in units of ∆t, we thus derive
LH L
H
LH
ρH
i (t + 1) = R0 ρi (t)ρs (t) = R0

ρL
i (t) H
ρ (t)ρH
s (t)
H
ρi (t) i

H
= R̃0H (t)ρH
i (t)ρs (t),

(2)
ρL

where we have defined R̃0H (t) = R0LH ρHi as an effective
i
time-dependent reproduction rate for group H. Eq. (2)
formally resembles a time-step in a simple epidemic dynamics of a single group but with R0H replaced by the
time-dependent R̃0H (t). Importantly, since R̃0H (t) is proρL

portional to the quotient ρHi , a much lower density of
i
infected in the H group (the main goal of 2GROUPS)
increases the epidemic growth within H – a very undesirable but unavoidable effect of the non-linear coupling
R0LH . During the initial exponential growth of infections in L, a stable situation characterized by a timeindependent R̃0H only occurs if the condition
R0LH
ρH
i
=
R0L
ρL
i

(3)

is satisfied. Then, the dynamics of ρH
i simply follows the
dynamics of ρL
with
a
delay
of
a
single
time step and an
i
overall reduction in amplitude, effectively dividing it by
m=

R0L
≥ 1,
R0LH

(4)

L
i.e. mρH
i (t + 1) ∼ ρi (t) (cf. Eq. (3)). Close to the
peak and during the downward slope of the dynamics, the
L
delay causes ρH
i to grow even slightly above ρi /m (see
Fig. 1). Hence, a simple estimate for the overall number
of infected I H within the high-risk group is given by

I H ≥ I L /m,

(5)

where I L denotes the overall number of infected within
the low-risk group during the epidemic (see Fig. 2(b)).
These general results are illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2(a).
In fact, a stronger bound holds throughout the relevant
L
parts of the epidemic, namely that mρH
i (t + 1) ≥ ρi (t)
(cf. the black dashed and blue solid curves in Fig. 1). We
stress that Fig. 1 shows data on the full model (1) with
finite parameter values R0H = 0.1 and R0HL = 0.1, and
the good agreement with our analytical predictions based
on neglecting those couplings thus corroborates the robustness of our analytical picture over a wider parameter
range.
More generally, we find that an undesirable outbreak
within the high-risk group that, apart from a delay by
one time-step, is qualitatively similar to the behavior of
the low-risk group occurs as soon as R0LH is non-zero,
even for very small values (see Fig. 2(a)). Furthermore,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.06.20226894; this version posted November 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

FIG. 2: Instability at weak inter-group coupling (a) and total infection during the epidemic (b), illustrating Eq. (5) for various
L
inter-group coupling values R0LH (evaluated at t = 100, R0L = 1.5, R0HL = R0H = 0 for the initial condition ρH
i (t = 0) = ρi (t =
0) = 10−4 ).

increasing R0H and R0HL is never found to reduce ρH
i (t)
(or I H for that matter). Hence, our analytical picture
for R0H = R0HL = 0 may be seen as an optimistic lower
bound for the infections within the high-risk group.
Concluding remarks.– In this work, we have shown that
the efficiency of a stratified epidemic strategy dividing
the population into a low- and a high-risk group is drastically limited by synchronization effects occurring for
any finite coupling between the groups. Specifically, the
most optimistic hope to maintain a significantly slower
effective reproduction rate for the high-risk group as compared to the low-risk group is largely ruled out. We have
explicitly demonstrated this analytically in SIR-based
2GROUP models that give a coarse grained mean-field
picture, noting that SIR models are microscopically more
accurate for the spread of e.g. influenza viruses than for
SARS-CoV-2, as clusters and superspreading events play
an important role for the latter. Furthermore, certain
quantitative aspects such as the delay in infections between the two groups may differ significantly due to finer
structures of a real society not captured by our simple
modelling [15]. Finally, we note that our model assumes
perfect immunity upon recovery. That may be a reasonable approximation during a specific wave of the epidemic, and deviations from this assumption can for sure
only make the situation worse for both groups. Despite
our minimal modeling, we would find it very surprising,
if the qualitative effects revealed in our present work, in
particular the impossibility of sustaining a selective containment for a risk-group only, could not be clearly identified in more microscopic modelling scenarios. Along
these lines, we hope that our findings stimulate future
efforts to analyze more detailed COVID-19 specific models from a viewpoint of epidemic curves corresponding to
different groups, including effects such as partial immunity, time-dependent strategies, imperfect vaccinations,
and relaxing NPIs.

As a matter of fact, a sort of 2GROUPs strategy
has been applied in Sweden for the first 7 months of
the COVID-19 pandemic. While this has certainly contributed to keeping the fatalities lower than in an entirely
unmitigated scenario, the comparably high fatality rates
in Sweden may serve as a practical example of how hard
it is to selectively protect high-risk groups [16, 17]. While
insufficient security measures naturally play a major role
here, we note that the outcome is in agreement with our
general analysis: the substantial impact on the high-risk
group has been reflecting the high spread in society at
large. This stands in contrast to the neighboring countries that have applied a containment strategy directed
to the society at large. Even without similarly stringent
restrictions for the risk groups, this has resulted in a per
capita fatality rate roughly an order of magnitude lower
than in Sweden. This indicates that synchronization phenomena as the ones revealed in our present study might
be more universal for epidemic dynamics, as long as infections occur between individuals (as opposed to disease
spreading via agents such as mosquitos).
Acknowledgments.— We would like to thank Marcus
Carlsson, Thors Hans Hansson and Jan Lötvall for useful comments and discussions. EJB acknowledges the
Science Forum Covid-19 (https://vetcov19.se/en/) for
numerous discussions on epidemiology and COVID-19.
EJB is supported by the Swedish Research Council (VR)
and the Wallenberg Academy Fellows program of the
Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

∗

Electronic address: jan.budich@tu-dresden.de
Electronic address: emil.bergholtz@fysik.su.se
[1] WHO (2020)Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): Situation Report - 72. April 1, 2020, World Health Organization, Geneva (2020), https://apps.who.int.
†

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.06.20226894; this version posted November 7, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[2] N.
M.
Ferguson
et
al.,
Impact of nonpharmaceutical
interventions
(NPIs)
to
reduce
COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand , DOI:
https://doi.org/10.25561/77482.
[3] S. Flaxman et al., (2020) Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions
on COVID-19 in 11 European countries (Imperial College
London, 2020), DOI: https://doi.org/10.25561/77731.
[4] T. Britton, F. Ball, and P. Trapman (2020) A mathematical model reveals the influence of population heterogeneity on herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2 , Science 369,
6505, 846-849.
[5] H. Salje et al., Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in
France, Science 369, 6500, 208-211.
[6] A. J. Kucharski et al., Early dynamics of transmission
and control of COVID-19: a mathematical modelling
study, The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20, 5, 553-558.
[7] nCoV-2019 Data Working Group (2020) Epidemiological data from the nCoV-2019 outbreak:
early descriptions from publicly available data,
http://virological.org/t/epidemiological-data-from-thencov-2019-outbreak-early-descriptions-from-publiclyavailable-data/337.
[8] M. Kulldorf et al. (2020), The Great Barrington Declaration, https://gbdeclaration.org.
[9] K. Alexanderson et al. (2020), THE JOHN SNOW MEMORANDUM , https://www.johnsnowmemo.com.
[10] We do not attempt a detailed modeling with many parameters specific to a given country, but rather aim at
distilling robust qualitative properties of the considered
scenarios that do not depend on any fine-tuning. Quantitative predictions will be about orders of magnitude
rather than changes of a few percent.
[11] ourworldindata.org, Case fatality rate of COVID19 by age, https://ourworldindata.org/mortality-riskcovid#case-fatality-rate-of-covid-19-by-age.
[12] W. O. Kermack, and A. G. McKendrick (1927), A Contribution to the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics, Proceedings of the Royal Society A. 115 (772): 700–721.
[13] H. Nishiura, N. M. Linton, A. R. Akhmetzhanov (2020).
Serial interval for novel coronavirus (COVID-19) infections, International Journal of Infectious Diseases. 93,
284-286.
[14] B. Rahman, E. Sadraddin and A. Porreca (2020). The
basic reproduction number of SARS?CoV?2 in Wuhan is
about to die out, how about the rest of the World? , Rev
Med Virol., 10.1002/rmv.2111.
[15] An example of this is that the infection may be introduced to society in a specific subpopulation of the lowrisk groups, such as rich and healthy tourists that go on
skiing vaccations, while it takes a few time steps (generations of transmission) until it has reached e.g. the usually
poorer care home workers that are in direct contact with
the high-risk group.
[16] M. Brandén et. al. (2020), Residential context and
COVID-19 mortality among adults aged 70 years and
older in Stockholm: a population-based, observational
study using individual-level data, Lancet Healthy Longev
2020, https://doi.org/10.1016/ S2666-7568(20)30016-7.
[17] A.C. Roxby and T.R. Gure (2020), Lessons from Sweden: where can older adults shelter from COVID-19? ,
Lancet Healthy Longev 2020, https://doi.org/10.1016/
S2666-7568(20)30035-0.

4

