medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A time-resolved proteomic and diagnostic map characterizes COVID-19 disease
progression and predicts outcome

Vadim Demichev1,2,3,#, Pinkus Tober-Lau4,#, Tatiana Nazarenko9,12, Charlotte Thibeault4,
Harry Whitwell10,11,28, Oliver Lemke1, Annika Röhl1, Anja Freiwald1, Lukasz Szyrwiel2, Daniela
Ludwig1, Clara Correia-Melo2, Elisa T. Helbig4, Paula Stubbemann4, Nana-Maria Grüning1,
Oleg Blyuss11,13,14, Spyros Vernardis2, Matthew White2, Christoph B. Messner1,2, Michael
Joannidis27, Thomas Sonnweber21, Sebastian J. Klein27, Alex Pizzini21, Yvonne Wohlfarter23,
Sabina Sahanic21, Richard Hilbe21, Benedikt Schaefer22, Sonja Wagner22, Mirja
Mittermaier4,24, Felix Machleidt4, Carmen Garcia4, Christoph Ruwwe-Glösenkamp4, Tilman
Lingscheid4, Laure Bosquillon de Jarcy4, Miriam S. Stegemann4, Moritz Pfeiffer4, Linda
Jürgens4, Sophy Denker5, Daniel Zickler6, Philipp Enghard6, Aleksej Zelezniak2,17, Archie
Campbell18,19, Caroline Hayward20, David J. Porteous18, 19, Riccardo E. Marioni18, Alexander
Uhrig4, Holger Müller-Redetzky4, Heinz Zoller22, Judith Löffler-Ragg21, Markus A. Keller23,
Ivan Tancevski21, John F. Timms12, Alexey Zaikin9,12,15,16, Stefan Hippenstiel4,26, Michael
Ramharter7, Martin Witzenrath4,26, Norbert Suttorp4,26, Kathryn Lilley3, Michael Mülleder25,
Leif Erik Sander4,26, PA-COVID-19 Study group℘, Markus Ralser1,2,✱,§, Florian Kurth4,7,✱
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Biochemistry, Berlin, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute, Molecular Biology of Metabolism Laboratory, London, UK
3
The University of Cambridge, Department of Biochemistry and Cambridge Centre for Proteomics, Cambridge,
UK
4
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Infectious Diseases and Respiratory Medicine, Berlin,
Germany
5
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Medical Department of Hematology, Oncology & Tumor Immunology,
Virchow Campus & Molekulares Krebsforschungszentrum, Berlin, Germany
6
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Department of Nephrology and Internal Intensive Care Medicine, Berlin,
Germany
7
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Department of Tropical Medicine, and University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department of Medicine, Hamburg, Germany
9
University College London, Department of Mathematics, London, UK
10
National Phenome Centre and Imperial Clinical Phenotyping Centre, Department of Metabolism, Digestion
and Reproduction, Imperial College London, London, UK
11
Lobachevsky University, Department of Applied Mathematics, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia
12
University College London, Department of Women’s Cancer, EGA Institute for Women’s Health, London,
UK
13
University of Hertfordshire, School of Physics, Astronomy and Mathematics, Hatfield, UK
14
Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Department of Paediatrics and Paediatric Infections
Diseases, Moscow, Russia
15
Lobachevsky University, Laboratory of Systems Medicine of Healthy Ageing, Nizhny Novgorod, Russia
16
Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Department of Paediatrics and Paediatric Infections
Diseases, Moscow, Russia
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
17
Chalmers University of Technology, Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Gothenburg, Sweden
1
2

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18

University of Edinburgh, Centre for Genomic and Experimental Medicine, Institute of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, UK
19
University of Edinburgh, Usher Institute, Edinburgh, UK
20
University of Edinburgh, MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
Edinburgh, UK
21
Medical University of Innsbruck, Department of Internal Medicine II, Innsbruck, Austria.
22
Medical University of Innsbruck, Christian Doppler Laboratory for Iron and Phosphate Biology, Department
of Internal Medicine I, Innsbruck, Austria.
23
Medical University of Innsbruck, Institute of Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria.
24
Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany
25
Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Core Facility - High-Throughput Mass Spectrometry, Berlin, Germany
26
German Centre for Lung Research, Germany
27
Medical University Innsbruck, Division of Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Innsbruck, Austria
28
Imperial College London, Section of Bioanalytical Chemistry, Division of Systems Medicine, Department of
Metabolism, Digestion and Reproduction, London, UK
#✱
§

These authors contributed equally
To whom Correspondence should be addressed: Markus Ralser, markus.ralser@charite.de +49 30 450 528141

℘PA-COVID-19

Study group

Malte Kleinschmidt, Katrin M. Heim, Belén Millet, Lil Meyer-Arndt, Ralf H. Hübner, Tim Andermann, Jan M.
Doehn, Bastian Opitz, Birgit Sawitzki, Daniel Grund, Peter Radünzel, Mariana Schürmann, Thomas Zoller,
Florian Alius, Philipp Knape, Astrid Breitbart, Yaosi Li, Lena Lippert, Felix Bremer, Panagiotis Pergantis, Dirk
Schürmann, Bettina Temmesfeld-Wollbrück, Daniel Wenisch, Sophia Brumhard, Sascha S. Haenel, Claudia
Conrad, Kai-Uwe Eckardt, Lukas Lehner, Jan M. Kruse, Carolin Ferse, Roland Körner, Claudia Spies, Andreas
Edel, Steffen Weber-Carstens, Alexander Krannich, Saskia Zvorc, Linna Li, Uwe Behrens, Sein Schmidt, Maria
Rönnefarth, Chantip Dang-Heine, Robert Röhle, Emma Lieker, Lucie Kretzler, Isabelle Wirsching, Christian
Wollboldt, Yinan Wu, Georg Schwanitz, Michael Hummel, Dana Briesemeister, Denise Treue, Michael,
Hummel, Victor M. Corman, Christian Drosten, Christof von Kalle

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
COVID-19 is highly variable in its clinical presentation, ranging from asymptomatic
infection to severe organ damage and death. There is an urgent need for predictive markers
that can guide clinical decision-making, inform about the effect of experimental therapies,
and point to novel therapeutic targets. Here, we characterize the time-dependent progression
of COVID-19 through different stages of the disease, by measuring 86 accredited diagnostic
parameters and plasma proteomes at 687 sampling points, in a cohort of 139 patients during
hospitalization. We report that the time-resolved patient molecular phenotypes reflect an
initial spike in the systemic inflammatory response, which is gradually alleviated and
followed by a protein signature indicative of tissue repair, metabolic reconstitution and
immunomodulation. Further, we show that the early host response is predictive for the
disease trajectory and gives rise to proteomic and diagnostic marker signatures that classify
the need for supplemental oxygen therapy and mechanical ventilation, and that predict the
time to recovery of mildly ill patients. In severely ill patients, the molecular phenotype of the
early host response predicts survival, in two independent cohorts and weeks before outcome.
We also identify age-specific molecular response to COVID-19, which involves increased
inflammation and lipoprotein dysregulation in older patients. Our study provides a deep and
time resolved molecular characterization of COVID-19 disease progression, and reports
biomarkers for risk-adapted treatment strategies and molecular disease monitoring. Our study
demonstrates accurate prognosis of COVID-19 outcome from proteomic signatures recorded
weeks earlier.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
COVID-19 has created unprecedented societal challenges, particularly for public health and
the global economy1–3. Efficient management of these challenges is hampered by the
variability of clinical manifestations, ranging from asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection to
death, despite maximal intensive care. Biomarkers and molecular signatures that enable
accurate prognosis of future disease courses are needed to optimize resource allocation and to
personalize treatment strategies. Patients likely to suffer progression to severe disease and
organ failure and those likely to remain stable could be identified early, which is particularly
valuable in scenarios where health care systems reach capacity limits. Prognostic panels
would also optimize the monitoring of novel treatments, thereby accelerating clinical trials4–6.
Knowledge of factors that differentiate recovery from deterioration over the course of the
disease will enhance our understanding of the inflammatory host response as well as the
underlying pathophysiology, and provide new therapeutic targets.
A number of biomarkers that classify COVID-19 severity have recently been described,
based on clinical chemistry, enzyme activities, immunoprofiling, single cell sequencing,
proteomics, and metabolomics7–15. These severity classifiers characterize COVID-19
pathology and host responses mainly in blood, serum, plasma or immune cells. Markers of
dysregulated coagulation, inflammation, and organ dysfunction have also been established as
risk factors for severe illness, including low platelet count, elevated levels of D-dimer, Creactive protein (CRP), interleukin 6 (IL-6), ferritin, troponin, and markers of kidney
injury16,17. By capturing host responses in an unbiased fashion, ’omic’ investigations have the
potential to go beyond classification of patients, as they capture disease-associated molecular
signatures and put them into context with homeostatic pathways. Proteomic investigations
have shown that the host response to COVID-19 is characterized by activation of the
complement cascade and the acute phase response which center around IL-6-driven
pathways. Other common antiviral pathways, such as type I interferons (IFN), do not
dominate the overall response to COVID-19, probably reflecting evasion of the IFN system
by SARS-CoV-2 and subsequent activation of inflammatory cascades18,19. Further, proteomic
data and diagnostic parameters can directly point to underlying pathological mechanisms and
possible therapeutic targets. For instance, using high-throughput proteomics, we reported a
decline in plasma levels of gelsolin (GSN) in patients with severe COVID-19 in a previous
study7, and recombinant human GSN is currently undergoing clinical testing for COVID-19
pneumonia in a phase II trial (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT04358406).
While many host response factors have been associated with COVID-19, it is still not
understood how they change over time, how they depend on disease progression, and how
they depend on one another or converge on common biological mechanisms. Also, while it is
important to classify the severity of COVID-19 at the point of sampling, much higher clinical
and biological value would be generated by markers that predict the outcome and future
disease progression. Here, we performed a time-resolved deep clinical and molecular
phenotyping of 139 adult patients with COVID-19 during hospitalization. At 687 sampling
points, we measured a compendium of physiological parameters and routine diagnostic

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

markers using gold standard, accredited clinical tests, and combined these measurements with
untargeted high-throughput plasma proteomics7 to obtain a comprehensive picture of how the
patients’ molecular phenotype develops over time. We study the associations between
different markers and the dynamic changes in their levels to differentiate between distinct
trajectories that characterize mild and severe COVID-19. We report that the inflammatory
host response in the early disease stage is a major determinant of clinical progression, and
facilitates accurate COVID-19 prognoses from the molecular patient phenotype of the early
disease stage. We describe biomarker profiles and diagnostic parameters that classify
treatment requirements, in particular the need for mechanical ventilation. Further, we report
the future prediction of recovery time in mildly ill patients as well as the individual risk of
worsening. In severely ill patients, proteomes that are recorded weeks before the clinical
outcome accurately predict survival. Our study provides the scientific basis as well as a
proof-of-principle for the predictability of COVID-19 disease trajectories based on the
molecular phenotype of the early disease stage.

Covariation of clinical diagnostic parameters and the plasma proteome characterizes
the host response to COVID-19
Several recent investigations have identified protein biomarkers and clinical parameters that
classify COVID-19 patients according to disease severity7–15. To identify i) which of these
markers and parameters correlate with each other by being attributed to a common biological
or physiological response, and ii) which markers predict outcome, we longitudinally
phenotyped 139 individuals admitted at Charité University Hospital, Berlin, Germany,
between March 01, 2020 and June 30, 2020 due to PCR confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection
(Supp. Fig. SF1). The patients exhibited highly variable disease courses, graded by the WHO
ordinal scale for clinical improvement (Supp. Table 1), ranging from WHO grade 3, mild
disease without need for oxygen support, to WHO grade 7, severe COVID-19 requiring
invasive mechanical ventilation and additional organ support therapies20. Twenty-three
patients were stable without the need of oxygen support (WHO grade 3) and could be
discharged after a median of 7 days of inpatient care (Supp. Table 2, Supp. Fig. SF1). Forty
seven (34%) patients required either low-flow or high-flow supplemental oxygen and sixtynine (50%) patients either presented with severe COVID-19 (WHO grade 6 or 7, i.e.
requiring mechanical ventilation) or deteriorated and required invasive mechanical
ventilation during their hospitalization. Forty six (33%) required renal replacement therapy
(RRT) and twenty two (16%) were treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO). Twenty (13%) patients died, including one patient who died due to non-COVID-19
related cause. Patients with a severe course of disease were older than those with mild disease
(49 years [IQR 35-70] for WHO grade 3 vs 62 years [IQR 53-73] for WHO grade 7,
P = 0.02) and age of 65 years or older was associated with a higher risk of death (OR 4.1
[95% CI 1.5 - 11.5]). The median duration of hospitalization was 20 days (IQR 9 - 48) and
correlated with severity (7 days for WHO grade 3 vs 51 days for WHO grade 7). The median
time from admission to death was 26 days (IQR 16-43).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

To capture the diverse disease trajectories on a molecular and biochemical level, we
systematically collected 86 clinical and routine diagnostic parameters as measured with
certified diagnostic tests, and monitored the development of risk scores such as the
‘sequential organ failure assessment’ (SOFA) score, blood gas analyses, blood cell counts,
enzyme activities and inflammation biomarkers (Supp. Table 3). To complement these
parameters with an untargeted analysis, we employed a recently developed high-throughput
proteomics platform that bases on high flow-rate chromatography tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) and acquired the data using SWATH-MS7,21. Creating a large mass
spectrometry-based clinical proteomic dataset for a deeply characterized patient group, we
measured a total of 687 human plasma proteomes, which required a total of 1169 non-blank
LC-MS/MS injections, and quantified 309 plasma protein groups.
To identify interdependencies of the clinically established routine diagnostic parameters and
the plasma proteomes, we characterized their covariation and present a direct correlation map
(Fig. 1c, Supp. Fig. SF2, SF3), which comprehensively characterizes the host response to
SARS-CoV-2 infection at a molecular level. To highlight some key observations, we report a
robust positive or negative correlation of IL-6 levels and other inflammatory markers (CRP,
procalcitonin) with acute phase proteins (APPs) (APOA2, APOE, CD14, CRP, GSN, ITIH3,
ITIH4, LYZ, SAA1, SAA2, SERPINA1, SERPINA3, AHSG; protein names corresponding
to the gene identifiers are provided in Supp. Table 3), coagulation factors and related proteins
(FGA, FGB, FGG, F2, F12, KLKB1, PLG, SERPINC1), and the complement system (C1R,
C1S, C8A, C9, CFB, CFD, CFHR5). Our data therefore links the prominent role of the IL-6
response in COVID-1911 to coagulation and the complement cascade. Consistently, in our
data, markers of cardiac (troponin T, NT-proBNP) and renal (creatinine, urea) function as
well as anaemia and dyserythropoiesis (hemoglobin, hematocrit, erythrocytes, and red blood
cell distribution width) were correlated with various acute phase proteins (APPs) (APOA2,
APOE, CD14, GSN, LYZ, SAA1, SAA2, SERPINA3, Fig. 1c), supporting the role of
inflammation in COVID-19-related organ damage and its impact on erythropoiesis.
Increased levels of neutrophils and occurrence of immature granulocyte precursors as
markers of emergency myelopoiesis have been linked to severe COVID-1912. Our data
reveals covariation between neutrophil counts and the levels of two inhibitors of neutrophil
serine proteases, SERPINA1 and SERPINA3 (Fig. 1c). These two proteins show the highest
correlation (0.72 and 0.79 Spearman R, respectively) with the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio
(NLR), a prognostic marker for COVID-1922,23. We further report a strong correlation (Fig.
1c) of alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl transferase activities, both characteristic of
biliary disorders24, with plasma levels of the polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR). We
note that cholangiocytes (bile duct epithelium cells) express ACE-2 and can be directly
infected with SARS-CoV-225, leading to host viral response-induced expression of PIGR and
cell destruction26.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Interdependence of clinical, diagnostic, physiological and proteomic parameters in COVID-19. a.
Study design. Schematic of the cohort of 139 patients with PCR confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection treated at
Charité University Hospital Berlin. Plasma proteomics and accredited diagnostic tests were applied at 687
sampling points, to generate high-resolution time series data for 86 routine diagnostic parameters and 309
protein quantities b. Covariation map for plasma proteins and routine diagnostic and physiological parameters
(log2-transformed). Statistically significant correlations (Spearman; P < 0.05) are coloured. Dots indicate
statistical significance after row-wise multiple-testing correction (FDR < 0.05), black rectangles – column-wise.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The panel on the right of the heatmap provides manual functional annotation for the proteins. c. Covariation of
key diagnostic parameters and plasma protein markers (log2-transformed) in COVID19 .

A map of plasma proteins and clinical diagnostic parameters depending on age and
disease severity
We identified 113 proteins and 55 diagnostic parameters in our cohort that increase or
decrease according to the severity of COVID-19 (Fig. 2, Supp. Fig. SF4 and SF5; Methods).
To our knowledge, more than 30 of these proteins have not been associated with COVID-19
severity previously (Supp. Table 3). These include mediators of inflammation and immune
response (CD44, B2M, PIGR, A2M), components of the complement cascade (CFD,
CFHRs), and several apolipoproteins (APOA2, APOC3, APOD, APOE and APOL1).
Furthermore, numerous markers of organ dysfunction (cardiac: NT-proBNP, troponin T;
renal: creatinine, urea; liver: aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase, gammaglutamyl transferase, total bilirubin) and, inversely, anemia (hemoglobin, erythrocytes,
hematocrit) were correlated with disease severity. In order to further dissect the proteomic
signatures of the most severely ill patients (WHO grade 7), we specifically characterized the
impact of organ support treatments (RRT and ECMO) on the patients’ molecular phenotype
(Supp. Fig. SF6 and SF7). We discuss these findings in Supp. Note 1.
A total of 62 proteins and 17 diagnostic parameters varied with patients’ age (Supp. Fig.
SF8). Out of these, 37 proteins do not change with age in a pre-COVID-19 general
population baseline (Generation Scotland cohort27), for which proteomes have been measured
with the same proteomic technology7 (Supp. Fig. SF9). We note that markers that increase
with age in COVID-19 patients are mostly driven by disease severity, which on average is
higher in older patients (Supp. Table 2). To identify markers that are upregulated or
downregulated in older patients in comparison to younger patients with comparable disease
severity, we tested the relationship between omics feature levels and age by accounting for
WHO severity grade as a covariate using linear modelling28 (Methods). This analysis
identified 36 proteins and 12 clinical laboratory markers that show up- or are downregulation
with age in COVID-19 patients (Fig. 2d, Supp. Fig. SF10, summarized in Fig. 5). Out of
these, 20 proteins do not change with age in the pre-COVID-19 population baseline
(Generation Scotland cohort proteome data7, Supp. Fig. SF9), or show the opposite
correlation with age in the general population (e.g. APOC2, Fig. 2d). These proteins that only
show an age-dependency in COVID-19 patients but not in the general population point to
age-dependent differences in host response patterns to SARS-CoV-2, and include markers
involved in inflammation (SERPINA3, ITIH4, SAA1, SAA1, SAA2, ITIH3, CFB, C7,
AHSG), lipid metabolism (APOC1, APOC2, APOC3, APOB, APOD), and coagulation
(KLKB1, FBLN1). We consider the implications of these findings in Supp. Note 2.
Using a machine learning algorithm based on gradient boosted decision trees (Methods), we
then evaluated to what extent routine diagnostic parameters and proteins can accurately
classify patients according to treatment requirements. Both proteomes and clinical diagnostic
parameters were highly discriminative of the patient being on invasive mechanical ventilation
(WHO grade 6 or 7, clinical laboratory values AUROC = 0.97, proteomic data AUROC =
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.98) (Fig. 2c). Scores reflecting the contribution of individual proteins and clinical
parameters to the machine learning model are provided in Supp. Table 3.

Figure 2. The molecular phenotype of patients with COVID-19 and its dependency on severity and age.
a. Abundance of plasma proteomes and clinical-diagnostic parameters dependent on COVID-19 severity
irrespective of age. Individual patients are grouped by severity. The severity of COVID-19 for each patient is
represented by the maximal clinical treatment received (WHO ordinal scale, Supp. Table 1). 113 proteins and 55
routine diagnostic parameters vary significantly (FDR < 0.05) between patients of the different WHO groups
upon accounting for age as a covariate using linear modelling28, Methods. A fully annotated heatmap is provided
in Supp. Fig. SF4. b. Selected protein markers and routine diagnostic parameters (log2-transformed) plotted
against the WHO ordinal scale indicating the disease severity of the patient. c. Performance of a machine
learning model characterising the need for invasive mechanical ventilation, based on either the proteomic data
or a signature assembled from accredited diagnostic parameters (Methods). Performance assessment of the
classifier was carried out on the test samples, which were held out during training in leave-one-out fashion.
d. Selected proteins differentially abundant depending on age (FDR < 0.05). Left, coloured: this data set (log2transformed levels; statistical testing was performed by accounting for the WHO grade as a covariate 28
(Methods); for visualisation only, the data were corrected for the WHO grade); right, black: general population
(log2-transformed levels; Generation Scotland cohort).

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Time-dependent alleviation of severity indicators highlights the role of the early host
response in COVID-19 progression
The time-resolved nature of our study facilitated a covariation analysis of protein levels and
routine diagnostic parameters along the patient trajectory (Supp. Fig. SF11). Correlating the
dynamics of omics features during the peak period of the disease (Methods), we noted
covariation of inflammatory markers, acute phase proteins (APPs), fibrinogen precursor
proteins, and the neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio. The correlation between APPs and the
markers of cardiac and renal impairment, observed across different patients without taking
into account any temporal resolution (Fig. 1b) was not reflected as a trend over time (Supp.
Fig. SF12).
To further dissect the dynamics of omics markers during the course of COVID-19, we
determined the longitudinal trend for all protein and routine diagnostic parameters during the
peak period of the disease (i.e. while receiving maximal treatment; Methods). In total, 89
proteins and 37 clinical parameters significantly changed over time (Fig. 3c, trends across all
time points at the maximum WHO grade are provided in Supp. Fig. SF13; Methods). As a
general pattern, proteins and diagnostic parameters upregulated in severe COVID-19 were
downregulated over time and vice versa. We further observed that signals of the markers that
varied with COVID-19 severity were most prominently changed in the early samples (Supp.
Fig. SF5), but alleviated with time (Supp. Fig. SF13; summarized in Fig. 5). For example,
components of the coagulation cascade with known acute phase activity, such as fibrinogen
and complement factors, were significantly downregulated over time during the peak period
of the disease. Proteins indicative of inflammatory response (e.g. ORM1, SERPINA1 and
SERPINA3, SAA1, SAA229–31) and clinical markers of inflammation, like CRP or IL-6, also
decreased over time. Conversely, extracellular matrix proteins, such as ECM1, LUM,
immunoregulatory factors (e.g. A2M32, HRG33) and proteins involved in lipid metabolism
(e.g. APOC1, APOD, APOM, GPLD1, PON1), and negative APPs (e.g. ITIH1, Fig. 3b),
which are downregulated in severe COVID-19 (Supp. Fig. SF5, summarized in Fig. 5),
showed an increase over time. This general alleviation of the initial molecular phenotype of
COVID-19 was consistently detected in both mildly and severely ill patients. Indeed, only 13
proteins showed differences in trend depending on the disease severity (Supp. Fig. SF14). Of
note, patients who died of COVID-19 exhibited different dynamics of certain omics markers
over time, including for example an increase in several APPs (discussed in the next section
and Supp. Note 3). We provide visualization of individual trajectories for all omics features
measured between the first and the last time points sampled at the peak of the disease (Supp.
Fig. SF15 - SF19).
Importantly, a number of organ function
time, particularly in severely ill patients.
transferase activity remained persistently
phosphatase increased (Fig. 3b, Supp.

markers did not demonstrate an alleviation with
For example, NT-proBNP and gamma-glutamyl
high on average, whereas the levels of alkaline
Fig. SF13). However, there was significant

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

heterogeneity in this response (see e.g. Fig. 3b, 3c), indicating a high diversity among the
patients regarding indicators of organ damage.
Overall, the molecular patient phenotype reflects an initial spike in the systemic
inflammatory response, which is gradually alleviated and followed by a protein signature
indicative of tissue repair, metabolic reconstitution and immunomodulation. This was
observed in both mildly and severely ill patients, highlighting the early disease phase as a
major molecular determinant of the COVID-19 phenotype.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. The progression of the COVID-19 molecular patient phenotype over time. a. Schematic: each
patient is followed during inpatient care by repetitive sampling, and the “trajectory” of each of the proteins and
the routine diagnostic features is analyzed (levels of different features are indicated with points of different

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

colors at each time point). b. Trajectories (change of log2-transformed levels with time) for selected proteins
and routine diagnostic parameters, for patients with maximum WHO grade 7. Sampling points during the peak
period of the disease (Methods) are considered (blue – survivors, black – patients who died). X-axis: 0 – first
time point measured at the peak of the disease, 1 – last. c. Protein levels and routine diagnostic parameters that
change significantly (FDR < 0.05) over time during the peak of the disease, shown for individual patients
stratified by their maximum treatment received (WHO grade): 89 proteins, 37 clinical laboratory measurements
show time dependency during the disease course (illustrated as log2-fold changes). The panel on the right from
the heatmap provides manual functional annotation for the proteins. Below the heatmap, the time span between
the first and the last sampling time point at the peak of the disease is indicated, along with the change in the
‘proteome severity’ score computed with machine learning (for visualisation only; Methods) as well as the
remaining time until the outcome (discharge or death).

Proteomes and diagnostic clinical markers predict future course of the disease and
outcome
We hypothesized that the molecular signature of the initial host response can be exploited for
prediction of the future disease course and outcome. We started by investigating the
predictability of the remaining time in hospital for mildly ill patients with max WHO grade 3.
We identified 26 protein biomarkers and 14 routine diagnostic markers (Fig. 4a, Supp. Fig.
SF20) that correlate with the time between the first sampling point and release from inpatient
care. The proteomic signature associated with longer duration of inpatient treatment and
hence more severe COVID-19 progression includes upregulated components of the
complement system (C1QA, C1QB, C1QC) and reflects altered coagulation (KLKB1, PLG,
SERPIND1) and inflammation (CD14, B2M, SERPINA3, CRP, GPLD1, PGLYRP2,
AHSG).
Next we explored the potential of using the levels of proteins and diagnostic parameters for
prediction of future clinical worsening, defined as progression to a higher severity grade on
the WHO scale, i.e. requirement for supplemental low-flow oxygen, high-flow oxygen or
invasive mechanical ventilation (Fig. 4b, Supp. Fig. SF21; Box 1). Upon using a linear model
to account for disease severity and age as covariates, 11 proteins and 9 clinical laboratory
markers were identified as predictors of future worsening, across all severity grades
(Methods). All 11 proteins are also among the markers of severity (Fig. 5, Supp. Fig. SF5),
but increased or decreased plasma levels of these proteins preceded clinical deterioration.
They reflect inflammation (CRP, ITIH2, SERPINA3, AHSG, B2M), coagulation (HRG,
PLG), and complement activation (C1R, CFD). Further, higher levels of AGT and CST3
were also predictive of clinical deterioration.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We further investigated whether the changes in the patients’ molecular phenotype over time
were indicative of survival chances in critically ill patients (i.e. patients on invasive
mechanical ventilation, with maximum WHO grade 7). Fourteen protein markers and 2
clinical measurements distinguished survivors from non-survivors (Fig. 4c, Supp. Fig. SF22).
We observed a significant increase in inflammatory and acute phase proteins over time (e.g.
SAA1;SAA2, CRP, ITIH3, LRG1, SERPINA1, and LBP) in patients with fatal outcome,
indicating a persistent pro-inflammatory signature. Similarly, further decline of three key
players in coagulation, F2, KLKB1 and the protease inhibitor A2M (all also generally
decreased in severe COVID-19, Fig. 3c, Supp. Fig. SF5), was associated with adverse
outcome.
In a last step, we established a machine learning model based on parenclitic networks52,53
(Methods) to predict survival in critically ill patients (WHO grade 7, n=49) from the
proteome of the earliest single time point sample at WHO grade 7 for a particular patient. On
the test subjects (the data of whom were excluded when training the machine learning
model), high prediction accuracy was achieved, with AUC = 0.81 for the receiver-operating
characteristic (ROC) curve. Of note, the model correctly predicted survival or adverse
outcome weeks in advance (median time from prediction to outcome 39 days, interquartile
range 16 - 64 days). To independently validate the machine learning model (trained on the
‘Charité’ cohort), we examined its performance on an independent cohort of 24 patients with
COVID-19 from Austria (‘Innsbruck’ cohort, Methods). Despite considerable differences
between the training and validation cohort, for instance regarding sampling time points, the

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

machine learning model demonstrated high predictive power on the independent cohort
(AUROC = 1.0, P = 0.00038, Fig. 4d). Using the cutoff value for survival prediction derived
from the Charité cohort, the model correctly predicted the outcome for 18 out of 19 patients
who survived and for 5 out of 5 patients who died in this independent cohort (Fig 4d).

Figure 4. COVID-19 prognosis based on early molecular patient phenotype a. Selected proteins and routine
diagnostic parameters predictive (FDR < 0.05) of the remaining time in hospital for mildly ill (WHO grade 3)
patients. Statistical testing was performed by including patient’s age as a covariate (Methods). Illustrated are the
log2-transformed levels of the proteins (upon correction for age as a covariate, for visualisation only) at the first
sampling point, plotted against the remaining time in hospital (days). b. Selected proteins that are predictive
(FDR < 0.05) of the future clinical worsening of the disease (that is progression to a higher WHO grade in the
future; Methods). Illustrated are the log2-transformed levels of the proteins at the first sampling point, upon
correction (for visualisation only) for the impact of the WHO grade and age as a covariates 28. c. Selected
proteins (FDR < 0.05), for which time-dependent concentration changes (y-axis: log2 fold change) during the
peak of the disease (Methods) are indicative of poor prognosis (death) in critically ill patients (maximum WHO
grade 7). Patients who died but did not receive the full therapy according to their (presumed) wish (DNI,
secondary DNR) were excluded from this analysis (Methods). d. Prediction of survival or death in critically ill
patients, from the first sampling time point at critical treatment level (WHO grade 7) using a machine learning
model based on parenclitic networks (Methods). Left panels: A classifier was trained on the proteomic data
measured for the Charité cohort (WHO grade 7 only, survival n=34, death n=15, median time between sampling
and outcome (i.e. discharge or death) 39 days, interquartile range 16 - 64 days). The performance was assessed
on the test samples, which were held out during training (Methods). Right panels: A classifier trained on the
Charité cohort was tested on the proteomic data measured for an independent cohort treated at the Medical
University of Innsbruck (Austria) (WHO grade 6 and 7 patients, survival n=19, death n=5, median time between
sampling and outcome 22 days, interquartile range 15 - 42 days). Bottom panels: Kaplan-Meier survival curves
for Charité and Innsbruck cohorts using a threshold of predicted probability (0.678) chosen to maximize
Youden’s J index (J = sensitivity + specificity - 1) of data from Charité cohort. Log-rank test was used to
compare survival rates between patients with predicted death risk < 0.678 (black) and > 0.678 (orange).

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
Upfront clinical decision making is essential for optimal treatment allocation to patients as
well as for efficient resource management within the hospital. For instance, early referral to
intensive care treatment units has been shown to improve prognosis and outcome for patients
with severe COVID-1954. One of the peculiarities of COVID-19 is that the examinable
clinical conditions of patients often do not reflect the true severity of the disease, e.g. with
respect to pulmonary insufficiency. In contrast to patients with severe bacterial pneumonia,
patients with COVID-19 often clinically appear to be only slightly affected, despite being
severely pulmonary insufficient, a phenomenon termed ‘happy’ hypoxemia55. Clinical
decisions therefore need to be supported by objective, molecular diagnostics.
Previously, we and others investigated the association of plasma and serum biomarkers with
COVID-19 severity7–11,14. In other studies, the potential prognostic value of several
established and newly discovered blood markers for predicting the future course of disease
was investigated, e.g. for IL-6, ferritin or resistin56–58. Yet, only very few studies set the
prognostic value in relation to patient age and current disease severity, the two most
important apparent characteristics for prognosis in COVID-19. For instance, a patient at
WHO grade 5 (high-flow oxygen) is significantly more likely to progress to mechanical
ventilation and subsequently die than a patient just admitted at WHO grade 3 (i.e. not
requiring oxygen support). Likewise, a 90-year old patient at WHO grade 3 is significantly
more likely to progress to more severe disease and to stay in the hospital longer than a 20year old patient at the same WHO grade. Accounting for both WHO grade and age as
covariates is thus relevant for establishing the prognostic value of biomarkers in COVID-19.
In this work we report proteomic and diagnostic markers that are measured with accredited
clinical assays, that possess prognostic value for disease progression in COVID-19. These
result from a comprehensive and time-resolved molecular phenotyping of a precisely
characterized patient cohort which reflects the spread of varying COVID-19 trajectories
(Supp. Note 4 for the resources generated). The measurements were performed in the early
period of COVID-19. i.e. before dexamethasone became standard of care for patients with
severe COVID-1959. Our data, which depict the initial spike in early inflammatory host
response as determinant for the future course of the disease, is hence not confounded by
standard anti-inflammatory treatment and will serve as particularly valuable resource and
reference for future studies. As our results indicate, the patients in our cohort show proteomic
signatures of higher basal inflammation with increasing age, which might be partially
responsible for the higher risk of severe COVID-19 in older individuals. Whereas several
approaches of targeted anti-inflammatory treatment have not been successful to prevent
clinical deterioration in COVID-19 so far60, our study indicates that this special patient
population might benefit particularly from treatments that mitigate the early inflammatory
host response.
We use the time-resolved nature of our data to gain insights into the pathophysiology of
COVID-19 disease progression. On the systems level, we observed an ‘alleviation’ of most

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

key markers of disease severity over time (Fig. 3c, Fig. 5), in both mildly and severely ill
patients, reflecting the gradual reversion of the patient’s molecular phenotype to baseline. It
is followed by a protein signature indicative of tissue repair, metabolic reconstitution and
immunomodulation. Exceptions are markers of organ dysfunction, especially markers of the
cardiac system, which persist in the trajectory of severely ill patients.
Exploiting the early host molecular phenotype for the future projection of the disease course,
our data reveals markers that correlate with the remaining time in hospital for mildly ill
patients (at WHO grade 3), which we consider as an approximation of the time to recovery.
Conversely we reveal markers that are prognostic for clinical worsening (i.e. that predict the
future requirement of a greater degree of oxygen/organ support) for patients at all severity
grades. Finally, we show that the molecular patient phenotype during the early disease stage
distinguishes at high precision the survival chances among the most severely ill (WHO grade
7) patients. Training parenclitic neworks with proteomic measurements taken from samples
that have large time intervals (median of 39 days) between collection and outcome (i.e. death
or discharge), resulted in a machine learning model that can accurately predict outcome.
Reassuringly, the model achieved even higher predictive power in an independent cohort of
COVID-19 patients from another hospital.
While prognostic assessments using measurements at single time points might be useful for
timely patient management and resource allocation, measuring dynamic parameters over time
can be particularly valuable for treatment monitoring, including evaluation of experimental
therapies as part of clinical trials. Moreover, the trends of certain proteins over time provide
insights into the pathophysiology of COVID-19 and reveal potential targets for therapeutic
interventions. As an example, we observed that a decline in SERPINA4 (kallistatin) levels
over time in patients with severe disease was associated with an increased risk of death (Fig
4c). Kallistatin is known to possess protective properties in acute lung injury and should be
considered as potential candidate for clinical testing in severe COVID-19, according to our
data61.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5. Summary: Association of individual plasma proteins, routine diagnostic and physiological
parameters with treatment, progression and outcome of COVID-19. For each statistical test considered
(association with COVID-19 severity, prediction of the remaining time in hospital for patients at WHO grade 3,
prediction of worsening, i.e. progression to a higher WHO grade in the future, association of the trend during the
peak period of the disease with the chance of death in patients with maximum WHO grade 7, trend during the
peak period of the disease, association with renal replacement therapy (RRT), association with ECMO and
association with higher patient age), measurements which show significant differences are highlighted, with the
color indicating the trend, e.g. red for CST3 in the “Association with COVID-19 severity” test indicates higher
levels of CST3 in severely ill patients. Proteins which change significantly with age in the Charité COVID-19
cohort (FDR < 0.05), but do not change significantly (P < 0.05) with age in the general population (Generation
Scotland cohort), are highlighted with a white circle in the 8-th row (“Association with age”).

We observed a considerable overlap between prognostic markers and those that are classifiers
of COVID-19 severity (Fig. 5). Indeed, out of 61 prognostic markers, 50 are also classifiers
of disease severity and displayed the same trend. As an example, SERPINA1 (Alpha-1
antitrypsin) and SERPINA3 (Alpha-1 antichymotrypsin) can be used for both classification
of current severity and prediction of future disease course. Both proteins possess antiinflammatory properties and are involved in protection of tissues from neutrophil elastaseand cathepsin G-mediated tissue damage43. Our data show strong correlation of both serpins
with levels of neutrophils and neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) in peripheral blood.
SERPINA1 is mainly produced by the liver but also in epithelial cells, pulmonary alveolar
cells, tissue macrophages, blood monocytes and granulocytes, so this finding could reflect a
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

global response to the increased NLR. Yet, after binding to effector enzymes, SERPINproteinase complexes are normally rapidly cleared from the blood, but become resistant to
degradation when cleaved at the reactive site loop62. Cleaved SERPINA1 and SERPINA3
have been shown to act as strong neutrophil chemoattractants44,45. The observed increase in
levels of SERPINA1 and SERPINA3 might therefore partly reflect the more stable,
chemoattractant, pro-inflammatory cleaved forms, rather than the short-lived tissue protective
proteins in severe COVID-19. Given the prominent role of neutrophil-activation in severe
COVID-1912, this finding merits further investigation.
Our data reveal AGT as another important marker predicting clinical worsening and
indicating severe disease. Activation of angiotensinogen occurs via the protease renin and the
endogenous angiotensin converting enzymes ACE or ACE2. ACE converts angiotensin I
(AngI) into pro-inflammatory, vasoconstrictive, and pro-fibrotic angiotensin II (AngII)34.
ACE2, in contrast, mediates conversion of angiotensins I and II into anti-inflammatory,
vasodilative, anti-fibrotic and anti-oxidant angiotensins 1-9 (Ang1-9) and 1-7 (Ang1-7)35.
SARS-CoV-2 invades host cells of the lung, heart, kidneys and other organs via ACE2,
resulting in internalization and downregulation of ACE234,36,63. Subsequently,
angiotensinogen is converted predominantly via ACE to AngII and is less degraded by
ACE2, resulting in AngII accumulation64,65. We can thus assume that the higher plasma
levels of AGT gene products in severely ill patients, as measured in our study, mainly reflect
the higher levels of AngII. Importantly, we observed a strong correlation of AGT with
markers of acute kidney injury (AKI; creatinine, urea; Supp. Fig. SF2 and SF12), a frequent
complication of COVID-19 and a risk factor for poor prognosis and fatal outcome66.
Aggravated by the absence of tissue protective Ang1-7, elevated levels of AngII lead to
activation of the renin-angiotensin-system (RAS) and contribute to hypoxic kidney injury67.
Of note, apart from tissue damaging effects, AngII has been shown to linearly correlate with
viral load and lung injury in SARS-CoV-2 infection37.
We observed that many of the markers that are both classifiers and predictors of the future
disease course are initiators of the inflammatory response. This group includes some of the
key initiators of the complement cascade, C1QA, C1QB, C1QC, C1R, CFD. In contrast,
severity markers without prognostic value largely include downstream effectors of
inflammatory-associated damage, such as GSN and the circulating actins ACTBL2 and
ACTB, ACTG1, and ECM1.
We note that a number of markers identified as predictors are already approved as biomarkers
by FDA, and for many of the proteins standardized quantification assays by ELISA or
Selective Reaction Monitoring (SRMs) are available68. Hence, although the high-resolution
high-throughput mass spectrometry platform as used in our study7 may be too complex for
the use in routine laboratories, the panels can be put into practice via the routine assays.
Future studies need to address the robustness of the predictors when measured as part of the
clinical routine. The use of machine learning is currently not a certified method to inform
clinical decisions. However, in addition to multiple works which have successfully used
machine learning for clinical prognosis previously (see recent reviews69–73), our results bear a
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

strong implication of the future potential of machine learning for clinical applications,
including personalized medicine. This calls for a worldwide effort aimed at developing
procedures which would allow reliable clinical validation of machine learning predictors,
their approval and their routine deployment in the clinic.
In summary, by following a deeply phenotyped COVID-19 patient cohort over time at the
level of the proteome and established diagnostic biomarkers and physiological parameters,
we have created a rich data resource for understanding the progression of COVID-19 until the
outcome. We have shown that an early spike in the inflammatory response is a key
determinant of progression of COVID-19, and that future disease progression is predictable
by using panels of routine diagnostic parameters as well as proteomic measurements from
early time point samples. Indeed, we achieved an accurate prediction of survival of severely
ill COVID-19 patients from plasma proteome samples that were, on average, recorded 39
days prior to the outcome. Our study provides comprehensive information about the key
determinants of the varying COVID-19 disease trajectories as well as marker panels for early
prognosis that can be exploited for clinical decision making, to devise personalized therapies,
as well as for monitoring the development of much needed COVID-19 treatments.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Note 1. Diagnostic parameters and Proteome signatures that
indicate therapeutic interventions
We investigated to what extent specific therapies, such as organ support in severely ill
patients (renal replacement therapy (RRT), extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO))
were reflected in the proteome and at the level of routine diagnostic parameters. HP and HPX
were reduced in patients on RRT and ECMO, reflecting hemolysis in the extracorporeal
circuits (Supp. Fig. SF6 and SF7). Elevated SERPINC1 levels mirror substitution of
antithrombin during ECMO. The reason for elevated levels of APOE in patients with ECMO
is unclear, but is in line with reports on increased levels of APOE in pediatric patients after
cardiopulmonary bypass74. The proteins increased in patients receiving RRT mainly reflect
impaired kidney function and have been associated with RRT before (AMBP, B2M, CST3,
LYZ, RBP4, Supp. Fig. SF6)75. Of note, increased levels of AMBP, B2M and LYZ have been
associated with death in chronic kidney disease39. Levels of CFD and APOH, both involved
in the complement system, were also increased41,76. CFD is eliminated renally and
accumulates in end stage renal disease, possibly leading to enhanced complement activation
via the alternative pathway77. In contrast, levels of APOH have even been reported to be
slightly lower following high-flux hemodialysis78.
We note that the analysis of the effect of treatments on the proteome has two limitations.
First, some of the markers identified might be prognostic for the treatment rather than reflect
its effect. Age and the Charlson comorbidity index belong to this category: patients receiving
ECMO were significantly younger and had a lower number of pre-existing chronic conditions
than those who did not. Second, the results might be partially confounded by the time elapsed
from the onset of the disease, as we have shown (Fig. 3) that omics signature does change
with time in COVID-19 patients while on invasive mechanical ventilation.

Supplementary Note 2. Age-specific response to COVID-19 in the context of
severity markers
Older age is one of the most significant risk factors for severe disease and adverse outcome in
COVID-19. Enhanced understanding of underlying mechanisms for the age-specific response
to SARS-CoV-2 infection is therefore important and needed for the development of effective
age-specific strategies for prevention and treatment. Furthermore, dissecting the age-specific
components of the host response will improve our knowledge of the pathogenicity of similar
viruses, making the world better prepared for future pandemics. Current theories
characterizing the link between the higher age and risk for severe disease include
immunosenescence, elevated baseline inflammation, or altered protein glycosylation
landscape leading to impaired antiviral response or reduced immune tolerance36,79–81.
However, a detailed and mechanistic understanding of the relation between COVID-19 and
aging is lacking. In this work, we leverage the large size and high precision of the proteomic

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

data acquired to map the age-related response to COVID-19, to provide a reference dataset
(Fig. 2d, Fig. 5, Supp. Fig. SF10) for future studies addressing this problem.
We report elevation of several inflammatory and acute phase proteins such as SERPINA3,
ITIH4, SAA1, and ITIH3 in older patients with COVID-19. SAA1 has been shown to induce
macrophage polarization to the M2-type which promotes tissue repair but also possesses profibrotic properties involved in the pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis82–84. Moreover, SAA1
mediates displacement of APOA1 from HDL leading to loss of the cardio- and vasoprotective
properties of HDL85. SERPINA3, as discussed above, has an ambivalent role as a neutrophil
proteinase inhibitor but also a powerful neutrophil chemoattractant. Upregulation of
SERPINA3 with age in COVID-19, along with the higher neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio,
suggests that excessive neutrophil response is one of the aggravating factors in older COVID19 patients. Taken together, our findings point towards a disproportionately dysregulated
inflammatory response to SARS-CoV-2 with age, which may be explained by an increased
baseline inflammation and immunosenescence in older patients86–88. Age-dependent increase
of FBLN1 and decrease of KLKB1 reflect alterations in blood coagulation which may
aggravate this effect by predisposing older patients to thromboembolic events, one of the key
clinical characteristics of severe COVID-19.
Interestingly, a number of apolipoproteins displayed a strong age-specific signature in
COVID-19. For instance, APOC2, a component of chylomicrons, very low density
lipoprotein (VLDL) and high density lipoprotein (HDL), and activator of lipoprotein lipase
involved in triglyceride metabolism89, was downregulated with age in COVID-19, but
upregulated with age in the general population90,91 (Fig. 2d). Dysregulation of apolipoproteins
has been observed in community acquired pneumonia and associated with unfavourable
outcome92. Remarkably, contrary to the general trend, APOD, APOC3 and APOE show
opposite trends in older COVID-19 patients and in severe disease (Fig. 5). APOD is
expressed by many tissues, including the brain93. An increase in APOD has been previously
observed in ischemic stroke and CNS inflammation and may reflect (subclinical)
involvement of the central nervous system especially in older patients with more severe
inflammation and more comorbidities94. Conversely, high levels of APOD have been shown
to temper coronavirus-mediated encephalitis in mice, indicating its role as a marker of CNS
damage as well as tissue protection and repair95. APOE, involved in inflammation, immune
response and lipid metabolism, is upregulated in severe COVID-19 but downregulated with
age in this cohort. APOE typically mediates anti-inflammatory effects by downregulation of
NFκB and inhibition of macrophage response to IFNy and TLR3, both mediators of viral
immune response. Moreover, it neutralizes bacterial LPS and enhances the adaptive immune
response by facilitating antigen presentation96. Downregulation with age may reflect a
compromised immune response leading to over-activation of NFκB and insufficient pathogen
clearance in older patients. Finally, APOE has been described to reduce proliferation of
myeloid progenitor cells97 and to reduce myeloid derived suppressor cell (MDSC) survival in
mice98. Thus, lower levels of APOE in the elderly may favor expansion of immature and
dysfunctional neutrophils that have been described as a hallmark in severe COVID-1912. This
broad involvement of APOE merits further investigation in future studies.
22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Note 3. Diverging trends at the proteome level during the
disease peak in individual patients
Some patients (59, 90, 96, 123) who died exhibited protein concentration trajectories
distinctly similar to “typical” survivors (Fig. 3c). Two of them (59, 90) had a prolonged ICU
stay with repeated septic episodes and finally defined limitations of therapy according to
presumed patients’ wishes (“secondary DNR”). Their protein signatures probably reflect the
phenomenon of immune paralysis that can follow bacterial sepsis associated with a prolonged
ICU treatment99. One patient (96) was receiving ongoing immunosuppressive therapy for an
autoimmune disorder, and a fourth patient (123) had a history of kidney transplantation, both
died of septic shock. Whether the particular group of solid organ recipients shows a distinct
protein signature associated with the outcome requires further investigation.
We also note that some survivors do not show a trajectory characteristic of the typical
‘alleviation’ of the proteomic phenotype (WHO = 4: 58, 106, 153; WHO = 6 or 7: 43, 80).
Specifically, the proteomic response in patients 106, 153 and 141 was indicative of overall
‘worsening’ of the proteome (Fig. 3c). In contrast, patients 43 and 80 exhibited the overall
‘alleviation’ of the proteome, except for the spike in the levels of CRP and serum amyloid
(Fig. 3c). Shorter time spans between sampling days may explain these observations in four
of these patients (43, 58, 80, 106), indicating that the host inflammatory response requires a
certain time to resolve, especially in more severely ill patients, and some of the markers of
systemic inflammation might linger, whereas a typical alleviation of the proteomic signature
can be observed even within a few days in moderate disease courses. The unusual pattern of
patient 153 was likely confounded by a skin infection that subsequently required antibiotic
treatment.

Supplementary Note 4: Overview of Resources generated
We provide deep and time-resolved resources that characterize COVID-19 at the level of
plasma proteomes and established diagnostic parameters (summarized in Box 2). We
demonstrate the extent to which proteomes and diagnostic parameters interdepend, in initial
response to the disease and in dynamics during the disease course. We show how they change
with age, differ depending on the disease severity, reflect the therapy received and evolve
over time. Our data have been acquired for COVID-19 patients’ samples and analysed in the
context of general population proteomics (Generation Scotland) for which samples have been
measured with the same proteomic technology7, but we also expect it to be of high value as a
reference for studies of other types of viral pneumonia as well as any investigations involving
both routine clinical phenotyping and plasma proteomics.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements
We thank Jan-David Manntz (Beckman, Germany) for help with the Biomek i7, Robert Lane,
Jean-Baptiste Vincedent and Nick Morrice (SCIEX) for help with the TripleTOF 6600. This
work was supported by the Berlin University Alliance (501_Massenspektrometrie,
501_Linklab, 112_PreEP_Corona_Ralser), by UKRI/NIHR through the UK Coronavirus
Immunology Consortium (UK-CIC), the BMBF/DLR Projektträger (01KI20160A,
01ZX1604B, 01KI20337, 01KX2021), Charité-BIH Centrum für Therapieforschung
(BIH_PA_covid-19_Ralser), the BBSRC (BB/N015215/1, BB/N015282/1), the Francis Crick
Institute, which receives its core funding from Cancer Research UK (FC001134), the UK
Medical Research Council (FC001134), and the Wellcome Trust (FC001134 and IA
200829/Z/16/Z). The work was further supported by the Ministry of Education and Research
(BMBF), as part of the National Research Node ‘Mass spectrometry in Systems Medicine
(MSCoresys), under grant agreement 031L0220A. Leif Erik Sander is supported by the
German Research Foundation (DFG, SFB-TR84 114933180) and by the Berlin Institute of
Health (BIH), which receives funding from the Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF).
Martin Witzenrath is supported by grants from the German Research Foundation, SFB-TR84
C06 and C09, by the German Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework
of the CAPSyS (01ZX1304B), CAPSyS-COVID (01ZX1604B), SYMPATH (01ZX1906A)
and PROVID project (01KI20160A) and by the Berlin Institute of Health (CM-COVID).
Stefan Hippenstiel is supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG, SFB-TR84 A04
and B06), and the BMBF (PROVID, and project 01KI2082). Norbert Suttorp is supported by
grants from the German Research Foundation, SFB-TR84 C09 und Z02, by the German
Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) in the framework of the PROGRESS
01KI07114. The study was further supported by Wellcome Trust (200829/Z/16/Z). The
Generation Scotland study received core support from the Chief Scientist Office of the
Scottish Government Health Directorates (CZD/16/6) and the Scottish Funding Council

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(HR03006), and is now supported by the Wellcome Trust (216767/Z/19/Z). Archie Campbell
is funded by HDR UK and the Wellcome Trust (216767/Z/19/Z). Caroline Hayward is
supported by an MRC University Unit Programme Grant (MC_UU_00007/10) (QTL in
Health and Disease). Riccardo Marioni is supported by an Alzheimer’s Research UK project
grant (ARUK-PG2017B-10). H. Whitwell, JF. Timms, A. Zaikin and T. Nazarenko are
supported by a Medical Research Council grant (MR/R02524X/1) and H. Whitwell, A.
Zaikin and O. Blyuss by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education agreement No. 07515-2020-808. H. Whitwell is supported by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR)
Imperial Biomedical Research Centre (BRC). J. Timms is supported by the National Institute
for Health Research (NIHR) UCLH/UCL Biomedical Research Centre. Mirja Mittermaier is
a participant in the BIH-Charité Digital Clinician Scientist Program funded by the Charité –
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, the Berlin Institute of Health, and the German Research
Foundation (DFG). Markus A. Keller is supported by the Austrian Science Funds (FWF;
P33333) and the Austrian Research Promotion Agency (FFG, #878654). Figures were created
with biorender.com.

References
1.

Alwan, N. A. et al. Scientific consensus on the COVID-19 pandemic: we need to act now. Lancet (2020)
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32153-X.

2.

Rosenbaum, L. The Untold Toll - The Pandemic’s Effects on Patients without Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med.
382, 2368–2371 (2020).

3.

Blumenthal, D., Fowler, E. J., Abrams, M. & Collins, S. R. Covid-19 - Implications for the Health Care
System. N. Engl. J. Med. 383, 1483–1488 (2020).

4.

Wu, D. et al. Vaccines and Therapies in Development for SARS-CoV-2 Infections. J. Clin. Med. Res. 9,
(2020).

5.

Phua, J. et al. Intensive care management of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): challenges and
recommendations. Lancet Respir Med 8, 506–517 (2020).

6.

Saxena, S. K. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): Epidemiology, Pathogenesis, Diagnosis, and
Therapeutics. (Springer Nature, 2020).

7.

Messner, C. B. et al. Ultra-High-Throughput Clinical Proteomics Reveals Classifiers of COVID-19
Infection. Cell Syst 11, 11–24.e4 (2020).

8.

Shen, B. et al. Proteomic and Metabolomic Characterization of COVID-19 Patient Sera. Cell 182, 59–
72.e15 (2020).

9.

Liu, Y. et al. Prominent coagulation disorder is closely related to inflammatory response and could be as a
prognostic indicator for ICU patients with COVID-19. J. Thromb. Thrombolysis (2020)

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

doi:10.1007/s11239-020-02174-9.
10. Laing, A. G. et al. A dynamic COVID-19 immune signature includes associations with poor prognosis.
Nat. Med. 26, 1623–1635 (2020).
11. D’Alessandro, A. et al. Serum Proteomics in COVID-19 Patients: Altered Coagulation and Complement
Status as a Function of IL-6 Level. J. Proteome Res. (2020) doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.0c00365.
12. Schulte-Schrepping, J. et al. Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid Cell Compartment.
Cell 182, 1419–1440.e23 (2020).
13. Wynants, L. et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19 infection: systematic review
and critical appraisal. BMJ 369, m1328 (2020).
14. Overmyer, K. A. et al. Large-scale Multi-omic Analysis of COVID-19 Severity. medRxiv (2020)
doi:10.1101/2020.07.17.20156513.
15. Shu, T. et al. Plasma Proteomics Identify Biomarkers and Pathogenesis of COVID-19. Immunity (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.10.008.
16. Danwang, C. et al. A meta-analysis of potential biomarkers associated with severity of coronavirus disease
2019 (COVID-19). Biomark Res 8, 37 (2020).
17. Henry, B. M., de Oliveira, M. H. S., Benoit, S., Plebani, M. & Lippi, G. Hematologic, biochemical and
immune biomarker abnormalities associated with severe illness and mortality in coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19): a meta-analysis. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 58, 1021–1028 (2020).
18. Yang, L. et al. COVID-19: immunopathogenesis and Immunotherapeutics. Signal Transduct Target Ther 5,
128 (2020).
19. Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19
patients. Science 369, 718–724 (2020).
20. Organization, W. H. & Others. WHO R&D Blueprint-Novel Coronavirus COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial
Synopsis. Geneva: World Health Organization (2020).
21. Gillet, L. C. et al. Targeted data extraction of the MS/MS spectra generated by data independent
acquisition: a new concept for consistent and accurate proteome analysis. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 11,
O111.016717 (2012).
22. Liu, J. et al. Neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio predicts critical illness patients with 2019 coronavirus disease
in the early stage. J. Transl. Med. 18, 206 (2020).
23. Lian, J. et al. High neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio associated with progression to critical illness in older

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

patients with COVID-19: a multicenter retrospective study. Aging 12, 13849–13859 (2020).
24. Poynard, T. & Imbert-Bismut, F. Chapter 14 - Laboratory Testing for Liver Disease. in Zakim and Boyer’s
Hepatology (Sixth Edition) (eds. Boyer, T. D., Manns, M. P. & Sanyal, A. J.) 201–215 (W.B. Saunders,
2012).
25. Zhao, B. et al. Recapitulation of SARS-CoV-2 infection and cholangiocyte damage with human liver
ductal organoids. Protein Cell 11, 771–775 (2020).
26. Schneeman, T. A. et al. Regulation of the polymeric Ig receptor by signaling through TLRs 3 and 4:
linking innate and adaptive immune responses. J. Immunol. 175, 376–384 (2005).
27. Smith, B. H. et al. Generation Scotland: the Scottish Family Health Study; a new resource for researching
genes and heritability. BMC Med. Genet. 7, 74 (2006).
28. Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray
studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, e47 (2015).
29. Wu, Y., Potempa, L. A., El Kebir, D. & Filep, J. G. C-reactive protein and inflammation: conformational
changes affect function. Biol. Chem. 396, 1181–1197 (2015).
30. Luo, Z., Lei, H., Sun, Y., Liu, X. & Su, D.-F. Orosomucoid, an acute response protein with multiple
modulating activities. J. Physiol. Biochem. 71, 329–340 (2015).
31. Sack, G. H., Jr. Serum amyloid A - a review. Mol. Med. 24, 46 (2018).
32. Rehman, A. A., Ahsan, H. & Khan, F. H. α-2-Macroglobulin: a physiological guardian. J. Cell. Physiol.
228, 1665–1675 (2013).
33. Wakabayashi, S. Chapter Nine - New Insights into the Functions of Histidine-Rich Glycoprotein. in
International Review of Cell and Molecular Biology (ed. Jeon, K. W.) vol. 304 467–493 (Academic Press,
2013).
34. Zhang, H., Penninger, J. M., Li, Y., Zhong, N. & Slutsky, A. S. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2)
as a SARS-CoV-2 receptor: molecular mechanisms and potential therapeutic target. Intensive Care Med.
46, 586–590 (2020).
35. Turner, A. J. Chapter 25 - ACE2 Cell Biology, Regulation, and Physiological Functions. in The Protective
Arm of the Renin Angiotensin System (RAS) (eds. Unger, T., Steckelings, U. M. & dos Santos, R. A. S.)
185–189 (Academic Press, 2015).
36. Tay, M. Z., Poh, C. M., Rénia, L., MacAry, P. A. & Ng, L. F. P. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity,
inflammation and intervention. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 20, 363–374 (2020).

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

37. Liu, Y. et al. Clinical and biochemical indexes from 2019-nCoV infected patients linked to viral loads and
lung injury. Sci. China Life Sci. 63, 364–374 (2020).
38. Hilt, Z. T. et al. Platelet-derived β2M regulates monocyte inflammatory responses. JCI Insight 4, (2019).
39. Makridakis, M. et al. Multiplexed MRM-based protein quantification of putative prognostic biomarkers for
chronic kidney disease progression in plasma. Sci. Rep. 10, 4815 (2020).
40. Hajishengallis, G., Reis, E. S., Mastellos, D. C., Ricklin, D. & Lambris, J. D. Novel mechanisms and
functions of complement. Nat. Immunol. 18, 1288–1298 (2017).
41. Volanakis, J. E. & Narayana, S. V. Complement factor D, a novel serine protease. Protein Sci. 5, 553–564
(1996).
42. Peralta, C. A. et al. Cystatin C identifies chronic kidney disease patients at higher risk for complications. J.
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 22, 147–155 (2011).
43. Benarafa, C. Regulation of Neutrophil Serine Proteases by Intracellular Serpins. in The Serpin Family:
Proteins with Multiple Functions in Health and Disease (eds. Geiger, M., Wahlmüller, F. & Furtmüller,
M.) 59–76 (Springer International Publishing, 2015).
44. Banda, M. J., Rice, A. G., Griffin, G. L. & Senior, R. M. Alpha 1-proteinase inhibitor is a neutrophil
chemoattractant after proteolytic inactivation by macrophage elastase. J. Biol. Chem. 263, 4481–4484
(1988).
45. Potempa, J., Fedak, D., Dubin, A., Mast, A. & Travis, J. Proteolytic inactivation of alpha-1-antichymotrypsin. Sites of cleavage and generation of chemotactic activity. J. Biol. Chem. 266, 21482–21487
(1991).
46. Ombrellino, M. et al. Fetuin, a negative acute phase protein, attenuates TNF synthesis and the innate
inflammatory response to carrageenan. Shock 15, 181–185 (2001).
47. Poon, I. K. H., Patel, K. K., Davis, D. S., Parish, C. R. & Hulett, M. D. Histidine-rich glycoprotein: the
Swiss Army knife of mammalian plasma. Blood 117, 2093–2101 (2011).
48. Zhuo, L., Hascall, V. C. & Kimata, K. Inter-α-trypsin Inhibitor, a Covalent Protein-GlycosaminoglycanProtein Complex. J. Biol. Chem. 279, 38079–38082 (2004).
49. Fries, E. & Blom, A. M. Bikunin--not just a plasma proteinase inhibitor. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 32,
125–137 (2000).
50. Chapin, J. C. & Hajjar, K. A. Fibrinolysis and the control of blood coagulation. Blood Rev. 29, 17–24
(2015).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

51. Heissig, B., Salama, Y., Takahashi, S., Osada, T. & Hattori, K. The multifaceted role of plasminogen in
inflammation. Cell. Signal. 75, 109761 (2020).
52. Whitwell, H. J., Blyuss, O., Menon, U., Timms, J. F. & Zaikin, A. Parenclitic networks for predicting
ovarian cancer. Oncotarget 9, 22717–22726 (2018).
53. Krivonosov, M., Nazarenko, T., Bacalini, M. G. & Franceschi, C. Age-dependent DNA methylation
Parenclitic Networks in family-based cohort patients with Down Syndrome. bioRxiv (2020).
54. Sun, Q., Qiu, H., Huang, M. & Yang, Y. Lower mortality of COVID-19 by early recognition and
intervention: experience from Jiangsu Province. Ann. Intensive Care 10, 33 (2020).
55. Stawicki, S. P. et al. The 2019-2020 Novel Coronavirus (Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus
2) Pandemic: A Joint American College of Academic International Medicine-World Academic Council of
Emergency Medicine Multidisciplinary COVID-19 Working Group Consensus Paper. J. Glob. Infect. Dis.
12, 47–93 (2020).
56. UpToDate. https://www.uptodate.com/contents/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-clinicalfeatures?search=covid%2019%20severe&source=search_result&selectedTitle=2~150&usage_type=default
&display_rank=2.
57. Grifoni, E. et al. Interleukin-6 as prognosticator in patients with COVID-19: IL-6 and Covid-19. J. Infect.
(2020).
58. Meizlish, M. L. et al. A neutrophil activation signature predicts critical illness and mortality in COVID-19.
medRxiv (2020) doi:10.1101/2020.09.01.20183897.
59. RECOVERY Collaborative Group et al. Dexamethasone in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19 Preliminary Report. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020) doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2021436.
60. Stone, J. H. et al. Efficacy of Tocilizumab in Patients Hospitalized with Covid-19. N. Engl. J. Med. (2020)
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2028836.
61. Lin, W.-C. et al. Kallistatin protects against sepsis-related acute lung injury via inhibiting inflammation
and apoptosis. Sci. Rep. 5, 12463 (2015).
62. Gettins, P. G. W. & Olson, S. T. Inhibitory serpins. New insights into their folding, polymerization,
regulation and clearance. Biochem. J 473, 2273–2293 (2016).
63. Hoffmann, M. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a
Clinically Proven Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271–280.e8 (2020).
64. Silhol, F., Sarlon, G., Deharo, J.-C. & Vaïsse, B. Downregulation of ACE2 induces overstimulation of the

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

renin-angiotensin system in COVID-19: should we block the renin-angiotensin system? Hypertens. Res. 43,
854–856 (2020).
65. Batlle, D., Wysocki, J., Soler, M. J. & Ranganath, K. Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2: enhancing the
degradation of angiotensin II as a potential therapy for diabetic nephropathy. Kidney Int. 81, 520–528
(2012).
66. Fu, E. L. et al. Acute kidney injury and kidney replacement therapy in COVID-19: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin. Kidney J. 13, 550–563 (2020).
67. Kasal, D. A., De Lorenzo, A. & Tibiriçá, E. COVID-19 and Microvascular Disease: Pathophysiology of
SARS-CoV-2 Infection With Focus on the Renin-Angiotensin System. Heart Lung Circ. (2020)
doi:10.1016/j.hlc.2020.08.010.
68. Bhowmick, P., Mohammed, Y. & Borchers, C. H. MRMAssayDB: an integrated resource for validated
targeted proteomics assays. Bioinformatics 34, 3566–3571 (2018).
69. Nagendran, M. et al. Artificial intelligence versus clinicians: systematic review of design, reporting
standards, and claims of deep learning studies. BMJ 368, m689 (2020).
70. Shah, P. et al. Artificial intelligence and machine learning in clinical development: a translational
perspective. NPJ Digit Med 2, 69 (2019).
71. Vollmer, S. et al. Machine learning and artificial intelligence research for patient benefit: 20 critical
questions on transparency, replicability, ethics, and effectiveness. BMJ 368, l6927 (2020).
72. Kelly, C. J., Karthikesalingam, A., Suleyman, M., Corrado, G. & King, D. Key challenges for delivering
clinical impact with artificial intelligence. BMC Med. 17, 195 (2019).
73. Lee, C. S. & Lee, A. Y. Clinical applications of continual learning machine learning. The Lancet Digital
Health 2, e279–e281 (2020).
74. Aĝirbaşli, M. et al. Apolipoprotein E Levels in Pediatric Patients Undergoing Cardiopulmonary Bypass.
Artificial Organs vol. 39 28–33 (2015).
75. Shao, B. et al. A Cluster of Proteins Implicated in Kidney Disease Is Increased in High-Density
Lipoprotein Isolated from Hemodialysis Subjects. J. Proteome Res. 14, 2792–2806 (2015).
76. McDonnell, T. et al. The role of beta-2-glycoprotein I in health and disease associating structure with
function: More than just APS. Blood Rev. 39, 100610 (2020).
77. Pascual, M. et al. Metabolism of complement factor D in renal failure. Kidney Int. 34, 529–536 (1988).
78. Han, S. et al. Proteomics investigation of the changes in serum proteins after high- and low-flux

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

hemodialysis. Ren. Fail. 40, 506–513 (2018).
79. Goronzy, J. J. & Weyand, C. M. Understanding immunosenescence to improve responses to vaccines. Nat.
Immunol. 14, 428–436 (2013).
80. Rea, I. M. et al. Age and Age-Related Diseases: Role of Inflammation Triggers and Cytokines. Front.
Immunol. 9, 586 (2018).
81. Franceschi, C., Garagnani, P., Parini, P., Giuliani, C. & Santoro, A. Inflammaging: a new immunemetabolic viewpoint for age-related diseases. Nat. Rev. Endocrinol. 14, 576–590 (2018).
82. Wermuth, P. J. & Jimenez, S. A. The significance of macrophage polarization subtypes for animal models
of tissue fibrosis and human fibrotic diseases. Clin. Transl. Med. 4, 2 (2015).
83. Liu, Y.-C., Zou, X.-B., Chai, Y.-F. & Yao, Y.-M. Macrophage polarization in inflammatory diseases. Int.
J. Biol. Sci. 10, 520–529 (2014).
84. Page, C. et al. Induction of alternatively activated macrophages enhances pathogenesis during severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus infection. J. Virol. 86, 13334–13349 (2012).
85. Gordon, S. M. Chapter 12 - Proteomic Diversity in HDL: A Driving Force for Particle Function and Target
for Therapeutic Intervention. in The HDL Handbook (Second Edition) (ed. Komoda, T.) 293–322
(Academic Press, 2014).
86. Chung, H. Y. et al. Redefining Chronic Inflammation in Aging and Age-Related Diseases: Proposal of the
Senoinflammation Concept. Aging Dis. 10, 367–382 (2019).
87. Soysal, P. et al. Inflammation and frailty in the elderly: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ageing
Res. Rev. 31, 1–8 (2016).
88. Ferrucci, L. et al. The origins of age-related proinflammatory state. Blood 105, 2294–2299 (2005).
89. Ramasamy, I. Recent advances in physiological lipoprotein metabolism. Clin. Chem. Lab. Med. 52, 1695–
1727 (2014).
90. Peters, M. J. et al. The transcriptional landscape of age in human peripheral blood. Nat. Commun. 6, 8570
(2015).
91. Harris, S. E. et al. Age-related gene expression changes, and transcriptome wide association study of
physical and cognitive aging traits, in the Lothian Birth Cohort 1936. Aging 9, 2489–2503 (2017).
92. Sharma, N. K. et al. Proteomic study revealed cellular assembly and lipid metabolism dysregulation in
sepsis secondary to community-acquired pneumonia. Sci. Rep. 7, 15606 (2017).
93. Dassati, S., Waldner, A. & Schweigreiter, R. Apolipoprotein D takes center stage in the stress response of

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the aging and degenerative brain. Neurobiol. Aging 35, 1632–1642 (2014).
94. Muffat, J. & Walker, D. W. Apolipoprotein D: an overview of its role in aging and age-related diseases.
Cell Cycle 9, 269–273 (2010).
95. Do Carmo, S., Jacomy, H., Talbot, P. J. & Rassart, E. Neuroprotective effect of apolipoprotein D against
human coronavirus OC43-induced encephalitis in mice. J. Neurosci. 28, 10330–10338 (2008).
96. Figueroa, D. M., Gordon, E. M., Yao, X. & Levine, S. J. Chapter 13 - Apolipoproteins as contextdependent regulators of lung inflammation. in Mechanisms and Manifestations of Obesity in Lung Disease
(eds. Johnston, R. A. & Suratt, B. T.) 301–326 (Academic Press, 2019).
97. Murphy, A. J. et al. ApoE regulates hematopoietic stem cell proliferation, monocytosis, and monocyte
accumulation in atherosclerotic lesions in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 121, 4138–4149 (2011).
98. Tavazoie, M. F. et al. LXR/ApoE Activation Restricts Innate Immune Suppression in Cancer. Cell 172,
825–840.e18 (2018).
99. Patricio, P., Paiva, J. A. & Borrego, L. M. Immune Response in Bacterial and Candida Sepsis. Eur. J.
Microbiol. Immunol. 9, 105–113 (2019).
100. Kurth, F. et al. Studying the pathophysiology of coronavirus disease 2019: a protocol for the Berlin
prospective COVID-19 patient cohort (Pa-COVID-19). Infection 48, 619–626 (2020).
101. ARDS Definition Task Force et al. Acute respiratory distress syndrome: the Berlin Definition. JAMA 307,
2526–2533 (2012).
102. Singer, M. et al. The Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3).
JAMA 315, 801–810 (2016).
103. Demichev, V., Messner, C. B., Vernardis, S. I., Lilley, K. S. & Ralser, M. DIA-NN: neural networks and
interference correction enable deep proteome coverage in high throughput. Nat. Methods 17, 41–44 (2020).
104. Cox, J. et al. Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal
peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 13, 2513–2526 (2014).
105. Pham, T. V., Henneman, A. A. & Jimenez, C. R. iq: an R package to estimate relative protein abundances
from ion quantification in DIA-MS-based proteomics. Bioinformatics (2020)
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btz961.
106. Team, R. C. & Others. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. (2013).
107. Millard, S. P. EnvStats, an RPackage for Environmental Statistics. Wiley StatsRef: Statistics Reference
Online (2014) doi:10.1002/9781118445112.stat07181.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

108. Smyth, G. K. Linear models and empirical bayes methods for assessing differential expression in
microarray experiments. Stat. Appl. Genet. Mol. Biol. 3, Article3 (2004).
109. Benjamini, Y. & Hochberg, Y. Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical and powerful approach to
multiple testing. J. R. Stat. Soc. (1995).
110. Chen, T. & Guestrin, C. XGBoost: A Scalable Tree Boosting System. in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 785–794 (Association for
Computing Machinery, 2016).
111. Friedman, J., Hastie, T. & Tibshirani, R. Regularization paths for generalized linear models via coordinate
descent. J. Stat. Softw. 33, 1 (2010).

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Methods

Charité patient cohort and clinical data
Patients were recruited within the Pa-COVID-19 study conducted at Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, a prospective observational cohort study on the pathophysiology
of COVID-19. The study protocol has been described in detail before100. All patients with
PCR-confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection were eligible for inclusion. Refusal to provide
informed consent by the patient or a legal representative and any condition prohibiting
supplemental blood for serial biosampling sampling were exclusion criteria. Patients were
treated according to current national and international guidelines. Three patients had Do Not
Intubate and Do Not Resuscitate (DNI/DNR) orders in place, declining mechanical
ventilation and other organ support or cardiopulmonary resuscitation. In 4 further cases,
limitation of therapy was decided at a later time point according to the patient’s presumed
wish (“secondary DNR”) and predictably unfavorable outcome. All other patients received
maximum intensive care treatment including organ replacement therapies at the discretion of
the responsible physicians.
Biosampling for proteome measurement was performed 3 times per week after inclusion. The
WHO ordinal scale for clinical improvement (Table 1) was used to assess disease severity.
ARDS was defined according to the Berlin ARDS criteria101. Sepsis was defined according to
sepsis-3 criteria102. The study was approved by the ethics committee of Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin (EA2/066/20) and conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and guidelines of Good Clinical Practice (ICH 1996). The study is registered in
the German and the WHO international registry for clinical studies (DRKS00021688).
Clinical data was captured in a purpose built electronic case report form data using the
capture system SecuTrial®. All routine laboratory parameters were analyzed in accredited
laboratories at Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin. Pseudonymized data exported from
SecuTrial® were processed using JMP Pro 14 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). If a
laboratory value was missing for a given day, values from up to two preceding days were
used for the analysis.
Innsbruck Patient cohort and clinical data
Serum samples from patients admitted to the intensive care unit at the Department of
Medicine, University Hospital of Innsbruck for the treatment of respiratory failure due to
severe COVID-19 were collected within the first days (median 7.5, IQR 5-12) after
admission. Written informed consent was either obtained before sampling or retrospectively
after recovery, if patients were mechanically ventilated at the time of sampling. COVID-19
was diagnosed on the basis of a (i) positive SARS-CoV2 PCR within the last 7 days prior to
study inclusion (ii) respiratory failure defined as a partial pressure of oxygen < 60 mmHg on
arterial blood gas analysis or a peripheral oxygen saturation of < 90% and (iii) typical
infiltrates on computed tomography scanning of the chest. Patients were treated according to
34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

national guidelines. The study was approved by the local ethics research committee EK-Nr.
1107/2020, and EK-Nr. 1103/2020 for follow-up.
Mass spectrometry and data analysis
Materials
Water (LC-MS Grade, Optima; 10509404), Acetonitrile (LC-MS Grade, Optima; 10001334)
and Methanol (LC-MS Grade, Optima, A456-212) were purchased from Fisher Chemicals.
DL-Dithiothreitol (BioUltra, 43815), Iodoacetamide (BioUltra, I1149) and Ammonium
Bicarbonate (Eluent additive for LC-MS, 40867) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Urea
(puriss. P.a., reag. Ph. Eur., 33247H) and Acetic Acid (Eluent additive for LC-MS, 49199)
were purchased from Honeywell Research Chemicals. Trypsin (Sequence grade, V511X) was
purchased from Promega. Control samples were prepared from Human Serum (Sigma
Aldrich, S7023-50MB) and Human Plasma (EDTA, Pooled Donor, Genetex GTX73265).
Mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis was performed as described previously7 with
minor adjustments to the workflow. Semi-automated sample preparation was performed in
96-well format, using previously prepared stock solution plates stored at -80°C. Briefly, 5μl
of thawed plasma samples were transferred to the pre-made denaturation/reduction stock
solution plates (55μl 8M Urea, 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 50mM dithiothreitol).
Subsequently, the plates were centrifuged for 15s at pulse setting (Eppendorf Centrifuge
5810R), mixed and incubated at 30°C for 60 minutes. 5μl was then transferred from the
iodoacetamide stock solution plate (100mM) to the sample plate and incubated in the dark at
23°C for 30 minutes before dilution with 100mM ABC buffer (340μl). 220μl of this solution
was transferred to the pre-made trypsin stock solution plate (12.5μl, 0.1μg/μl) and incubated
at 37°C for 17 h (Memmert IPP55 incubator). The trypsin/total protein ratio was ~1/40. The
digestion was quenched by addition of formic acid (10% v/v, 25μl). The digestion mixture
was cleaned-up using C18 96-well plates (BioPureSPE Macro 96-Well, 100mg PROTO C18,
The Nest Group) and redissolved in 50μl 0.1% formic acid.
Each 96-well plate contained 8 plasma and 4 serum sample preparation controls, and the
acquisition workflow included a pooled quality control sample every ~10 injections. Liquid
chromatography was performed using the Agilent 1290 Infinity II system coupled to a
TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) equipped with IonDrive Turbo V Source
(Sciex). A total of 5μl was injected, and the peptides were separated in reversed phase mode
using a C18 ZORBAX Rapid Resolution High Definition (RRHD) column 2.1mm x 50mm,
1.8μm particles. A linear gradient was applied which ramps from 1% B to 40% B in 5
minutes (Buffer A: 0.1% FA; Buffer B: ACN/0.1% FA) with a flow rate of 800μl/min. For
washing the column, the organic solvent was increased to 80% B in 0.5 minutes and was kept
for 0.2 minutes at this composition before going back to 1% B in 0.1 min. The mass
spectrometer was operated in the high sensitivity mode. The DIA/SWATH method consisted
of an MS1 scan from m/z 100 to m/z 1500 (20ms accumulation time) and 25 MS2 scans
(25ms accumulation time) with variable precursor isolation width covering the mass range
from m/z 450 to m/z 850 7. An IonDrive Turbo V Source (Sciex) was used with ion source
35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

gas 1 (nebulizer gas), ion source gas 2 (heater gas) and curtain gas set to 50, 40 and 25,
respectively. The source temperature was set to 450 and the ion spray voltage to 5500V.
The data were processed with DIA-NN103, an open-source software suite for DIA / SWATH
data processing (https://github.com/vdemichev/DiaNN, commit 4498bd7) using a two-step
spectral library refinement procedure as described previously7, with filtering at precursor
level q-value (1%), library q-value (0.5%) and gene group q-value (1%). Highly hydrophobic
peptides (reference retention time > 110 on the iRT scale) were discarded. Batch correction
was performed at the precursor level as described previously7, using linear regression for
intra-batch correction and control samples for inter-batch correction. Protein quantification
was subsequently carried out using the MaxLFQ algorithm104,105 as implemented in the diann
R package (https://github.com/vdemichev/diann-rpackage). The Generation Scotland cohort
proteomics raw data, which we described previously7, have been reanalyzed using the
updated software pipeline, to ensure comparability.
Statistical analysis and multiple-testing correction
Statistical testing was performed in the R environment for statistical computing, version
3.6.0106. All protein and clinical laboratory measurements (except for standard and actual
base excess) were first log2-transformed. For differential abundance testing, only protein
groups matched to at least three different unmodified peptide sequences were considered.
Significance testing for a zero median (for analysing trajectories) or against binary variables
(worsening, death) was performed using the Wilcoxon W test or Mann-Whitney U test,
respectively, as implemented in the “wilcox.test” function of the “stats” R package. Testing
against a continuous variable (e.g. when determining significance of pairwise correlations)
was performed using the Kendall Tau test, with the slope estimated using the Theil-Sen
method, as implemented in the “kendallTrendTest” function of the “EnvStats”107 package.
When covariates had to be taken into account, we used linear modelling with the “limma”28 R
package, with P-values obtained using “eBayes”108. Modelling with “limma” was likewise
used to correct for these covariates for visualisation purposes. WHO grade was considered as
a “factor-type” covariate (resulting in a “limma” design matrix with one-hot encoding for
different WHO grades). Multiple-testing correction was performed using the BenjaminiHochberg false discovery rate controlling procedure109 as implemented in the “p.adjust”
function of the “stats” R package. The adjusted p-values below 0.05 were considered
significant. Multiple-testing correction for differential abundance analysis was performed
separately for proteins with MRM assays available68, the rest of proteins measured, the
clinical laboratory measurements and the clinical factors (age, Charlson score, BMI,
Horowitz index and FiO2, SOFA score), to ensure that the false discovery rate stayed below
0.05 for each of these categories of features. Likewise, when determining the significance of
correlations in correlation matrices, correction was performed for each row or each column
separately, to ensure less than 5% false discoveries in each row or column, respectively. For
correlation map visualisations, black points were used to indicate row-wise significant
correlations, and black rectangles at the border of the respective cell - column-wise
significant correlations.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Quantities of gene products corresponding to open reading frames named IGxx (i.e. different
types of immunoglobulin chains) were summed together to generate quantities representative
of the overall levels of immunoglobulin classes (IGHVs, IGLVs, etc). This does not affect
any conclusions of this work and was done purely to improve visualization and simplify the
interpretation of the heatmaps and correlation maps. Full protein level tables, including levels
of individual immunoglobulin gene products, are provided in supplementary materials.
Identifying markers of the disease severity
The first time point measured at the maximum WHO grade was chosen for each patient. For
each omics feature, its log2-transformed values were tested for a trend depending on the
WHO grade. Age was included as a covariate in the linear model as described above.
Identifying markers with vary with age in COVID-19
The first sampling time point measured was chosen per patient. For each omics feature, its
log2-transformed values were tested for a trend depending on age. The test was performed
either using the Kendall Tau test (as described above; Supp. Fig. SF8, Supp. Fig. SF9), or by
accounting for WHO grade as a covariate in the linear model (as described above; Supp. Fig.
SF10, Fig. 5).
Identifying markers of RRT and ECMO
For each omics feature, the P-value was calculated using the Mann-Whitney test, comparing
between the median log2-levels across all sampling time points at WHO grade 7 in patients
who did not receive the therapy and the median log2-levels across all sampling time points at
WHO grade 7 after initiation of the respective therapy in patients who did.
Identifying markers predictive of the remaining time in hospital
Patients, for which the first sampling time point before the outcome corresponded to the
WHO = 3 severity grade (that is the patient did not require supplemental oxygen on that day),
were considered. Thus, no correction for disease severity was necessary. Testing of log2levels of each omics feature (measured for the first sampling time point) vs the remaining
time in hospital (days) was performed by including age as a covariate in the linear model as
described above.
Identifying markers predictive of disease worsening
The first sampling time point measured was chosen per patient. Future disease worsening was
defined as a future increase in the WHO grade (for patients at WHO grade < 7) or death (for
patients at WHO grade 7). For each omics feature, its log2-levels were compared between
patients who did not worsen and patients who did, with age and current WHO grade (as
factor) included as covariates in the linear model as described above.
Peak period of the disease definition
When studying the dynamic changes in omics values during the disease course, we focused
on the time points sampled when the disease was the most severe for a particular patient. For
each patient, we thus defined the “peak period of the disease” as the time when the patient
37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

was receiving the most intensive treatment during their stay in hospital, that is the time when
the patient was at WHO grade 6 or 7, for patients who received invasive mechanical
ventilation at some point, or otherwise at their maximum WHO grade (3, 4 or 5).
Identifying proteins changing with time at the peak of the disease
Only patients with at least two days between the first and last sampling time points at the
peak of the disease (as defined above) were considered. For each omics feature, a linear
regression model was fitted for its log2-levels vs the day number, and the quantity slopeadj =
(linear regression slope) * (number of days between first and last time points) was calculated.
A Wilcoxon W test was then applied to compare the median of slopeadj to zero. The values of
slopeadj for each feature are visualised in Supp. Fig. SF13.
Correlation maps
General correlation maps were generated using the log2-transformed values of features at the
first time point measured at the maximum WHO grade for each patient. The correlation map
between feature changes during the peak of the disease (as defined above) was generated by
correlating the slopeadj values (as defined above). The map of significant protein correlations
not detected in the general population was generated by excluding all correlations which were
either significant (P <= 0.05, without multiple-testing correction) with the same trend in the
Generation Scotland cohort, or could not be calculated reliably therein (less than 20 valid
points).
Identifying omics trajectories that are predictive of survival in critical patients
For each omics feature, the difference between its log2-levels at the last and the first
sampling timepoints at the peak of the disease (as defined above) was considered. Among
patients which were at WHO = 7 severity grade at some point, the distribution of this
difference between survivors and non-survivors was compared using the Mann-Whitney U
test. Patients still in critical condition on 16 September 2020 were excluded (115, 129).
Patients with therapy limitations according to (presumed) patients’ wishes (DNI, secondary
DNR) were likewise excluded (26, 52, 59, 83, 90).
Prediction of mechanical ventilation with machine learning
To reflect the power of omics measurements in characterising the phenotype, a classifier was
constructed to predict mechanical ventilation (at the present time point) using either the
proteome or the clinical data. All protein and clinical laboratory measurements were log2transformed. The first time point measured at the maximum WHO grade was selected per
patient. We used a gradient boosted tree algorithm implemented in the XGBoost 1.2.0110
under Python 3.7.4. The classifier was based on the construction of 500 gradient boosted
trees using leave-one-out cross-validation and the “exact” tree method. To circumvent
overfitting the shrinkage factor “eta” was set to 0.05 using a subsampling of 0.5 of the
training data. In addition, the L2 regularization term “lambda” was set to 100. For the
assessment of classifier performance, the leave-one-out method was applied in the following
way: the prediction was made for each sample separately, by excluding (withholding) this
sample from the dataset, training the classifier on the remaining (independent) samples and
38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

then predicting the withheld sample using the trained model. For the determination of the
feature importances one classifier was trained on all data points using only the proteome
measurements and the same setup as described above. The feature importance scores were
then extracted directly from the trained classifier.
“Proteome severity” score calculation
A proteome severity score was calculated for each sample, to be used for visualisation in Fig.
3c. This was done via a LASSO model (as implemented in the cv.glmnet() function of the
“glmnet”111 R package), trained on the proteomes corresponding to the first time point
acquired for each patient, to predict the current WHO grade. For this, all protein
measurements were first log2-transformed. Only proteins quantified with at least three
different peptides were considered, on which minimal-value imputation was used.
Prediction of survival using parenclitic networks
The first time point measured at the maximum WHO grade was selected per patient. Only
patients with maximum WHO grade 7 were considered. Patients still critical on 16.09.2020
were excluded (115, 129), as well as patient 26, due to the cause of death unrelated to
COVID-19. To reduce the feature space used as input for the machine learning model, we
limited it to the quantities of 57 proteins which are FDA-approved biomarkers with MRM
assays available68 and which were quantified with at least three different peptides in this
study. Missing values were imputed using minimal value imputation, and the data were
standardized.
Machine learning was carried out using the parenclitic networks approach52,53. Briefly, during
training, for each pair of features, a radial SVM classifier is trained (using the svm() function
from the “e1071” R package with default settings). For each sample, a network is then built,
wherein vertices correspond to features and the edge weight is the death probability as
predicted by the SVM classifier. Maximum, mean and standard deviation of the edge
weights, as well as the numbers of edges with weights greater than 0.5 (i.e. fatal outcome is
predicted) and nodes with at least one such edge are calculated. A LASSO classification
model (alpha = 0.01) is then constructed on these 5 features using the glmnet() function of the
“glmnet”111 R package with default settings.
For the assessment of the classifier performance (Charité cohort), a cross-validation method
was applied in the following way: the prediction was made for each sample by excluding
(withholding) it from the dataset along with two other samples (chosen randomly with the
constraint that out of 3 samples one corresponds to a non-survivor and two to survivors),
training the classifier on the remaining (independent) samples and then generating predictions
for the withheld samples using the trained model. Such leave-3-out partition was generated
randomly 50 times and the predictions for each sample were averaged. For the assessment of
the performance on an independent dataset (Innsbruck cohort), the classifier was trained on
all the Charité samples and used to estimate the probabilities of fatal outcome on the
Innsbruck cohort.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figures and Tables

Patient state

Descriptor

Score

Uninfected

No clinical or virological evidence of
infection

0

Ambulatory

No limitation of activities

1

Limitation of activities

2

No oxygen therapy

3

Oxygen by mask or nasal prongs

4

Non-invasive ventilation or high-flow
oxygen

5

Intubation and mechanical ventilation

6

Ventilation + additional organ support
(vasopressors, RRT, ECMO)

7

Hospitalised - mild disease

Hospitalised - severe disease

Supp. Table 1. WHO ordinal scale for clinical improvement in COVID-19 as used in the
study (World Health Organisation 2020).

All patients

No invasive mechanical ventilation
Max WHO 3
No supplemental
oxygen

All patients
Number of patients

Max WHO 4
Supplemental low
flow oxygen

Invasive mechanical ventilation

Max WHO 5
Supplemental high
flow oxygen

Max WHO 6
Invasive
mechanical
ventilation

deceased**

Max WHO 7
additional organ
replacement
therapy

139

100%

23

17%

33

24%

14

10%

8

6%

61

44%

15

11%

Male (for sorting purposes first)

95

68%

10

43%

25

76%

11

79%

6

75%

43

70%

12

80%

Female

44

32%

13

57%

8

24%

3

21%

2

25%

18

30%

3

20%

61

50 - 71

49

35 - 70

63

48 - 71

62

49 - 85

61

58 - 68

62

53 - 73

67

53 - 74

57

41%

6

26%

16

48%

6

43%

3

38%

26

43%

9

60%

23.3 - 34.9 27.4

Sex

Age, years​ (Median, IQR)
≥ 65
BMI​ (kg/m​ , Median, IQR)
2​

27.8

24.7 - 31.9

25.4

23.0 - 30.6

27.2

23.3 - 30.3

27.1

25.0 - 33.9

29.4

25.7 - 34.0

28.4

24.0 - 31.2

< 25 kg/m​2

40

29%

10

43%

13

39%

3

21%

2

25%

12

20%

4

27%

≥ 25 kg/m​2

97

71%

13

57%

20

61%

11

79%

6

75%

47

80%

11

73%

Pre-existing conditions
CCI (Median, IQR)

3

1-4

1

0-3

4

1-5

3

1-6

2.5

1-4

3

1-4

3

3-5

<3

65

47%

16

70%

13

39%

7

50%

4

50%

25

41%

2

13%

≥3

74

53%

7

30%

20

61%

7

50%

4

50%

36

59%

13

87%

Hypertension

78

56%

6

26%

21

64%

7

50%

4

50%

40

66%

13

87%

Congestive heart failure

7

5%

0

0%

3

9%

0

0%

1

13%

3

5%

1

7%

h/o myocardial infarction

13

9%

1

4%

2

6%

1

7%

1

13%

8

13%

1

7%

Chronic lung disease

22

16%

2

9%

6

18%

1

7%

3

38%

10

16%

2

13%

Asthma

7

5%

1

4%

2

6%

0

0%

1

13%

3

5%

1

7%

COPD

15

11%

1

4%

5

15%

0

0%

2

25%

7

11%

1

7%
13%

on home oxygen therapy

6

4%

0

0%

1

3%

0

0%

1

13%

4

7%

2

31

22%

1

4%

9

27%

4

29%

2

25%

15

25%

3

20%

Type II diabetes (% of diabetes)

30

97%

1

100%

8

89%

4

100%

2

100%

15

100%

3

100%

Oral hypoglycemic drugs

16

12%

0

0%

5

15%

2

14%

0

0%

9

15%

2

13%

Insulin

11

8%

0

0%

6

18%

2

14%

2

25%

3

5%

0

0%

19

14%

2

9%

8

24%

3

21%

0

0%

6

10%

2

13%

Diabetes

Chronic kidney disease

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Requiring RRT

2

2%

0

0%

1

3%

0

0%

0

0%

1

2%

1

8

6%

2

9%

3

9%

1

7%

0

0%

2

3%

1

7%

21

15%

4

17%

9

27%

1

7%

1

13%

6

10%

3

20%

7

5%

0

0%

1

3%

1

7%

1

13%

4

7%

1

7%

6

4%

0

0%

1

3%

1

7%

1

13%

3

5%

0

0%

active malignancy

3

2%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

1

13%

2

3%

1

7%

h/o solid organ transplant

3

2%

0

0%

2

6%

0

0%

0

0%

1

2%

1

7%

Chronic liver disease
Lipid metabolism disorder
h/o stroke
ischemic

7%

h/o immunosuppressive therapy
within past 3 months

13

9%

2

9%

4

12%

2

14%

0

0%

5

8%

3

20%

h/o smoking

33

24%

6

26%

14

42%

2

14%

2

25%

9

15%

2

13%

5

4%

1

4%

2

6%

0

0%

1

13%

1

2%

0

0%

current smoker
Outpatient medication
Total amount (Median, IQR)

2

1-3

1

0-2

3

2-5

1

0-2

3

1-5

2

1-4

1

1-3

ARB

24

17%

2

9%

6

18%

2

14%

1

13%

13

21%

1

7%

ACE-i

22

22%

3

13%

8

24%

1

7%

1

13%

9

15%

2

13%

Lipid lowering agents

25

25%

2

9%

11

33%

0

0%

1

13%

11

18%

3

20%
16 - 43

Duration of hospital course* (days,
median, IQR)

20

9 - 48

7

4 - 10

14

9 - 17

20

13 - 28

38

21 - 62

48

33 - 76

26

Proning**

51

38%

-

-

-

-

-

-

3

38%

48

79%

13

87%

Mechanical ventilation**

69

50%

-

-

-

-

-

-

8

100%

61

100%

15

100%

RRT

46

33%

0

0%

1

3%

0

0%

2

25%

43

70%

13

87%

ECMO**

22

16%

-

-

-

-

-

0

0%

22

37%

8

53%

ARDS

76

55%

0

0%

3

9%

7

50%

6

75%

60

98%

15

100%

Sepsis

41

29%

0

0%

2

6%

3

21%

2

25%

34

56%

11

73%

Thromboembolic event

32

23%

0

0%

1

3%

2

14%

2

25%

27

44%

7

47%

7

6%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

7

12%

2

13%

20**
*

14%

0

0%

1

3%

2

14%

0

0%

17

28%

-

-

2%

3%

0

0%

1

3%

2

14%

0

0%

0

0%

-

-

4

3%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

4

7%

Requiring new oxygen therapy after
discharge*

12

10%

0

0%

0

0%

1

7%

1

13%

10

24%

-

-

Requiring new RRT after discharge*

6

5%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

0

0%

5

12%

-

-

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation**
Outcome
Deceased (incl. DNI/CNR)
DNI/DNR
Secondary DNR

Data are shown in n (%) unless otherwise indicated. IQR – interquartile range, CCI – Charlson’s comorbidity index; CKD – chronic kidney disease; ACE-I – angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitor, ARB - Angiotensin II receptor blockers, RRT – renal replacement therapy, ECMO – extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, DNI/DNR – do not intubate/do not resuscitate, i.e.
patient’s wish not to receive mechanical ventilation, organ replacement therapy, or cardiopulmonary resuscitation - secondary DNR - secondary limitation of therapy in situation of probable
unfavourable outcome and according to the presumed patient’s wish
* deceased patients not included
** patients with DNI/DNR not included
*** one patient died of non-COVID-19 related cause

Supp. Table 2. Baseline, treatment and outcome characteristics of patient cohort with
COVID-19 at Charité - University hospital Berlin. Patients are stratified according to the
maximum grade on WHO ordinal scale.
The following tables are included as separate supplementary files in a .zip file attached
to this medRxiv preprint​.
Supp. Table 3. Measurements and statistical tests summary.
Supp. Table 4. Correlations of protein and clinical lab measurements (corresponds to Fig.
1b).

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.09.20228015; this version posted November 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supp. Table 5. All correlations between the omics measurements used in this study
(corresponds to Supp. Fig. SF2).
Supp. Table 6. COVID-19-specific protein-protein correlations (corresponds to Supp. Fig.
SF3).
Supp. Table 7. Correlations between dynamic changes in omics measurements during the
peak period of the disease (corresponds to Supp. Fig. SF11).
Supplementary files (Supp. Fig. SF1 - SF22) are provided as separate PDFs in a .zip file
attached to this medRxiv preprint. All figures are also provided as separate high-resolution
PDFs.

43

