medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Analysis of Epidemic Situation of New
Coronavirus Infection at Home and Abroad Based
on Rescaled Range (R / S) Method
Xiaofeng Ji1, Zhou Tang1, Kejian Wang1, Xianbin Li1, Houqiang Li1
1
Sichuan Academy of Social Sciences
E-mail:935824321@qq.com

1 Summary
1.1 Background
The outbreak of the new coronavirus infection broke out in Wuhan City, Hubei Province in
December 2019, and has spread to 97 countries and regions around the world. Apart from China,
there are currently three other severely affected areas, namely Italy, South Korea, and Iran. This
poses a huge threat to China's and even global public health security, challenges scientific research
work such as disease surveillance and tracking, clinical treatment, and vaccine development, and it
also brings huge uncertainty to the global economy. As of March 11, 2020, the epidemic situation
in China is nearing its end, but the epidemic situation abroad is in the outbreak period. Italy has
even taken measures to close the city nationwide, with a total of 118,020 cases of infection
worldwide.

1.2 Method
This article selects the data of newly confirmed cases of COVID-19 at home and abroad as
the data sample. Among them: the data of newly confirmed cases abroad is represented by Italy,
and the span is from February 13 to March 10. The data of newly confirmed cases at home are
divided into two parts: Hubei Province and other provinces except Hubei Province, spanning from
January 23 to March 3, and with February 12 as the cutting point, it’s divided into two periods, the
growth period and the recession period. The rescaled range (R / S) analysis method and the
dimensionless fractal Hurst exponent are used to measure the correlation of time series to
determine whether the time series conforms to the fractal Brownian motion, that is, a biased
random process. Contrast analysis of the meaning of H value in different stages and different
overall H values in the same stage.

1.3 Results
Based on R / S analysis and calculated Hurst value of newly confirmed cases in Hubei and
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
non-Hubei
provinces, it was found that the H value of Hubei Province in the first stage was 0.574,

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

which is greater than 0.5, indicating that the future time series has a positive correlation and
Fractal characteristics; The H value in the second stage is 1.368, which is greater than 1, which
indicates that the future epidemic situation is completely preventable and controllable, and the
second stage has a downward trend characteristic, which indicates that there is a high probability
that the future time series will decline. The H values of the first and second stages of non-Hubei
Province are 0.223 and 0.387, respectively, which are both less than 0.5, indicating that the time
series of confirmed cases in the future is likely to return to historical points, and the H value in the
second stage is greater than that in the first stage, indicating that the time series of confirmed cases
in the second stage is more long-term memory than the time series of confirmed cases in the first
stage. The daily absolute number of newly confirmed cases in Italy was converted to the daily
growth rate of confirmed cases to eliminate the volatility of the data. The H value was 1.853,
which was greater than 1, indicating that the time series of future confirmed cases is similar to the
trend of historical changes. The daily rate of change in cases will continue to rise.

1.4 Conclusion
According to the different interpretation of the H value obtained by the R / S analysis method,
hierarchical isolation measures are adopted accordingly. When the H value is greater than 0.5, it
indicates that the development of the epidemic situation in the area has more long-term memory,
that is, when the number of confirmed cases in the past increases rapidly, the probability of the time
series of confirmed cases in the future will continue the historical trend. Therefore, it is necessary
to formulate strict anti-epidemic measures in accordance with the actual conditions of various
countries, to detect, isolate, and treat early to reduce the base of infectious agents.

2 Introduction
At the beginning of the outbreak of the new coronavirus infection, some cases were related to
the South China Seafood Market in Wuhan City, Hubei Province. At first, it was diagnosed as
"unknown cause of pneumonia", but it quickly spread to all parts of the country and parts of
Southeast Asia, North America, Europe and other countries and regions. It is a virus that can
develop into severe respiratory diseases. On February 11, 2020, the International Virus
Classification Commission officially named the virus "Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Virus
2", referred to as "SARS-CoV-2". At the same time, the World Health Organization named the
virus-infected pneumonia " Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) "and escalated the epidemic into an
international public health emergency of concern. As of March 11, 2020, a total of 118,020
COVID-19 diagnoses have been confirmed worldwide. A total of 37,064 cases have been

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

confirmed abroad, of which 7,755 cases have been confirmed in South Korea and 10,149 cases
have been confirmed in Italy. A total of 80,956 cases have been confirmed in China, of which
67,73 cases have been diagnosed in Hubei Province. The origin of the new coronavirus has not yet
been determined, and various evidences suggest that its source of infection comes from wild
animals. The medical field mainly focuses on three aspects: etiological characteristics, clinical
diagnosis, and epidemiology, Several studies have shown that SARS-CoV-2 is most similar to bat
SARS-like coronaviruses (SARS-like CoVs) and is more infectious than SARS viruses during the
incubation period.[1]
Since the outbreak of the new crown virus infection in Wuhan in 2019, many scholars have
performed simulation analysis on the spread and prevention of the epidemic, and reached different
conclusions. Ziff (2020) believes that using the basic infection number R0 to measure the
possibility of large-scale transmission of the virus without prevention and control is not realistic.[2]
The main drawback is that it is necessary to assume that the virus's propagation path is
exponential, and it can be corrected using the SEIR logarithmic model.[3] Li et al. (2020) used
Log-normal, Weibull, and Gamma distributions to estimate the basic regeneration number R0 as
2.2 (95% CI, 1.4 to 3.9) and the latency period to be 5.2 days (95% CI, 4.1-7). The number of
confirmed cases doubles every 7.4 days, and the interval from onset to inpatient treatment and cure
was 9.1 days (95% CI, 8.6-9.7). [4] Wu et al. (2020) analyzed and predicted by SEIR model and
estimated the basic regeneration number R0 to be 2.6 (95% CI, 2.47-2.86), the estimated
cumulative total confirmed cases was 75,815 (95% CI, 37304 to 130330) and the number of
confirmed casesDoubled at 6.4 days (95% CI, 5.8-7.1). [5] The calculation shows that the
transmission path of New Coronavirus has certain fractal process characteristics. By comparing
the difference between the actual confirmed case and the theoretical value, you can determine
which period the epidemic is in:rising or falling. Vazquez (2006) uses the branching process of
fractal theory to describe the spread of variables, to establish mathematical models for different
situations such as population or virus transmission in reality, to determine the corresponding
power index and to calculate the potential development path of historical data.[6] Throughout the
severe situation of the global economy, the spread of the new crown virus infection epidemic has
led to a sudden drop in demand and production, which has affected the global supply chain
economy. In the external environment of economic downturn, how to maintain macroeconomic
stability and find opportunities among risks has become the focus of attention. [7]

3 Rescaled Range (R / S) Analysis

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3.1 Overview of R/S and H value theory
The R/S analysis method was discovered by the British hydrologist H.E.Hurst in 1951 when
he examined the Nile discharge variation. [8] It is a widely used robust non-parametric statistical m
ethod. The biggest advantage is that the measured time series does not need to assume its specific
distrib-ution characteristics whether the sequence is smooth. The robustness of the R/S analysis res
-ults is not affected by the distribution characteristics.[9]
H value is also called Hurst index. Hurst believes that the following relationship exists betwe
en R / S and H: (R / S) t = (t / 2) H, which can be obtained by log (R / S) and log (n) regression fitt
ing for judgment Trend and randomness of time series Whether the time series is a fractal B-rowni
an motion is determined according to whether the H value is equal to 0.5. The H index has a wide r
ange of applications. Cajueiro (2004) believes that the H index can be used to determine the effecti
veness of the securities market. This method can be extended to other fields that study the d-ynami
c characteristics of time series. [10] When predicting a set of memorable data, it can refer to its histo
rical development path. Improper selection of the length of the time series will affect the bias of th
e estimation of the H index and reduce the accuracy of the prediction. To correct this error, Baruni
k (2010) uses a rolling time window to deter-mine the form of the H index over time, and uses the
AR (1) -GARCH (1,1) process to filter the s-equence. Multifractal detrending analysis (MF-DFA)
uses different polynomials to fit different ord-er moments of variables. It is a generalization of the
DFA method and can improve the accuracy o-f processing thick-tailed data.[11]

3.2 Model building
In this paper, the rescaling range method is used for modeling. It is assumed that the
transmission process of the New Coronavirus conforms to the expansion path of fractal theory. At
the same time, Italy uses the newly diagnosed change rate. The R/S value is linearly regressed on
the time series span to obtain the H index of different regions, determine the fractal dimension of
the model, and analyze the possible change direction of historical data over time.
Hypothetical time series {x i } , i = 1,2,3 , n the span is the time series length n.Segment this
time series to construct n-t+1 subsequences. Let the divided subsequence be {Y j } ,

j = 1,2,3 , n − t + 1 ,Where t is the length of the initial segmentation subsequence, and the last
subsequence is the time series itself. The relevant information of each subsequence is shown in
Table 1.
Table1 Subsequence for time series segmentation

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The data contained in the

Subsequence number

Subsequence length

1

t

x1,x2,...,xt

2

t+1

x1，x2...,xt, xt+1

......

......

......

n-t+1

n

x1，x2...,xn

subsequence

Define the mean of the time series as:
_

xn =

1 n
 xi
n i =1

(1)

Cumulative dispersion as:
t

_

X (t , n) =  ( xi − x n ),1  t  n

(2)

R( j ) = max X (t , n) − min X (t , n)

(3)

i =1

The range as:
1t  n

1t  n

The mean square error of the time series as:

S ( j) =

_
1 t + j −1
(
x
−
Y
 i j ) 2 ，j = 1,2,3, n − t + 1
t + j − 1 i =1

(4)

Among them
—

Yj =

t + j −1
1
 xi，j = 1,2,3, , n − t + 1
t + j − 1 i =1

(5)

Rescaled R / S as:

(R S ) j =

R( j )
，j = 1,2,3, , n − t + 1
S ( j)

(6)

With respect to each subsequence of length, n-t+1 range and mean square errors can be obtained.
The Hurst exponent can be approximated by plotting the image with log(R/S)j and log(t) .where the
base of the logarithm is 10, and the approximate value of Hurst is the slope of the linear regression
model fitting curve.
log( R S ) j = log(c) + H log(t )

(7)

Where c is a constant. The Hurst index of the time series can describe the trend characteristics
of the self-similarity of the time series. When 0 <H <0.5, the time series has anti-persistence, that is,
the future change increment of the time series is opposite to the change increment of the historical
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

period; when H = 0.5, the standard Brownian motion, the time series is random walk; when H> 0.5,
the future data growth trend of the time series is similar to a certain historical trend, with positive
persistence, long-term memory and fractal characteristics.[12]

4

Predictability analysis of new coronavirus infections

4.1 The data description
This article analyzes the epidemic situation in China in two stages: the first stage is from Janu
-ary 23 to February 11; the second stage is from February 13 to March 3. The subjects selected are
also divided into two: one is the newly confirmed daily cases in Hubei Province; the other is the to
tal daily newly confirmed cases in all provinces except Hubei Province. The newly confirmed case
in Italy are highly similar to those in Hubei Province in the early stage, so the main body selected
for the analysis of the foreign epidemic was Italy's newly confirmed cases from February 22 to Ma
-rch 7. The data comes from China's National Health Committee and the International Health Orga
-nization.

4.2 Predictability analysis
This article assumes that the length of the initial subsequence of the time series formed by Hu
bei Province and other provinces except Hubei Province is t=5, and the initial subsequence of the t
-ime series formed by the daily rate of newly added diagnostic changes in Italy is t=4. The model a
-nalysis is mainly divided into three parts: R/S analysis and calculation of Hurst value for daily new cases in Italy, Hubei Province and other provinces in China. Quantitative methods such as traditi
-onal dynamics models, Logistic functions, and Log-normal distributions, due to the different logic
of the estimated parameters, result in predictions that differ greatly from actual data. The R/S anal
-ysis method does not need to assume the distribution characteristics of the series, and makes a the
oretical basis for the future trend change of the time series by estimating the H value.
4.2.1 Analysis of epidemic situation abroad
Because the daily number of newly diagnosed patients in Italy varies greatly, in order to
reduce the volatility of the time series, the daily rate of new cases is selected as the time series.
Analyze and fit according to the data published daily by the World Health Organization and the
China Health Committee, as shown in Figures 1 to 3:
1. Cumulative dispersion
The cumulative dispersion reflects the change of the time series data of confirmed cases relati
-ve to the time series mean. Observing the cumulative dispersion curve (Figure 2) and the daily inc
-rease rate curve (Figure 1), it can be known that when the cumulative dispersion curve is tilted up

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ward, the data at the corresponding position in the time series is greater than the average value of t
-he time series; When tilting down, the data at the corresponding position in the time series should
be less than the average of the time series. In the cumulative dispersion curve (Figure 2), the cumu
-lative dispersion curve formed by the 1-2th data point slopes upward, indicating that the 1-2th dat
-a value in the time series (Figure 1) is greater than the average; from Figure 1 and Figure It can be
seen that the 3rd to 13th data values are smaller than the average value of the time series.
2. Fractal Hurst Index
Using Matlab to linearly fit log(R/S) and log(n), the regression equation log (R/S)=1.853log
(n)-1.388 is obtained. The regression equation shows that the H value is 1.853, which indicates tha
-t the time series of the daily rate of newly diagnosed changes in Italy is not a standard Brownian
motion and is completely predictive, indicating that the daily rate of newly diagnosed changes in It
aly in the short term is similar to the historical trend. The rate of new diagnoses will continue to ris
-e.

Figure 1 Time series of newly added diagnosed changes in Italy

Figure 3 Log(R/S) and log(n) regression fitting (Italy)

4.2.2 Analysis of domestic epidemic situation
4.2.2-1 Analysis of epidemic situation in Hubei Province

7

Figure 2 Cumulative deviation (Italy)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The first case of new coronary pneumonia occurred in Wuhan City, Hubei Province.
Analyzing the newly diagnosed patients in Hubei Province and calculating the H value is of
reference and predictive significance to countries and regions that are in the outbreak period. This
article counts the daily number of newly diagnosed new types of coronary pneumonia in Wuhan
from January 20th to March 3rd. Among them, Hubei Provincial Health and Construction
Commission changed the authentication method of confirmed cases, which resulted in the sudden
increase of new coronary pneumonia to 14840 on February 12th. Data for that day. By observing
the characteristics of the time series, the sequence was divided into two sections with February 12
as the dividing point, January 20-February 11 as the epidemic rise phase, and February 13-March
3 as the epidemic decline phase. Figures 4-9 can be obtained by data analysis and fitting. Analysis
shows:
1. Time series characteristics
It can be seen from Figure 4 that the number of newly diagnosed patients on February 4
reached the peak of the first stage, and it seems to have shown a downward trend since then.
However, in combination with the number of confirmed patients at the early stage of the second
stage of Figure 7 and the data of February 12 that have been removed, we can see that The
downward trend in the number of people is an illusion due to imperfect judgment standards. In the
second stage (Figure 7), the number of newly diagnosed patients decreased greatly from February
13 to 19, and the number of newly diagnosed patients fluctuated around the value of 400 for more
than ten days. Epilogue stage.
2. Cumulative dispersion
The time series curve and cumulative dispersion curve of newly diagnosed patients have asso
-ciated characteristics. Comparing Figure 4 and Figure 5, it can be seen that in the first stage, the
number of newly confirmed patients before January 31 is less than the serial average, and the num
ber of newly confirmed patients from January 31 to February 11 is larger than the serial average. C
-omparing Figures 7 and 8, it can be seen that in the second stage, the number of newly confirmed
diagnoses before February 18 is above the serial mean, and the number of newly confirmed diagno
-ses from February 19 is below the serial mean.
3. Fractal Hurst Index
Using Matlab to linearly fit log(R/S) and log(n), we can get the first-stage regression equation
of Hubei Province log(R/S)=0.574log(n)+0.152. The fitted curve is shown in Figure 6; The second-stage regression equation of Hubei Province is log (R/S)=1.368log(n)-0.814. The fitted curve is
shown in Figure 9. It can be found that the H value of both stages is not equal to 0.5, indicating tha
-t the newly confirmed number of newly diagnosed coronaviruses in Hubei Province is not random
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ly walked, which also reflects that a series of tracking and isolation measures adopted by Hubei Pr
-ovince have played a certain role.
The H value in the first stage is 0.574> 0.5, indicating that the sequences are generally long-te
-rm memory and are positively correlated, that is, if the number of newly confirmed cases during
the previous analysis increases (sequence upwards), then the newly confirmed cases during the nex
-t analysis The probability of increase is high. Therefore, it can be predicted from the H value that
the number of newly confirmed cases in the short term is still rising. However, from the data point
of view, after the number reached 14840 cases on the 12th, the number dropped sharply to 4,823
on the 13th, and the confirmed cases began to show a downward trend. This is due to an inflection
point in the trend brought about by changes in diagnostic criteria.
The H value in the second stage is 1.368> 1, which indicates that the sequence is fully predict
-able. This explains to some extent that under the current environment of national control and conc
-erted national efforts, the epidemic of new crown pneumonia is preventable and controllable.

Figure 4 Time series of newly diagnosed patients
in Hubei Province (first stage)

Figure 5 Cumulative dispersion (first stage in Hubei Province)

Figure 6 Log(R/S) and log(n) regression fitting
(the first stage of Hubei Province)

Figure 7 Time Series of Daily New Population
in Hubei Province (Second Stage)

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 8 Cumulative dispersion (second stage in Hubei Province)

Figure 9 Log(R/S) and log(n) regression fitting
(second stage in Hubei Province)

4.2.2-2 Analysis of Epidemic Situation in Other Provinces
Hubei Province, as an area where the early COVID-19 infections outbroke, has concentrated
on studying the transmission mechanism and the trends of confirmed cases to tell the similarities
and differences with other provinces in China, and it is of significance to take different protective
measures for different provinces. In this article, the reasons for the selection and stage division of
the number of newly confirmed cases in other provinces in China except Hubei are the same as
above. The daily number of newly confirmed cases from January 23 to February 11 is used as the
first stage data. We take the period between February 13 to March 3 as the second stage. Figures
10-15 can be obtained through Matlab data analysis. The results are as follows:
2.1 Time series characteristics
From the change in the number of the newly confirmed cases in the first stage over time, the
curve generally showed a trend of rising before decreasing. Before t = 10, the diagnosis and
treatment of COVID-19 infection cases are still in the initial stage. Patients and medical
personnel’s understanding of the disease has not reached the level of infectious diseases. The
general public has not paid enough attention to it and has not adopted protective measures widely.
With the outbreak of the incubation virus, the number of newly diagnosed cases continues to rise,
reaching a small peak around February 10. Since February, the number of new cases has increased
sharply again, probably because the virus carriers in the population flowing out of Hubei Province
from mid-January to January have passed the incubation period and their symptoms have begun to
appear. A first-level response to major public health emergencies was initiated. Medical staff and
administrative staff efficiently screened out latent and close contacts, and actively adopted
preventive and control measures such as isolation, disinfection, and hospitalization. Increasing the
efficiency of disease management mechanisms has indirectly led to rise in newly diagnosed cases.
Beginning around February 12, local medical systems have basically established a coping

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

mechanism for new crown virus infection. From quarantining patients and tracking close contacts
to detection and treatment of patients, methodical prevention and control measures have had a
positive effect, and new confirmed cases have been added. The number started to fall.
The time series data of confirmed cases in the second stage fluctuated more obviously than in
the previous stage. As shown in Figure 13, the peak occurred on February 13, probably because
the national standard for diagnosis has changed from nucleic acid testing to clinical diagnosis from
February 11. Many previously undiagnosed patients were included in new cases. This growth peak
lasted 2-3 days, and returned to its previous path after February 15. Except for the peak point, the
daily confirmed new cases in the second stage showed a downward trend, and it can be seen that
the early anti-epidemic effect has gradually emerged. After February 25, the number of newly
confirmed cases per day remained basically in the single digits.
2.2 Cumulative Deviation
It can be seen from Figure 11 that the cumulative deviation curve of the first stage in other
provinces across the country slopes to the upper right, and the slope increases first and then
decreases, indicating that the daily new confirmed cases in this stage are generally larger than the
serial mean. During the period from January 23 to February 11, although the epidemic prevention
and control has achieved initial results, its development still shows an expanding trend and has not
yet entered a period of decline. It can be seen from FIG. 14 that the cumulative deviation curve in
the second stage shows an upward trend and then a downward trend, and reaches a peak around
February 21. The daily new cases before the peak point are generally larger than the overall mean
value, and then start to be below the mean value point, reflecting that the newly confirmed cases
have been initially contained.
3. 2.3 Fractal Hurst Index
We obtained the regression equation log (R / S) = 0.2246log (n) +0.571 using Matlab to fit
the first stage data . It can be seen that H = 0.2246, and the fitting curve is shown in Figure 12,
which shows that the scattered points follow the fractal Brownian motion process. Generally, the
random walk sequence spreads more slowly, and the sequence points tend to return to historical
points in the future. The fitting regression equation in the second stage is log (R / S) = 0.3872log
(n) -0.504, H = 0.3872. The fitting curve is plotted in Figure 15, which presents that the daily new
cases in this stage show a downward trend. We do not fully understand the mechanism of virus
development and mutation, yet we cannot relax our vigilance. With the development of foreign
epidemics, new imported cases may appear in China, bringing new growth peaks. Strict prevention
and screening measures are needed for this.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure10 Daily diagnosis in other provinces(first stage)

Figure11 Cumulative deviation in other provinces(first stage)

Figure12 Regression of Log(R/S) to log(n) (first stage)

Figure13 Daily diagnosis in other provinces(second stage)

Figure 14 Daily diagnosis in other provinces(second stage)

Figure15 Regression of Log(R/S) to log(n) (second stage)

In general, the H values of the two stages in other provinces are less than 0.5, and the timeseries data of newly confirmed diagnosis nationwide may return to historical points in the future.
The number of newly added people in the first stage has a peak on the 9th and 12th days,
respectively. The growth rate of newly diagnosed patients has slowed in the last five days.
According to the prediction of the H index, the number of new people will pick up in a period of
time after the first stage. It then gradually declined and the number of new diagnoses will
gradually decrease after the second stage. The data shows that 377 people were newly diagnosed
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

on February 11, and the number of people increased sharply on February 12 due to changes in
clinical diagnostic standards, while 267 people were added on February 13, and the overall decline
was subsequently shown. This fits the second stage H index.The time series data showed a high
peak on February 20, which may be related to the occurrence of clustered morbidity events in
some areas, such as the confirmed diagnosis of prison groups.

5 Conclusion
This paper establishes a rescaled range analysis model to analyze and predict the epidemic
situation in three different areas. The obtained H index is located in different intervals. Using this
result we can see that there are also differences in the development paths among regions with
different outbreak times both at home and abroad. By analyzing historical data, we can make a
trend prediction of the future situation of virus transmission.
The results of the model analysis show that the Hurst value of the new change rate in Italy is
greater than 1, and the time series follow a fractal Brownian motion, indicating that the future
trend is similar to the past with a high probability. Therefore, the Italian government should focus
on controlling the infection in terms of source, cutting off the transmission route, following the
principle of early detection, early isolation, and early treatment to reduce the gathering of large
people, in the meantime regularly cleaning of public spaces is necessary. The number of newly
diagnosed patients in Italy is highly similar to that in Hubei. It can learned from the strict measures
adopted by Hubei in isolation and treatment, community prevention and other measures. Also,
they can adopt effective protection measures based on the actual situation of the epidemic in the
country to significantly reduce the population contact rate. Blocking the route of transmission, and
thoroughly controlling the spread of the epidemic can also help. The H indexes of all provinces in
China except Hubei are in the range of (0,0.5), indicating that the virus transmission has fractal
Brownian motion characteristics. There may be a correlation between the future path and historical
data, and the number of newly diagnosed patients will be increased in the short term. We can see
the risk of returning to the historical path. Therefore, the masses and medical staff need to take
corresponding preventive and controlling measures. Yet it is not time to relax our vigilance, we
should continue to strengthen our protection and observe the changes in data, as well as pay
particular attention to the cyclical fluctuations that rise after the number of confirmed diagnoses
declines.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.15.20036756; this version posted March 20, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Reference
[1]Qiang Li, Wei Feng, Ying-Hui Quan. Trend and forecasting of the COVID-19 outbreak in China.
Journal of Infection,2020.
[2] Anna L. Ziff, Robert M. Ziff.Fractal kinetics of Covid-19 pandemics (with update 3/1/20). MedRxiv
preprint,2020.
[3]Kamalich Muniz-Rodriguez, Gerardo Chowell. Epidemic doubling time of the COVID-19 epidemic by
Chinese province.MedRxiv,2020.
[4] Qun Li, M.Med.etl, Early Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus–Infected
Pneumonia, The new england journal of medicine,2020.1.29.
[5] Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, Gabriel M Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and
international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet.
Published online January 31,2020.

[6] Alexei Vazquez. Polynomial Growth in Branching Processes with Diverging Reproductive
Number.Physical Review Letters,2006.
[7]Szu-chieh Chen, Chung-Min Liao. Predictive models of control strategies involved in containing indoor
airborne infections. Indoor Air,2007,16(6):469-81.
[8] Hurst H E.The long-term storage capacity of reservoirs[J].Transactions of the American Society of Civil
Engineer,1951,116:770-808.

[9]Javier Gamero, Juan A. Tamayo, Juan A. Martínez-Román. Forecast of the evolution of the contagious
disease caused by novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China. arXiv:2002.04739 [q-bio.PE].
[10] Daniel O. Cajueiro, Benjamin M. Tabak. The Hurst exponent over time: Testing the assertion that
emerging markets are becoming more efficient. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications
336(3-4):521-537.
[11] Jozef Barunik, Ladislav Kristoufek. On Hurst exponent estimation under heavy-tailed distributions.
Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications (2010), 389 (18), pp. 3844-3855.
[12] Wang Yue, Gao Xue-dong.Segmentation for time series data based on R/S analysis.Computer
Engineering and Application,2008,44(29);223-223.

14

