medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Natural history, trajectory, and management of mechanically ventilated COVID-19 patients in the
United Kingdom
Brijesh V Patel1 # *, Shlomi Haar2 #, Rhodri Handslip1 #, Teresa Mei-Ling Lee1, Sunil Patel1, J. Alex
Harston2, Feargus Hosking-Jervis3, Donna Kelly4, Barnaby Sanderson5, Barbara Bogatta6, Kate
Tatham7, Ingeborg Welters8, Luigi Camporota5, Anthony C Gordon9, Matthieu Komorowski9, David
Antcliffe9, and John R Prowle10 $, Zudin Puthucheary10 $, A. Aldo Faisal11 $ *; on behalf of the United
Kingdom COVID-ICU National Service Evaluation‡.
#

Joint first authors; $ Joint senior authors

‡

Collaborators are listed in the supplementary appendix pp 3

*Corresponding Authors

Affiliations
1

Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine & Intensive Care, Department of Surgery & Cancer, Faculty
of Medicine, Imperial College London; Department of Adult Intensive Care, The Royal Brompton and
Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Sydney Street, London, United Kingdom.

2

Brain and Behaviour Lab, Dept. of Bioengineering and Behaviour Analytics Lab, Data Science
Institute, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom
3

Department of Surgery & Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, United Kingdom

4

Department of Critical Care, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon
Tyne, United Kingdom
5

Department of Critical Care, Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, St Thomas' Hospital,
London, United Kingdom
6

Department of Critical Care, Aintree University Hospital Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United
Kingdom.

7

Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine & Intensive Care, Department of Surgery & Cancer, Faculty
of Medicine, Imperial College London; Department of Anaesthetics and Critical Care, The Royal
Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom.
8

Department of Critical Care, Liverpool University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and University of
Liverpool, United Kingdom
9

Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine & Intensive Care, Department of Surgery & Cancer, Faculty
of Medicine, Imperial College London; Department of Critical Care, Imperial College Healthcare NHS
Trust, London, United Kingdom.
10

Critical Care and Peri-operative Medicine Research Group, William Harvey Research Institute,
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London,
UK

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11

Dept. Of Computing & Dept. Of Bioengineering and Behaviour Analytics Lab, Data Science Institute
and UKRI Centre for Doctoral Training in AI for Healthcare, Imperial College London, UK, and MRC
London Institute for Medical Sciences, London, United Kingdom.

*Clinical Science contact –

Dr Brijesh V Patel MD PhD. Clinical Senior Lecturer & Consultant in

Intensive Care Medicine. Division of Anaesthetics, Pain Medicine & Intensive Care, Department of
Surgery & Cancer, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London; Department of Adult Intensive
Care, The Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, Sydney Street, London SW3 6NP
email: brijesh.patel@imperial.ac.uk

*Data Science contact –

Professor A. Aldo Faisal PhD. Professor of AI & Neuroscience. Dept. Of

Computing & Dept. Of Bioengineering and Behaviour Analytics Lab, Data Science Institute and UKRI
Centre for Doctoral Training in AI for Healthcare, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, UK, and
MRC London Institute for Medical Sciences, London W12 0NN UK
email: aldo.faisal@imperial.ac.uk

Contributions:
Study concepts & design: BVP, SH, DA, JP, ZP, AAF
Literature search: BVP, SH, AAF
Database development: BVP, FHJ, RH, SH, TL
Data collection: All authors
Data science: BVP, SH, RH, TL, KT, DA, MK, LC, JP, ZP, AAF
Statistical analysis: SH, BVP, JP, ZP, AAF
Manuscript preparation: BVP, SH, RH, TL, KT, DA, MK, LC, JP, ZP, AAF
Figures: SH, BVP, AAF
Online tool: JAH, AAF
Final manuscript review: All authors

Acknowledgements.

The authors are grateful to the patients, families and NHS staff of those

affected by COVID-19 for whom the NHS had the privilege of delivering care during the pandemic.
The data extracted for this evaluation would not have been possible without the expertise and
goodwill of multiple doctors, nurses, other allied health professionals, and data coordinators across
the NHS hospital organizations that contributed. We also thank the Intensive Care Society for
endorsing this national service evaluation. Collaborators are listed in the supplementary appendix
page 3.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Funding. This study was supported through an internal research grant from the Imperial

College

London COVID-19 Research Fund to AAF and BVP; and an award from the Royal Brompton &
Harefield Hospitals charity to BVP and general support from the NIHR Imperial Biomedical Research
Centre. ACG is funded by an NIHR Research Professorship (2015-06-019). The funders had no role in
the study design or writing. All authors had full access to all the data in the study. The writing
committee had the sole responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Background. To date the description of mechanically ventilated patients with Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19) has focussed on admission characteristics with no consideration of the dynamic
course of the disease. Here, we present a data-driven analysis of granular, daily data from a
representative proportion of patients undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) within the
United Kingdom (UK) to evaluate the complete natural history of COVID-19.

Methods.

We included adult patients undergoing IMV within 48 hours of ICU admission with

complete clinical data until intensive care unit (ICU) death or discharge. We examined factors and
trajectories that determined disease progression and responsiveness to interventions used in acute
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Our data visualisation tool is available as a web-based widget
(https://www.CovidUK.ICU).

Findings. Data for 633 adults with COVID-19 who were mechanically ventilated between 01 March
2020 and 31 August 2020 were analysed. Mortality, intensity of mechanical ventilation and severity
of organ injury increased with severity of hypoxaemia. Median PaO2/FiO2 in non-survivors on the day
of death was 12.3(8.9-18.4) kPa suggesting severe refractory hypoxaemia as a major contributor to
mortality. Non-resolution of hypoxaemia over the first week of IMV was associated with higher ICU
mortality (60.4% versus 17.6%; P<0.001). The reported ideal body weight overestimated our
calculated ideal body weight derived from reported height, with three-quarters of all reported tidal
volume values were above 6mL/kg of ideal body weight. Overall, 76% of patients with moderate
hypoxaemia and 46% with severe did not undergo prone position at any stage of admission.
Furthermore, only 45% showed a persistent oxygenation response on prone position. Nonresponders to prone position show higher lactate, D-Dimers, troponin, cardiovascular component of
the sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score, and higher ICU mortality (69.5% versus 31.1%;
P<0.001). There was no difference in number of prone sessions between survivors and nonsurvivors, however, patients who died without receiving prone position had a greater number of
missed opportunities for prone intervention (7(3-15.5) versus 2(0-6); P<0.001).

Interpretation. A sizeable proportion of patients with progressive worsening of hypoxaemia had no
application of and were refractory to evidence based ARDS strategies and showed a higher
mortality. Strategies for early recognition and management of COVID-19 patients refractory to
conventional

management

strategies

will

be

critical

to

improving

future

outcomes.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Research in context
Evidence before this study

Beyond the regular literature expertise of our consortium, we enhanced our literature review - due
to the fast-evolving Covid-19 publication situation- by searching PubMed for articles published in
English or with English language abstracts on October 26, 2020 (and before), with the terms
“mechanical ventilation”, “prone position”, “AND (”coronavirus” OR ”COVID-19”). Studies including
patients not receiving ventilation were excluded, as were those reporting on paediatric and singlecentre populations. Note, that neither of those studies analysed the data with respect to the
temporal evolution of patients and at our level of granularity. Only four multicentre studies reported
detailed ventilator settings and outcomes in ventilated patients with COVID-19. All studies showed
only ventilator settings with restricted time points either on admission or the first 4 days of
admission. None enabled granular visualisation and analysis of longitudinal ICU trajectory and
management.
Added value of this study

This study provides a comprehensive analysis and visualisation of routine clinical measurements
tracking the whole ICU time course of patients undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation for
COVID-19. Mechanically ventilated patients with COVID-19 have a different natural history and
trajectory from descriptions of non-COVID ARDS patients, not predictable from admission
physiology. Refractory hypoxaemia is an attributable factor associated with poor outcomes in Covid19 and hence, understanding of use and utility of evidence-based ARDS interventions is clinically
crucial. Opportunities to apply prone positioning appropriately are frequently missed, application of
high levels of PEEP, and higher tidal volume delivery than planned is common. Lack of
responsiveness to advanced ARDS management is associated with hypercoagulation and
cardiovascular instability. These data may help homogenise future clinical management protocols
and suggest change-of-practice trials.
Implications of all the available evidence

This study shows that disease progression in Covid-19 during the first surge occurred more
frequently and for longer than other forms of respiratory failure from pre-Covid19 studies.
Furthermore, variations in clinical practise occur across sites which may benefit from standardisation
of evidence-based practise. Patients that do not resolve hypoxaemia over the first week have a
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

significantly higher mortality, and, crucially, that a significant proportion are refractory to prone
interventions and show variability in responses to PEEP changes. Opportunities to implement prone
position were missed in many patients and this was compounded with its reduced effect on
oxygenation with delayed application. This lack of responsiveness is related to indices of
inflammation, thrombosis, and cardiac dysfunction suggesting that pulmonary thrombosis could
influence prone responsiveness and should be pro-actively investigated in the setting of refractory
Covid-19 ARDS. Prediction of failure to resolve or respond to ARDS interventions could further focus
research

on

this

group

with

worse

outcome.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) was declared a global pandemic on March 11, 2020 by the World Health
Organisation. COVID-19 related severe acute hypoxemic respiratory failure invariably leads to
intensive care unit (ICU) admission. These patients fulfil Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (ARDS)
criteria

1–4

. However, there remain major uncertainties around the extent of pathological and

physiological differences between COVID-19 related ARDS and other causes of ARDS. This ambiguity
leads to an ongoing debate on the application of existing evidence-based ARDS management to
COVID-19 patients 5. Reports based on compliance-based phenotypes and pulmonary angiopathy
management in COVID-19 further fuel the uncertainties regarding the clinical management of these
acutely unwell patients with a high mortality rate

6–8

, which we aim to clarify with this data-driven

service evaluation.
Pre-COVID evidence-based guidelines for ARDS management include lung-protective ventilation,
prone positioning, a conservative fluid strategy, with the option of open lung strategy and
neuromuscular blockade (NMBA) 9. Patients with refractory respiratory failure should be considered
for timely escalation to extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) support

10,11

. Moreover,

reports suggest that real-world compliance with evidence based ARDS management strategies is
difficult at a system level 12, particularly during times of workforce stress, such as during the first
wave of the pandemic. Furthermore, these interventions are implemented at various stages of ARDS
progression and are time-sensitive over the natural history of illness

13,14

. Monitoring of dynamic

responsiveness to interventions is fundamental to clinical practise in critical care and is increasingly
facilitated by advanced analytics

15

. Whilst there have been reports of the epidemiological

characteristics of hospitalised patients with COVID-19 admitted to intensive care in the UK

16,17

,

there has been limited analysis of temporal clinical data combining use of and response to ARDS
management strategies.
Accordingly, we undertook a cohort study across a representative set of intensive care units in the
United Kingdom, to report the natural history of mechanically ventilated COVID-19 patients. Our
specific aims were to ascertain use, compliance, duration and effect of established ARDS
management strategies and, to define, from routine clinical measurements, factors associated with
disease progression, responsiveness to prone positioning, and mortality.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Study design: We performed a multicentre, observational cohort study in patients with SARS-CoV-2
infection who required mechanical ventilation for severe COVID-19 infection in the United Kingdom.

Exposure:

Adult patients (aged ≥18 years) with laboratory confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection who

required invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) in the United Kingdom between March 1st and August
31st, 2020. Only patients transferred to the study sites within 48 hours of intubation were included,
and patients progressing to ECMO were excluded due to the nature of ECMO provision in the UK.

Ethical approval:

The United Kingdom Health Research Authority determined that the study be

exempt from review by an NHS Research Ethics Committee. Each site registered the study protocol
as a service evaluation. The “Strengthening The Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology”
statement guidelines were applied (see supplementary appendix pages 4-5) 18.

Data collection and procedures:

To manage the considerable daily data flow we set up a

standardised data processing pipeline where only routine, pseudonymised data were collected with
no change to clinical care. In brief, the case report form captured admission demographics, twice
daily (8am and 8pm) respiratory physiology and blood gas results, daily ARDS interventions, daily
COVID-19 interventions, daily blood results and outcome status. Table S1 lists the participating sites.
Patients were identified through daily review of paper or electronic medical records using a
standardised case record form (CRF), with retrospective and prospective data collection permitted.
Data were extracted from either electronic healthcare records (EHRs) or paper-based records into
the COVID-ICU secure REDCap database (REDCap v10.0.10; Vanderbilt University, US).

Missing data and imputation:

We made the heuristic decision of setting the threshold of data

completeness (i.e. missingness) to balance of patients we could include against the number of
variables. We defined this by examination of the available variables in the first 48 hours of admission
or the last 36 hours before prone or the first 36 hours after prone. If in these 3/4 twelve-hour
measurement points, all were missing, then we counted this patient as ‘missing’ data. The
missingness is thus the percentage of patients where there is no measurement in this 36/48-hour
window for a modality. Percentage of missing data per modality are shown in Table S2, and details
of missing data are shown in Table S18. Data imputation was applied using k-nearest neighbours’
algorithm. We ran the imputation with a k of 3, 5, and 7 both on the continuous variable and on the
quartile categorization. The maximal odds ratio difference between the imputation approaches for
each variable was 0.04 (IQR 0.03-0.07) and had no effect on the significance. All reported results are
based on 5-nearest neighbours' imputation on the quartile categorization.
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statistical analysis. Descriptive variables are expressed as percentage, or median and interquartile
range (IQR), as appropriate. Continuous variables were analysed with Mann Whitney U or Kruskall
Wallis tests, as appropriate. Categorical variables were compared using Fisher's exact test or the Chisquare test for equal proportion, as appropriate. All statistical tests were 2-sided and p≤0.05 was
considered statistically significant. The incidence and duration of interventions as well as ventilation
settings were analysed and reported to current strategies e.g., low tidal volume ventilation and
ARDSNet Positive End Expiratory Pressure (PEEP) tables. The analysis for mortality across the surge
was assessed in quartiles of patients admitted with the median as the peak of the surge (peak: 31st
March; median: 1st April 2020). We defined an intervention period as a daily application of the
intervention with a day of no intervention defining the end of the current period. For group-wise
analysis, the outcome of the therapies was measured as categorical variables of “Mild, Moderate, or
Severe”, “Survival or Death”, “resolver or non-resolver”, and “prone responder or non-responder”.
The severity of hypoxaemia was categorised as per Berlin Definition criteria

19

: mild hypoxaemia

(PaO2/FiO2>26 kPa); moderate hypoxaemia (PaO2/FiO2: 26.7-13.3 kPa); and severe hypoxaemia
(PaO2/FiO2<13.3 kPa). To evaluate features associated with progression of hypoxaemia, we analysed
evolution of hypoxaemia over the first 7 days of invasive mechanical ventilation and categorised
them into two groups, “resolvers” and “non-resolvers”. Patients who changed from severe to
moderate; severe to mild; moderate to mild; remained mild or got discharged from ICU were
considered “resolvers” while those who changed from mild to moderate; mild to severe; moderate
to severe, remained moderate or severe, or died, were considered “non-resolvers”. We further
considered the longer-term effect on PaO2/FiO2 after prone positioning and defined prone
responsiveness as maintenance of a mean PaO2/FiO2 >20kPa over 7 days after the first prone
episode. Finally, we defined a prone window as a PaO2/FiO2<20kPa, with an FiO2≥0.6, a
PEEP≥5cmH2O

20

to assess opportunities to apply the intervention. Prone windows were measured

at 8am and 8pm with the ventilator and arterial blood gas evaluation.

Logistic regression models.

Multivariate logistic regression models were applied (with screening

univariate, p<0.1) to each outcome variable to test associations with independent variables. The full
list of variables tested for inclusion in these models is shown in Table S2, but only variables with less
than 40% missingness were included in each outcome model (missing value analysis in the relevant
time points is shown in Table S2). Variables that showed clinical overlap (e.g. SOFA renal and
creatinine) had one variable excluded. A data driven approach to collinearity was not taken as many
clinical variables associated with each other due to relationships with severity of illness. A full
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

correlation matrix can be found in the supplementary figures. For all outcomes, only patients with
more than 80% of the variables were included in the models. Accordingly, up to 20% of the data
were missing and thus were imputed. Data were assumed to be missing at random (MAR) owing to
the nature of different personnel at many different sites completing each data entry (the full missing
value analysis, by site and by day, is shown in Tables S17 and S18). To enable interpretable and
comparable odds ratios, all continuous variables were transformed to categorical by splitting them
into quartiles. Accordingly, the odds ratio is the risk increase per quartile increase in the
measurement. For age, the odds ratio is the risk increase per decade increase; for SOFA scores, the
odds ratio is the risk increase per unit increase in the SOFA score; and for binary variables (e.g.,
gender, comorbidities) the odds ratio is the risk increase of being positive (e.g. being male, having
comorbidity).

Statistical analysis of natural history and management. The association between the change over
time of each independent variable and the outcome measures was tested in repeated measures (rm)
ANOVA. For the survival and first week resolver outcome, rmANOVA was applied on the physiology
variables over the first week of mechanical ventilation, while for the prone responder outcome, it
was applied on the physiology variables over a week from the day before the first PP episode. The
rmANOVA was applied separately to each physiology variable, and for each variable, only patients
with more than 80% of the variable’s measurements over that week were included in the model.
Variables for which fewer than 30 patients had more than 80% of the measurements were not
analysed. To prevent the risk of too many false positive, we accounted for multiple comparisons in
the interaction statistic by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR).
Analyses were carried out using MATLAB (MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA). Detailed data science
methods are described in the supplementary appendix.

Role of the funding source. This study was supported through an internal research grant from the
Imperial College London COVID-19 Research Fund to AAF and BVP; and an award from the Royal
Brompton & Harefield Hospitals charity to BVP and general support from the NIHR Imperial
Biomedical Research Centre. The funders had no role in study design or writing. All authors had full
access to all the data in the study. The writing committee had sole responsibility for the decision to
submit for publication.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Clinical characteristics on ICU admission
A total of 633 mechanically ventilated patients admitted to 13 UK National Health Service (NHS)
Trusts with 18 ICU sites between 01 March 2020 and 31 August 2020 had complete daily data up to
ICU death or discharge (figure 1). The variation in admissions amongst ICUs is shown in
supplementary table S1. Baseline demographics were similar to the Intensive Care National Audit
and Research Centre cohort

23

with an ICU survival of 57.7% (figure 1, Tables S3, and S4). Median

duration of symptoms prior to ICU admission was 8 (6-12) days. In total, 25.1% of patients were
transferred within 48 hours of intubation from another ICU and were included in the analysis.
Transfers over 48 hours after intubation were excluded for the purposes of this analysis.
On initiation of mechanical ventilation, the severity of mild, moderate and severe hypoxaemia was
23.2%; 50.6%, and 26.2%, respectfully, with an expected mortality gradient (figure 1). Increased
severity was associated with increased intensity of mechanical ventilation, severity of organ failure
(including dynamic respiratory system compliance, oxygenation index, and ventilatory ratio), and
increased application of interventions (table 1). Time series analyses showed that admission severity
groups generally maintained the same severity over the first 7 days whereas all other parameters
were of no clinical or statistical relevance (figure S4).

Application of interventions
The application of ARDS interventions are sequential as part of routine management whereby lack of
response leads to further interventions. Our web-based tool enables interactive exploration and
visualisation of this sequence within the patient journey (https://www.coviduk.icu/). Application of
PEEP>10cmH2O (74%), continuous NMBA (70%), prone position (50%), inhaled nitric oxide (14%),
inhaled prostacyclin (11%), and antimicrobial usage (70%) increased with increasing admission
severity of ARDS (table 1). All reported percentages are out of the sub-group of patients for which
we have the full records for each intervention (table 1). Figure 2 shows the time of starting and
duration of daily recorded interventions. The application, median start date and duration of the first
episode of each intervention is shown in table S5. NMBA was commenced on admission (1[0-3] days)
and lasted 4(1-7) days. Prone position was applied on day 2(1-5) and lasted 2(1-4) days. Inhaled
nitric oxide and prostacyclin were commenced on day 6(3-9) and 7(3-15) and were continued for
4(2-7) days and 3(1-7) days, respectively. Tracheostomy was performed in 29% at a median 14(9-18)
days, predominantly in those patients likely to survive (40% versus 10.9%; P<0.001). Diuresis was
utilised in 74% and applied on day 1(1-3) and lasted 3(1-5) days. Renal replacement therapy was
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

utilised in 38% of patients with a median commencement on day 3(1-6) after IMV, and a median
duration of 5(3-11) days. Anti-microbial prescribing was common in 70% of patients and were
administer on or before day of admission, often lasting 6(4-9) days.
The reported ideal body weight overestimated our calculated ideal body weight derived from
reported height (http://ardsnet.org) in 92.6% of patients (Figure 3). Hence, median tidal volume per
kg on actual ideal body weight was 7.0 [IQR 6.0-8.4] mL/kg across all breaths and 5.6 [IQR 4.7-6.6]
mL/kg on reported ideal body weight. Three-quarters of all reported tidal volume values were above
6mL/kg of ideal body weight (figure 3). Survivors and non-survivors showed the same distribution of
tidal volume variation. Over 65% of reported PEEP values were set outside +/- 1cmH2O and 53% set
outside +/- 2cmH2O of the ARDSNet PEEP-FiO2 tables (figure 3). Patients with BMI<40 had a higher
set PEEP than recommended by the PEEP-FiO2 table. In contrast, patients with BMI>40 had a lower
set PEEP than recommended by the PEEP-FiO2 table. Changes in PEEP were widespread over the first
7 days of IMV with both increases and decreases leading to unpredictable changes in PaO2/FiO2
(Figure 3).

Progression of hypoxaemia in COVID-19-induced respiratory failure
To ensure comparability with pre-COVID ARDS studies we chose an analysis horizon spanning the
first 7 days. The movement of patients across severity groups (mild, moderate and severe
hypoxaemia) showed deterioration in 31.4% of cases, remained static in 45.1% and resolved in only
23.5% of patients over the first 7 days (Table 2; Figure 4). Overall, progression to a worse PaO2/FiO2
severity group occurred in twice the number of patients as compared to pre-COVID studies of ARDS
(Table 2). ICU mortality in hypoxaemia resolvers was significantly lower than non-resolvers (17.6%
versus 60.4%; P<0.001; Figure 4). Differences between resolvers and non-resolvers were apparent in
demographic, ventilatory, physiological, and laboratory parameters on admission as shown in Table
S6. Unsurprisingly, non-resolution was associated with increased application of interventions.
Resolvers were younger (57(47-64) vs 60(54-67) years; P<0.001) and showed a longer duration of
symptoms prior to ICU admission 9.0 (7-14) vs 7 (6-11) days (p=0.004). Non-resolvers had a longer
duration of IMV and ICU stay (Table S6). Resolvers had prone position applied significantly earlier
(2[1-5] vs 4[2-7] days; P=0.007). There were also clinically, and statistically higher admission counts
of blood lymphocytes in resolvers, whereas non-resolvers had higher ferritin and cardiovascular
SOFA score (Table S6). Time series analysis over the first 7 days showed important clinically
significant interactions between groups in indices of respiratory physiology, cumulative fluid
balance, acid-base status, renal function, CRP and SOFA score (Figure 4; Figure S2; and Table S7).

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Multivariate regression showed that increased age and increasing cardiovascular SOFA were
associated with worsening of hypoxaemia within the first week of IMV (Figure 4; table S8).

Responsiveness to prone positioning
In this first wave of the pandemic, prone position was used in 49.5% of patients. Of patients that
received of prone position, 63% were pronated once and 37% twice or more. Mortality was 52.7% and
28.4% in those patients who did and did not undergo prone positioning, respectively. Prone position
was applied earlier in patients with greater severity. While patients that did not undergo prone
position may overall have had milder disease, we found that 76% of these patients who had
moderate hypoxaemia and 46% who had severe, at any stage of admission, did not undergo prone
position at all. In patients who received no prone position, there was 1(IQR 0-2) prone windows per
patient ignored during the first 48 hours and 3(IQR 1-10) during the whole patient journey. In
patients who received prone interventions, there were on average 3(IQR 1-6) prone windows per
patient before prone initiation that were missed. There was no difference in number of prone
sessions between survivors and non-survivors, however, patients who died without receiving prone
position had a greater number of missed prone windows (7(3-15) versus 2(0-6); P<0.001; Table S13).
We analysed change in PaO2/FiO2 over 36 hours around the first prone intervention. The median
duration of first prone cycle was 2(1-4) days. Responsiveness to prone position was found to
decrease the later the prone episode was initiated after intubation (Figure 5; Spearman r=0.16,
P=0.012). We further considered the longer-term effect on PaO2/FiO2 after prone positioning. Only
44.4% of patients maintained a mean PaO2/FiO2 > 20kPa over 7 days after the initiation of prone
position. Mortality was significantly lower in prone responders than in non-responders (31.1%
versus 69.5%, p<0.001 as seen in Figure 5). Of note, 40% of patients that improved hypoxaemia
category (resolvers) did not respond to prone position and 36% of patients that worsened
hypoxaemia category (non-resolvers) showed an overall improved oxygenation response with prone
positioning. Furthermore, only 58% of non-resolvers received prone position and often later in their
course. Importantly, there were a higher number of missed opportunities to prone in non-resolvers
compared to resolvers (6 [3-13] versus 1 [0-4] windows per patient; P<0.0001; Table S6).
Non-responders to prone position tended to be older and showed worse respiratory mechanics,
higher lactate, higher cumulative fluid balance, higher troponin, higher D-dimer, and higher
Cardiovascular and Respiratory SOFA scores. A prone response was associated with an improved
oxygenation index (OI) over the first week of prone position (Figure 5A; Figure S3; Table S10). Whilst
there were no significant differences in the duration of IMV prior to the first prone period, the
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

duration of the first period, or the number of future prone periods between responders and nonresponders; non-responders had a higher number of missed prone windows than responders (3 [1-7]
versus 2 [1-5] windows per patient; P<0.05; Table S6). Moreover, multivariate logistic regression
analysis suggests that higher peri-proning lactate, cardiovascular SOFA and respiratory SOFA values
were associated with poor prone responsiveness (Figure 5; Table S11).

Determinants of mortality
Survival to ICU discharge was 57.7%, and admission characteristic differences between survivors and
non-survivors are shown in supplementary table S13. Statistically significant interactions were noted
in the group-wise ANOVA within several parameters (Figure S5; Table S13) between survivors and
non-survivors. With the median being the peak of the surge, the first quartile of patients admitted
during the surge had a death rate of 37.3%; the second quartile, 53%; the third quartile, 43.4%; and
the last quartile, 35.9%. The multivariate model showed clinical variables independently associated
with mortality were higher age (HR 1.95 per decade, 95% CI 1.58–2.4), male gender (HR 2.05, 95% CI
1.17–3.61), higher lactate (HR 1.52 per quartile (0.6 mmol/L), 95% CI 1.21–1.92), and higher SOFA
coagulation score (HR 1.95, 95% CI 1.17–3.26) (Figure S5; Table S15). Median PaO2/FiO2 in nonsurvivors on the day of death was 12.3(8.9-18.4) kPa suggesting many patients died with (and
possibly as a result of) severe refractory hypoxaemia. In those that died, active withdrawal of
support occurred in 65% of patients (85/130), in the 13 sites which reported, and unanticipated
cardiac arrest occurred in 11% of patients (13/122). Patients who had life support withdrawn had a
median age of 64(57-70) years, a length of mechanical ventilation of 11(6-18) days; a last PaO2/FiO2
of 12.8 (10-19.5) kPa and had a high incidence of prone intervention (72%). 100% of deaths were
attributed to COVID-19.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
The United Kingdom saw 10,834 patients admitted to 258 intensive care units between 1st February
and 31st August with 7702 requiring advanced respiratory support

17

. We describe a complete

natural history of a cohort of patients with COVID-19 undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation
(IMV) including detailed interventions for COVID-19-induced respiratory failure. We report
differences between 1) admission severities of ARDS, 2) early (< 1 week) resolution and nonresolution; 3) prone responders vs non-responders; and 4) survivors vs non-survivors. Most patients
showed disease severity consistent with moderate ARDS, however, severity of hypoxaemia was
greater, median length of IMV in survivors was longer as compared to the pre-COVID LUNG-SAFE
study (15(8-28) vs 8(4-15) days, respectively)

13

. This longer period of COVID-19 ventilation has

significant implications for provision of critical care bed capacity and further analysis of the impact of
COVID-19 therapies on this outcome will be needed 21. The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the
potential for significant deviations in care through several mechanisms including overwhelmed
healthcare systems to application of local guidelines from small single centre reports. There was
considerable heterogeneity in application of interventions between centres, and our granular
analyses of the time course and duration of interventions advise on areas where clinical
management could be better standardised and improved. In comparison, the disease progression
and applications of interventions was similar to that described by the REVA network 3. Finally, this
may prompt specific clinical trials to be conducted to evaluate these interventions in this new
disease.

Mechanical ventilation strategies
Covid-19 has triggered immense debate on whether ventilation strategies should be different
compared to non-COVID ARDS, due to the severity of hypoxaemia with relatively preserved
compliance, and the vasocentric nature of disease

22

. In our cohort, most patients received lung

protective ventilation with tidal volumes less than 8mL/kg and plateau pressures less than 30cmH2O.
This was despite systematic errors in measurement of height and derived ideal body weight.
However, PEEP was set higher than the ARDSNet PEEP table, and changes in PEEP over 12 hours did
not equate to improvements in PaO2/FiO2. Other measures such as the recruitment/inflation index
may provide better approaches to PEEP titration 23. ARDS, in particular that caused by COVID-19, can
show significant pulmonary vascular perfusion defects secondary to significant endothelial
inflammation

7,24

. These data show that a decline in dynamic compliance is associated with

increasing severity of disease (despite the application of higher PEEP), highlighting the need for
personalised approaches to PEEP application in all causes of ARDS and for it to be assessed in high
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

quality clinical studies during the pandemic. This may have specific relevance to the care of obese
patients with ARDS, as UK practise does not seem to comply with high BMI PEEP tables.

Disease progression
Although differences in admission markers of inflammation (LDH (Lactate dehydrogenase), CRP,
ferritin, procalcitonin), thrombosis (platelets, D-dimers) and cardiac dysfunction (troponin and BNP
(Brain Natriuretic Peptide)) were seen between patients that survived and died, time series mixed
model analysis suggests survivors also showed progressive reductions in CRP and neutrophils, in
addition to restoration of lymphocyte and platelet counts. Indeed, survivors demonstrated
improvements in dynamic respiratory system compliance along with reductions in ventilatory
requirements over the first week. Consistent with other studies, increasing age and male gender
were associated with mortality

16

. Higher lactate and coagulation SOFA were associated with an

increased risk of death. This is consistent with recent data showing lower platelet counts being
associated with the hyperinflammatory phenotype of ARDS which is associated with worse outcome
25

.

The extent to which patients resolved was dependent on progression of disease as well as the
responsiveness to various ARDS interventions. A period of the first 7 days was chosen to specifically
enable a robust comparison with pre-COVID ARDS studies, notably the Berlin definition and LUNGSAFE studies 13,19. Furthermore, by day 14, 51% of the study cohort achieved an outcome of death or
survival

and hence, examination of early resolution would pick up true signal differences

(immediate resolvers may be patients of less concern versus non-resolvers who are patients of more
concern). These data show that within the first week, only 25% of patients resolved their
hypoxaemia whereas three-quarters, remained static or worsened, despite the increased application
of adjunctive ARDS interventions such as PEEP>10cmH2O, prone position and inhaled vasodilators in
the non-resolving group. This is in stark contrast to previous pre-COVID ARDS studies showed
progression of 13.5% 19 and 15% 13 (see table 2), underlining the severity and different progression,
of this disease during the first surge. Non-resolvers were older, had a shorter duration of symptoms
prior to ICU admission (suggesting an earlier stage and/or more aggressive course of disease), and a
mortality of 59.4% whereas, patients whose hypoxaemia resolved in the first week had a 16.3%
mortality. Additionally, resolvers showed improvements in non-respiratory SOFA score and faster
reduction in CRP and resolution of lymphopenia. Resolvers underwent prone position on average 2
days earlier than non-resolvers. Higher age and male gender independently predicted nonresolution in the first week of IMV.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Importantly, hypoxaemia could have a significant attributable impact on mortality in Covid-19. In
particular, many patients die with (and possibly as a result of) severe refractory hypoxaemia, often
refractory to interventions such as high PEEP, conservative fluid balance, NMBA, and prone
positioning, potentially explaining the high reported rates of withdrawal of support during a
pandemic. It has been suggested that failure to improve oxygenation index (OI) over the first 7 days
may provide indications for failure of interventions in clinical trials 26. We chose PaO2/FiO2 as this is
used as clinical criteria for application and termination of interventions. Indeed, there is a strong
inverse significant relationship between oxygenation index (OI) and PaO2/FiO2 in our dataset
(supplementary figure S7 - Spearman R=-0.89; P<0.001), suggesting that PaO2/FiO2 could potentially
be replaced by OI in our analysis. Furthermore, the ANOVA shows that OI separates significantly
between all groups. Given the retrospective nature of this analysis, prospective validation to assess
utility of OI in clinical risk prediction and failure of interventions is important for future studies.

Prone Positioning
Prone position is a proven evidence-based intervention for ARDS which should be applied to patients
20

suitably fitting criteria

. In particular, the enormous clinical impact of prone position on gas

exchange and mortality in pre-COVID ARDS, prompted this evaluation of prone position during
Covid-19 to assess how its application could be better understood and improved. Whilst prone
positioning improves oxygenation, however, there are conflicting reports as to whether this equates
to improved mortality 27,28. Indeed, the oxygenation response to prone position is likely a non-linear
interaction between improved ventilation perfusion matching, more homogenous distribution of
lung stress and lung strain with lower ventilator-induced lung injury, and reduced loading and strain
of the right ventricle

29

. However, in our study, less than half of patients who underwent prone

positioning showed a sustained response in PaO2/FiO2 over the following week which is a key clinical
indicator for termination of prone interventions

30

. Prone responders showed improvements in

PaCO2, OI, ventilatory ratio (VR), and lower peak pressures. This is consistent with findings from the
APRONET study which showed improved oxygenation with reduced driving pressure

31

. Non-

responders had a higher peri-pronation lactate, Ferritin, D-dimer, and worse cardiac indices (i.e.
higher cardiovascular SOFA and respiratory SOFA score, troponin, and BNP). We have recently
shown in a cohort of 90 patients that right ventricular fractional area change (FAC) and ventricularpulmonary artery coupling (as measured by FAC:Right ventricular systolic pressure ratio) correlated
significantly not only with troponin, BNP and pulmonary vascular resistance but also with measures
of ventilation (namely PEEP and PaO2/FiO2) and a liver marker of congestion (alanine transaminase)
32

. These data suggest the need for closer attention to measures indicative of pulmonary vascular
17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

inflammation, thrombosis, and subsequent right heart dysfunction as determinants of which COVID19 patients fail prone position and, for appropriate escalation to more advanced support such as
ECMO 10,11,33.
The median PaO2/FiO2 in non-survivors was 12.3(8.9-18.4) kPa suggesting many patients died with
severe hypoxaemia, the attributable mortality of which remains undetermined in Covid-19. The
intention of our analysis was to discover characteristics between proned patients who did and did
not show a sustained change in oxygenation response to enable earlier risk stratification for
patients. Non-resolvers underwent prone positioning 2 days later than resolvers; however, prone
responders and non-responders underwent the interventions for a similar length but yet nonresponders showed nearly double the mortality of responders. Importantly, responsiveness to prone
positioning decayed with duration of IMV prior to the first prone position intervention suggesting
that prospective studies should examine whether earlier prone positioning regardless of hypoxaemia
severity could beneficially modulate disease progression in Covid-19, especially considering the
current application of prone position in self-ventilating patients 34. Although the time prone position
was applied after intubation was similar between responders and non-responders; non-responders
could have received prone positioning earlier as they had greater missed prone windows. This could
be due to a higher severity of illness and other factors known to impede application of this
important intervention

31

. Pre-pandemic, ECMO referral criteria in the UK have a critical time

window, usually within 7 days of mechanical ventilation, and once a patient is refractory to
interventions such as prone position. Understanding personalised responsiveness of prone position
in COVID-19 may enable these traditional criteria to be re-evaluated. Of importance half of patients
with severe ARDS did not have prone inteventions, suggesting that factors outside the scope of the
current dataset (e.g. systems-related or lack of clinical awareness e.g. judgement that hypoxaemia is
not severe enough or cardiovascular instability) may need to be assessed in future prospective
studies 31.

Strengths and Limitations
There are clear limitations of this analysis, not least its observational, retrospective nature, with
testing not standardized across sites, and some sites not being able to complete all data for all
patients. For instance, we have not included an analysis between sites and have focussed on the
physiology and progression of patients solely undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation for COVID19. In contrast, to many studies with a focus on all hospitalised patients we chose to focus on
patients undergoing mechanical ventilation as this remains a key defining criteria for admission to
ICU as well as a decision for active treatment 16,35. Further limitations include bias towards ICUs that
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

could contribute data and 38% of patients were managed in specialist severe acute respiratory
failure centres often out of necessity as these centres saw a significant number of capacity related
transfers (34%). Information censuring because of death or improvement may result in bias in the
longitudinal data, but only patients with continuous data for the first 7 days were included in these
analyses. Long-term outcome (e.g. 60-/90-day mortality) were not captured as this was not the focus
of this analysis. However, the UK Intensive Care National Audit and Research Centre (ICNARC)

17

report that most deaths (88.7%) and ICU discharges (79.6%) occurred before day 30 whereas most
acute hospital discharges (82%) occurred between days 60 and 90. This is not dissimilar to our
findings where 93% of deaths and 72% of discharges occurred at 28-days. Furthermore, this report
shows that 52.2% of patients receiving invasive mechanical ventilation survived ICU and 48.2%
achieved hospital discharge. Hence, only 4% of patients died in hospital having been discharged from
ICU. Patients progressing to ECMO were excluded due to the lack of data prior to ECMO support.
Finally, this study evaluated routine clinical care, and hence as such, there may be missing data, as I)
some ICUs may not have collected any data at all of a certain measurement modality, in contrast to
the majority of the sites (e.g. based on laboratory service configuration); ii) ICUs may have collected
the data of a modality but it was not collected for specific patients in contrast to the other patients
at that site (i.e. based on clinical need); iii) ICUs may have planned to collect the data of a modality
for all patients at their site, but some data points (e.g. on the afternoon of the 3rd day) are missing
(i.e. data capture within the clinical information systems); and iv) ICUs may not have transposed the
data into the eCRF (i.e. RedCAP data entry was missed). We made a heuristic decision of setting the
threshold of missingness to balance of patients we could include against the number of variables
(tables S17 and S18 describe missingness by site and over time).
Regarding strengths, we opted for a twice daily collection of data in contrast to a worst daily value,
to appreciate the progression of disease and impact of complex interventions, but also achieve a
pragmatic balance with ease of data collection for sites. The novelty of this analysis is the utilisation
of routinely measured clinical physiological and laboratory parameters over time to determine
trajectories and application of interventions. We have described here the most complete COVID
critical care dataset published thus far with most data missingness likely due to the variations in care
22

. Given the granular data there are, of course, many considerations with respect to additional

analytics, including Artificial Intelligence based methods

15,36,37

, that can highlight details and

temporal trajectories of patients. However, we chose to describe here the fundamental service
evaluation aimed at answering front-line clinically relevant critical care questions manage the
ongoing Covid-19 emergency. For this purpose, we used established statistical methods that can be
immediately understood by busy front-line colleagues. In turn, to help understand the data better
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

we have therefore focused a lot on the visualisation and provided the corresponding intuitive
visualisation

tool

to

visualise

the

patient

journeys

in

any

generic

web

browser

(https://www.coviduk.icu/).

Implications for clinical service provision
The natural history of COVID-ARDS shows significant admission severity with longer duration of
ventilation and refractory hypoxaemia with severe hypoxaemia as a primary cause of death. Whilst
admission characteristics correlated with severity and outcome, our data suggests that 75% of
patients continued to deteriorate over the first 7 days, resulting in a significantly longer period of
mechanical ventilation than non-COVID ARDS. The time series analyses of longitudinal disease
trajectory emphasises the importance of routine and frequent assessment of inflammation,
thrombosis, and cardiac dysfunction in unpicking lack of clinical response to advanced ARDS
management. This was reflected in the fact that while the utility of severity scores such as APACHE II
have been questioned

17

, the use of SOFA score, particularly its cardiovascular and coagulation

components, may be useful for prediction of progression. The application of ARDS interventions
(high PEEP; NMBA; Prone position; and inhaled nitric oxide) increased with hypoxaemia severity.
Regarding prone positioning, less than half of patients maintain a PaO2/FiO2 above 20kPa after its
application, and crucially, its effectiveness decayed over time. Many patients did not receive prone
position and had many missed prone windows when it could have been applied either earlier or at
all. Usage of antibiotics was over 70% and further evaluation is required to understand whether this
use was empirical or microbiologically guided. Of note, renal replacement therapy was applied to
over a third of patients with no relation to hypoxaemia severity.
We describe key clinical determinants, hypoxaemia resolution and responsiveness to prone position,
which may be more reliable for understanding disease trajectory and prognostication in COVID19 associated ARDS. These data advocate for the development of randomised controlled trials to
develop a COVID-19 specific evidence-base for established ARDS interventions in this phenotypically
distinct ARDS population. Particular priorities would be assessment of indications, timing, and
efficacy of prone position ventilation, benefit and hazards of "open lung" strategies, and
optimisation of fluid management. While this evidence-base is developed, recommendations for the
practical clinical management should include pro-active, serial re-evaluation of clinical response to
advanced ARDS management strategies.

Conclusions
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mechanically ventilated patients with COVID-19 have a different natural history and trajectory from
descriptions of non-COVID ARDS patients, not predictable from admission physiology. Nonresponsiveness to advanced ARDS management is high and associated with hypercoagulation and
cardiovascular instability. Variations in clinical practise and subsequent clinical trajectories occur
which may benefit from re-evaluation and standardisation of evidence-based practise, as evidenced
in this study by data-driven means. Our granular data-driven approach and digital online tool
demonstrates how a form of "standing" multi-centre service evaluation could help monitor and
inform better clinical practice.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. (A) Study population flowchart. (B) Age, ethnicities, and pre-admission co-morbidities of

COVID-19 patients undergoing invasive mechanical ventilation [Cardiovascular Disease (CVD);
Hypertension (HT), Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD), Venous thromboembolism (VTE), Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), Immunosuppression (IS). (C) Admission dates to intensive
care unit (ICU) across first pandemic surge; Grey vertical lines represent quartiles based on number
of patients admitted. (D) Outcome to ICU admission. Grey vertical lines labelled 25%, 50%, 75%
indicate the time points (8, 14 and 23 days, respectively) by which the stated proportion of patients
that were either discharged or deceased. (E) ICU survival curves for the different admission
severities of hypoxaemia following the 3 ARDS severity groups as defined in the main text. [(B, C, D)
Discharged (green) and died (red) distributions are stacked one over the other. Percentages are out
of the total number of patients (N=633).]
Figure 2. Visualisation of the variability of when and how long interventions were applied for and

their associated patient outcome (green - discharge, red - deceased) showing data in a separate
boxed panel for each intervention. Each boxed panel contains a scatter plot of the number of days of
invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) at which first intervention was applied (x-Axis) vs duration of
the first period of that intervention in days (y-Axis). Parallel to the respective axis we show the
marginal histogram of the data points in the scatter plot (e.g. the histogram for start of first
intervention on the x-Axis). In the bottom left of the boxed panel we show the histogram of the
number of repeated intervention periods a patient underwent (see main text for details). See Table
S5 for an overview of the interventions and their respective use statistics. Most patients will have
had multiple interventions, see our online interface (www.covidUK.icu) to explore the interactions
between interventions.
Figure 3. Overview of weight effect on tidal volume and PEEP management. (A) The distributions of

reported (light blue) and calculated ideal (light red) body weights highlighting systematic differences.
(B) The distributions tidal volumes in ml/Kg for reported and ideal body weights. (C) The
management of PEEP as a function of FiO2 plotted in a scatter plot for non-morbidly obese patients
(BMI<40, left) and morbidly obese (BMI>=40, right). Each plot shows the pre-COVID recommended
PEEP ladder of ARDSNet (solid black line) against actual data points showing clearly visible departure
from recommended pre-COVID PEEP ladder. Data points are colour coded by Days after initiation of
IMV (see colour bar in the next sub-figure). (D) Visualisation of the changes in PEEP against the
change in PaO2/FiO2 ratio. The changes are measured across two adjacent time points with the PEEP

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

change being introduced at some point between the two time points. Data points are colour coded
by days after initiation of IMV (see colour bar).
Figure 4. (A) Alluvial diagram of patient movements between ARDS severity groups: Mild

hypoxaemia (PaO2/FiO2>26), Moderate hypoxaemia (PaO2/FiO2: 26.7-13.3), and severe hypoxaemia
(PaO2/FiO2<13.3) and patient outcome (Discharged - green, deceased - red). Each solid bar
represents an ARDS severity group at a given number of days since initiation of IMV. Shaded
coloured streams between bars represent transitions of patients between the severity groups from
one time point to the next, which is either their new severity or their outcome. The height of the
bars represents the proportion of patients at that time point (i.e., they stack up to 100%) and the
height of a stream field represents the size of the components contained in both bars connected by
the stream. (B) ICU survival curves for patients who were showing improvement in hypoxaemia
category over the first week on IMV (resolvers, light blue) versus deterioration in hypoxaemia
category (non-resolvers, yellow). (C) Each panel presents the time-series of a physiological measure
of resolvers (light blue) versus non-resolvers (yellow) over the first 3 weeks of IMV (*P<0.05
interaction with mixed model ANOVA over the first week of IMV, see table S7). The Solid lines are
the group medians and the shaded areas are the semi-interquartile range. The number of subjects
decay over time as patients die and discharge and the initial and final numbers available for each
measure are presented on the graph. The full set of variables is presented in Figure S2. (D) The odds
ratio and their 95% confidence interval for Multivariate logistic regression models where a higher
odds ratio is the increased likelihood for progression of hypoxaemia for each step increase in the
admission variable and physiological measures. Continuous variables were discretely sized by a split
into quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and table S8 for the full stats). All variables (of
the list in table S2) with less than 40% missingness were included in the model. Subjects with more
than 20% missing data were removed from the analysis.
Figure 5. Responsiveness to prone position with responders defined as maintenance of a mean

PaO2/FiO2 >20kPa over 7 days after the first prone episode. (A) Each panel presents the time-series
of a physiological measure of prone responders (blue) versus non-responders (red) from a day
before the first prone manoeuvre to 7 days after (*P<0.05 interaction with mixed model ANOVA
over this period, see table S10). The Solid lines are the group medians and the shaded areas are the
semi-interquartile range. The number of subjects decay over time as patients die and discharge and
the initial and final numbers available for each measure are presented on the graph. The full set of
variables is presented in Figure S3. (B) Changes in PaO2/FiO2 ratio over 36 hours around the first
prone manoeuvre (from the last measurement before until the first measurement the day after) as a
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

function of the duration of IMV prior to the manoeuvre. The dots are colour coded by ARDS severity
prior to the manoeuvre. The red line presents an exponential fit, and the reported r is the Spearman
rank correlation. (C) ICU survival curves for prone responder (blue) versus non-responder (red)
versus patients who received no prone position (grey). (D-E) The odds ratio and their 95%
confidence interval for Multivariate logistic regression models where a higher odds ratio is the
increased likelihood of not responding to prone position for each step increase in the admission
variable and in the (D) pre-pronation (the last record within 24 hours prior intervention) or (E) postpronation (the first record in the day after intervention) physiological measures. Continuous
variables were discretely sized by a split into quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and
table S11 and s12 for the full stats for pre- and post-prone respectively). All variables (of the list in
table S2) with less than 40% missingness were included in the model. Subjects with more than 20%
missing data were removed from the analysis.
Figure S1. (A) Outcome of adjunctive interventions application (bold colours) versus no application

(lighter colours): from the bottom we stack discharged and intervened (solid green), deceased and
intervened (solid red), discharged and not-intervention (light green), deceased and non-intervention
(light red). Percentages are out of the total number of patients (N=633). Most patients will have had
multiple interventions, so the bar chart does double count. (B) Percentages of patients being in a
low or high hypoxaemia severity (PaO2/FiO2 ratio > or < 20kPa) at the last time point before the
intervention (i.e. either morning of the day of the intervention or the evening before).
Figure S2. (A) Time-series analyses of first week resolution. Each panel presents the time-series of a

physiological measure of resolvers (light blue) versus non-resolvers (yellow) over the first 3 weeks of
IMV (*P<0.05 interaction with mixed model ANOVA over the first week of IMV, see table S7). The
Solid lines are the group medians and the shaded areas are the semi-interquartile range. The
number of subjects decay over time as patients die and discharge and the initial and final numbers
available for each measure are presented on the graph. A subset of these variables is presented in
Figure 4C. (B) Correlation matrix between all variables considered for the logistic regression (the
final set of parameters was based on less then 40% missingness, see table S2). (C) The odds ratio and
their 95% confidence interval for Univariate and Multivariate logistic regression models where a
higher odds ratio is the increased likelihood for progression of hypoxaemia for each step increase in
the admission variable and physiological measures. Continuous variables were discretely sized by a
split into quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and table S8 for the full stats). All
variables (of the list in table S2) with less than 40% missingness were included in the model. Subjects
with more than 20% missing data were removed from the analysis.
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S3. (A) Time-series analyses of prone responsiveness. Each panel presents the time-series of a

physiological measure of prone responders (blue) versus non-responders (red) from a day before the
first prone manoeuvre to 7 days after (*P<0.05 interaction with mixed model ANOVA over this
period, see table S10). The Solid lines are the group medians and the shaded areas are the semiinterquartile range. The number of subjects decay over time as patients die and discharge and the
initial and final numbers available for each measure are presented on the graph. A subset of these
variables is presented in Figure 5A. (B) Correlation matrix between all variables considered for the
logistic regression (the final set of parameters was based on less then 40% missingness, see table
S2). (C) The odds ratio and their 95% confidence interval for Univariate and Multivariate logistic
regression models where a higher odds ratio is the increased likelihood of not responding to prone
position for each step increase in the admission variable and in the pre-pronation (the last record
within 24 hours prior intervention) physiological measures. Continuous variables were discretely
sized by a split into quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and table S11 for the full stats
for pre- and post-prone respectively). All variables (of the list in table S2) with less than 40%
missingness were included in the model. Subjects with more than 20% missing data were removed
from the analysis.
Figure S4. (A) Correlation matrix between all variables considered for the logistic regression (the

final set of parameters was based on less then 40% missingness, see table S2). (B) The odds ratio and
their 95% confidence interval for Univariate and Multivariate logistic regression models where a
higher odds ratio is the increased likelihood of not responding to prone position for each step
increase in the admission variable and in the post-pronation (the first record in the day after
intervention) physiological measures. Continuous variables were discretely sized by a split into
quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and table s12 for the full stats for pre- and postprone respectively). All variables (of the list in table S2) with less than 40% missingness were
included in the model. Subjects with more than 20% missing data were removed from the analysis.
Figure S5. Time-series analyses of admission severity. Each panel presents the time-series of a

physiological measure over the first 3 weeks of IMV, grouped by hypoxaemia on IMV initiation: Mild
(PaO2/FiO2>26), Moderate (PaO2/FiO2: 26.7-13.3), and severe (PaO2/FiO2<13.3). (*P<0.05 interaction
with mixed model ANOVA over the first week of IMV, see table S16). The Solid lines are the group
medians, and the shaded areas are the semi-interquartile range. The number of subjects decay over
time as patients die and discharge and the initial and final numbers available for each measure are
presented on the graph.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S6. Time-series analyses of ICU outcome. (A) Each panel presents the time-series of a

physiological measure of patients who were discharged (green) versus died (red) over the first 3
weeks of IMV (*P<0.05 interaction with mixed model ANOVA over the first week of IMV, see table
S14). The Solid lines are the group medians, and the shaded areas are the semi-interquartile range.
The number of subjects decay over time as patients die and discharge and the initial and final
numbers available for each measure are presented on the graph. (B) Correlation matrix between all
variables considered for the logistic regression (the final set of parameters was based on less then
40% missingness, see table S2). (C) The odds ratio and their 95% confidence interval for Univariate
and Multivariate logistic regression models where a higher odds ratio is the increased likelihood of
dying for each step increase in the admission variable and physiological measures. Continuous
variables were discretely sized by a split into quartiles (see supplementary methods for details and
table S14 for the full stats). All variables (of the list in table S2) with less than 40% missingness were
included in the model. Subjects with more than 20% missing data were removed from the analysis.
Figure S7. Variations in the reported application of interventions between sites. On the y axis are the

percentages of patients who received each intervention in each site. On the bars are the number of
the patients who received each intervention in each site over the total number of patients from that
site.
Figure S8. Oxygenation Index (OI) dependency on P/F ratio. Scatter plot of admission measurements

of Oxygenation Index vs PaO2/FiO2 (in red) shows a strong exponential link. Twice daily
measurements of Oxygenation Index vs PaO2/FiO2 of all patients during the entire ICU stay (black)
shows the same strong exponential link.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table Legends
Table 1 - Clinical and physiological characteristics, outcomes and interventions according to severity
of hypoxaemia on admission.
Table 2 - Progression of hypoxaemia in COVID-19 as compared to pre-COVID ARDS publications.
Tables show patient numbers and proportions changing between mild, moderate, and severe
hypoxaemia categories from day 1 to day 7 of invasive mechanical ventilation. Table 2a – COVID-ICU
database; 2b – LUNG-SAFE study 19; 2c – Berlin definition study 25.
Table S1 - Individual site contributions
Table S2 - Variables included in logistic regression models
Table S3 - Distribution of comorbidities with a) severity on admission and b) ICU outcome
Table S4 - Comparison between COVID-ICU and the UK Intensive Care National Audit and Research
Centre (ICNARC)
Table S5 - The application, median start date and duration of the first episode of interventions
Table S6 - Clinical and physiological characteristics, outcomes, and interventions according to
resolution of hypoxaemia over the first week of invasive mechanical ventilation.
Table S7 - Time series mixed model ANOVA according to resolution of hypoxaemia over the first
week of mechanical ventilation.
Table S8 - Uni- and multivariate model analysis of factors associated with progression of hypoxaemia
over the first week of invasive mechanical ventilation
Table S9 - Clinical and physiological characteristics, outcomes and interventions according to prone
responsiveness.
Table S10 - Time series mixed model ANOVA according to prone responsiveness.
Table S11 - Uni- and multivariate model analysis of pre-pronation factors associated with prone
responsiveness.
Table S12 - Uni- and multivariate model analysis of post-pronation factors associated with prone
responsiveness.
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table S13- Clinical and physiological characteristics, outcomes and interventions according to ICU
outcome.
Table S14 - Time series mixed model ANOVA according to ICU outcome.
Table S15- Uni- and multivariate model analysis of factors associated with ICU mortality.
Table S16 - Time series mixed model ANOVA according to ARDS on admission.
Table S17 – Percentages of missing values for each parameter in each site.
Table S18 – Percentages of missing values for each parameter on each day.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1 Grasselli G, Tonetti T, Protti A, et al. Pathophysiology of COVID-19-associated acute respiratory
distress syndrome: a multicentre prospective observational study. Lancet Respir Medicine 2020.
DOI:10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30370-2.
2 Ferrando C, Suarez-Sipmann F, Mellado-Artigas R, et al. Clinical features, ventilatory management,
and outcome of ARDS caused by COVID-19 are similar to other causes of ARDS. Intens Care Med
2020; : 1–12.
3 Schmidt M, Hajage D, Demoule A, et al. Clinical characteristics and day-90 outcomes of 4244
critically ill adults with COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. Intens Care Med 2020; : 1–14.
4 Sinha P, Calfee CS, Cherian S, et al. Prevalence of phenotypes of acute respiratory distress
syndrome in critically ill patients with COVID-19: a prospective observational study. Lancet Respir
Medicine 2020. DOI:10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30366-0.
5 Bos LDJ, Sinha P, Dickson RP. The perils of premature phenotyping in COVID: a call for caution.
European Respir J 2020; : 2001768.
6 Gattinoni L, Coppola S, Cressoni M, Busana M, Rossi S, Chiumello D. Covid-19 Does Not Lead to a
“Typical” Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. Am J Resp Crit Care 2020; 0.
DOI:10.1164/rccm.202003-0817le.
7 Patel BV, Arachchillage DJ, Ridge CA, et al. Pulmonary Angiopathy in Severe COVID-19: Physiologic,
Imaging and Hematologic Observations. Am J Resp Crit Care 2020. DOI:10.1164/rccm.2020041412oc.
8 Ackermann M, Verleden SE, Kuehnel M, et al. Pulmonary Vascular Endothelialitis, Thrombosis, and
Angiogenesis in Covid-19. New Engl J Medicine 2020. DOI:10.1056/nejmoa2015432.
9 Fan E, Beitler JR, Brochard L, et al. COVID-19-associated acute respiratory distress syndrome: is a
different approach to management warranted? Lancet Respir Medicine 2020. DOI:10.1016/s22132600(20)30304-0.
10 Schmidt M, Hajage D, Lebreton G, et al. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation for severe acute
respiratory distress syndrome associated with COVID-19: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet Respir
Medicine 2020. DOI:10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30328-3.
11 Barbaro RP, MacLaren G, Boonstra PS, et al. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support in
COVID-19: an international cohort study of the Extracorporeal Life Support Organization registry.
Lancet 2020; 396: 1071–8.
12 Needham DM, Colantuoni E, Mendez-Tellez PA, et al. Lung protective mechanical ventilation and
two year survival in patients with acute lung injury: prospective cohort study. Bmj Br Medical J 2012;
344: e2124.
13 Bellani G, Laffey JG, Pham T, et al. Epidemiology, Patterns of Care, and Mortality for Patients With
Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome in Intensive Care Units in 50 Countries. Jama 2016; 315: 788–
800.
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

14 Duggal A, Rezoagli E, Pham T, et al. Patterns of Use of Adjunctive Therapies in Patients With Early
Moderate to Severe ARDS. Chest 2020; 157: 1497–505.
15 Komorowski M, Celi LA, Badawi O, Gordon AC, Faisal AA. The Artificial Intelligence Clinician learns
optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care. Nat Med 2018; 24: 1716–20.
16 Docherty AB, Harrison EM, Green CA, et al. Features of 20 133 UK patients in hospital with covid19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: prospective observational cohort study.
Bmj 2020; 369: m1985.
17 Richards-Belle A, Orzechowska I, Gould DW, et al. COVID-19 in critical care: epidemiology of the
first epidemic wave across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Intens Care Med 2020; : 1–13.
18 Elm E von, Altman DG, Egger M, et al. The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational Studies
in Epidemiology (STROBE) Statement: guidelines for reporting observational studies*. B World
Health Organ 2007; 85: 867–72.
19 Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome: The Berlin Definition. Jama 2012; 307: 2526–33.
20 Guérin C, Reignier J, Richard J-C, et al. Prone Positioning in Severe Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome. New Engl J Medicine 2013; 368: 2159–68.
21 Bauer J, Brüggmann D, Klingelhöfer D, et al. Access to intensive care in 14 European countries: a
spatial analysis of intensive care need and capacity in the light of COVID-19. Intens Care Med 2020; :
1–9.
22 Chiumello D, Busana M, Coppola S, et al. Physiological and quantitative CT-scan characterization
of COVID-19 and typical ARDS: a matched cohort study. Intens Care Med 2020; : 1–10.
23 Pan C, Chen L, Lu C, et al. Lung Recruitability in COVID-19–associated Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome: A Single-Center Observational Study. Am J Resp Crit Care 2020; 201: 1294–7.
24 Ridge CA, Desai SR, Jeyin N, et al. Dual-Energy CT Pulmonary Angiography (DECTPA) Quantifies
Vasculopathy in Severe COVID-19 Pneumonia. Radiology Cardiothorac Imaging 2020; 2: e200428.
25 Sinha P, Delucchi KL, McAuley DF, O’Kane CM, Matthay MA, Calfee CS. Development and
validation of parsimonious algorithms to classify acute respiratory distress syndrome phenotypes: a
secondary analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Respir Medicine 2020; 8: 247–57.
26 Go L, Budinger GRS, Kwasny MJ, et al. Failure to Improve the Oxygenation Index Is a Useful
Predictor of Therapy Failure in Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Clinical Trials. Crit Care Med
2016; 44: e40–4.
27 Lemasson S, Ayzac L, Girard R, Gaillard S, Pavaday K, Guérin C. Does gas exchange response to
prone position predict mortality in hypoxemic acute respiratory failure? Intens Care Med 2006; 32:
1987–93.
28 Albert RK, Keniston A, Baboi L, Ayzac L, Guérin C, Investigators P. Prone Position–induced
Improvement in Gas Exchange Does Not Predict Improved Survival in the Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome. Am J Resp Crit Care 2014; 189: 494–6.
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.10.20226688; this version posted December 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

29 Vieillard-Baron A, Charron C, Caille V, Belliard G, Page B, Jardin F. Prone Positioning Unloads the
Right Ventricle in Severe ARDS. Chest 2007; 132: 1440–6.
30 Guérin C, Albert RK, Beitler J, et al. Prone position in ARDS patients: why, when, how and for
whom. Intens Care Med 2020; : 1–12.
31 Guérin C, Beuret P, Constantin JM, et al. A prospective international observational prevalence
study on prone positioning of ARDS patients: the APRONET (ARDS Prone Position Network) study.
Intens Care Med 2018; 44: 22–37.
32 Bleakley C, Singh S, Garfield B, et al. Right ventricular dysfunction in critically ill COVID-19 ARDS.
Int J Cardiol 2020. DOI:10.1016/j.ijcard.2020.11.043.
33 Shekar K, Slutsky AS, Brodie D. ECMO for severe ARDS associated with COVID-19: now we know
we can, but should we? Lancet Respir Medicine 2020. DOI:10.1016/s2213-2600(20)30357-x.
34 Coppo A, Bellani G, Winterton D, et al. Feasibility and physiological effects of prone positioning in
non-intubated patients with acute respiratory failure due to COVID-19 (PRON-COVID): a prospective
cohort study. Lancet Respir Medicine 2020; 8: 765–74.
35 Knight SR, Ho A, Pius R, et al. Risk stratification of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19
using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: development and validation of the 4C
Mortality Score. Bmj 2020; 370: m3339.
36 Parbhoo S, Gottesman O, Ross AS, et al. Improving counterfactual reasoning with kernelised
dynamic mixing models. Plos One 2018; 13: e0205839.
37 Li L, Albert-Smet I, Faisal AA. Optimizing Medical Treatment for Sepsis in Intensive Care: from
Reinforcement Learning to Pre-Trial Evaluation. Arxiv 2020.

31

Figure 1
A

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1130 patients

119 transferred from another ICU after 48 hours of MV
98 received ECMO
172 did not receive mechanical ventilation
64 repatriated to another ICU with no outcome measure
44 Admitted after 31 Aug 2020

C

633 patients

B

D

E

Figure 2

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

C

D

Figure 4

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

C

B

D

Figure 5

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

C

D

E

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1

Clinical Characterisitcs
label

units

Male
White

ABG

633
542

median [IQR] / N (%)

PaO2/FiO2
>26.7
Group N median [IQR] / N (%)
147
126

633
524
408
633
633
633

481 (76%)
250 (46.1%)
59.0 [51.0 66.0]
28.1 [24.9 32.8]
8.0 [6.0 12.0]
14.0 [8.0 23.0]
13.0 [7.0 22.0]
268 (42.3%)

FiO2 (%)

628

PaO2 to FiO2 ratio
Tidal Volume (mls/IBW)
Respiratory rate
Minute ventilation
Peak pressure
Plateau pressure
PEEP
Mean airway pressure
Pressure support
Dynamic Compliance
Oxygenation Index
Ventilatory Ratio

626
472
627
606
599
80
603
387
371
564
387
470

Age
BMI
Time since onset of symptoms
ICU length of stay
Length of mechanical ventilation
ICU Mortality
Vent

ALL
Total N

years
kg/m2
days
days
days
%

ml/Kg(IBW)
bpm
L/minute
ml/Kg(RBW)
ml/Kg(IBW)
cmH_20
cmH_20
cmH_20
mls/cmH20

Oxygen saturation
pH
PaO2

kPa

518
630
630

PaCO2

13.3-26.6
Group N median [IQR] / N (%)

<13.3
Group N median [IQR] / N (%)

2

166
123
92
166
166
166

124 (74.7%)
65 (45.8%)
59.0 [52.0 65.0]
29.3 [25.4 34.6]
7.5 [6.0 12.0]
14.0 [9.0 22.0]
14.0 [8.0 21.0]
86 (51.8%)

p(KruskalWallis/Chi )
0.411
0.243
0.272
0.088
0.851
0.355
0.295
0.000

60.0 [50.0 70.0]

166

80.0 [70.0 90.0]

0.000

18.7 [16.0 22.0]
6.7 [6.0 7.6]
19.0 [16.0 22.0]
8.6 [6.9 10.5]
26.0 [23.0 29.0]
25.0 [22.0 28.0]
10.0 [8.0 12.0]
16.0 [13.0 19.0]
10.0 [6.0 14.0]
32.9 [25.0 42.0]
8.2 [6.1 9.9]
1.5 [1.3 2.0]

165
106
166
158
155
22
161
97
86
145
97
106

10.9 [9.4 12.1]
7.0 [6.0 7.8]
20.0 [16.0 22.7]
8.6 [6.9 10.4]
29.0 [25.0 31.0]
28.0 [25.0 29.0]
10.0 [10.0 12.0]
17.0 [15.0 20.0]
10.0 [5.0 14.0]
27.1 [22.3 35.8]
15.2 [11.8 18.2]
1.7 [1.3 2.4]

0.000
0.264
0.075
0.078
0.000
0.032
0.000
0.000

281
320
320

95.0 [93.0 97.0]
7.4 [7.3 7.4]
10.7 [9.4 12.9]

117
165
165

93.0 [90.0 96.0]
7.3 [7.3 7.4]
9.3 [7.8 10.7]

0.000
0.001
0.000

320
274

147
123
90
147
147
147

107 (72.8%)
50 (39.7%)
59.0 [48.0 66.0]
28.0 [24.8 32.4]
9.0 [6.0 13.0]
13.0 [7.0 24.8]
11.0 [6.0 23.8]
40 (27.2%)

166
142

320
278
226
320
320
320

250 (78.1%)
135 (49.3%)
60.0 [52.5 67.0]
28.0 [24.8 32.1]
8.0 [6.0 12.0]
14.0 [8.0 23.0]
13.0 [8.0 22.0]
142 (44.4%)

60.0 [45.0 80.0]

143

18.3 [13.0 25.0]
6.8 [6.0 7.8]
18.8 [16.0 22.0]
8.5 [6.9 10.4]
26.0 [23.0 30.0]
26.0 [22.5 28.5]
10.0 [8.0 12.0]
16.0 [13.2 19.0]
10.0 [5.3 14.0]
31.5 [24.3 40.2]
8.1 [5.1 12.5]
1.5 [1.2 2.1]

142
112
142
138
138
10
140
96
83
135
96
110

40.0 [30.0 50.0]

319

35.2 [29.9 42.4]
6.9 [6.2 8.0]
18.0 [16.0 22.0]
8.2 [6.5 9.7]
24.0 [21.0 26.0]
24.0 [22.0 26.0]
10.0 [7.0 10.0]
15.0 [12.0 17.0]
10.0 [5.0 12.0]
32.4 [26.0 40.8]
4.0 [3.2 5.2]
1.4 [1.0 1.9]

319
254
319
310
306
48
302
194
202
284
194
254

95.0 [93.0 98.0]
7.4 [7.3 7.4]
10.7 [9.2 13.1]

120
145
145

97.0 [95.0 99.0]
7.4 [7.3 7.4]
12.8 [11.0 17.5]

0.610
0.000
0.000
0.000

kPa

630

6.0 [5.2 7.2]

145

5.4 [4.7 6.2]

320

6.0 [5.3 7.0]

165

6.6 [5.5 8.0]

0.000

Base excess
HCO3

mmol/L

630
629

-0.3 [-2.6 2.2]
24.5 [22.5 26.7]

145
145

-0.9 [-3.4 1.3]
23.8 [21.2 25.6]

320
319

-0.3 [-2.5 1.9]
24.3 [22.6 26.6]

165
165

0.7 [-2.3 4.0]
25.3 [22.8 28.1]

0.000
0.000

Lactate

mmol/L

604

1.2 [1.0 1.6]

137

1.1 [0.9 1.4]

304

1.2 [1.0 1.6]

163

1.3 [1.0 1.8]

0.001

428
626
508
579
588
619
629

9.0 [7.0 11.0]
3.0 [3.0 4.0]
3.0 [0.0 4.0]
3.0 [3.0 4.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 1.0]

96
142
119
128
138
143
145

7.0 [5.0 9.0]
2.0 [1.0 2.0]
3.0 [0.0 4.0]
3.0 [3.0 4.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 1.0]

210
319
247
297
293
313
318

8.5 [7.0 10.0]
3.0 [3.0 3.0]
0.0 [0.0 4.0]
3.0 [3.0 4.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 1.0]

122
165
142
154
157
163
166

11.0 [8.0 12.0]
4.0 [4.0 4.0]
4.0 [0.0 4.0]
3.0 [3.0 4.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 1.0]

0.000
0.000
0.008
0.096
0.808
0.647
0.857

114.0 [92.0 128.0]
0.4 [0.3 0.4]
9.6 [7.0 13.1]
8.1 [5.7 11.3]
0.4 [0.3 0.7]
0.8 [0.5 1.2]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]

143
63
143
143
143
143
110
113

113.0 [89.3 128.0]
0.3 [0.3 0.4]
9.3 [6.8 12.6]
7.5 [5.4 10.5]
0.6 [0.3 0.8]
0.8 [0.6 1.4]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]

313
172
313
313
310
310
248
244

113.0 [91.8 129.0]
0.4 [0.3 0.4]
9.5 [6.9 13.0]
8.0 [5.5 11.1]
0.4 [0.3 0.7]
0.8 [0.5 1.2]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]

163
77
163
162
161
162
140
136

117.0 [95.5 128.0]
0.4 [0.3 0.4]
10.1 [7.5 13.7]
8.6 [6.6 12.3]
0.4 [0.3 0.6]
0.8 [0.5 1.1]
0.0 [0.0 0.0]
0.0 [0.0 0.1]

0.558
0.011
0.350
0.060
0.005
0.359
0.135
0.925

SOFA

SOFA score
SOFA Respiratory
SOFA Nervous
SOFA Cardiovascular
SOFA Liver
SOFA Coagulation
SOFA Kidneys

FBC

Haemoglobin
Haematocrit
White blood cell count
Neutrophils
Monocytes
Lymphocytes
Basophils
Eosinophils

g/dL
x10^9/L
x10^9/L
x10^9/L
x10^9/L
x10^9/L
x10^9/L

619
312
619
618
614
615
498
493

Coag

Platelet Count
APTT
PT
INR
Fibrinogen
D-dimer

μmol/L
U/L
U/L
U/L
U/L
IU/L

619
398
396
212
410
391

246.0 [185.3 320.8]
32.1 [28.3 37.4]
13.9 [12.4 15.2]
1.1 [1.1 1.2]
6.8 [5.6 8.1]
2642.0 [990.5 7701.3]

143
81
81
43
100
85

244.0 [190.3 332.0]
31.0 [28.6 36.4]
13.9 [12.7 15.0]
1.2 [1.1 1.3]
6.2 [5.4 7.6]
2310.0 [980.8 5809.5]

313
195
193
114
218
183

250.0 [183.0 322.8]
31.8 [28.0 36.5]
13.7 [12.1 15.0]
1.1 [1.0 1.2]
7.1 [5.9 8.4]
2050.0 [930.3 6278.8]

163
122
122
55
92
123

237.0 [185.0 307.5]
33.9 [28.8 38.0]
14.3 [12.9 15.6]
1.1 [1.1 1.2]
6.5 [5.0 7.6]
3390.0 [1366.3 9851.8]

0.811
0.188
0.057
0.060
0.001
0.018

Electrolytes

Blood Urea Nitrogen (BUN)
Creatinine
Sodium
Potassium

mmol/L
μmol/L
mmol/L
mmol/L

498
621
621
620

7.4 [4.9 11.8]
88.0 [66.0 140.0]
139.0 [136.0 142.0]
4.4 [4.0 4.8]

111
144
144
143

6.3 [4.4 10.6]
85.0 [65.5 148.5]
139.0 [136.5 142.0]
4.5 [4.1 4.8]

249
314
314
314

7.7 [5.3 12.2]
89.0 [71.0 141.0]
138.0 [135.0 141.0]
4.4 [4.1 4.8]

138
163
163
163

7.8 [4.8 11.8]
85.0 [63.0 131.0]
139.0 [136.0 142.0]
4.4 [4.0 4.8]

0.045
0.322
0.049
0.512

Liver

Bilirubin
Alkaline Phosphatase
AST
ALT

μmol/L
U/L
U/L
U/L

588
600
99
592

10.0 [7.0 15.0]
77.0 [58.5 113.0]
59.0 [39.3 85.0]
37.0 [24.0 59.0]

138
138
22
138

10.0 [7.0 14.0]
76.0 [55.0 109.0]
62.0 [46.0 108.0]
32.0 [22.0 60.0]

293
300
52
294

10.0 [7.0 15.0]
73.5 [53.0 107.5]
59.5 [37.0 84.5]
37.0 [25.0 56.0]

157
162
25
160

10.0 [7.0 15.0]
87.5 [65.0 133.0]
56.0 [42.3 74.5]
42.5 [27.0 68.5]

0.344
0.002
0.615
0.072

Inflammation LDH (Lactate dehydrogenase)
Ferritin
CRP
Procalcitonin

IU/L
ng/mL

194
290
592
125

649.0 [452.0 921.0]
1218.5 [696.0 2320.0]
215.7 [135.0 311.0]
0.7 [0.3 2.2]

36
61
144
34

553.5 [394.0 832.0]
1070.0 [651.8 1871.8]
165.5 [86.0 260.5]
0.3 [0.2 1.0]

107
157
292
57

622.0 [467.5 792.8]
1296.0 [701.5 2342.5]
223.8 [145.7 316.4]
0.8 [0.3 2.5]

51
72
156
34

728.0 [512.0 1228.0]
1356.0 [717.5 2743.0]
242.7 [167.8 321.1]
1.4 [0.5 2.6]

0.048
0.363
0.000
0.002

Cardiac

Creatinine Kinase
High sensitivity Troponin
NT Pro BNP

U/L
pg/ml

243
253
58

217.0 [83.5 637.3]
21.8 [11.0 61.0]
537.5 [165.0 1478.0]

50
52
8

285.5 [68.0 1078.0]
22.6 [11.0 110.9]
255.5 [103.0 1201.0]

123
130
33

222.0 [98.0 571.0]
20.3 [10.0 55.1]
433.0 [158.5 1545.0]

70
71
17

171.5 [93.0 484.0]
22.0 [12.2 75.5]
692.0 [416.3 1763.0]

0.701
0.360
0.457

Cumulative Fluid balance

L

589

343.0 [-212.3 1058.3]

135

205.0 [-301.9 821.3]

298

365.0 [-185.0 1074.0]

156

452.5 [-264.5 1597.0]

0.044

633
516
622
617
551
521
521
521
555
598
582
438
313

159 (25.1%)
145 (28.1%)
459 (73.8%)
434 (70.3%)
273 (49.5%)
73 (14%)
55 (10.6%)
51 (9.79%)
211 (38%)
443 (74.1%)
304 (52.2%)
55 (12.6%)
219 (70%)

147
117
143
139
127
121
121
121
126
134
130
99
63

31 (21.1%)
38 (32.5%)
73 (51%)
74 (53.2%)
35 (27.6%)
10 (8.26%)
10 (8.26%)
7 (5.79%)
44 (34.9%)
95 (70.9%)
62 (47.7%)
11 (11.1%)
39 (61.9%)

320
282
314
314
291
283
283
283
297
311
307
242
173

86 (26.9%)
80 (28.4%)
242 (77.1%)
222 (70.7%)
152 (52.2%)
36 (12.7%)
34 (12%)
29 (10.2%)
110 (37%)
235 (75.6%)
153 (49.8%)
34 (14%)
126 (72.8%)

166
117
165
164
133
117
117
117
132
153
145
97
77

42 (25.3%)
27 (23.1%)
144 (87.3%)
138 (84.1%)
86 (64.7%)
27 (23.1%)
11 (9.4%)
15 (12.8%)
57 (43.2%)
113 (73.9%)
89 (61.4%)
10 (10.3%)
54 (70.1%)

0.407
0.059
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.032
0.216
0.246
0.607
0.128
0.129
0.195
0.021

273
273
273
270
273
360

1.0 [1.0 2.0]
3.0 [1.8 6.0]
2.0 [1.0 4.0]
119 (44.1%)
3.0 [1.0 6.0]
3.0 [1.0 10.0]

35
35
35
35
35
112

1.0 [1.0 2.0]
4.0 [2.0 7.8]
2.0 [1.0 4.0]
23 (65.7%)
0.0 [0.0 5.0]
1.0 [0.0 3.0]

152
152
152
150
152
168

1.0 [1.0 2.0]
4.0 [2.0 7.0]
2.0 [1.0 3.5]
71 (47.3%)
3.0 [1.0 7.0]
4.0 [1.0 10.0]

86
86
86
85
86
80

1.0 [1.0 2.0]
2.0 [1.0 4.0]
2.0 [1.0 4.0]
25 (29.4%)
2.0 [1.0 5.0]
7.5 [3.0 16.0]

0.177
0.005
0.913
0.087
0.014
0.000

145
145

13.0 [9.0 18.0]
14.0 [6.0 21.3]

38
38

14.0 [10.0 19.0]
14.0 [11.0 22.0]

80
80

14.0 [8.5 19.0]
15.0 [7.0 21.5]

27
27

11.0 [6.3 15.0]
10.0 [3.3 19.5]

0.050
0.122

130
244

85 (65.4%)
21 (8.61%)

20
42

9 (45%)
7 (16.7%)

76
139

53 (69.7%)
11 (7.91%)

34
63

23 (67.6%)
3 (4.76%)

0.009
0.341

Fluid

ug/L

Adjunctive interventions
Was patient transferred in?
Tracheostomy
PEEP>10
Neuro-muscular blockade
Prone positioning
Inhaled nitric oxide
Inhaled prostacyclin
Bronchoscopy
Renal replacement therapy
Diuretics
Corticosteroids
Therapeutic heparin
Antibiotics
Prone
No of proning episodes
mech vent prior first prone
durationn of first prone
responsders to proning
missed windows prior to prone
missed windows - unproned
Tracheostomy
mech vent prior to tracheostomy
durationn of tracheostomy
End of life parameters
life sustaining therapy withdrawn
cardiac arrest during admission

days
days

days
days

COVID-ICU

LUNG SAFE

Berlin Definition
P/F on Day 7

<13.3

Total

>26.7

51

71

18

140

13.3-26.6

55

137

75

267

<13.3

8

58

42

108

114

266

135

515

26.7-40
26.7-40

Total

184

32

714

140

1106

<13.3

557

26.7-40 13.3-26.6 <13.3
26.7-40
13.3-26.6

<13.3

>26.7

36.4%

50.7%

12.9%

13.3-26.6

20.6%

51.3%

28.1%

<13.3

7.4%

53.7%

38.9%

26.7-40
31.8%

44.7%

26.7-40
13.3-26.6
<13.3

Total

33

819

230

1820

<13.3

1031
3670

P/F on Day 7

13.3-26.6

234

2377

P/F on
Admission

P/F on
Admission

<13.3

13.3-26.6

P/F on Day 7
>26.7

23.5%

P/F on Day 7

13.3-26.6

P/F on
Admission

13.3-26.6

P/F on
Admission

P/F on
Admission

P/F on Day 7
>26.7

P/F on Day 7

13.3-26.6

<13.3

25.8%

4.5%
12.7%

Overall
15.0%

26.7-40 13.3-26.6 <13.3
P/F on
Admission

Table 2

(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

26.7-40
13.3-26.6
<13.3

28.6%

4.0%
12.6%

Overall
13.5%

