medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Addressing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Decontamination: Methylene Blue and Light
Inactivates SARS-CoV-2 on N95 Respirators and
Masks with Maintenance of Integrity and Fit
Thomas S. Lendvay1,#, James Chen1, Brian H. Harcourt2, Florine E.M. Scholte3, F. Selcen
Kilinc-Balci4, Ying Ling Lin5, Molly M. Lamb6, Larry F. Chu7, Amy Price7, David Evans8, YiChan Lin8, Christopher N. Mores9, Jaya Sahni10, Kareem B. Kabra9, Eric Haubruge11, Etienne
Thiry12, Belinda Heyne13, Jan Laperre14, Sarah Simmons15, Jan M. Davies15,16,23, Yi Cui17, Thor
Wagner10, Tanner Clark1, Sarah J. Smit18, Rod Parker19, Thomas Gallagher20, Emily Timm20,
Louisa F. Ludwig-Begall12, Nicolas Macia13, Cyrus Mackie13, Karen Hope16, Ken Page16, Susan
Reader16, Peter Faris16, Olivier Jolois14, Alpa Patel18, Jean-Luc Lemyre19, Vanessa MolloySimard19, Kamonthip Homdayjanakul6, Sarah R. Tritsch9, Constance Wielick12, Mark Mayo21,
Rebecca Malott15, Jean-Francois Willaert11, Hans Nauwynck22, Lorène Dams12, Simon De
Jaeger12, Lei Liao24, Mervin Zhao24, Steven Chu25, John M. Conly15,16, May C. Chu6
Department of Urology, University of Washington School of Medicine , Seattle, Seattle Children’s Hospital,
Washington, USA. 2Viral Special Pathogens Branch, Division of High Consequence Pathogens and Pathology,
National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 3Department of Infectious Diseases, Microbiology and Immunology, CRCHU de QuébecUniversité Laval, Québec, QC, Canada. 4National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL), National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA. 5World Health Organization. 6Center for Global Health, Colorado School of Public Health, Anschutz Medical
Campus, Aurora, Colorado, USA. 7The AIM Lab, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California
USA. 8Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
9
Department of Global Health, Milken Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington University,
Washington, DC, USA. 10Seattle Children’s Research Institute, Seattle, Washington USA. 11Gembloux
AgroBioTech, Terra Research Center, University of Liège, Gembloux, Belgium. 12Department of Infectious and
Parasitic Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. 13Department of
Chemistry, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. 14Centexbel, Grace-Hollogne, Belgium. 15W21C
Research and Innovation Centre, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. 16Alberta Health Services,
Alberta, Canada. 17Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
USA. 18Nelson Laboratories, LLC, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. 19Stryker, Quebec, Canada. 20Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, Illinois, USA. 21British Standards
Institution, London, United Kingdom. 22Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent University, Merelbeke, Belgium.
23
Department of Anesthesiology, Perioperative and Pain Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
24
4CAir, Inc., Sunnyvale, California, USA. 25Department of Physics, Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA.
1

#Correspondence to:
Thomas S. Lendvay, MD
Professor, Department of Urology, University of Washington
Seattle Children’s Hospital
Address: 4800 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA, 98105
Email: thomas.lendvay@seattlechildrens.org
Phone: 206-987-4403

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
Background: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has resulted in severe
shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) necessary to protect front-line healthcare
personnel. These shortages underscore the urgent need for simple, efficient, and inexpensive
methods to decontaminate SARS-CoV-2-exposed PPE enabling safe reuse of masks and
respirators. Efficient decontamination must be available not only in low-resourced settings, but
also in well-resourced settings affected by PPE shortages. Methylene blue (MB) photochemical
treatment, hitherto with many clinical applications including those used to inactivate virus in
plasma, presents a novel approach for widely applicable PPE decontamination. Dry heat (DH)
treatment is another potential low-cost decontamination method.
Methods: MB and light (MBL) and DH treatments were used to inactivate coronavirus on
respirator and mask material. We tested three N95 filtering facepiece respirators (FFRs), two
medical masks (MMs), and one cloth community mask (CM). FFR/MM/CM materials were
inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 (a Betacoronavirus), murine hepatitis virus (MHV) (a
Betacoronavirus), or porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV) (an Alphacoronavirus), and treated
with 10 µM MB followed by 50,000 lux of broad-spectrum light or 12,500 lux of red light for 30
minutes, or with 75°C DH for 60 minutes. In parallel, we tested respirator and mask integrity
using several standard methods and compared to the FDA-authorized vaporized hydrogen
peroxide plus ozone (VHP+O3) decontamination method. Intact FFRs/MMs/CM were subjected
to five cycles of decontamination (5CD) to assess integrity using International Standardization
Organization (ISO), American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) International, National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), and Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) test methods.
Findings: Overall, MBL robustly and consistently inactivated all three coronaviruses with at
least a 4-log reduction. DH yielded similar results, with the exception of MHV, which was only
reduced by 2-log after treatment. FFR/MM integrity was maintained for 5 cycles of MBL or DH
treatment, whereas one FFR failed after 5 cycles of VHP+O3. Baseline performance for the CM
was variable, but reduction of integrity was minimal.
Interpretation: Methylene blue with light and DH treatment decontaminated masks and
respirators by inactivating three tested coronaviruses without compromising integrity through
5CD. MBL decontamination of masks is effective, low-cost and does not require specialized
equipment, making it applicable in all-resource settings. These attractive features support the
utilization and continued development of this novel PPE decontamination method.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

INTRODUCTION
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused by SARS-CoV-2 has resulted in
critical personal protective equipment (PPE) shortages, especially filtering facepiece respirators
(FFRs, also known as N95 respirators) and medical masks (MMs). N95 FFRs are respiratory
protective devices which are designed to filter at least 95% of airborne particles. A MM is a
medical device covering the mouth, nose and chin ensuring a barrier that limits exposure of an
infective agent between healthcare personnel (HCP) and the patient. MMs are used by HCPs to
prevent large respiratory droplets and bodily fluid splashes from reaching the mouth and the nose
of the wearer and help reduce and/or control at the source the spread of large respiratory droplets
from the person wearing the mask. MMs include surgical and procedure masks and are not
considered respiratory protective devices. N95 FFRs tightly fit the face while MMs are designed
as loose-fitting devices. Although designed for single short-term usage, FFRs and MMs
potentially contaminated by SARS-CoV-2 are being re-used on an emergency basis due to short
supply during the current pandemic. These shortages have necessitated the rapid development
and deployment of various disinfection techniques and equipment, and have led to the World
Health Organization (WHO) issuing interim guidance on rational PPE use (1), including methods
for decontamination (mostly for FFRs) (2). The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
granted Emergency Use Authorization (EUA) of hydrogen peroxide and steam sterilization
systems to decontaminate FFRs/MMs intended for reuse (3). However, these technologies
remain less available in low-resource settings, where the majority of frontline HCPs have
inadequate protection.
Photochemical treatment represents a disinfection method that uses a photosensitive drug,
referred to as a photosensitizer, which when combined with visible light, generates singlet
oxygen from ambient molecular oxygen in the air. Singlet oxygen inactivates viruses by
damaging viral nucleic acids and viral membranes (4,5). One such photosensitizer is methylene
blue (MB), which, in addition to its primary FDA-approved medical indication to treat
methemoglobinemia, has been used as a sterilization method for human plasma transfusions
when combined with light, used for inactivating SARS-CoV-2 and many other microorganisms
(6-8). See Supplemental material for additional background information.
The aim of the “Development of Methods for Masks and N95 Decontamination” (DeMaND)
study was to evaluate methods that inactivate SARS-CoV-2 on respirators and masks, which can
be applied anywhere, at low cost and without complicated procedures. We examined if
methylene blue plus light (MBL) or dry heat (DH) treatments could effectively decontaminate
commonly used FFRs, MMs, or a community mask (CM) while maintaining mask integrity
(filtration, breathability, fluid resistance and fit) after multiple cycles of decontamination. This
study leveraged four virology laboratories and six PPE integrity testing sites to examine: (a)
MBL and DH virucidal effect using two isolates of SARS-CoV-2 and two other coronaviruses
requiring a lower level of biocontainment, and (b) the impact of five cycles of decontamination
(5CD) on the integrity of treated FFRs/MMs and a CM [FIGURE 1].
The number of decontamination cycles was selected based on the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC)’s recommended maximum number of donnings as part of crisis capacity
strategies based on the current literature (9). The FFRs/MMs were selected based on popularity
and availability during recent outbreak response and to account for physical differences such as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

cup shapes, material and structure. For the integrity testing, we compared MBL and DH to the
FDA-authorized vaporized hydrogen peroxide plus ozone system (VHP+O3) (2).

FIGURE 1. Graphical representation of the DeMaND study outline. (A) Overview of the coronaviruses,
decontamination methods and masks used. (B) FFRs, MMs andr a CM were inoculated with virus and treated with
either MB and light (MBL) or dry heat (DH). Remaining infectious virus was quantified using TCID 50 or plaque
assays. (C) In parallel with the virucidal testing of MBL and DH treatments, intact FFRs/MMs/CMs were subjected
to 5 cycles of decontamination before mask integrity/fit was tested using the indicated methods. Abbreviations:
PRCV = porcine respiratory coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 = severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, MHV =
murine hepatitis virus, MBL = methylene blue + light, DH = dry heat (75°C), VHP+O 3 = vaporized hydrogen
peroxide plus ozone. See Supplemental Table S1 for the respirator and mask decontamination and testing matrix.

RESULTS
Methylene blue and light (MBL) inactivates coronaviruses in tissue culture plates
To confirm that MBL is able to inactivate coronavirus, varying concentrations of MB were
mixed with porcine respiratory coronavirus (PRCV) and exposed to light (12,500 lux of red
light). Treatment with 0.1 µM MB plus light resulted in a 6-log reduction in PRCV titers. In the
absence of additional light, a higher MB dose (1 µM) still resulted in a 6-log reduction [FIGURE
2A].
Next, to confirm the ability of MBL to specifically reduce SARS-CoV-2 infectivity, varying
concentrations of MB were mixed with SARS-CoV-2 and exposed to high intensity broadspectrum light (50,000 lux). MB inhibited SARS-CoV-2 infectivity with a dose-dependent effect,
with or without exposure to high intensity light. This virucidal effect was strikingly enhanced in
the presence of a strong light source. The half-maximal effective concentration (EC50) of MB
was 3.1 µM when exposed to <100 lux of light, but 1.8 nM with the addition of high intensity
light, a 1722-fold effect [FIGURE 2B].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

FIGURE 2. Inactivation of PRCV and SARS-CoV-2 using methylene blue and light (MBL). (A) To determine the
efficacy of different MB concentrations, serial dilutions of MB were added to wells of a 48-well plate containing 10
µL PRCV (2x107 TCID50/ml). Technical triplicates were performed using three separate plates. Plates were either
exposed to a red-light source (12,500 lux) for 30 minutes or were protected from light (<100 lux). Dotted line
indicates limit of detection. (B) Serial dilutions of MB were added to wells of a 12-well plate containing ~50 PFU of
SARS-CoV-2 in MEM plus 15% FCS. Plates were either exposed to 50,000 lux of broad-spectrum light for 45 min or
were protected from light (<100 lux). Viral titers were determined using three replicate samples.

MBL and DH inactivate coronaviruses on FFR/MM material
To examine the dose required to inactivate respirators/masks contaminated with SARS-CoV-2 or
murine hepatitis virus (MHV), we tested a representative generic facemask and N95 respirator
(Type II generic facemask (FW) and 3M 1870+ N95 respirator (R3), respectively). These masks
were cut into coupons, inoculated with virus, and treated with 1 or 10 μM MB and light for the
indicated time periods [FIGURE 3A]. All viruses displayed sensitivity to MBL treatment. Using
10 µM MB with light resulted in complete inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 and MHV on both FFR
and MM material after 5 minutes of treatment: a 3-4 log reduction of SARS-CoV-2 and >5 log
reduction of MHV titers. Using a lower dose (1 µM), complete inactivation was observed after
30 minutes of light exposure, though a 2-4 log reduction of viral titers was already observed after
5 minutes. We also observed that MB treatment in the absence of additional light resulted in
substantial reductions of viral titers.
In parallel, coupons inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 or MHV, or complete masks inoculated with
PRCV, were treated with 65°C or 75°C dry heat (DH) for up to 60 minutes. Although all viruses
displayed a degree of temperature sensitivity, 60 minutes exposure did not result in complete
inactivation [FIGURE 3B].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

FIGURE 3. MBL and DH inactivate MHV, SARS-CoV-2 and PRCV on FFR/MM material.
(A) Effect of methylene blue and light treatment on SARS-CoV-2 and MHV titers. A 10 µl aliquot of SARS-CoV-2 or
MHV was applied to coupons derived from a FFR (R3) or MM (FW) and left to dry for 20 min. Subsequently 10 or
30 µl of MB was added to the virus spot on each coupon at the indicated concentrations. The samples were exposed
to light (50,000 lux) for the indicated time periods or left in the biosafety cabinet with the lights off. Each virus titer
was measured using 2-6 replicate samples by plaque assay or median tissue culture infection dose (TCID50). Data
are represented as mean +/- SD. (B) Effect of DH treatment on SARS-CoV-2, PRCV and MHV titers. A 10 µl aliquot
of SARS-CoV-2 or MHV was applied to coupons derived from a FFR (R3) or MM (FW) and left to dry for 20 min.
Subsequently, the samples were incubated at 65°C or 75°C for the indicated time periods. Alternatively, 100 ul of
PRCV was injected under the outer layer of intact FFRs or MMs and allowed to dry for 30 minutes before exposure
to DH. Each virus titer was measured using 2-6 replicate samples by plaque assay or TCID50. Data are represented
as mean +/- SD. FW= Type II generic face mask. R3= 3M panel respirator (1870+). Dotted line indicates limit of
detection.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

To ensure that MBL or DH can be utilized to efficiently decontaminate a wide variety of masks,
we tested 3 more masks, including one additional MM (Type IIR ASTM F2100 Level 2 Halyard
(FH)), and two additional FFRs (duckbill FFR from Halyard (RH) and half-sphere 1860 from
3M (RM)). Coupons or intact masks were inoculated as described, treated with 10 µM MB and
exposed to light for 30 minutes [FIGURE 4A-D], conditions which demonstrated robust
inactivation in the previous experiments. We observed complete inactivation (up to 4 logs) of
SARS-CoV-2 for all masks and respirators tested. Treatment with 10 µM MB without exposure
to bright light resulted in substantial virus reduction [FIGURE 4B]. For MHV, no virus was
detectable for FH, R3, RH, and RM, signifying a 4-5 log reduction. A low level of virus was
detectable in one replicate for FW [FIGURE 4A]. For PRCV, which was injected underneath the
outer mask layer, a >5-log virus reduction was observed after MB treatment of FH, FW, R3 and
RH masks. In contrast, only an approximate 3-log reduction was observed for RM masks
[FIGURE 4D].
To assess DH inactivation of these additional 3 masks, coupons or intact masks were inoculated
with virus and exposed to 75°C for 60 minutes. PRCV was generally effectively inactivated by
DH treatment, resulting in >5 logs of virus reduction [FIGURE 4H]. FH and RM coupons
inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 were not fully inactivated [FIGURE 4F,G]. MHV titers were only
modestly reduced (~2 logs) across all mask types [FIGURE 4E]. Total log reductions for both
MBL and DH conditions by mask type are listed in [TABLE 1].
In addition, we tested the effect of MBL or DH inactivation on MM and FFR straps inoculated
with PRCV. MB and DH treatment of FH, FW, and R3 elastic straps resulted in inactivation of
nearly 4 logs of PRCV. In contrast, MBL treatment of RH, as well as both MBL and DH
treatment of RM respirator straps resulted in infectious titer reductions of less than 3 logs
[Supplemental FIGURE S4].

FIGURE 4. Effect of MBL treatment on MHV, PRCV and SARS-CoV-2 titers on the surfaces of three FFRs (R3,
RH, RM) and two MMs (FH, FW). (A-C) A 10 µl aliquot of SARS-CoV-2 or MHV was applied to coupons of the
indicated masks and dried for 20 min. 10-30 µl of 10 µM MB was added to each coupon, depending on coupon size,
and the samples were treated with light (50,000 lux) or protected from light. (D) 100 ul of PRCV was injected under
the outer layer of intact FFRs or MMs and allowed to dry for 30 minutes. Subsequently the FFRs and MMs were
sprayed with 10 µM MB and dried for 30 minutes in the dark before exposure to 12,500 lux of red light. (E-H) Effect
of 75°C DH treatment on MHV, PRCV and SARS-CoV-2 titers on the surface of three FFRs (R3, RH, RM) and two

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

MMs (FH, FW). A 10 µl aliquot of SARS-CoV-2 or MHV was applied to coupons of the indicated masks and dried
for 20 min. (H) 100 ul of PRCV was injected under the outer layer of intact FFRs/MMs and dried for 30 minutes.
For PRCV, MBL and DH were tested simultaneously and share the same control data. Coupons and intact
respirators/masks were incubated at 75°C for 60 minutes. Each virus titer was determined using 2-6 replicate
samples by plaque assay or TCID50. Data is represented as mean +/- SD. ND = Not detected. FH= Type IIR ASTM
F2100 Level 2 Halyard face mask. FW= Type II EN 14683 generic face mask. R3= 3M panel respirator (1870+).
RH= Halyard duckbill respirator (Fluidshield-46727). RM= 3M half-sphere respirator (1860). Dotted line indicates
limit of detection.

Community Mask
Cloth community masks (CM) are globally in wide use; therefore, we investigated the
decontamination efficacy of MBL and DH on a homemade CM made of a cotton inner and outer
layers surrounding two layers of spunbond polypropylene.
Overall, virus recovery from the CM mask (made of cotton inner and outer layers surrounding
two layers of spunbond polypropylene) was less efficient than from the FFRs and MMs, possibly
due to absorption by the outer cotton layer. This was especially prominent for SARS-CoV-2inoculated CMs. MBL treatment of CMs resulted in complete inactivation of SARS-CoV-2 and
MHV. In contrast, PRCV titers were only reduced by 0.4 log, whereas >5 logs of PRCV were
inactivated after DH treatment [FIGURE 5A-D].
The overall percent reduction in virus titer after treatment across all FFRs/MMs and viruses
ranged from 99.8-100% for MBL, and 96.9–99.6% for DH. For the CM this was 88.8% for MBL
and 97.2% for DH [TABLE 1].

TABLE 1. Log reduction and percent inactivation of coronaviruses treated with MBL or DH.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

FIGURE 5. Effect of MBL or DH treatment on MHV, PRCV and SARS-CoV-2 titers inoculated on CMs.
Coupons cut from CM were inoculated with 100 ul of PRCV or 10 ul of SARS-CoV-2 or MHV, dried for 20-30 min,
and treated with 10 uM MB before exposure to 50,000 lux of light or 12,500 lux of red light (PRCV) for 30 min or
exposure to 75°C of DH for 60 min. CM = community mask. ND = not detected. Dotted line indicates limit of
detection.

Evaluation of Potential Applications of MBL in a Clinical Setting
Three potential applications of MB in a clinical environment were examined. First, since some
clinical settings may not have access to bright light, we investigated whether 10 µM MB
combined with ambient light would be sufficient to inactivate SARS-CoV-2. Nearly 5-log of
SARS-CoV-2 was inactivated by treatment with 10 µM MB and exposure to 700 lux (ambient
light generated by light in a biosafety hood) for 60 minutes, and nearly 3-log of virus was
inactivated by 10 µM MB in <100 lux of light (biosafety hood with the lights off) [FIGURE 6A].
Second, the possibility of pre-treating respirators/masks with MB was investigated. Coupons
were treated with 10 µM MB, dried, and inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 on either the
hydrophobic outer layer or the hydrophilic inner layer before exposure to 50,000 lux of light for
30 min. No infectious virus could be recovered from either side of the light-exposed coupons,
signifying inactivation of >4 logs of virus [FIGURE 6B]. Intact RM respirators and FH masks
were sprayed with 10 µM MB, dried overnight, inoculated with MHV, and exposed to 50,000
lux of light for 30 min. No detectable virus was recovered [FIGURE 6D].
Lastly, 10 l of a sample from a clinical specimen (saliva) with a titer of 1.15 x 105 PFU/ml
obtained from a COVID-19 patient was inoculated onto coupons from an R3 respirator and
treated with MBL (30 min). No infectious virus was detectable after this treatment indicating that
this inactivation method may be effective in a clinical setting where infectious virus may be
found in proteinaceous matrixes which would potentially facilitate viability [FIGURE 6C].

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

FIGURE 6. Potential applications of MBL in a clinical setting. (A) Effect of low light levels on SARS-CoV-2
inactivation using MB. A 10 µl aliquot of SARS-CoV-2 was applied to R3 coupons and dried for 20 min. Ten
microliters of 10 µM MB was added to each coupon before treatment with 700 lux or <100 lux of light. Seven
hundred lux is the light level produced by the biosafety hood lights and is used to represent ambient light. (B) Effect
of MB pre-treatment on SARS-CoV-2 inactivation. Coupons were cut from R3 masks and soaked for 1 hr in 10 µM
MB. The coupons were then air-dried in the dark for 2 days before adding 10 µl of virus to either the inner or outer
layers. The samples were exposed to light (50,000 lux) for 30 min, and the virus titer determined by plaque assay
using 6 replicates. (C) Inactivation of a SARS-CoV-2 clinical specimen by MBL. A saliva specimen was obtained
from a COVID-19 patient with a titer of 1.1 x 105 PFU/ml for SARS-CoV-2. Ten µl aliquots were applied to coupons
cut from a R3 mask and treated with 10 µM MB and exposed to 50,000 lux of light for 30 min. Each virus titer was
measured using 6 replicate samples. (D) Effect of MB pre-treatment on MHV inactivation using intact masks. Intact
R3 and FW masks were pretreated with 10 µM MB by spraying the front and back with a total of 7-8 ml of MB and
allowed to dry overnight in the dark. The dried masks were inoculated with MHV and exposed to 50,000 lux of light
for 30 minutes, and the inoculated areas were excised before elution and titration. ND = Not detected. FH= Type
IIR Halyard face mask. RM= 3M 1860 half-sphere respirator. Dotted line indicates limit of detection.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

N95 Respirator, Medical Mask, and Community Mask Integrity Testing
Integrity of the FFRs/MMs/CM was assessed using a number of standard test methods to
examine if MBL or DH decontamination treatments affected mask integrity. Filtration efficiency,
breathability, fluid resistance and fit testing of FFRs/MMs/CM were assessed before and after
5CD. Results were compared to the FDA-authorized VHP+O3 decontamination method. The
following sections describe each of the integrity test methods and results (see Supplemental
Tables S2A and S2B for all integrity test results). Certain test methods are employed for
respirator approval/certification by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
(NIOSH) and European Notifying Bodies. Other tests, such as for medical masks, are required
by the FDA for clearance or for compliance to the European Medical Device Directive.
First, we determined the filtration efficiency of the tested masks/respirators. Filtration efficiency
testing measures the percentage of particles of a certain size that are stopped and retained by the
mask material. Filtration efficiency testing using sub-micron (count median diameter of 0.075 ±
0.020 µm) sodium chloride (NaCl) particles is typically used to evaluate tight-fitting respirators,
while medical masks are typically tested using larger 3-micron droplets containing culturable
bacteria (Staphylococcus aureus). Sub-micron filtration efficiency testing is the more stringent of
the two filtration tests since this method uses smaller and charge-neutralized particles, and a high
air flow rate (simulating inhalation at heavy workload). Therefore, the standardized sub-micron
testing was used to compare filtration efficiency between FFRs and MMs after decontamination
treatments. Bacterial filtration efficiency was assessed only for MMs and CM.
Sub-micron Particulate Filtration Efficiency
FIGURE 7A depicts the filtration efficiency of all FFR and MM models before (untreated) and
after 5CD. High filtration efficiencies were expected for the FFRs as they were all NIOSHapproved N95 FFRs, which requires ≥95% sub-micron filtration efficiency. All three FFR
models surpassed the minimum 95% NaCl sub-micron filtration efficiency requirement before
and after 5CD. Untreated FW and FH masks achieved 76% and 86% filtration efficiency
respectively, and in general filtration efficiency increased after MBL, DH, and VHP+O3
treatments for these masks. Since the CMs were made using materials found in the community,
higher variability was observed between individual masks. As seen in FIGURE 7A, CMs
achieved 34%, 32%, and 47% sub-micron filtration efficiencies at baseline (before treatment)
and after MBL or DH treatments, respectively. Since VHP+O3 is not an effective
decontamination method for materials containing cellulose, this treatment was not performed on
CMs. Overall, MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatment of FFRs/MMs/CM did not cause any
significant differences in the NaCl sub-micron filtration efficiency of the studied models
(p>0.01).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

NP

NP

FIGURE 7. Effect of MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatments on the filtration efficiency of FFRs/MMs/CM.
(A) NaCl sub-micron filtration efficiencies of FFRs/MMs/CM before and after 5CD. NaCl sub-micron filtration
efficiency is a measure of the ability of a respirator or medical mask to capture aerosolized particles smaller than
one micron, expressed as a percentage of particles that do not pass the material at a given velocity or flow rate.
Particle size ranges from 0.022–0.259 µm with a count median diameter of 0.075 ± 0.020 µm and a geometric
standard deviation (GSD) of less than 1.86 to give a mass median aerodynamic diameter of 0.3 μm and air flow is
85 L/min (which simulates inhalation at heavy workload). (B) Bacterial filtration efficiencies of FFRs/MMs/CM
before and after 5CD. Bacterial filtration efficiency is the effectiveness of medical face mask material in preventing
the passage of aerosolized bacteria suspended in 3 µm droplets, expressed as the percentage that does not pass the
mask material at a 28.3 L/min flow rate (similar to human breathing at a light workload). *Horizontal solid line
represents the N95 filtration efficiency requirement of ≥95% particle filtration efficiency according to 42 CFR Part
84. **Horizontal solid lines represent the bacterial filtration efficiency (3 µm droplet size) requirement of ≥98%
according to EN 14683 Type II and IIR and ASTM F2100 Level 2 and Level 3 MMs; >70% and >90% levels
according to CEN CWA 17553 (solid and liquid particles without any biological challenge) and >70% according to
AATCC M14 for CM. RH= Halyard duckbill respirator (Fluidshield-46727). RM= 3M half-sphere respirator
(1860). R3= 3M panel respirator (1870+). FH= ASTM F2100 Level 2 Halyard face mask. FW= EN 14683 Type II
generic face mask. CM=Community mask. NP= not performed.

Bacterial Filtration Efficiency (BFE) using 3-micron Droplets Containing Bacteria
Filtration efficiency of medical/surgical mask material is determined using bacterial filtration
efficiency (BFE) testing. BFE should be ≥98% according to EN 14683 for Type II and ASTM
F2100 for Level 2 medical masks. Both FW and FH masks achieved greater than 98% BFE
before and after 5CD of the three different decontamination methods while CM achieved 88%,
91%, and 87% BFE as baseline and after MBL and DH treatments, respectively [FIGURE 7B].
Overall, no significant differences were observed in the BFE values of any of the tested mask
models after 5CD with the three decontamination treatments.
Breathability Testing
The breathability, or resistance to airflow via inhalation and exhalation, is an indication of the
difficulty in breathing through the respirators or masks. Breathability is an important property for
FFRs’ and MMs’ wearer comfort. The breathability of FFRs is assessed by inhalation and
exhalation resistance tests. According to 42 CFR Part 84 requirements, exhalation resistance
should not exceed 25mm H2O and inhalation resistance should not exceed and 35 mm H2O. EN
149 also requires that the inhalation resistance of respirators (FFP2) at slightly higher flow rate
(95 L/min) should be less than 2.4 mbar, or approximately 24 mmH2O. Breathability of MMs is
determined by a differential pressure test, which is one of the requirements according to ASTM

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

F2100-19 and EN 14683:2019 medical face mask standards. It is also one of the required test
methods by FDA for clearance of certain medical masks, including surgical masks.
Inhalation and Exhalation Resistance
FIGURE 8A and 8B show inhalation and exhalation resistances of FFRs/MMs/CM before and
after 5CD. Results show that all FFR models achieved inhalation and exhalation resistance far
below the breathing resistance limits according to applicable standards and regulations, implying
that it would not be harder for the wearer to breath through the masks after 5 decontamination
cycles. Although assessments of inhalation and exhalation resistance is not commonly conducted
on MM materials, these properties were assessed in this study to understand the impact of
decontamination processes on MMs, and to compare FFRs with MMs in terms of breathability.
MMs demonstrated similar inhalation resistances, but much lower exhalation resistance values
compared to FFRs. Inhalation and exhalation breathing resistances were at least 60% below the
allowable thresholds for all FFR models, according to the respective NIOSH 42 CFR Part 84 and
EN 149 requirements for breathing resistance of FFRs. Inhalation resistance of all face masks
decreased (improved) after 5CD. Notably, inhalation resistance of the CM declined from 8.1 to
4.2 and 3.4 mmH2O after MBL and DH treatment, respectively.
Differential Pressure
The differential pressure (pressure drop) test measures the differential air pressure on either side
of the MM materials using a digital manometer and is a required test method according to ASTM
F2100-19 and EN 14683:2019. It is also one of the required test methods by FDA and the
European Medical Device Directive for clearance of medical masks. As shown in FIGURE 8C,
all of the MMs/CM maintained performance below the maximum allowed differential pressure
values before and after 5CD. A slightly higher pressure drop was noted after decontamination
with VHP+O3 for both MMs. Overall, no concerns were reported in terms of breathability after
the decontamination treatments. An additional, modified breathability test was performed using a
Sheffield dummy that simulated breathing and wear, see Supplemental Figure S5.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

B

A

**

Exhale @ 85 L/min

Inhale @ 85 L/min

**

*
NP

**

*

* *
NP

NP

Figure 8. Effect of MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatments on the breathability of FFRs/MMs/CM. (A) Inhalation
and (B) Exhalation breathing resistances before and after 5CD. The resistance to airflow during inhalation and
exhalation is an indication of the difficulty in breathing through the respirators/masks. (C) Differential pressure
results for MMs/CM before and after 5CD. Pressure drop is a measure of the differential air pressure on either side
of the medical mask. *Results from decontaminated FFRs/MMs are significantly different from untreated masks
(Student’s t test or Mann-Whitney U test p<0.01). **Horizontal solid lines represent the following breathing
resistance standards: Inhalation: ≤35 mmH2O; Exhalation: ≤25 mmH2O for respirators according to 42 CFR Part
84. Note: EN 149 maximum inhalation resistance at 95 L/min is 2.4 mbar, or approximately 24 mmH 2O. At higher
flow rate according to EN 149, the equivalent breathing resistance may increase slightly but can be similar to the 42
CFR Part 84 maximum inhalation resistance at 85 L/min. Similarly, maximum resistance at 95 L/min is 2.4 mbar for
inhalation and 3.0 mbar for exhalation according to CEN CWA 17553 for cloth masks. †Horizontal solid lines
represent the maximum allowed differential pressure in the following standards: <40 Pa/cm2 according to EN
14683:2019 Annex C for Type II; <58.83 Pa/cm 2 according to ASTM F2100 for Level 2; and ≤70 Pa/cm 2 according
to CEN CWA 17553 for CMs. RH= Halyard duckbill respirator (Fluidshield-46727). RM= 3M half-sphere
respirator (1860). R3= 3M panel respirator (1870+). FH= ASTM F2100 Level 2 Halyard face mask. FW= EN
14683 Type II generic face mask. CM=Community mask. NP: not performed.

Fluid Resistance Testing
During a medical procedure, a blood vessel is occasionally punctured resulting in a high velocity
stream of blood impacting a medical face mask. Fluid (splash) resistance testing is used to
evaluate the resistance of medical face masks to penetration by a small volume (~2 mL) of a
high-velocity stream of synthetic blood. Medical face mask pass/fail determinations are based on
visual detection of synthetic blood penetration on the reverse side. Fluid resistance properties of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

MMs and CM were assessed by both challenging from the inside (inner surface) to investigate
their potential source control performance, and from the outside (outer surface) to investigate the
protection from splash and sprays that can be encountered during surgeries, patient care, and
large droplets (respiratory secretions) that may be generated by other people’s coughs or sneezes.
FW masks demonstrated 60% pass before treatment, and 80%, 50%, and 40% pass when
challenged from inside (observed outside) after MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatments, respectively
[FIGURE 9]. Untreated and DH-treated FH masks achieved 90% pass when challenged from the
inside. The passing results increased to 100% after MBL or VHP+O3 treatments. In addition,
untreated, MBL and DH-treated CMs demonstrated 30%, 40% and 50% pass rates respectively,
when challenged from inside (observed outside). The fluid resistance of CMs was higher when
challenged from the outside compared to the inside. This result was unexpected since the same
fabric types were used in the inner and outer surfaces of the CM. However, it may be from the
variable and uncontrolled nature of the construction of community masks. Furthermore, it was
observed that the decontamination processes increased the fluid resistance of outside materials of
both MM models. However, fluid resistance of outside materials of CMs declined after MBL and
DH treatments. There were no significant differences between treated masks and untreated
masks (Fisher’s exact test).
Inside Surface Challenge

A

B

Outside Surface Challenge
100%

Fluid Resistance

Fluid Resistance

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
NP

0%
FW

FH

CM

80%
60%
40%
20%
NP

0%
FW

MM or CM Model
untreated

MBL 5x

DH 5x

VHP+O3 5x

FH

CM

MM or CM Model
untreated

MBL 5x

DH 5x

VHP+O3 5x

FIGURE 9. Effect of MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatments on the fluid (splash) resistance properties of inside and
outside surfaces of MMs/CM. Fluid resistance of masks was assessed using a high-velocity (120 mmHg pressure)
stream of artificial blood (2 mL). Ten masks were tested per condition, with all masks passing at 100%, meaning
fluid penetration was visually undetectable on the opposite side. Masks were either challenged from the inside (A)
or the outside, with fluid resistance/penetration assessed on the opposite side. FH= ASTM F2100 Level 2 Halyard
face mask. FW= EN 14683 Type II generic face mask. CM=Community mask. NP= not performed.

Fit Testing
The respirator must fit the user’s face snugly (i.e., create a seal) to minimize the number of
particles that bypass the filter through gaps between the user’s skin and the respirator seal.
Therefore, fit testing is a critical component to a respiratory protection program whenever
workers use tight-fitting respirators, such as N95 FFRs. Fit testing provides a measure of how
well a respirator/mask seals around the contours of the face. A good fit ensures exchanged air is
filtered through the respirator/mask. Fit was assessed using a PortaCount® PRO+ 8038 machine
with human participants (many of whom were healthcare personnel), and their natural

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

anthropometric variations. In addition, advanced headforms that mimicked human head shapes
were used to measure fit. The impact of the decontamination method on respirator/mask fit, in
terms of fit factors (FF) was compared. Strap/ear loop/tie elastic recovery/tensile strength testing
was also performed to investigate discrepancies in fit.
Respirators maintained human participant FF values above 100 after 5 MBL and DH
decontamination cycles. However, five cycles of VHP+O3 decontamination decreased human fit
of RH and RM to the point of failure [FIGURE 10A]. Human fit testing was also performed for
MMs and CMs to demonstrate that these types of masks are not designed to ensure a tight fit
[FIGURE 10A].
A ‘strong acrid odor’ was noted on some of the VHP+O3 treated FFRs and MMs, while ‘not
unpleasant slight odor’ was noted on some of the FFR after MBL and DH treatments at one of
the fit testing sites. Partial elasticity loss in the VHP+O3 treated FFR straps and MMs ear loops
were also observed by the wearers, see Supplemental section: Tensile Testing of Elastomeric
Straps, Ear Loops, and Ties. Some of the nosepiece foams on VHP+O3 treated RMs were
discolored (turned from gray to brown). In addition to the discoloration, the nose bridge was
more rigid for the three MBL-treated RMs.
Manikin fit factors using an advanced, realistic manikin head, resulted in similar overall passing
of the OSHA 1910.134(f)(10) criterion of 100 FF for all three FFRs (11) [FIGURE 10B]. The
differences observed between human fit and manikin fit can be attributed to the variability in
testing procedures and human facial dimensions and generally the challenge of FFRs to
universally fit the wearer.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

A

**
**
*

*
NP

B

†

FIGURE 10. Effect of MBL, DH, and VHP+O3- treatments on human and manikin overall fit factor for three
FFRs (R3, RH, RM), two MMs (FH, FW) and CM. (A) Human fit testing was performed with volunteer
participants who adjusted the FFR, MM or CM to achieve the highest fit factors or seal and subsequently performed
head movements and remeasured fit or seal. The PortaCount® PRO+ 8038 machine was used to determine overall
fit, with human participants and with manikins with advanced head forms. (B) Manikin fit factors using advanced,
realistic manikin headforms is a reproducible method to test fit without volunteer participants. Its use confirms fit

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

for anticipated facial dimensions. *Indicates significantly different values between treated and untreated FFR, MM
or CM at p<0.05, Student’s t- test or Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. **Horizontal solid line represents the
following standard: ≥100; OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134(f)(10). Percentages on or above each bar represents % of
respirators or masks tested that surpassed this standard. While the standard does not apply to face masks, we
present the % to note the strong difference between respirator and face mask test results. †Horizontal solid line
represents the following standard: Per OSHA 1910.134(f)(10), if the Overall Fit Factor as determined through an
OSHA-accepted quantitative fit testing protocol is equal to or greater than 100 for tight-fitting half facepieces, then
the fit test has been passed for that respirator. RH= Halyard duckbill respirator (Fluidshield-46727). RM= 3M halfsphere respirator (1860). R3= 3M panel respirator (1870+). FH= ASTM F2100 Level 2 Halyard face mask. FW=
EN 14683 Type II generic face mask. CM=Community mask.NP= not performed.

DISCUSSION
We observed that methylene blue and light applied to FFR and MM completely inactivates
SARS-CoV-2. Importantly, MBL, as a new proposed decontamination method, did not cause any
significant changes in any of the filtration, breathability or fluid resistance properties
investigated in this study after 5 decontamination cycles, and our results are consistent with
filtration efficiency seen after VHP+O3 treatment. The additional finding that MB-pretreated
FFRs and MMs continue to inactivate coronavirus provides a potential opportunity for healthcare
providers and other front-line workers to safely re-use their PPE, as well as supply active viral
inactivation during wear. MB is available globally and can be applied using spray bottles. This
study demonstrates viral inactivation using MB combined with 50,000 lux of broad-spectrum
light (~1/3 of illumination on a sunny day). Bright light treatment can be supplied by simple
white light lamps sold in hardware stores. Furthermore, in a small preliminary experiment, even
MB exposed to ambient light (700 lux) and low light (<100 lux) inactivated SARS-CoV-2. This
finding needs to be further studied but suggests that MB can work using ambient light available
in hospital and clinic settings. We did observe, however, that lower light intensities require a
longer light exposure duration for efficacy.
Identifying methods to decontaminate PPE to protect healthcare personnel is paramount. A
recent study demonstrated recovery of viable virus from FFR material inoculated with viral loads
of SARS-CoV-2 and stored at 20°C with 40-50% relative humidity for 21 days. (12) These
common conditions in health care settings demonstrate the importance of having an inexpensive,
simple, and robust means of decontamination of PPE like MBL that can retain functionality and
performance. In our study, PRCV was inoculated under the outer layer of MMs and FFRs to
mimic the worst-case scenario of high-titer virus penetrating the outer layer of a mask. MBL
robustly inactivated >5 logs of virus for both MMs and 2 of the FFRs, suggesting that both MB
and light were able to sufficiently penetrate the outer layer of the PPE. The exceptions were RM
(2.7 log or 99.8% reduction) and CM (0.4 log or 60.5% reduction). RM is a half-sphere with a
more rigid shell which may have blocked some of the MB or light from penetrating to the inner
layer. Fisher et al. saw a similar finding with UVC light penetration, which was impacted the
further into the filter material the light passed. (13)
Consistent with previous studies (14), the DH and VHP+O3 treatments did not alter the filtration
efficiency of masks and respirators tested in this study. MB and the DH decontamination can
now be added to the rare category of decontamination methods that do not violate mask integrity
for the models tested (including fit), which thus far only included the gold standard VHP (3,9,1416-). Although the FDA approved a few VHP systems for PPE decontamination, they are not
easily obtainable in low-resource settings. Various studies have also investigated the impact of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

heat on the filtration efficiency and physical deformation of FFR or filter media and
demonstrated that higher temperatures could negatively affect integrity (13,17,18).
Dry heat yielded inconsistent viral inactivation in our study possibly owing to evidence that
humidity plays a role in heat inactivation (19). The finding that DH on CM materials yielded
better viral inactivation may be due to the ability of the cotton materials to rise to inactivationlevel temperatures faster than the synthetic FFR and MM materials, although we did not test the
material surface temperature during the heating to prove this. In one study, improved inactivation
was demonstrated with moist heat (100% relative humidity) reducing initial SARS-CoV-2 titers
almost 5-logs at 75C for 30 minutes (19). Our rationale for testing 75C DH without humidity
related to testing the simplest method which could be replicated in any location where standard
ovens exist without the complexity of regulating or delivering a certain amount of humidity.
We decided to compare a CM in this study to provide first definitive analysis in the same study
format used for respirators and medical-grade masks. The tested CM performed surprisingly well
in some of the integrity tests. This is likely due to the double cotton layer combined with two
layers of polypropylene spunbond fabric. Not all CMs in use around the world contain these
multiple layers, especially non-woven layers. The heterogeneity of materials and design, and
lack of standardization of CM used for source control make generalized conclusions difficult.
When testing MBL virucidal activity on CM, we observed inconsistent results when virus was
inoculated under the cloth layer. This could be due to absorption of MB into the cotton layer.
Alternatively, CM material color or finishing dye chemicals potentially impeded MB efficacy
through light absorption. These hypotheses should be tested using alternative CM fabrics, colors,
and models.
Our studies on MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 decontamination were constructed to parallel other
studies investigating the impact of heat and VHP+O3 on the filtration efficiency and physical
deformation of FFR or filter media. Previous studies evaluated meltblown polypropylene filter
media using NaCl aerosol testing and found that filtration efficiency remained ≥95% after twenty
treatment cycles consisting of 75°C for 30 min (14,17,20). On the other hand, Viscusi et al. (15)
autoclaved two FFR models at 121°C/15 psi for 15 or 30 minutes and reported that filtration
efficiency of both models decreased below minimum NIOSH requirements. A study
investigating dry heat at lower temperature settings (110°C) reported that reduction of filtration
efficiency was FFR model-specific (16). Previous studies also reported that VHP did not result in
the reduction in the filtration efficiency of any of the N95 FFR models tested, while showing
significant inactivation of spores, bacteriophages, and SARS-CoV-2 virus (3,9,14,16,20).
Battelle CCDS (Critical Care Decontamination System)™ was approved by the FDA as the first
emergency use authorization (EUA) for decontamination system for FFRs (3). In Battelle’s
system, the 3M 1860 model (RM) was shown to maintain filtration performance for 50 treatment
cycles of VHP treatment using the Clarus® R HPV generator (utilizing 30% H2O2) (3).
Additionally, FFR fit was shown to be unaffected for up to twenty VHP treatments cycles using
a manikin headform which was assessed on one FFR model without donning and doffing
between cycles.Strap degradation, however, did occur after twenty treatment cycles (3). In
addition, the FDA has issued an EUA for the SSS VHP N95 Respirator Decontamination System
manufactured by Stryker Sustainability Solutions where reprocessing is limited to three cycles
(2).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Fischer et al. (14) incorporated test subject quantitative respirator fit testing of intact FFRs using
a PortaCount® following each cycle of heat treatment and wear for two hours and reported that
the mean fit factor of six fit tests remained >100 for both one and two treatment cycles, but fell
slightly below 100 after three dry heat (70°C) cycles. They also reported that one FFR did not
have any physical deformation. The same study reported that the mean fit factor of six fit tests
remained acceptable (according to OSHA criterion) following three VHP treatment cycles.
We also collected additional measures related to the physical appearance, physical comfort, and
user acceptance of decontaminated FFRs/MMs. The purpose of these measures was to determine
whether different decontamination methods impact FFRs and MMs in ways beyond physical fit,
which could affect perceptions of healthcare personnel in terms of their use of decontaminated
devices and ultimately if the use of decontaminated devices would affect HCPs’ performance
and delivery of care. We plan to analyze and report upon this component of the study in a future
publication.
There were limitations to this study. We only tested 3 types of FFRs, yet there are approximately
500 N95 FFR models approved by NIOSH and many medical masks around the world. Each
FFR, MM, or CM model has distinct filter/strap/ear loop/tie materials and design characteristics
(e.g., surface area, dead space, nose padding). The differences in materials and design
characteristics among all available FFR/MM/CM models result in variable outcomes for
decontamination efficacy and effect of decontamination on FFR performance. CDC recommends
that a decontamination method’s effectiveness be evaluated for specific FFR models in
collaboration with the manufacturer, and if needed, a third-party laboratory (21).
Another limitation within our study was that our primary inactivation studies were performed
with direct application of a fixed quantity of MB onto coupons and only two of our experiments
tested the spraying of MB onto a whole mask or the soaking of PPE material into a solution of
MB. We attempted to normalize the volume of MB applied to the coupons to the amount of per
square surface area. For example, if 7-8 mL of MB solution was sprayed onto an intact mask (4
sprays on outer and 2 sprays on inner surface), based on the surface area of a 3M N95 1860
respirator (RM), this would result in 10-30 ul of MB for the each 1 cm2 coupon.
In our clinical specimen experiment, we demonstrated SARS-CoV-2 inactivation with MBL.
Obtaining whole masks worn by healthcare personnel who cared for COVID-19 patients was not
in the scope of our study, yet would add strength to our finding that a saliva specimen from a
COVID-19 positive patient was inactivated by the MBL treatment.
All labs performed their studies with ‘biological triplicates’ – three like-masks or respirators
from the same respective manufacturing batches were used for every mask tested. We attempted
to enhance and strengthen our findings by leveraging four different virology testing sites using
three different coronavirus species, including two surrogate coronaviruses. Our findings with the
surrogate coronaviruses allow future studies to test diagnostics and therapeutics at lower levels
of biocontainment than required for SARS-CoV-2. We believe that conducting our simultaneous
experiments across two continents using the same methodology but in different labs, as well as
conducting additional experiments using a SARS-CoV-2 clinical sample provides generalizable
knowledge. The heterogeneity of light administration methods replicated practical light
scenarios. The ovens used in the studies were all different and only standardized for the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

temperature administered (75°C). The use of alternative heat and alternative light producing
methods parallels what we would expect in the real-world settings – no standard products, but
ability to standardize a protocol.
The biocompatibility of MB on masks was not tested in this study yet the concentrations of MB
– 10 M – used to spray onto the masks or used to drop onto mask coupons, were far below the
clinically used MB concentrations administered intravenously for methemoglobinemia (1 mg/kg)
(5), orally as third line therapy for malaria (22), or applied intranasally for Staphylococcus
aureus (23). The amount of MB sprayed onto each mask using our 10 µM solution was <0.026
mg. Our team will be testing the amount of MB that a wearer might inhale during the course of
an 8-10 hr shift wearing a mask. Although human fit testers of the MBL-treated masks did not
experience any negative effects, more rigorous inhalational biocompatibility tests need to be
done.
We did not replicate multiple real-life PPE donning and doffing over multiple shifts or extended
wear which could affect FFR fit and performance over time. Degesys et al. tested the real time fit
using models we used in our study. The 3M 1860 maintained fit for more than 5 donnings (24).
In addition, off-gassing of decontamination chemicals was not evaluated although anecdotally,
some wearers of the VHP+O3 treated masks complained of an “acrid” or “acidic” smell while
some wearers of the MBL-treated masked claimed that there was a “mild” and “calming” aroma
appreciated. Human factors assessments, including user acceptance of decontaminated FFRs,
MMs, and CMs by HCPs are underway. Further testing of the MBL method for user acceptance
and workplace compatibility are also being explored.
We demonstrate that MB activated by broad-spectrum white or red light effectively inactivates
coronaviruses including the novel SARS-CoV-2 on typical medical mask surfaces without
affecting mask material integrity, or alterating mask fit and filtration characteristics. This series
of studies provides evidence that MB can be applied to the surface of a FFR or MM and
illuminated by a light source as a disinfection technique, enabling safer reuse of single-use
disposable respirators and masks in shortage situations. One could envision using this
decontamination process after each work shift in a healthcare setting. Integrity was maintained
for the FFR models tested in this study after 5CD, however, the variability in the the design and
materials (e.g., straps and earloops) may still lead to mask performance changes with successive
donnings and doffings that will still need to be assessed to ensure adequate fit of the respirators.
Residual MB remaining on the mask surface activated by ambient white light could also provide
a novel means of continual disinfection of viral particles which become adherent to the mask
surface in-use. Indeed, under ambient lighting condition, the surface of the masks treated with
MB could produce up to 3.2x1015 molecules of singlet oxygen per second (Supplemental Table
S6). Other potential uses include application of MB to face coverings used in low resource
medical and general community settings, in order to enhance protection, not only of persons in
proximity to the face covering user, but also to increase protection of the user from airborne
virus. In the medical setting, on site, MBL spot treatments of PPE touch points prior to doffing
may also decrease accidental contamination and may potentially provide increased protection of
healthcare and laboratory workers. A further series of experiments intended to support the
implementation of these additional uses of MB and light are underway.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

CONCLUSION
We provide the first evidence that methylene blue and light can inactivate human coronavirus on
FFRs and MMs commonly worn by healthcare personnel and essential workers without
decreasing performance and fit. Our findings provide a recipe for easily accessible, inexpensive,
effective PPE re-use and afford an opportunity for utilization in high- and low-resourced settings
to address issues of global supply shortages and reduced time of decontamination relative to
VHP+03. Residual MB remaining on the mask surface activated by ambient white light could
also provide a novel means of continual disinfection of viral particles which become adherent to
the mask surface in-use, continually reducing wearer exposure to SARS-CoV-2. We are
investigating applying MBL to a wider range of high-threat pathogens.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Respirators and Masks
In this study, three FFRs - Halyard Fluidshield-46727 duckbill respirator (RH, NIOSH Approval
Number: TC-84A-7521) (O & M Halyard,), 3M 1860 half-sphere respirator (RM, NIOSH
Approval Number: TC-84A-0006), and 3M 1870+ panel respirator (R3, NIOSH Approval
Number: TC-84A-5726) (3M), and three MM models - generic EN 14683 Type II medical mask
(FW), Halyard ASTM F2100 Level 2 procedure mask (FH) (O & M Halyard), and a homemade
community cloth mask (CM) - were tested [TABLE 2.]. All of the FFRs used in this study are
surgical FFRs. Surgical FFRs are NIOSH-approved particulate respirators that have also been
cleared by the FDA as medical devices. The CM consisted of an inner and outer cotton layer
surrounding two layers of polypropylene spun-bond fabrics. See Supplemental Table S1 for
details on which labs and testing sites respirators and masks were sent to for decontamination
and testing.
TABLE 2. Masks and Respirators used in this study.

Viruses
SARS-CoV-2 was obtained from Dr. Darryl Falzarano (VIDO) (GISAID accession ID:
EPI_ISL_425177) used in Lab 2 or from a patient at the George Washington University Hospital
used in Lab 1 and was propagated in Vero CCL-81 cells. Viral titers were determined by plaque
assay and typically reached 1.0-6.6 x106 PFU/mL. A SARS-CoV-2 clinical saliva specimen with
a titer of 1.1 x 105 PFU/ml was obtained with the University of Calgary Conjoint Health
Research Ethics Board approval (ID# REB20-0444). The recombinant murine hepatitis virus
(MHV) stock (rA59-E-FL-M) was described previously (25). Porcine respiratory coronavirus
(PRCV), a spike gene deletion mutant of transmissible gastroenteritis virus (TGEV) and a
member of the Alphacoronavirus 1 species (26,27), was used as a SARS-CoV-2 surrogate.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

PRCV strain 91V44 (28) was passaged three times on ST cells. Both MHV and PRCV were used
as SARS-CoV-2 surrogates.
Tissue Culture
Murine Delayed Brain Tumor (DBT) cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 1%
GlutaMAX, 1% HEPES, 1% NEAA, 10% Tryptose Phosphate Broth and 10% Fetal Bovine
Serum (FBS). Vero CCL-81 cells were purchased from ATCC and cultured in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% GlutaMAX, 1% Pen/Strep, and 0.1% Amphotericin B.
Alternatively, Vero CCL-81 cells were cultured in MEM supplemented with 2 mM L-glutamine,
1 mM Sodium Pyruvate, 1x NEAA, 1% Pen/Strep, 0.1% Amphotericin B, and 10% FBS. Vero
E6 cells (ATCC) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 1% GlutaMAX.
Swine testicular (ST) cells were maintained in MEM supplemented with 5% FBS, 1% sodium
pyruvate, and antibiotics (100U/ml penicillin, 0.1 mg/ml streptomycin, 0.05 mg/ml gentamycin).
All cells were grown at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.
Light Sources for Methylene Blue Testing
Light boxes developed at Colorado State University were used at Seattle Children’s Research
Institute, George Washington University, University of Calgary and Nelson Laboratories
containing the 4000K Husky LED lights (model# K40187). Husky LEDs were also used at the
University of Alberta but were 3500K. The University of Liège and Centexbel used a light box
of their own design containing horticultural lamps for their studies. Luminescence was verified
using light meters in all laboratories (Latnex, model LM-50KL; DeltaOHM, Model HD2102.2;
or Cooke, Model CK-CL400; see Supplemental section).
Virus Inoculation and Elution
Masks were cut into 7-10 mm2 coupons and inoculated with the maximum available titer of
SARS-CoV-2 or the surrogate coronaviruses (MHV or PRCV). The volume of the inoculum for
SARS-CoV-2 and MHV was 10 L. Virus was added to the outer layer of each coupon (or inner
layer where specified) with a pipette and dried for 20 mins before inactivation treatments were
initiated. For elution, coupons were soaked in media in a 1.5 ml microtube (MHV, SARS-CoV-2
experiments) or 15-ml tube (PRCV experiments). Tubes were vortexed or rocked on an orbital
rocker for 10-20 minutes. Alternatively, 100 l PRCV was injected under the respirators/masks
outer layer using an ultra-fine insulin needle. After decontamination, 34 mm2 coupons were cut
from the masks, placed in a 15-ml tube containing media and vortexed. Remaining infectious
virus was quantified by median tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)or plaque assays.
Methylene Blue Treatment
MB was obtained from Sigma (M9140), ThermoFisher Scientific (J60823) or American Regent
(0517-0374-05). Stock solutions were prepared using ultrapure distilled water. After inoculation
of the virus and a 20 min drying step, 10-30 l of MB at the indicated concentrations was added
to the coupons and exposed to 50,000 lux of broad-spectrum light or 12,500 lux of red light for
varying time points. Broad-spectrum light and red-light sources were based on the local labs’
method for administering adequate light energy for MB activation. And 12,500lux of red light
roughly equates to the same amount of light energy within the MB excitation wavelength that
50,000 lux of white light yields. Intact inoculated masks were sprayed with 7-8 ml of 10 M MB
and allowed to dry for 30 minutes protected from light before exposure to 12,500 lux of red light

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

for 30 min. For dark control, coupons and masks were left in biosafety hood with the light off or
covered by aluminum foil (<100 lux).
For the pre-treatment tests, R3 coupons were soaked with 10 µM MB for >1 hour and dried 2
days protected from light. SARS-CoV-2 was spotted on outer or inner mask layers, dried for 20
minutes before exposure to 50,000 lux of light for 30 min. Virus was eluted from the coupons
and quantified by plaque assay. Intact RM and FW received 6 sprays on the front and 2 in the
back (8 ml total) and dried overnight. MHV was added to three points on the outer surface, dried
for 20 minutes and exposed to 50,000 lux of light for 30 min. The inoculated areas were excised
from the mask, eluted, and quantified by TCID50 assay.
Dry Heat Treatment
Inoculated coupons were placed in a tissue culture plate and incubated at the indicated
temperatures in a dry heat oven (IsoTemp, Fisher Scientific, VWR Dry-Line 56-Prime oven or
Lab-line L-C oven with a DataChart 1250 temperature probe). A calibrated analog thermometer
was used to verify temperature if a temperature probe was not available. Intact inoculated FFRs
and MMs were placed horizontally on a metal frame in a dry oven (M-Steryl, AMB Ecosteryl
Company) containing two calibrated Pt100 sensors to record the temperature throughout the
experiment to ensure correct exposure conditions.
PPE Integrity Testing
Samples were tested as-received (‘untreated’), with DH, with VHP+O3 and with MBL. All
decontaminated samples were treated off-site (Nelson, 4CAir, University of Liege) before
reaching the integrity labs for testing.
Filtration Efficiency Testing
Filtration was assessed using NaCl sub-micron particles for FFRs, MMs, and CM; and using 3micron droplets that contain bacterial challenge for MMs and CM. Although medical face masks
are not typically tested using NaCl sub-micron particles, performing the tests with this
challenging-size particle allowed comparison of filtration performance between masks and
respirators. Sub-micron particulate filtration efficiency is a measure of the ability of a respirator
or medical mask to capture aerosolized particles smaller than one micron, expressed as a
percentage of a known number of particles that do not pass the material at a given face velocity
for flat samples or flowrate for whole article testing. Untreated and decontaminated respirators
were tested for filtration efficiency using a modified version of the NIOSH Standard Test
Procedure (STP) TEB-APR-STP-0059 (29), using an Automated Filter Tester (CERTITEST®,
Model 8130, TSI, Inc.) and according to the National Personal Protective Technology
Laboratory (NPPTL) Decontaminated Respirator Assessment Plan (11). In sub-micron testing,
charged-neutralized particle size ranges from 0.022–0.259 µm with a count median diameter of
0.075 ± 0.020 µm and a geometric standard deviation (GSD) of less than 1.86 to give a mass
median aerodynamic diameter of 0.3 μm, and air flow is 85 L/min (which simulates inhalation at
heavy workload). Respirator testing was completed at the NIOSH NPPTL. Results were
evaluated against NIOSH performance criteria according to 42 CFR Part 84 for FFR approvals
(minimum 95% filtration efficiency) (30). Untreated and decontaminated medical face masks
and community masks were also tested following the same method at Nelson Laboratories.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

The bacterial filtration efficiency (BFE) test is a conventional method to measure filtration
efficiency of medical face masks (31). BFE was measured using the bacteria Staphylococcus
aureus (diameter: 1 μm) as the challenge organism. A suspension of S. aureus was aerosolized
using a nebulizer to give a challenge level of 1700–3000 colony-forming units (CFU) per test as
specified by the ASTM F2101 method (32). The bacterial aerosol is a water droplet containing
the bacteria and not an individual bacterial particle. The particles were not charge neutralized for
testing. The aerosol sample was drawn through a test sample clamped into the top of a 6-stage
Andersen sampler with agar plates for collection of the bacteria particles at a flow rate of 28.3
L/min for 1 min. The design of 6-stage Andersen sampler is based on the human respiratory
tract, where all airborne particles greater than 0.65 μm are classified aerodynamically. The flow
rate of 28.3 L/min is similar to human breathing flow rate (at light workload) to obtain
deposition of particles in different stages of the Andersen sampler. Aerosol droplets generated in
this test ranges from 0.65 to 7 µm with a mean particle size of approximately 3.0 µm. As
previously mentioned, BFE was employed on masks only. It was performed on untreated and
decontaminated MMs and CMs at Nelson Laboratories and Centexbel. Results were evaluated
against performance criteria according to EN 148683 Type II and ASTM F2100 and Level 2
medical masks (≥98% 3 µm bacterial droplet filtration efficiency), CEN CWA 17553 (≥70% and
≥90% 3-micron solid or liquid particles without biological challenge) (33) and AATCC M14
(20) (>70% 3-micron latex spheres) for CM.
The filtration efficiency of fibrous filter materials is controlled by factors including, aerosol
charge, particle size distribution, face velocity and filter material charge. When NIOSH submicron and BFE test methods are compared, NIOSH approval testing is considered as more
stringent or worst-case method, because of the use of charge neutralized aerosol size close to the
most penetrating particle size at relatively higher flow rate (face velocity), to produce maximum
penetration or conservative filtration efficiency.
Breathability Testing
Breathability was assessed using inhalation and exhalation breathing resistance measurements
according to the NIOSH standard testing procedures according to 42CFR Part 84 for the all of
the respirators and masks (30, 34) and pressure drop measurements for masks only (ASTM
F2100 and EN 14683). An additional breathability assessment using clause 7.16 of the EN 149
standard for European respirators was used and is termed “Sheffield Dummy Air Flow
Differences” or Sheffield AFD (EN 149).
Inhalation and exhalation resistance of devices were tested using NIOSH STPs (TEB-APR-STP0007 and TEB-APR-STP-0003). The results in mmH2O were recorded and evaluated against
NIOSH performance maximum limits for FFR approvals (25 mmH2O for exhalation and 35
mmH2O for inhalation) at approximately 85 ± 2 L/min airflow. Respirator testing was completed
at the NIOSH NPPTL while MMs and CMs were tested at the Nelson Laboratories.
The differential pressure (delta p) testing of untreated and decontaminated samples was
performed according to ASTM F2100 and EN 14683 and measured the differential air pressure
on either side of the mask using a digital manometer at Nelson Laboratories and Centexbel
Laboratories. The delta p values were reported in mm water/cm2 (required units for ASTM
F2100) and Pa/cm2 (required units for EN 14683) of test area and evaluated against ASTM

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

F2100 Level 2 and EN 14683 Type II requirements for and masks (ASTM F2100 <6.0 mm
H2O/cm2 and <40Pa/cm2 for Type II).
Fluid Resistance Testing
Testing the fluid penetration resistance (resistance to splash and spray) by synthetic blood is one
of the requirements of FDA surgical mask clearance in the U.S. for all three different levels of
masks defined in ASTM F2100. It is also required by EN 14683 for Type IIR masks only. The
synthetic blood penetration testing of untreated and decontaminated samples was performed on
medical face masks and community masks at Nelson Laboratories and Centexbel according to
ASTM F1862 or ISO 22609:2004 at 120 mmHg pressure which is required for ASTM F2100
Level 2 masks and EN 14683 Type IIR masks. For each mask type, five samples were tested
with the outside facing the synthetic blood to determine the barrier resistance and five samples
were tested with the inside facing the synthetic blood to assess the source control properties. The
percentage of passing samples (no visible penetration) was calculated and compared to ASTM
F2100 requirements (29 out of the 32 passing results).
Fit Testing
Human Fit
Fit testing was conducted with the PortaCount® Pro+ 8038 (TSI Inc., Shoreview, MN, USA) at
two study sites: Stanford University, and the University of Calgary. The human fit testing was
determined to be exempt from ethics board review by both the Research Compliance Office,
Stanford University (March 23, 2020) and the Conjoint Health Research Ethic Board, University
of Calgary (June 12, 2020). All fit testing of masks was done with OSHA-approved protocols for
testing N95. However, sample sizes and study designs differed between sites. At Stanford
University, fit testing of test masks was performed on a human model (LC) using the OSHA test
protocol of the PortaCount Pro+ 8038. At the University of Calgary, three groups of five
healthcare personnel completed fit tests a repeated-measures design, with respirator type and
between-subjects factor. At both sites, the fit test protocol consisted of eight dynamic tasks:
normal breathing, heavy breathing, turning head side-to-side, head up-and-down, talking,
grimace, bend over and normal breathing. Each cycle of tests was performed twice for each mask
and Fit Factor (FF) was calculated.
In addition to these measures, participants at the University of Calgary (including 15 additional
healthcare personnel who participated in a separate study arm focused on surgical/procedural and
cloth masks; total N = 30) provided data on measures related to the physical appearance, physical
comfort, and trustworthiness and acceptance of the decontaminated masks. Data from these
measures, which is not included in the current manuscript, will be presented in a separate
publication.
Manikin Fit
The static advanced headform fit testing (29) was used to determine the anticipated changes in
fit. Static fit testing was completed on FFRs only at NIOSH NPPTL using a static advanced
headform (StAH) that quantifies the changes in manikin fit factor. The TSI, Inc. PortaCount®
PRO+ 8038 (Shorewood, Minnesota, USA) in “N95 Enabled” mode was used for this
evaluation. Assessments of respirators were done using normal and deep breathing without
dynamic movements and a speaking passage (11).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Statistical Analysis
Measurements with standard error bars were generated using Prisma Analytics (Munich,
Germany). Means and standard deviations or percent pass of each integrity test method were
calculated separately by FFR/MM/CM style. Data for each integrity test method conducted at
more than one test site were pooled to create overall means and standard deviations or percent
pass. Normality of the data distribution was tested using the Shapiro-Wilk test. Significant
differences between untreated and treated FFR/MM/CM were calculated with Student’s t-tests,
Mann-Whitney U tests, or Fisher’s exact tests, as appropriate (SAS v9.4). EC50s were calculated
using GraphPad Prism 8. Full results of integrity tests are presented in Supplemental Table S2A
and 2B.
Acknowledgements
FSKB and YLL acknowledge the donation of masks and respirators from the WHO, as well as
the guidance from the WHO CDG, 3M and Halyard. MCC thanks the contribution of the NIOSH
National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory: Jonisha P. Pollard, Michael S Bergman,
Kevin Strickland, Rebecca Streeter, Christian C. Coby, Nichole Suhon, and Jeremy J Brannen.
BHH and MCC acknowledge the biomedical engineering hackathon group through Cassandra
Howard and the light boxes built by the Colorado State University Biomedical team, Dr. Jorge
Rocca and Han Chi. DE wishes to thank Megan Desaulniers and Dr. Dan Dragon for BSL3
operations at the University of Alberta. JMC acknowledges the assistance of Johanna Blaak and
Michelle Wright of the W21C Research and Innovation Centre, University of Calgary for
consultation on methodology and for project management, respectively, Jeanette Adams and
Rhea Campbell of Alberta Health Services for conducting the human fit testing, and David
Silverstone from Alberta Health Services for oversight and management. ET wishes to thank
Amélie Matton, Murielle Perrin and Frédéric de Meulemeester (AMB Ecosteryl, Mons,
Belgium) for suggestions and technical and administrative support and thanks Chantal
Vanmaercke and Carine Boone for their excellent technical support. MCC thanks the
administrative support of Mary Moua. TSL acknowledges the support of the Seattle Children’s
Hospital Medical Director of Infection Prevention, Dr. Danielle Zerr, and the Chief Medical
Officer, Dr. Ruth McDonald.
Disclaimer
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Author contributions
TSL, JC, BHH, FEMS, MCC, YLL, FSKB, DE designed the study methodology. SC provided
methodology design and concepts. JC and BH collated and analyzed Methylene Blue clinical
chemistry data with NM and OJ developing and performing Methylene Blue test protocols. AP
coordinated the Writing and Communications Group. BHH and FEMS coordinated the protocol,
standardization and performance of the Virus Study Group (TSL, YL, KBK, EH, ET, YC, TC,
CNM, LFLB, DE, JS, CW, TW, JC). SRT, LD, HN, JFW, SDJ contributed to technical operation
and generated data needs of the Virus Study Group. TG and ET contributed the MHV
methodology and virus stock to the Seattle Children’s Research Institute. FSKB and YLL
coordinated the evaluation performance, data validation and standardization of the methodology
of the PPE Integrity Performance Group (SJS, AP, RP, MM, YC) with JO, VMS, JLL providing
the test methods and data collection for the integrity performance of the masks and respirators.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

YC coordinated mask and respirator particulate testing by LL and MZ. MML provided the
statistical analysis of the study data with assistance by PF for the PortaCount data at the Calgary
site. The PortaCount human fit testing for the decontaminated masks at the Calgary site was
planned by JMD, KP and SS and coordinated by RJM and JMC with assistance from SR, PF, and
KH. AP and LFC provided PortaCount human fit testing data from the (Anesthesia Informatics
and Media) AIM lab site. MCC, KH, ML coordinated the DeMaND study administration and
logistics. All authors were provided the final manuscript for comments and approval.
SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURES AND TABLES
- TABLE S1: Respirator and Mask Decontamination and Testing Matrix
- TABLE S2A: Integrity Results for Face Masks (MMs and CM)
- TABLE S2B: Integrity Testing Results for Respirators (FFRs)
-

Background: Methylene Blue as a Photosensitizer:
o FIGURE S1: Absorption spectrum of a 10 µM methylene blue solution in distilled
water.
o FIGURE S2: Photosensitized production of 1O2 by Methylene Blue (MB).
o TABLE S3: Viral log reductions achieved by MB photodynamic therapy.

-

Singlet Oxygen Production Rate - Theoretical Evaluation.
o FIGURE S3: Irradiance spectrum of the Husky light source measured at a distance
that generates a total illuminance of 100,000 lux.
o TABLE S4: Calculated fraction of photon absorbed per molecule of MB per second
(P) for various light sources.
o TABLE S5: Total number of photons absorbed per second by the external surface of
the mask.
o TABLE S6: Number of singlet oxygen molecules produced per second on the entire
external surface of the mask.

-

FIGURE S4: Mask Strap Viral Inactivation with MBL or DH

-

Tensile Testing of Elastomeric Straps, Ear Loops, and Ties

-

Simulated Wear and Air Flow Difference Detection using Sheffield Dummy
o FIGURE S5: Effect of MBL, DH, and VHP+O3 treatments on the air flow rate
differences measured with the Sheffield Dummy Head for three FFRs (R3, RH, RM),
two MMs (FH, FW) and CM during inhalation and exhalation.

-

Supplemental Materials and Methods
o Light boxes
• FIGURE S6: Two constructed light boxes used in the study
o Tensile Strength Testing
o Sheffield AFD Testing

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

REFERENCES
1.
2.

3.
4.
5.

6.

7.

8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.

14.

15.

16.

WHO. Rational use of personal protective equipment for coronavirus disease 2019 (
COVID-19 ). World Health Organization. 2020;6 (April):1–28.
United States Food and Drug Administration. Decontamination Systems for Personal
Protective Equipment EUAs. 2020;1–4. Available from: https://www.fda.gov/medicaldevices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-emergency-use-authorizations-medicaldevices/decontamination-systems-personal-protective-equipment-euas
Battelle. Final Report for the Bioquell Hydrogen Peroxide Vapor ( HPV )
Decontamination for Reuse of N95 Respirators. 2016;46.
Costa L, Faustino MAF, Neves MGPMS, Cunha Â, Almeida A. Photodynamic
inactivation of mammalian viruses and bacteriophages. Viruses. 2012;4(7):1034–74.
Tuite EM, Kelly JM. New trends in photobiology. Photochemical interactions of
methylene blue and analogues with DNA and other biological substrates. Journal of
Photochemistry and Photobiology, B: Biology. 1993;21(2–3):103–24.
Boix-Garriga E, Rodríguez-Amigo B, Planas O, Nonell S. Chapter 2 Properties of Singlet
Oxygen. In: Singlet Oxygen: Applications in Biosciences and Nanosciences, Volume 1
[Internet]. The Royal Society of Chemistry; 2016. p. 23–46. Available from:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/9781782622208-00023
Muller-Breitkreutz K, Mohr H, Briviba K, Sies H. Inactivation of viruses by chemically
and photochemically generated singlet molecular oxygen. J Photochem Photobiol B
[Internet]. 1995/09/01. 1995;30(1):63–70. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8558363
Wagner SJ. Virus inactivation in blood components by photoactive phenothiazine dyes.
Transfusion Medicine Reviews. 2002;16(1):61–6.
Bergman MS, Viscusi DJ, Heimbuch BK, Wander JD, Sambol AR, Shaffer RE.
Evaluation of multiple (3-Cycle) decontamination processing for filtering facepiece
respirators. Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics. 2010;5(4):33–41.
Yan J, Guha S, Hariharan P, Myers M. Modeling the Effectiveness of Respiratory
Protective Devices in Reducing Influenza Outbreak. Risk Analysis. 2019;39(3):647–61.
NIOSH. Decontaminated Respirator Assessment Plan. NIOSH. 2020. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/respirators/testing/pdfs/NIOSHApproved_Decon_TestPl
an10.pdf
Kasloff S, Strong J, Funk D, Cutts T. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 on Critical Personal
Protective Equipment. medrxiv Jan 1, 2020.
Fisher EM. and Shaffer RE. A method to determine the available UV‐C dose for the
decontamination of filtering facepiece respirators. Journal of applied microbiology 110.1
(2011): 287-295.
Fischer RJ, Morris DH, Doremalen N Van, Sarchette S, Matson MJ, Bushmaker T, et al.
Effectiveness of N95 respirator decontamination and reuse against SARS-CoV-2 Virus.
Emerging Infectious Diseases. 2020;26(9):2253–5.
Viscusi DJ, King WP, Shaffer RE. Effect of decontamination on the filtration efficiency of
two filtering facepiece respirator models. International Society for Respiratory Protection
[Internet]. 2007;24(3/4):93. Available from: https://www.isrp.com/the-isrpjournal/journal-public-abstracts/1138-vol-24-no-3-and-no-4-2007-pp-93-107-viscusiopen-access/file
Viscusi DJ, Bergman MS, Eimer BC, Shaffer RE. Evaluation of five decontamination

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.
31.

methods for filtering facepiece respirators. Annals of Occupational Hygiene.
2009;53(8):815–27.
Yan R, Chillrud S, Magadini DL, Yan B. surgical facial masks : stretching supplies and
better protection during the ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of the International
Society for Respiratory Protection. 2020;37(1):19–35.
Price A, Cui Y, Liao L, Xiao W, Chu S, Chu L. Is the fit of N95 facial masks effected by
disinfection ? A study of heat and UV disinfection methods using the OSHA protocol fit
test. medrxiv Jan 1,2020.
Campos RK, Jin J, Rafael GH, Zhao M, Liao L, Simmons G, et al. Decontamination of
SARS-CoV-2 and Other RNA Viruses from N95 Level Meltblown Polypropylene Fabric
Using Heat under Different Humidities. ACS Nano. 2020;14(10):14017-25.
Zhao M, Liao L, Xiao W, Yu X, Wang H, Wang Q, et al. Household materials selection
for homemade cloth face coverings and their filtration efficiency enhancement with
triboelectric charging. Nano Letters. medrxiv June 2, 2020.
CDC. Implementing Filtering Facepiece Respirator (FFR) Reuse, Including Reuse after
Decontamination, When There Are Known Shortages of N95 Respirators. CDC. 2020.
Available from: https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/ppestrategy/decontamination-reuse-respirators.html
Rengelshausen J, Burhenne J, Fröhlich M, Tayrouz Y, Singh SK, Riedel KD, et al.
Pharmacokinetic interaction of chloroquine and methylene blue combination against
malaria. European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. 2004;60(10):709–15.
Krespi YP, Kizhner V. Laser-assisted nasal decolonization of Staphylococcus aureus,
including methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. American Journal of
Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Medicine and Surgery [Internet]. 2012;33(5):572–5.
Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjoto.2012.02.002
Degesys NF, Wang RC, Kwan E, Fahimi J, Noble JA, Raven MC. Correlation Between
N95 Extended Use and Reuse and Fit Failure in an Emergency Department. JAMA
[Internet]. 2020 Jul 7;324(1):94. Available from:
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2767023
Boscarino JA, Logan HL, Lacny JJ, Gallagher TM. Envelope protein palmitoylations are
crucial for murine coronavirus assembly. Journal of virology [Internet]. 2008
Mar;82(6):2989–99. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18184706
Pensaert M, Callebaut P, Vergote J. Isolation of a porcine respiratory, non-enteric
coronavirus related to transmissible gastroenteritis. The Veterinary quarterly.
1986;8(3):257–61.
Wesley RD, Hill HT, Biwer JD. Evidence for a porcine respiratory coronavirus,
antigenically similar to transmissible gastroenteritis virus, in the United States. Vol. 2,
Journal of Veterinary Diagnostic Investigation. 1990. p. 312–7.
Cox E, Hooyberghs J, Pensaert MB. Sites of replication of a porcine respiratory
coronavirus related to transmissible gastroenteritis virus. Research in veterinary science.
1990;48(2):165–9.
NIOSH. Determination of Particulate Filter Efficiency Level for N95 Series Filters against
Solid Particulates for Non-Powered, Air-Purifying Respirators Standard Testing
Procedure (STP). [Internet]. NIOSH. 2019 [cited 2020 Apr 30].
NIOSH. 2 CFR Part 84. NIOSH [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2020 Apr 20]; Available from:
https://ecfr.io/Title-42/pt42.1.84
ASTM. F2100-19e1 Standard Specification for Performance of Materials Used in Medical

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.11.20236919; this version posted December 12, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

32.

33.

34.

Face Masks. ASTM International. West Conshohocken, PA; 2020.
ASTM. F2101-19 Standard Test Method for Evaluating the Bacterial Filtration Efficiency
(BFE) of Medical Face Mask Materials, Using a Biological Aerosol of Staphylococcus
aureus. ASTM International. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International(2019b);
2019.
CEN CWA 17553 Community face coverings - Guide to minimum requirements, methods
of testing and use, 2020.
https://www.cencenelec.eu/research/CWA/Documents/CWA17553_2020.pdf
NIOSH. Determination of Exhalation Resistance Test, Air-Purifying Respirators Standard
Testing Procedure (STP) [Internet]. NIOSH 2019. Available from:
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/npptl/stps/pdfs/TEB-APR-STP-0003-508.pdf

