medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

The psychosocial impact on frontline health and social care
professionals in the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic: a
qualitative interview study.
Henry Aughterson, Alison McKinlay, Daisy Fancourt, Alexandra Burton

Abstract
Objectives To explore the psychosocial well-being of health and social care professionals working
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Design This was a qualitative study deploying in-depth, individual interviews, which were audiorecorded and transcribed verbatim. Thematic analysis was used for coding.
Participants This study involved 25 participants from a range of frontline professions in health and
social care.
Setting Interviews were conducted over the phone or video call, depending on participant preference.
Results From the analysis, we identified 5 overarching themes: communication challenges, workrelated stressors, support structures, personal growth, and individual resilience. The participants
expressed difficulties such as communication challenges and changing work conditions, but also
positive factors such as increased team unity at work, and a greater reflection on what matters in life.
Conclusions This study provides evidence on the support needs of health and social care
professionals amid continued and future disruptions caused by the pandemic. It also elucidates some
of the successful strategies (such as mindfulness, hobbies, restricting news intake, virtual socialising
activities) deployed by health and social care professionals that can support their resilience and wellbeing and be used to guide future interventions.
Keywords COVID-19 pandemic, mental health, resilience, coping strategies, healthcare workers,
carers, social workers, qualitative research, UK
Strengths and limitations of this study
•

This is the first study in the UK to interview both health and social care professionals working
in a range of settings on their experiences working through COVID-19.

•

This study used a strong theoretical approach to inform the topic guide, and one-to-one
interviews allowed in-depth analysis of the psychosocial experiences of health and social care
professionals, complementing the wider availability of quantitative evidence.

•

We interviewed a wide range of professions, which provided breadth of experience but might
limit the specificity of findings.

•

Given the fluctuating nature of the pandemic, attitudes of health and social care professionals
may change over time. This can be challenging to capture during a single interview, however
we did ask questions on how their experience had progressed longitudinally.
1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

•

Our sample may have been biased towards people who had more free time to participate and
so were coping better than others. However, our sample still described a number of stressful
experiences during the pandemic, and it is also possible that workers who were frustrated or
stressed wished to express their views.

Introduction
To control the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic, epidemiological measures were taken across the
globe, with responses differing between nations depending on their own public health circumstances,
scientific advice and political priorities (1). In the UK, from March 23rd this involved a national
‘lockdown’, involving significant restrictions on citizens’ way of life including measures such as
‘staying at home’, social distancing and the closure of workplaces, shops and other services (2).
Specific lockdown measures were eased over time, but major constraints and the progressive
tightening and relaxing of such restraints remained for substantial periods.
Some professions, known as ‘key workers’, considered to provide an essential service to the public,
were excluded from various restrictions and continued working throughout the pandemic. Crucially,
health and social care professionals were designated as key workers to enable their continued
support for patients and clients throughout the UK’s National Health Service (NHS) and social care
system. When measures were first announced, significant concerns arose around lack of capacity
within the NHS, limited personal protective equipment (PPE) and staff burnout (3). Previous research
exploring the psychological impact on health and care professionals during epidemics such as SARS
(Severe Acute Respiratory syndrome) and MERS (Middle East Respiratory Syndrome), has
highlighted the adverse psychological effects that frontline health work during epidemics can have (4–
6). There is also emerging evidence during the COVID-19 pandemic that healthcare workers
experienced heightened levels of stress and anxiety (7–11), depression (8,9,12) and poor sleep
quality (8,13).
There are a number of reasons why health and care workers can experience adverse psychological
consequences in epidemics. First, rising cases of a new infection can lead to longer hours, more
intense working environments, and work-life imbalance, which disrupt the equilibrium between work
demands and workers’ response capacity (14). This, coupled with a lack of control, unclear job
expectations, and lack of social support at work are the components of ‘professional burn-out’ (15).
Concerns about the mental health and wellbeing of health and social care professionals in the UK
were growing prior to the Covid-19 pandemic, with ‘professional burnout’ recognised as a particular
challenge (15,16). Moreover, there is evidence one may feel they lack the tools to manage (‘loss of
manageability’) the confusion created by diagnosing and treating an unknown infection (‘loss of
comprehensibility’) and experience a reduction of work to essential rather than meaningful patient
interactions (‘loss of meaningfulness’) which combined may disrupt their ‘sense of coherence’ (SOC)
(a measure of how well one is able to cope with stressors) (17,6,18,19). This disruption has been

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

found to adversely affect mental health (the SOC theory informed part of our interview guide; See
‘Methods’) (20). However, equally there is evidence demonstrating that health and care workers have
moderate to high levels of psychological resilience during times of pandemics (21), and so it is
unclear whether or not they will have a robust, or disrupted, sense of coherence during COVID. Third,
staff may be concerned about their own risks from exposure to a new pathogen, or the risks that they
might infect family or friends. These concerns can be particularly acute when the aetiology and
outcomes from a new virus are not well understood (6).
There are few published qualitative studies that have investigated the psychosocial impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on both health and social care professionals within the UK. One qualitative study
interviewing 30 hospital-based healthcare workers in the UK found heightened anxiety related to PPE
issues and lack of training in new skills (17), while another study with nurses and support workers in
care settings identified a lack of pandemic preparedness, heightened anxiety, shortage of PPE and
ever-changing PPE guidance (22). It is unclear what the psychosocial challenges faced by other
health and care workers are – such as GPs, mental health and social workers. Moreover, current
research on health and care workers during COVID-19 has predominantly been quantitative, using
pre-assumed hypotheses of negative effects. However, in previous pandemics such as SARS and
MERS, there were some positive outcomes including a more positive outlook towards work, growth
under pressure, greater comradery with colleagues, and a strong sense of professional responsibility
and personal development (5,6). A UK study interviewing hospital-based healthcare workers during
COVID-19 also found increased solidarity between colleagues and high levels of morale (17).
There is a need for qualitative research to explore factors that may have helped alleviate distress
amongst health and social care workers during the pandemic. This is crucial in order to provide richer
data of their experiences to aid our understanding of specific stressors, guide future support and
interventions both as COVID-19 continues, and also in the occasion of future pandemics and stressful
situations within the NHS. The aims of this study were to explore: (1) The impact of the COVID-19
pandemic overall on the working lives and mental health of health and social care professionals, and
(2) the factors that contribute to the resilience of health and social care professionals during the
pandemic.

Methods
Sample and recruitment:
We recruited health and social care professionals from across the UK using social media, personal
contacts, newsletters and from a sample of participants taking part in a large, nationwide, quantitative
survey study: the UCL COVID-19 Social Study (23). This research forms a qualitative component of
this larger study. 25 participants, from a range of frontline professions within health and social care,
were recruited and interviewed between May 1st and September 17th (Table 1). Sampling was
purposive to include a range of ages, ethnicity, gender and professional roles. Interviews ceased
when saturation was reached and the lead author identified no new themes. Presentation of

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

recruitment, data collection and analysis are aligned with the COREQ criteria for reporting qualitative
research (24).

Data collection:
Semi-structured, one-to-one, telephone or video interviews were conducted by HA (PhD student and
trainee medic) and AB (mental health services researcher) exploring the impact of the pandemic on
participants’ social lives, work life, and mental health. The interviews lasted an average of 51 minutes
(range 29-93). Berkman’s social networks framework and Antonovsky’s sense of coherence (SOC)
theory informed the topic guide questions on social life and mental health, respectively (25,20). The
full Topic Guide is provided in Supplementary Material and exemplary questions are provided in
Figure 1. All participants were given a Participant Information Sheet and encouraged to ask
questions. Written informed consent was then obtained and a demographics form completed by all
participants. We audio-recorded interviews with participants’ consent, and recordings were
transcribed by a professional transcription service.

•
•
•
•

How would you describe your social life now that
social distancing measures have been brought in
because of Covid-19?
In what ways has your work life been impacted by
the Covid-19 pandemic?
How do you feel about the changes that have
been brought about by Covid-19? Have they had
any impact on your mental health or wellbeing?
Have there been any positive experiences for you
resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic?

Figure 1: Examples of Questions in the Topic Guide

Data analysis:
The analytical approach deployed was reflexive thematic analysis (26). This followed the steps
described by Braun and Clarke (27) of familiarisation with the data, generation and definition of codes,
theme searching, and producing the report. HA and AM (research psychologist) independently coded
four transcripts, which were discussed before HA coded and interpreted all remaining transcripts,
continuing until saturation was reached and no new codes identified. A deductive approach was used
to develop the initial coding framework based on concepts in the topic guide, followed by an inductive
coding approach as new concepts were added to the framework based on the data. Contradictory
data and context around codes was retained, to capture subtle nuances. Codes were then grouped
into themes, with each theme representing a meaningful pattern in the data. All final themes were
agreed by study authors. Weekly team meetings with researchers from the qualitative COVID-19
Social Study team were also utilised to discuss and develop findings. The software utilised for coding
was NVivo qualitative data analysis, Version 12 (28).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
We interviewed 25 participants, from a range of professions within health and social care including
doctors, nurses, carers and social workers working in hospital, residential, community and primary
care settings. Participants were aged 26-65, predominantly female (80%) and White British (68%).
Table 1: Characteristics of the health and social care professionals
Number of participants

25

Profession

Hospital doctor (6)
GP (4)
Hospital nurse (3)
Social worker (3)
Home carer (2)
Care home carer (2)
Assistant psychologist (1)
Community mental health nurse (1)
Practice nurse (1)
Counsellor & psychotherapist (1)
Physiotherapist (1)

Age

Range 26-65 (Mean 39)

Gender

Male 5
Female 20

Ethnicity

White British 17
Asian 3
Black British 2
White & Asian 1
White Irish 1
White Other 1

Themes:
5 primary themes were identified. These were: Communication challenges, Work-related
stressors, Support structures, Resilience, and Personal growth. Themes and corresponding subthemes are displayed in Figure 1.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Communication
challenges
Work-related
stressors

• Virtual consulting
• Difficult conversations
• Need to protect loved ones
• Public not following rules
• Increased workload and changing work
conditions
• Uncertainty of risk to patients

Support
structures

• Team unity
• Leadership
• Social support

Resilience

• Proactive coping
• Accepting uncertainty
• Increased sense of purpose and reward

Personal growth

• Slowing down
• Increased reflection
• Improved non-work relationships
Figur

e 2: Themes and sub-themes

Communication challenges
The pandemic brought with it numerous challenges around communication for health and social care
professionals in their work, particularly when moving consultations online and having difficult
discussions.

Virtual consulting
Some consultations had shifted online, especially among GPs, therapists and social workers. Several
participants said that one of the key benefits was the increased efficiency of virtual communication
and consultations.
“much more is done remotely, which is just so much more efficient, because patients don’t always
need to be seen face to face. Patients preferred it, we preferred it.” (Participant_16_GP)

However, more often participants talked about the limitations of virtual consultations. Some found it
difficult to provide appropriate emotional support, especially in a time where there was heightened
need. This was more commonly an issue for social care, mental health and palliative care
professionals supporting vulnerable adults or children.
“It makes me realise the importance of seeing someone face to face to actually support them. I just
don’t think a telephone call or a Zoom call is sufficient when it comes to helping people who have
profound mental health issues, or even mild mental health issues. And I think that some people just

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

need the power of touch or a hug or a face-to-face human person to ensure that they’re kept safe and
okay” (Participant_4_Hospital doctor_palliative_care_registrar)
Participants often found it difficult to build new relationships virtually, especially when working with
children:

“I think if you already know someone well, and you are speaking to them on video call, then that’s fine
because you’ve already established the relationship… but if you have to start establishing the
relationship on a video call…there is something missing I think, especially working with children…
especially if you have a child that’s introverted or struggles to communicate or has learning difficulties
or is very shy. It’s harder to make them feel comfortable when you’re on video call”
(Participant_10_social_worker)
Participants talked about difficulties identifying crucial signs of deterioration in health from patients or
clients, e.g. from body language:
“we have to be able to pick up signs, for instance, if they are suicidal, I think there’s an anxiety there
that doing it online, it’s difficult sometimes to do that, to pick up on some nuances of the way they
talk… we can’t see their whole body language” (Participant_9_counsellor&psychotherapist)
Participants, especially mental health and social workers, experienced difficulty ensuring a
confidential space when consulting virtually:

“When they’re (children) talking to you, perhaps you see them in a room and it seems like they’re
alone. But actually, maybe they have all their family members that are standing in the corner”
(Participant_10_social_worker)

Difficult conversations
A common challenge during this period was an increase in difficult conversations with patients, clients
and their family members. The need for PPE, and virtual consultations, accentuated these difficulties.
This was especially apparent in those working in services that provide mental health and palliative
care.
“Family communication is awful these days… You can’t see someone, and you’re speaking to them
on the phone, and you’re telling them that they can’t come and see their loved one, and that their
loved one might well die, that’s an awful conversation to have with someone…it’s definitely one of the
worst things about COVID for me” (Participant_8_Hospital_doctor)
Several participants said they were providing more emotional support to patients and clients than
usual:

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

“There’s been a huge amount of emotional support that we’ve had to give through anxiety, through
grief. All that has been heightened quite greatly really. And a deeper sense of sadness in yourself,
that you’re trying to support people and having that empathy for them, thinking this is just absolutely
horrendous for them” (Participant_20_Home_carer)

Work-related stressors
Health and social care professionals experienced a range of challenging emotions and psychological
difficulties.

The need to protect loved ones
Nearly all participants spoke about ongoing worry for friends and family compounded by a fear of
transmitting the virus to them – due to participants’ increased risk of catching it at work.

“Normally I would see my mum every day… but where I work, I was worried, I was more at risk to
catch anything, so I definitely didn’t. My sisters were actually going into the garden, and talking to
her… but I wouldn’t, so I was standing at the gate. So that was pretty hard, because I’m very close to
my mum” (Participant_21_Care_home_manager&carer)

Increased workload and changing work conditions
Fatigue and exhaustion were commonly reported by participants throughout this period.
“I’m just feeling really run down… I literally have 4 or 5 weeks where I’ve not left the house unless it’s
just to pop to the supermarket… I find that really does impact me… it’s like work has taken over my
whole life and I’m exhausted” (Participant_11_Family_support_worker)
Whilst not unanimous, some participants experienced longer working hours and increased workload.

“my routine was really like… wake up, eat something, go into work, which as shifts as nurses we had
to stay in the hospital for 12 and a half hours…go home and eat something, drink something, go to
sleep… then wake up and then go to work again… we have been extremely busy compared to the
normality” (Participant_19_Hospital_nurse)
Feelings of fatigue were also enhanced by the tenuous nature of PPE:

“you just become quite tired…it culminated with masks, visors, aprons, hot weather and regulations
changing and sometimes you’d come home from a shift and feel you’d been pulled in all directions
really” (Participant_20_Home_carer&nurse)

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Public not following the rules
Some participants experienced frustration with members of the public not following social distancing
and other guidelines, feeling that their work on the frontline was being undermined.
“I’ve been quite annoyed… you’re trying your best in lockdown to obey the government guidelines and
I think I’ve had a huge amount of frustration by hearing and seeing people who haven’t…certain
politicians as well that haven’t stuck to guidelines, and I feel sometimes I’ve been working my socks
off and felt quite cheated” (Participant_20_Home_carer&nurse)

Uncertainty of risk to patients
A common concern was making decisions that balanced the complex, and often unknown, risks
associated with the virus along with other health risks. This was particularly difficult during the early
phases of the pandemic, when less was known about the virus.
“…sometimes I’ve thought, right, we do need to bring patients in, but then are you putting them at
more risk exposing them to the virus, which could actually kill them, and actually they could potentially
just have a gastro bug and not bowel cancer?” (Participant_16_GP)

Support structures
The availability of support structures at work and home was identified as an important buffer for the
psychosocial impact of working during the pandemic and in coping with considerable work-related
changes.

Team unity:
Many participants felt closer to their team, and that team unity had increased during the pandemic,
united over a common cause. This was more likely if teams were cohesive before the pandemic, and
was particularly apparent for doctors in primary and secondary care.

“just having the vibes that we’re all in this together and we’re all going (through) the same thing, and
we’re pulling in the same direction” (Participant_3_Hospital_doctor_intensive_care)
Some of this unity was facilitated through virtual communication:
“We actually started up a group, ourselves, on WhatsApp. It’s just our team, it doesn’t include
management. It’s just for family support workers and social workers… we try not to put work stuff on
there… we try to send each other funny messages or memes… to keep us going”
(Participant_11_family_support_worker)

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Some participants felt the increase in virtual meetings improved attendance, due to the ease of just
being able to “dial in” and improved collaborative working among multidisciplinary teams.
“when we’re safeguarding a child, you are supposed to work collaboratively… it’ll be social care and
school, health, maybe a youth organisation or domestic abuse organisation… when you’re doing
these physical meetings, beforehand, people just wouldn’t turn up… but now, they can just dial in”
(Participant_23_Social_worker)
However, team unity was not unanimous, with several participants experiencing loneliness, due to an
increase in lone working or working from home.

“there was a time…I was then at home isolating for two weeks, and so I was working from home. I
had remote access to my computer, so I was doing purely telephone consultations from home and I
felt very isolated there, and I didn’t feel like I was part of the team at all” (Participant_13_GP)
A few participants also described difficulties connecting with colleagues virtually for support:
“I think it could have been improved by seeing each other face-to-face, and I have to say that has
been really detrimental to our team. I think you lose a lot by not seeing someone face to face, in terms
of their body language and non-verbal cues aren’t always captured particularly well through IT”
(Participant_4_Hospital_doctor_palliative_care_registrar)

Leadership
Participants expressed frustration about government handling and changing advice throughout the
pandemic. In particular, participants talked about confusing guidance received from management and
government regarding PPE or distancing procedures at work, as well as the speed in which the
guidance changed.
“I know they (upper management in NHS) have difficult decisions to make quickly but I sometimes
find their rule making quite vague. A bit like the government, I feel like they’re making it up as they go
along somewhat. And it changed every day so you’d log onto your emails and there’d be some new
change” (Participant_15_community_mental_health_nurse)

However, some felt the culture of blame itself was frustrating:
“the other thing that annoys me sometimes is that... everyone wants to blame everybody…it’s like the
blame game…everybody has to blame Boris… Somebody’s responsible. China’s responsible... I feel
that illnesses and viruses have been around forever and ever and ever… you can’t really be pointing
the finger all the time, and I find it quite depressing” (Participant_12_Hospital_doctor_critical_care)

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Most participants felt supported at work and received regular emotional and practical check-ins from
management. A small number felt ignored by management, which led to feelings of being
overwhelmed:
“I was quite anxious about being in the office with COVID... I had some colleagues of mine who were
able to work from home… I was told that this wasn’t possible… it was business as usual. It was a real
sense of frustration, not feeling that you’re being listened to by my manager and just a sense of
feeling overwhelmed and quite helpless about the situation” (Participant_24_Assistant_psychologist)

Social support
Most participants had supportive relationships with family, friends and colleagues, which helped
contribute to a sense of resilience among participants.

“I’ve got a good, strong marriage and we’re a good partnership, my husband and I, and we’ve
supported each other through all this… our friends are going through similar things, so I’m able to talk
to my friends as well. I’ve got a good network of friends, so I’m very lucky.”
(Participant_20_Home_carer&nurse)
They also felt supported by their local community, and the public, e.g. through the ‘Clap for Carers’
movement where people across the country stood outside their front door once a week to applaud
health and care workers for their contribution:
“the Clap for Carers thing, the neighbours would come out and clap, and I found that quite touching…
quite uplifting actually” (Participant_12_Hospital_doctor_critical_care)

Resilience
Despite the difficulties and challenges, most participants said they experienced psychosocial benefits
during the pandemic, which many attributed to their individual coping style or sense of resilience.

Proactive coping
Most participants said they used well-developed coping mechanisms to deal with the ever-changing
circumstances, including engaging in hobbies, participating in virtual activities, and maintaining
routines.
“I do genuinely believe getting out into nature has a really good impact on one’s mental health and it
certainly does on mine…Crafting, doing things, keeping busy…that’s really important for your mental
health having that occupations. I crochet… we paint, we draw, we make jewellery…”
(Participant_15_Community_mental_health_nurse)

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Many participants discussed the negative impact of constant news coverage on coronavirus and the
death count, and intentionally restricted their news intake as they felt it was unhelpful, even harmful to
their mental health:
“the virus messes with your head more than it does your body, if you’re not hospitalised. That’s just
down to the media at the end of the day. There’s so much media and so much emphasis on death,
not so much on recovery” (Participant_7_Hospital_nurse)

Accepting uncertainty
Most participants had a degree of personal, psychological resilience linked to an acceptance, or
‘letting go’, of what they had no control over, such as the overall outcome of the pandemic or
government restrictions.

“I’m generally much less anxious now than I was in January and February. And part of that, I think, is
about thinking a lot more about death and being a lot more accepting about death, and about what
you can control and what’s out of your control” (Participant_14_GP)

Part of this philosophy seemed to be influenced by their previous experiences, and their profession:
“Because of my job, I think I’m aware that we’re not really in control of lots of things in our life… I see
that all the time with patients and people I care for… we don’t have control over everything and we
have to have a level of acceptance for that” (Participant_15_community_mental_health_nurse)

Increased sense of purpose and reward
Most participants expressed gratitude for being able to continue working. This brought with it benefits
such as purpose, daily structure, predictability, a degree of socialising and being ‘in-the-know’ about
the virus. Participants also talked about how it felt good to be able to contribute. For many, this was
highly rewarding and brought a heightened sense of purpose.
“…some people would view me as not being lucky, because I’m a frontline worker, but that’s my job
and that’s what I’m trained to do, so I don’t view that as unlucky… I have been lucky in the sense that
I’ve been able to keep busy, to keep working, to feel I’m contributing” (Participant_17_GP)
Guilt occurred when participants weren’t able to contribute as much as they would have liked e.g. they
were told they couldn’t work because they were high-risk, or had to work from home.
“at first, I felt incredibly guilty by the fact that I wasn’t helping out on the frontline because I was
pregnant. I was just told I’m not allowed to see any patients, by occupational health, and sent home”
(Participant_6_Hospital_doctor)

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Personal growth
The pandemic also brought with it opportunities for personal growth among participants.

Increased reflection
Many participants experienced a greater reflection on “what matters” in their lives. Commonly this was
spending quality time with friends and family and appreciating the small things in life.

“one benefit is that actually we quite like a simple life and actually you come to appreciate the very
simple things, which are just being outside, going for a bike ride, having a picnic…just the health and
happiness of your own family is what’s important and everything else, you can generally sort out”
(Participant_17_GP)

Slowing down
Many participants discussed how the pandemic had given them a chance to slow down and have
more “me-time” and expressed this was something they wished to take forward beyond the pandemic.
This view may seem in conflict with the increased workload experienced by some participants, but
reflected the changes outside of work, e.g. having fewer social obligations due to social distancing
restrictions.
“We have really busy lives generally, and we spend a lot of time rushing around doing lots of stuff,
and actually this time has been quite nice in many ways as a period to kind of slow down a bit and I
think just appreciating each other” (Participant_1_Hospital_doctor)

Improved non-work relationships
Whilst not unanimous, many participants talked about how some of their relationships with others
improved during the pandemic, especially with family members they lived with, the crisis having
brought them closer.
“I’ve connected with my family a lot more… I feel really good about spending more time with my
daughter…that’s time that I would never have had with her, so that’s really special”
(Participant_5_academic_respiratory_physiotherapist)

Discussion
This qualitative interview study explored the psychosocial impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
health and social care professionals in the UK. We identified five key themes shared between
professionals’ accounts. The main difficulties reported were ‘communication challenges’ (consisting of
‘virtual consulting’ and ‘difficult conversations’) and ‘work-related stressors’ (consisting of ‘need to
protect loved ones’, ‘public not following rules’, ‘increased workload and changing work conditions’
and ‘uncertainty of risk to patients’). Three factors appeared to mitigate some of the psychological
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

distress of the pandemic: ‘support structures’ (consisting of ‘team unity’, ‘leadership’ and ‘social
support’), ‘resilience’ (consisting of ‘proactive coping’, ‘accepting uncertainty’ and ‘increased sense of
purpose and reward’) and ‘personal growth’ (consisting of ‘slowing down’, ‘increased reflection’ and
‘improved relationships’).
The themes were drawn from interviews with professionals working in different areas of health and
social care, and some themes were felt more strongly in certain jobs than others. For example, GPs
and social workers enjoyed the efficiency of new virtual consultations, but GPs found it difficult to use
with older adults and those with age-related cognitive decline. Those working with mental health
clients, such as psychotherapists and social workers, experienced digital connectivity issues when
communicating with vulnerable clients, leading to frustrating repetitions and difficulties building a
trusting relationship. This corroborates findings from previous research on barriers to virtual
consulting (29). Those working with older adults, found one of the most challenging elements of the
pandemic was having difficult conversations over the telephone with loved ones of patients who were
dying - often having to convey that visiting restrictions meant they would be unable to say goodbye in
person. This is potentially concerning for the well-being of patients and healthcare professionals,
given previous research has highlighted the importance of an appropriate physical and social setting
in breaking bad news, and also the presence of family members (30,31).

There were a number of common work-related stressors among participants. One of these was
frustration with members of the public not following the social distancing and hygiene regulations, and
with the government’s handling of the pandemic. Some also expressed frustration at the ‘culture of
blame’ that they felt permeated the media and public discourse, which can be maladaptive and
harmful for one’s own mental well-being (32). Emotional and physical fatigue were also common
experiences across all professions, corroborating qualitative studies of health and care workers during
COVID-19 and previous pandemics globally (4,5,33). Many participants were worried about putting
their loved ones at risk of catching COVID-19 as highlighted by previous research (34), however in
our study it appears to have been a particular concern amongst carers and hospital doctors/nurses,
perhaps due to their higher level of virus exposure.

Most participants experienced an increased sense of team unity; that they were ‘all in this together’
fighting a common enemy. This may have led to a degree of resilience against some of the stressful
elements of working in a pandemic, supporting findings from previous pandemics (5,10). Moreover,
supporting Berkman’s social networks theory (35) which informed part of our interview guide, strong
social relationships were frequently cited by participants as key supportive mechanisms for their
mental health during this period, including supportive partners at home, friends, family and
colleagues. Those participants that did experience loneliness at work during the pandemic were lone
workers, working from home, or described unsupportive management. In line with our findings, a
recent systematic review of quantitative studies examining the impact of COVID-19 on healthcare
workers found social support to be a vital resource underlying their ability to cope (21).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Participants also described using their own internal resilience as a way to buffer many of the key
stressors involved in working through the pandemic, and even thrive at times. They adopted proactive
coping mechanisms, as seen in healthcare workers during SARS (36). These often involved partaking
in activities that now have substantial evidence for their role in improving mental health including:
exercise (37), arts and crafts (38), spending time in nature (39,40), virtual activities with friends, and
maintaining a healthy routine (41,42). Consistent with research from previous pandemics and recent
quantitative data during COVID-19, participants also restricted their news intake, particularly as they
felt the constant reporting of COVID-19 and the prevalent discourse of blame negatively impacted
their mental health (6,23).

Most participants said they were successfully able to ‘let go’ of aspects of the pandemic that they felt
were out of their control, such as the overall course of the virus and government restrictions. This
demonstrates a psychological theory known as ‘radical acceptance’ (43), and may have been
responsible in part for the resilience reported by many participants, also having been identified as a
successful coping strategy for healthcare workers in previous pandemics (36). Some academics have
critiqued ‘resilience’ as a concept for its focus on individual- rather than structural-level factors (44),
however, participants in the study highlighted the link between these factors, particularly the
importance of social networks and social support structures at work. Most participants also expressed
gratitude for being able to continue working and described a sense of increased purpose and reward
for being able to contribute during the pandemic.
Common ‘personal growth’ themes were frequently described in participant accounts. Most
participants reflected more on ‘what matters’ in life during this period, which included relationships
with friends and family, their health and the health of loved ones, and ‘appreciating the small things’ in
life. These findings mirror international qualitative studies looking at the psychological impact of
COVID-19 and previous pandemics on health and care workers which found they experienced ‘growth
under pressure’ (5,33) and increased gratitude and self-reflection (33). ‘Growth under pressure’ may
be a closely linked (but slightly diluted) concept to ‘post-traumatic growth’ seen in individuals
experiencing personal growth in the aftermath of highly challenging life crises (45). Lastly, participants
demonstrated a high “sense of coherence” which enhanced their ability to cope during stressful
experiences (19). Participants spoke about ‘manageability’ whereby they were highly proactive in their
coping mechanisms, ‘comprehensibility’ in their enhanced understanding of the virus and need for
social distancing restrictions, and ‘meaningfulness’ in how they experienced a heightened sense of
purpose through their contribution during the pandemic.

Strengths & Limitations
This is the first study in the UK to interview both health and social care professionals working in a
range of settings on their experiences working through COVID-19, which we felt important as they all

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

continued to provide vital frontline care during the pandemic. This study used a strong theoretical
approach to inform the topic guide, and one-to-one interviews allowed in-depth analysis of the
psychosocial experiences of health and social care professionals, complementing the wider breadth
of quantitative evidence. There were also some limitations. First, we interviewed a wide range of
professions, which provided breadth of experience but might limit the specificity of findings. However,
due to similarities in the roles of health and care professionals we felt it important to include a range of
voices. Second, given the fluctuating nature of the pandemic, attitudes of health and social care
professionals may change over time. This can be difficult to capture during a single interview,
however we did ask questions on how their experience had progressed longitudinally. Third, our
sample may have been biased towards people who had more free time to participate and so were
coping better than others. However, our sample still described a number of stressful experiences
during the pandemic, and it is equally possible that workers who were frustrated or stressed wished to
express their views.

Implications
This study has important implications for health and social care workers, managers, commissioners of
services and policy makers during the ongoing pandemic and beyond. First, it highlights the key
stressors experienced by health and social care professionals during the COVID-19 pandemic. Many
of these echo findings from previous epidemics, but whilst this is reassuring in terms of data
credibility, it highlights a concerning lack of improvement in working conditions during such
emergencies over the past two decades. It is vital that the challenges identified here are addressed.
Health and care professionals navigating difficult conversations via telephone or video may benefit
from extra training and support at work, for example in use of the WIRE-SPIKES protocol for breaking
bad news remotely (46). Further, this study provides evidence for the supportive and coping
mechanisms used by workers who experienced resilience during this period. Application of coping
strategies including leisure activities were common and reportedly beneficial, as were the use of
mindful techniques such as expressing gratitude. This suggests that health and care professionals
may benefit from regular work-based interventions providing space for such activities. Whilst such
activities may feel extraneous during emergency situations, the building of resilience and positive
coping outside of pandemic situations and the tackling of problems such as staff burnout will likely
improve staff coping capacity in future epidemic situations. Alongside this, adequate provision for
social support should be ensured, from family and friends but also via the work place e.g. through
enhanced supervision or peer support. The research presented here suggests that investment into
wellbeing support could play a vital role in helping health and care workers to manage emotional
stress.

Conclusion

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first qualitative study to explore the psychosocial impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on both health and social care professionals working in different settings
across the UK. Participants experienced communication challenges and changing work conditions,
but also positive factors such as increased team unity, and greater reflection on what matters in their
life. This study offers important evidence for continued and future disruptions caused by the COVID19 pandemic. It also elucidates successful psychological and practical strategies deployed by health
and social care professionals that could be used to support their resilience and well-being.

Funding statement

This COVID-19 Social Study was funded by the Nuffield Foundation [WEL/FR-000022583], but the
views expressed here are those of the authors. The study was also supported by the MARCH Mental
Health Network funded by the Cross-Disciplinary Mental Health Network Plus initiative supported by
UK Research and Innovation [ES/S002588/1], and by the Wellcome Trust [221400/Z/20/Z]. DF was
funded by the Wellcome Trust [205407/Z/16/Z].

Ethical approval

The study was reviewed and approved by the UCL Ethics Committee (Project ID 14895/005).

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank other members of the qualitative COVID-19 social study team at UCL,
who helped discuss themes during the analysis stages at weekly team meetings: Dr Thomas May, Dr
Anna Roberts, and Dr Joanna Dawes.

References
1.

Adhikari SP, Meng S, Wu Y-J, Mao Y-P, Ye R-X, Wang Q-Z, et al. Epidemiology, causes, clinical
manifestation and diagnosis, prevention and control of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) during
the early outbreak period: a scoping review. Infect Dis Poverty. 2020 Mar 17;9(1):29.

2.

Iacobucci G. Covid-19: UK lockdown is “crucial” to saving lives, say doctors and scientists. BMJ
[Internet]. 2020 Mar 24 [cited 2020 Sep 3];368. Available from:
https://www.bmj.com/content/368/bmj.m1204

3.

Shaw SCK. Hopelessness, helplessness and resilience: The importance of safeguarding our
trainees’ mental wellbeing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Nurse Educ Pract. 2020
Mar;44:102780.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

4.

McAlonan GM, Lee AM, Cheung V, Cheung C, Tsang KWT, Sham PC, et al. Immediate and
sustained psychological impact of an emerging infectious disease outbreak on health care
workers. Can J Psychiatry. 2007 Apr;52(4):241–7.

5.

Kim Y. Nurses’ experiences of care for patients with Middle East respiratory syndromecoronavirus in South Korea. American Journal of Infection Control. 2018 Jul 1;46(7):781–7.

6.

Lee S-H, Juang Y-Y, Su Y-J, Lee H-L, Lin Yi-Hui, Chao C-C. Facing SARS: psychological
impacts on SARS team nurses and psychiatric services in a Taiwan general hospital. General
Hospital Psychiatry. 2005 Sep 1;27(5):352–8.

7.

Kang L, Li Y, Hu S, Chen M, Yang C, Yang BX, et al. The mental health of medical workers in
Wuhan, China dealing with the 2019 novel coronavirus. The Lancet Psychiatry. 2020 Mar
1;7(3):e14.

8.

Lai J, Ma S, Wang Y, Cai Z, Hu J, Wei N, et al. Factors Associated With Mental Health Outcomes
Among Health Care Workers Exposed to Coronavirus Disease 2019. JAMA Netw Open. 2020
Mar 23;3(3):e203976.

9.

Du J, Dong L, Wang T, Yuan C, Fu R, Zhang L, et al. Psychological symptoms among frontline
healthcare workers during COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan. Gen Hosp Psychiatry [Internet]. 2020
Apr 3 [cited 2020 Oct 26]; Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7194721/

10. Sun N, Wei L, Shi S, Jiao D, Song R, Ma L, et al. A qualitative study on the psychological
experience of caregivers of COVID-19 patients. American Journal of Infection Control. 2020 Jun
1;48(6):592–8.
11. Xiao H, Zhang Y, Kong D, Li S, Yang N. The Effects of Social Support on Sleep Quality of
Medical Staff Treating Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) in January and
February 2020 in China. Med Sci Monit. 2020 Mar 5;26:e923549-1-e923549-8.
12. Lu W, Wang H, Lin Y, Li L. Psychological status of medical workforce during the COVID-19
pandemic: A cross-sectional study. Psychiatry Res. 2020 Jun;288:112936.
13. Huang Y, Zhao N. Generalized anxiety disorder, depressive symptoms and sleep quality during
COVID-19 outbreak in China: a web-based cross-sectional survey. Psychiatry Res. 2020
Jun;288:112954.
14. Quick TL. Linking productivity and health. Healthy Work: Stress, Productivity, and the
Reconstruction of Working Life Robert Karasek and Tores Theorell New York: Basic Books, Inc.
1990 $29.95 Canada $39.95 381 pages. National Productivity Review. 1990;9(4):475–8.
15. Imo UO. Burnout and psychiatric morbidity among doctors in the UK: A systematic literature
review of prevalence and associated factors. BJPsych Bulletin. 2017 Aug;41(4):197–204.
16. Coyle D, Edwards D, Hannigan B, Fothergill A, Burnard P. A systematic review of stress among
mental health social workers. International Social Work. 2005 Mar 1;48(2):201–11.
17. Vindrola-Padros C, Andrews L, Dowrick A, Djellouli N, Fillmore H, Gonzalez EB, et al.
Perceptions and experiences of healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK.
BMJ Open. 2020 Nov 1;10(11):e040503.
18. Williamson V, Murphy D, Greenberg N. COVID-19 and experiences of moral injury in front-line
key workers. Occup Med (Lond). 2020 Jul 17;70(5):317–9.
19. Eriksson M. The Sense of Coherence in the Salutogenic Model of Health. In: Mittelmark MB,
Sagy S, Eriksson M, Bauer GF, Pelikan JM, Lindström B, et al., editors. The Handbook of
Salutogenesis [Internet]. Cham (CH): Springer; 2017 [cited 2019 Nov 27]. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK435812/
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

20. Eriksson M, Lindstrom B. Antonovsky’s sense of coherence scale and its relation with quality of
life: a systematic review. Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health. 2007 Nov 1;61(11):938–
44.
21. Labrague LJ. Psychological resilience, coping behaviours, and social support among healthcare
workers during the COVID-19 pandemic: a systematic review of quantitative studies. medRxiv.
2020 Nov 6;2020.11.05.20226415.
22. Nyashanu M, Pfende F, Ekpenyong M. Exploring the challenges faced by frontline workers in
health and social care amid the COVID-19 pandemic: experiences of frontline workers in the
English Midlands region, UK. Journal of Interprofessional Care. 2020 Sep 2;34(5):655–61.
23. Bu F, Steptoe A, Mak HW, Fancourt D. Time-use and mental health during the COVID-19
pandemic: a panel analysis of 55,204 adults followed across 11 weeks of lockdown in the UK.
medRxiv. 2020 Aug 21;2020.08.18.20177345.
24. Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a
32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care. 2007 Dec 1;19(6):349–
57.
25. Berkman LF. The Assessment of Social Networks and Social Support in the Elderly. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society. 1983;31(12):743–9.
26. Braun V, Clarke V. Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis. Qualitative Research in Sport,
Exercise and Health. 2019 Aug 8;11(4):589–97.
27. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology.
2006 Jan;3(2):77–101.
28. QSR International Pty Ltd. NVIVO [Internet]. [cited 2020 Nov 4]. Available from:
https://www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software/home
29. Donaghy E, Atherton H, Hammersley V, McNeilly H, Bikker A, Robbins L, et al. Acceptability,
benefits, and challenges of video consulting: a qualitative study in primary care. Br J Gen Pract.
2019 Sep 1;69(686):e586–94.
30. Monden KR, Gentry L, Cox TR. Delivering Bad News to Patients. Baylor University Medical
Center Proceedings. 2016 Jan 1;29(1):101–2.
31. Ptacek JT, Fries EA, Eberhardt TL, Ptacek JJ. Breaking bad news to patients: physicians’
perceptions of the process. Support Care Cancer. 1999 Apr 1;7(3):113–20.
32. Tennen H, Affleck G. Blaming others for threatening events. Psychological Bulletin.
1990;108(2):209–32.
33. Sun N, Wei L, Shi S, Jiao D, Song R, Ma L, et al. A qualitative study on the psychological
experience of caregivers of COVID-19 patients. American Journal of Infection Control. 2020 Jun
1;48(6):592–8.
34. Balasubramanian A, Paleri V, Bennett R, Paleri V. Impact of COVID-19 on the mental health of
surgeons and coping strategies. Head & Neck. 2020;42(7):1638–44.
35. Berkman LF. Social Networks and Health. 2010;27.
36. Wong TW, Yau JKY, Chan CLW, Kwong RSY, Ho SMY, Lau CC, et al. The psychological impact
of severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak on healthcare workers in emergency departments
and how they cope. European Journal of Emergency Medicine. 2005 Feb;12(1):13–18.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.25.20238766; this version posted November 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

37. Stathopoulou G, Powers MB, Berry AC, Smits JAJ, Otto MW. Exercise Interventions for Mental
Health: A Quantitative and Qualitative Review. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice.
2006;13(2):179–93.
38. Fancourt D, Finn S. What is the evidence on the role of the arts in improving health and wellbeing? A scoping review [Internet]. WHO Regional Office for Europe, Copenhagen; 2019. (WHO
Health Evidence Network Synthesis Reports). Available from:
http://europepmc.org/books/NBK553773
39. Clatworthy J, Hinds J, Camic PM. Gardening as a mental health intervention: a review. Mental
Health Review Journal [Internet]. 2013 Nov 29 [cited 2020 Oct 30]; Available from:
https://www.emerald.com/insight/content/doi/10.1108/MHRJ-02-2013-0007/full/html
40. Kotera Y, Richardson M, Sheffield D. Effects of Shinrin-Yoku (Forest Bathing) and Nature
Therapy on Mental Health: a Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Int J Ment Health Addiction
[Internet]. 2020 Jul 28 [cited 2020 Oct 30]; Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11469-02000363-4
41. Lyall LM, Wyse CA, Graham N, Ferguson A, Lyall DM, Cullen B, et al. Association of disrupted
circadian rhythmicity with mood disorders, subjective wellbeing, and cognitive function: a crosssectional study of 91 105 participants from the UK Biobank. The Lancet Psychiatry. 2018 Jun
1;5(6):507–14.
42. Lanza HI, Drabick DAG. Family Routine Moderates the Relation Between Child Impulsivity and
Oppositional Defiant Disorder Symptoms. J Abnorm Child Psychol. 2011 Jan 1;39(1):83–94.
43. Robins CJ, Schmidt III H, Linehan MM. Dialectical Behavior Therapy: Synthesizing Radical
Acceptance with Skillful Means. In: Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding the cognitivebehavioral tradition. New York, NY, US: Guilford Press; 2004. p. 30–44.
44. Fletcher D, Sarkar M. Psychological resilience: A review and critique of definitions, concepts, and
theory. European Psychologist. 2013;18(1):12–23.
45. Tedeschi RG, Calhoun LG. Posttraumatic Growth: Conceptual Foundations and Empirical
Evidence. Psychological Inquiry. 2004 Jan 1;15(1):1–18.
46. Holstead RG, Robinson AG. Discussing Serious News Remotely: Navigating Difficult
Conversations During a Pandemic. JCO Oncology Practice. 2020 May 18;16(7):363–8.
47. Kinsella P, Garland A. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy for Mental Health Workers: A Beginner’s
Guide. Routledge; 2008. 265 p.
48. Shapiro SL, Brown KW, Biegel GM. Teaching self-care to caregivers: Effects of mindfulnessbased stress reduction on the mental health of therapists in training. Training and Education in
Professional Psychology. 2007;1(2):105–15.
49. Cocchiara RA, Peruzzo M, Mannocci A, Ottolenghi L, Villari P, Polimeni A, et al. The Use of Yoga
to Manage Stress and Burnout in Healthcare Workers: A Systematic Review. Journal of Clinical
Medicine. 2019 Mar;8(3):284.

20

