medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

[TITLE]: Single cell profiling of COVID-19 patients: an international data resource from
multiple tissues
[Authors]: Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Single-Cell COVID-19 Consortia*
*Primary Contacts:
Esteban Ballestar (​eballestar@carrerasresearch.org​); Donna L. Farber (​df2396@cumc.columbia.edu​); Sarah Glover
(​scglover@umc.edu​); ​Bruce Horwitz (​bruce.horwitz@childrens.harvard.edu​); Kerstin Meyer (​km16@sanger.ac.uk​); Marko
Nikolić (​m.nikolic@ucl.ac.uk​); Jose Ordovas-Montanes (​jose.ordovas-montanes@childrens.harvard.edu​); Peter Sims
(​pas2182@cumc.columbia.edu​); ​Alex Shalek (​shalek@mit.edu​); Niels Vandamme (​Niels.Vandamme@vib.be​); Linos
Vandekerckhove (​Linos.Vandekerckhove@UGent.be​); ​Roser Vento-Tormo (​rv4@sanger.ac.uk​); Alexandra Chloe Villani
(​avillani@mgh.harvard.edu​)
A full list of contributing authors is provided as a supplementary table

[Data Availability]: ​covid19cellatlas.org​ ‘Patient Donors’
[Abstract]:
In late 2019 and through 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic swept the world, presenting both
scientific and medical challenges associated with understanding and treating a previously
unknown disease. To help address the need for great understanding of COVID-19, the scientific
community mobilized and banded together rapidly to characterize SARS-CoV-2 infection,
pathogenesis and its distinct disease trajectories. The urgency of COVID-19 provided a
pressing use-case for leveraging relatively new tools, technologies, and nascent collaborative
networks. Single-cell biology is one such example that has emerged over the last decade as a
powerful approach that provides unprecedented resolution to the cellular and molecular
underpinnings of biological processes. Early foundational work within the single-cell community,
including the Human Cell Atlas, utilized published and unpublished data to characterize the
putative target cells of SARS-CoV-2 sampled from diverse organs based on expression of the
viral receptor ACE2 and associated entry factors TMPRSS2 and CTSL (Muus et al., 2020;
Sungnak et al., 2020; Ziegler et al., 2020). This initial characterization of reference data
provided an important foundation for framing infection and pathology in the airway as well as
other organs. However, initial community analysis was limited to samples derived from
uninfected donors and other previously-sampled disease indications. This report provides an
overview of a single-cell data resource derived from samples from COVID-19 patients along with
initial observations and guidance on data reuse and exploration.
1. Introduction & Overview
In late 2019 and through 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic swept the world, presenting both
scientific and medical challenges associated with understanding and treating a previously
unknown disease. To help address the need for great understanding of COVID-19, the scientific
community mobilized and banded together rapidly to characterize SARS-CoV-2 infection,
pathogenesis and its distinct disease trajectories. The urgency of COVID-19 provided a
pressing use-case for leveraging relatively new tools, technologies, and nascent collaborative
networks. Single-cell biology is one such example that has emerged over the last decade as a

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

powerful approach that provides unprecedented resolution to the cellular and molecular
underpinnings of biological processes. Early foundational work within the single-cell community,
including the Human Cell Atlas, utilized published and unpublished data to characterize the
putative target cells of SARS-CoV-2 sampled from diverse organs based on expression of the
viral receptor ​ACE2 and associated entry factors ​TMPRSS2 and ​CTSL (Muus et al., 2020;
Sungnak et al., 2020; Ziegler et al., 2020)​. This initial characterization of reference data
provided an important foundation for framing infection and pathology in the airway as well as
other organs. However, initial community analysis was limited to samples derived from
uninfected donors and other previously-sampled disease indications.
Initial analysis of viral entry factors in existing single-cell datasets spurred a widespread interest
in extending analysis to include data generated from COVID-19 patient samples. There was a
need for rapid data generation and sharing to clarify COVID-19 pathophysiology and direct
future work. In response, the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative solicited brief proposals from members
of their existing communities who have pioneered various aspects of single-cell biology.
Proposals were prioritized based on: 1. a demonstrated ability to actively recruit necessary
participants, 2. sampling of tissues involved in primary infection or those that appear to be
subsequently impacted in COVID-19 pathology, 3. an ability to rapidly generate data, and 4. a
willingness to share the data extraordinarily quickly. The teams span clinical and research
scientists across a diversity of fields and institutions and are organized below by their main
affiliations (Table 1), with full author lists (See Author Table provided as an appendix) including
all participating members.
All projects aimed to generate and openly share initial data within ~2 months as a criteria of
these awards. Work was initiated in May, 2020, and the teams quickly recruited, processed and
analyzed samples allowing for the initial release described here. The pace of these projects was
intended to enable data analysis and exploration by other groups, and open possibilities for
accelerated use by the scientific community for a variety of critical questions.
A preliminary summary of the cohorts, approaches and data from these initial projects are
described below. All teams involved share a goal of providing early data access, recognizing
that their own characterizations of these data are works-in-progress and should be treated as
such. Further sample collection, sequencing, and analysis is likely to refine what is presented,
and we are committed to providing updates as this progresses. Nevertheless, this first release
provides a glimpse into: 1. dense temporal sampling of COVID-19 progression; 2. the impact of
underlying immune conditions including primary immunodeficiencies and autoimmune diseases;
3. the host response in underrepresented, but disproportionately impacted, participants; 4.
age-dependent responses; 4. CITE-Seq analysis; 5. the impact of severe disease across
organs; and, 7. sampling of a large cohort. In all cases, the main study limitation is that no
dataset is definitive at this stage -- that is, both locked or powered to reveal correlates.
However, all data currently collected and preliminarily annotated is being shared now in-line with
the goals of the group and to solicit input, provide a community resource, and accelerate our
collective understanding of COVID-19. Over time, we hope that these data sets, together with

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

others’, allows the scientific community to answer initial questions such as: 1) What are the ​in
vivo cellular targets of SARS-CoV-2 in respiratory tissue? 2) How do cells of the airways and
other affected tissues respond to the virus? and, 3) How does the immune system respond over
the course of the infection and does this change with the age of the patient and disease
severity?
All data can be openly and freely explored and re-used by accessing the data portal at
covid19cellatlas.org and clicking on ‘Patient Donors’, though certain stipulations, designed to
protect those who worked tirelessly to generate these data, apply (please see Community
Standards and Publication Policy). This preprint along with the data and analysis will be updated
with additional samples and insight as they emerge in the months to come.
Re-use of this resource is strongly encouraged with the caveat that both the dataset and its
interpretation are in a nascent state. This release represents a fraction of the ultimate complete
resource, and changes in the diversity of cell types – particularly detection of rare cell subsets –
are expected following creation and reanalysis of the larger dataset. Further, the results from
preliminary analyses of SARS-CoV-2 viral transcript alignments may change as more robust
and conservative statistical procedures are applied to correct for possible confounders. Some
groups have provided preliminary cell type annotations, and these may also change as we learn
more about this disease and with additional input from additional domain experts. Many cell
populations are in highly activated states, which can obscure their identities in comparison to
more homeostatic conditions. In many cases, the specimens from these studies present unique
challenges for scRNA-seq. Procurement procedures were often suboptimal or difficult to control
under the circumstances of a clinical environment during a pandemic, and the disease
pathology often presented unexpected complexities. For example, in the Columbia study on
severe COVID-19, both the blood and airway samples contained extremely high levels of
neutrophils, which had to be removed prior to analysis. Samples could also contain higher levels
of ambient RNA and multiplets than in other settings. Finally, we urge caution when performing
new analyses using these data, paying particular attention to potential cofounders associated
with sample collection, which presented unique challenges during a pandemic, and power
limitations for uncovering the impact of any one correlate of disease severity (e.g., age, time
since infection, gender) given multifactorial nature of COVID-19.
2. Community Standards and Publication Policy:
Our consortium has publicly released several single-cell genomic datasets and accompanying
clinical metadata with the hope that other scientists will immediately use this resource to
advance our understanding of COVID-19. Currently, none of the consortium members have
independently, or collectively, published any findings describing the presented data in a
peer-reviewed journal. At this time, we ask that anyone who intends to publish observations
derived directly or indirectly from this resource please contact the consortium members who
generated the relevant data prior to submission (Table 1). While we have made every effort to
clarify sample information, experimental and analytical methods, and caveats associated with
these data (see “Words of Caution” above and below), direct communication with consortium

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

members will prevent misunderstandings or misinterpretations that could lead to scientific
errors. In some cases, consortium members may have additional data that were generated
outside of the scope of their CZI-funded project, which could also be useful and shareable.
Finally, we would like to ensure that all individuals who generated these data are properly
credited for their efforts.
3. Outline of Cohorts and Study Design
Table 1: Overview of cohorts and data sets
Coordinating
Institutions

Coh
ort
Size

Tissues
sampled

Cohort Features

Sample
s
Report
ed

Assays Used

Contacts

Columbia

4

blood/airw
ay wash

Longitudinal
sampling of
intubated COVID-19
patients

27

scRNA-seq

Donna Farber
(df2396@cumc.columbia.ed
u); Peter Sims
(pas2182@cumc.columbia.e
du)

MGH/Broad

768

Blood

Acute COVID-19
cohort across a
range of WHO
categories seen at
the Department of
Emergency
Medicine at MGH,
including 306
patients who tested
positive and 50
patients who tested
negative for
SARS-cov-2. Blood
samples were
collected at up to 4
time points during
hospitalization.

32

scRNAseq

Alexandra-Chloé Villani
(​avillani@mgh.harvard.edu​)

UMMC/BCH/Bro
ad/MIT

40

Nasophary
ngeal
Swab

Sampling of swabs
from nasal and
pharyngeal areas of
control cases and
individuals across a
range of Covid-19
disease severities
seen at University of
Mississippi Medical
Center

21

scRNA-seq

Alex K. Shalek
(​shalek@mit.edu​); Jose
Ordovas-Montanes
(​jose.ordovas-montanes@ch
ildrens.harvard.edu​);
Bruce Horwitz
(​bruce.horwitz@childrens.ha
rvard.edu​);
Sarah Glover
(​scglover@umc.edu​)

Wellcome
Sanger Institute
/Josep Carreras
Research
Institute (IJC)

30

Blood (30)
/ nasal
swab (10)

Sampling peripheral
blood and matched
nasal swabs from
donors with prior
immunodeficiencies
and autoimmune
conditions infected
with SARS-cov-2.
We also included
blood and nasal

13

scRNA-seq

Roser Vento-Tormo
(​rv4@sanger.ac.uk​);
Esteban Ballestar
(​eballestar@carrerasresearc
h.org​)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

swabs from donors
without prior
immune conditions
infected with
SARS-cov-2
VIB/Ghent
University
Hospital

19

Blood/airw
ay wash

Sampling of
bronchoalveolar
lavage fluid (BALF)
and patient-matched
peripheral blood
mononuclear cells
(PBMC). Blood was
sampled at 1 or 2
timepoints. The
cohort consists of
COVID-19 patients,
control cases with a
non-SARS-CoV2
respiratory disease
and healthy
controls.

19

scRNAseq (3’)
- CITE-seq

Niels Vandamme
(​Niels.Vandamme@vib.be​),
Linos Vandekerckhove
(​Linos.Vandekerckhove@UG
ent.be​)

Wellcome
Sanger Institute/
University
College London

14

Nasal
brushings
and blood

Sampling of
matched airway
brushings and blood
of adult COVID-19
patients

15

scRNA-seq

Kerstin Meyer
(​km16@sanger.ac.uk​);
Marko Nikolić
(​m.nikolic@ucl.ac.uk​ )

4. Summary of Individual Studies & Observations:
4.1. Columbia University Medical Center
Study Overview and Design​:
We profiled matching blood and airway wash samples for four patients who had been intubated
at Columbia University Irving Medical Center for acute respiratory distress syndrome, a serious
complication of SARS-CoV-2 infection. We enrolled patients in the medical ICU and satellite
ICUs that were established to accommodate the large patient volume under IRB protocol
AAAS9659. Enrollment criteria include patients with diagnosed COVID-19 (positive PCR test for
SARS-CoV-2) who were intubated during the previous 24-48 hours and exclude patients treated
with immunosuppressants or with known immunodeficiencies or cancer. For three of the four
patients (COV022, COV026, and COV028), we acquired samples at multiple time points
following intubation (​Table 2​). One patient (COV027) died following the first day of intubation.
We isolated mononuclear cells from all of these samples and profiled them with scRNA-seq.
Table 2: scRNA-seq data sets from Columbia study.
Patient ID

Patient Status

Samples Acquired

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COV022

Recovered from severe
COVID-19

Airway Wash: Intubation Days
2, 3, 4
Blood PBMCs: Intubation Days
2, 3, 4

COV026

Died from severe
COVID-19

Airway Wash: Intubation Days
1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
Blood PBMCs: Intubation Days
3, 4, 7, 8

COV027

Died from severe
COVID-19

Airway Wash: Intubation Day 1
Blood PBMCs: Intubation Day 1

COV028

Died from severe
COVID-19

Airway Wash: Intubation Days
2, 3, 4, 7
Blood PBMCs: Intubation Days
2, 3, 4, 7

Sample Collection
We collected paired endotracheal tube (ETT) washes obtained during daily flushing as part of
clinical treatment and blood samples daily from the time of enrollment until extubation (recovery)
or death. We profiled a subset of these samples using scRNA-seq.
Initial Observations and Challenges
To date, we have focused on compositional analysis of matching blood and airway wash
specimens from intubated patients. The mononuclear cells isolated from peripheral blood
contain myeloid cells, T cells, B cells, plasma cells, neutrophils and dendritic cells. The MNCs
for airway washes include myeloid cells, epithelial cells, T cells, B cells, mast cells, ionocytes,
and plasmablasts/plasma cells. We observed low levels red blood cell and platelet
contamination in a subset of samples from both sources. Importantly, prior to depletion, all of
the samples contained very high levels of neutrophils, which we had to remove in order to
obtain high-quality scRNA-seq data that were not dominated by a single cell type. In addition,
neutrophils have a tendency to lyse prematurely, releasing nucleases and proteases that can
compromise mRNA capture and library construction.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Myeloid cells in both the blood and airway were notably diverse both in terms of cellular identity
and chemokine expression. Although not included in our original data release, efforts are
underway to provide a more comprehensive annotation of myeloid subsets in these specimens.
Additionally, we observed a broad diversity of epithelial cells including club, goblet, ionocytes,
and likely tuft cells. However, we did not detect reads aligning to the SARS-CoV-2 transcriptome
in these or any cells in this data set. Finally, we also obtained good coverage of T cell subsets in
both the blood and airway, and based on markers like ​ITGA1​ and ​CXCR6​, the airway washes
contain high levels of tissue resident memory (TRM) T cells.
4.2 Sanger & IJC
Study Overview and Design​:
Human blood samples were obtained from a cohort of patients under SARS-CoV-2 infection
with pre-existing immunological condition, including patients with autoimmune diseases such as
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriasis (Ps), Sjogren syndrome (Sj), eosinophilic granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (EGPA) and multiple sclerosis (MS). Immunodeficient patients consisted in
individuals diagnosed with common variable immunodeficiency (CVID), missing IgA and IgM
isotypes and displaying missing or reduced IgG, as well as one individual with lymphopenia and
another with bone marrow failure of unknown origin. In some cases, PBMCs samples before,
during and after SARS-CoV-2 infection were collected from the same individual (CVID patient 1
and CVID patient 2). For some individuals, nasal swab samples were also collected in parallel
with the PBMC sample. For nasal sample collection, the swab was gently inserted along the
nasal septum, just above the floor of the nasal passage, to the nasopharynx, until resistance
was felt and then the swab was rotated 5 times. The patients were previously diagnosed
according to European Society for Immunodeficiencies (ESID) criteria and established criteria
for autoimmune diseases (​Perricone and Valesini, 2014)​ . They were collected at Hospital La
Paz, Hospital La Princesa, Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Hospital Can Ruti and Hospital Bellvitge
(Spain), and Medical Center-University of Freiburg (Germany). All donors received oral and
written information about the possibility that their blood and nasal biopsies would be used for
research purposes, and any questions that arose were then answered. Before giving their first
sample the donors signed a consent form approved by the Ethics Committee at their
corresponding hospitals, which adhered to the principles set out in the WMA Declaration of
Helsinki.
Initial Observations:​
Our preliminary analysis of peripheral blood has revealed distinct populations of T cells: CD4+
naive T cells (T4naive: CD4, CD45RA and CCR7); memory CD4+ T cells (T4mem: CD4,
CD45RO and CCL5); naive CD8+ T cells (T8naive: CD8, CD45RA and CCR7); memory CD8 T
cells (T8mem: CD8, CD45RO and CCL5); regulatory T cells (T4reg: annotated by FOXP3 and
IL2RA); and gamma-delta T cells (Tgd: TRDV2). B cells subsets captured included naïve B cells
(Bnaive: TCL1A); memory B cells (Bmem: LSP1); and plasma cells (PC: JCHAIN and MZB1).
Additionally, we identified two subsets of NK cells (NK1: FCGR3A, CCL5, GZMH; NK2:
FCGR3Aneg, CCL5neg, XCL1). The myeloid fraction was comprised by three subsets of
monocytes (Classical: CD14+ FCGR3A-; intermediate: CD14+ FCGR3A+; non-classical:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

CD14low FCGR3A); neutrophils (Neu: FCGR3B); conventional dendritic cells (cDC1: IRF4,
CLEC9A; cDC2: CD1C); and, plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC: CLEC4C and TNFRSF21).
Additionally, we identified erythrocytes (Ery: HBB); platelets (Plt: PPBP, TUBB1 and PF4); and,
hematopoietic precursor cells (HSC: CD34).
Several clusters of epithelial cells were defined in the nasal swabs: Squamous cells (SCEL and
TMPRSS11E); secretory cells (XBP1 and MUC5AC); and ciliated cells (PIFO, FOXJ1 and
MLF1). Immune cells found in the nasal swabs included myeloid, B and T cells.
4.3 University of Mississippi Medical Center, Boston Children's Hospital & Broad Institute
Study Overview and Design​:
Our group is using single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) to characterize the direct cellular targets of
viral infection and bystander cell responses among the nasal mucosa of an adult cohort
following COVID-19 diagnosis and inpatient hospitalization at the University of Mississippi
Medical Center. Nasopharyngeal swabs are being collected and banked at the patient bedside
and then processed for scRNA-seq. To date, we have generated a dataset which includes 21
participants (15 diagnosed with COVID-19, 6 controls; eventual cohort size of 40+ participants).
We hypothesize that ​the intrinsic response of ​direct viral targets following infection, as well as
their interactions with innate and adaptive immune cells and the tissue parenchyma in the nasal
mucosa, plays a crucial role in limiting or permitting COVID-19 disease progression and
severity. Identifying whether and how upper airway host-virus interactions specify divergent
outcomes is essential to understand SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and identify treatments and
vaccine strategies uniquely suited to individuals suffering from, or at risk for, COVID-19.
Participants aged 18 years and older were recruited and prospectively enrolled by the study
team at University of Mississippi Medical Center (UMMC) (Jackson, Mississippi) between April
2020 and July 2020. Informed consent was obtained from the participation or their legally
authorized representative in accordance with UMMC IRB#2020-0065. COVID-19 positive
participants were recruited from the hospital or acute respiratory clinic. COVID-19 negative
participants were recruited from the UMMC GI Endoscopy lab. All individuals undergoing
endoscopy were required to have a negative test for SARS-CoV-2. Inclusion criteria for
COVID-19 participants included fever, cough, sore throat and/or shortness of breath with
presumed diagnosis of COVID-19 upper respiratory tract infection. The patients all weighed 110
lbs or greater. Non-COVID-19 (control) participants all had a negative COVID-19 test, weighed
110 pounds or greater, and were seen in either GI Endoscopy or UMMC Acute Respiratory
Clinic. Exclusion criteria for both cohorts included a history of blood transfusion within 4 weeks
and subjects who could not be assigned a definitive COVID-19 diagnosis from either nucleic
acid testing or Chest CT imaging. For the nasopharyngeal (NP) samples, both genders were
represented – males (n=7) and females (n=8). 6 of the participants were non-COVID-19
(control) – 2 identified as male, 4 as female. The median age of patients that provided NP
samples was 56 years old. The median age of patients that provided NP samples was 56 years
old. The average day at which NP samples were collected ranged from Day 1 to Day 3 of
hospitalization. It should be noted that collection day does not uniformly correspond to days post

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

infection or the presentation of symptoms and is a challenge when considering and comparing
COVID-19 progression in many studies. The Institutional Review Board approved the study, and
all subjects provided written informed consent, or their legally authorized representative
provided it on their behalf. Research samples were collected from volunteers in the form of
nasal swabs. A healthcare provider collected the nasopharyngeal sample using a single
FLOQswab (COPAN, cat# 0123) which was then viably frozen prior to dissociation and
scRNA-seq using Seq-Well S^3 (Summary of Methods).

Initial Observations:
The current interim dataset consists of cells derived from 21 study participants: 6 were
non-COVID19 SARS-CoV-2 negative controls and 15 were diagnosed with COVID-19 based on
SARS-CoV-2 PCR from nasopharyngeal swab sample and chest CT. As of 7/31/20, the dataset
consists of 32,389 genes and 12,427 cells, with an additional 27 distinct genomic features from
SARS-CoV-2. Cellular recovery across distinct nasal swabs was highly variable, and we
recovered slightly fewer cells among nasal swabs from COVID-19 participants, with 499 +/- 145
(mean +/- SEM) cells per participant, compared to 823 +/- 224 cells per control participant (n.s.,
p = 0.25 by student’s t-test). We speculate that lower cell recovery may derive from higher
proportions of dead and dying cells in infected and inflamed samples. We found roughly
equivalent quality of cells (following preprocessing steps outlined above) across nasal swabs
from COVID19 and control participants.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 1​. ​A single-cell representation of nasopharyngeal swabs from control and COVID-19
participants sampled at the University of Mississippi Medical Center
Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) of 12,427 single cells, with points colored by cell
identity (​Supplementary Table 1​), representing n= 6 non-COVID-19 SARS-CoV-2-negative controls, and
n= 15 COVID-19 participants PCR-positive for SARS-CoV-2.

Following the dimensionality reduction and clustering approaches discussed above, we
annotated 21 clusters corresponding to distinct cell types and states across immune and
epithelial identities (​Figure 1, Supplementary Table 1: ​marker gene lists using ‘bimod’
likelihood-ratio test). As tissue sampling relied on surface-resident cells that were gently scraped
off of the nasopharyngeal epithelium, we did not expect to recover stromal cells such as
endothelial cells, fibroblasts, or pericytes, which were found in previous scRNA-seq datasets
from nasal epithelial surgical samples (​Ordovas-Montanes et al., 2018; Garcia et al., 2019)​ . We
recovered several immune cell populations, including T cells, dendritic cells, and macrophages,
but did not find clusters of cells corresponding to plasmablasts, neutrophils, mast cells, and
eosinophils, which have been recovered in superficial nasal wash or nasal scraping samples by

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

other groups (​Cao et al., 2020; Ordovas-Montanes et al., 2018)​ . We suspect further iterations of
this dataset with larger sample sizes may identify more diverse immune cell populations, and
that the logistics of freezing and thawing may impact composition, especially for granulocyte
populations. Finally, we were able to identify a distinct subset of macrophages defined by
elevated co-expression of multiple inflammatory cytokines, including ​IL1B, CCL3, CCL20,
CCL3L1​, termed “Cytokine Expressing Macrophages”.
Among epithelial cell clusters, we recovered ciliated cells, secretory/goblet cells, squamous
cells, and basal cells. We also recovered deuterosomal cells, defined by expression of ​DEUP1​,
CDC20B​, ​HELLS​, ​FOXN4​, and HES6, that were recently identified by Garcia et al. using
scRNA-seq of airway epithelial cultures (​Garcia et al., 2019)​ . This population is thought to
represent an important precursor population for ciliated cell types through upregulation of genes
required for centriole amplification and cilium assembly. Ionocytes were also readily
distinguished from other epithelial cell types by expression of ​FOXI1, FOXI2, CFTR, ​and
ASCL3​. Ciliated epithelial cells (defined by unique expression of ​PIFO, CAPS, FOXJ1​, and
multiple gene modules encoding components of cilia microtubule structures) were the most
abundant cell type recovered across all nasal swabs. Upon subclustering of ciliated epithelial
cells, we observed four distinct cell subtypes, each defined by significant expression of unique
genes, and putatively named “Ciliated Cells ​BEST4 high”, “Ciliated Cells ​BEST1 high”, “Ciliated
Cells Intermediate or Developing”, and “Ciliated Cells Interferon Responsive”. At present, we are
unsure as to whether the “Ciliated Cells Intermediate or Developing” represent a developmental
precursor to more terminally differentiated ciliated cell types, or are a technical artifact of cellular
complexity or gene spillover, or a combination of both. Further work is necessary to model
developmental trajectories within this dataset.
Squamous cell clusters were annotated by their unique expression of genes such as ​SCEL,
KLK7, KRT6A​, and subdivided into 3 clusters, temporarily named “Squamous Cells 1”,
“Squamous Cells 2”, and “Squamous Cells 3”. In general, cells within "Squamous Cells 1”
appear to express diminished abundances of genes present in more differentiated squamous
cell clusters. As discussed with respect to “Ciliated Cells Intermediate or Developing” above,
further analysis and additional samples will be required to resolve whether this represents a
developmental intermediate or technical artifact. Notable defining genes expressed by
“Squamous Cells 2” include cytokines ​IL36G, IL36A​, and ​CXCL1, as well as highest expression
of cornified envelope genes ​SPRR2D, SPRR1B, SPRR2A, SPRR3, SPRR2E a
​ nd CNFN,
potentially indicating this subset of cells is at a later stage in squamous cell development.
“Squamous Cells 3” ​express higher levels of interferon response genes than other squamous
cell clusters, including ​OAS3​, ​OAS1​, and ​MX1,​ and multiple genes involved in antigen
presentation and processing, such as ​TAPBP, TAP1, HLA-C,​ and ​HLA-F​, as well as ​VEGFA​.
We identified substantial diversity among Secretory/Goblet cell populations within this dataset,
putatively named “Secretory Cells 1-5”, which all express high abundances of ​AQP5​, ​CXCL17​,
SLPI,​ and ​PIGR.​ “Secretory Cells 1” and “Secretory Cells 2” express high levels of ​MUC16,
MUC4 and MUC5AC compared to other secretory populations (many of which express non-zero
UMI of these mucins, but at diminished frequency and abundance). “Secretory Cells 2” are
distinguished by high expression of various interferon responsive genes such as ​IFI44​, ​STAT6,​

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

DUOX2,​ ​HLA-F,​ ​HLA-DRA​, ​HLA-A,​ and ​HLA-DRB5,​ as well as ​TNFSF10 (TRAIL). Our current
dataset suggests “Secretory Cells 1” and “Secretory Cells 2” represent two types of goblet cells,
and based on expression of ​SCGB1A1 w
​ ithin “Secretory Cells 2” and “Secretory Cells 3”, there
are potentially club cells intermixed within these clusters (or these clusters represent
developmental intermediates), which may be resolved with additional samples and deeper
profiling. Like “Secretory Cells 1” and “Secretory Cells 2”, “Secretory Cells 3” also express high
abundances of ​BPIFB1,​ but lack high expression levels of other mucins. “Secretory Cells 3” also
express high levels of antigen processing and presentation related genes and interferon
response factors, and uniquely contain high levels of early response genes and AP-1 family
transcription factors such as ​FOSB, MAFF, DUSP1, KLF4, NR4A1, ATF3, JUND, ID3, and ID1.
“Secretory Cells 4” are distinguished by expression of ​PLAU and ​SAA1​/​SAA2​, two acute phase
response proteins, in addition to ​NFKBIA,​ ​NFKBIZ​, ​CXCL8,​ ​CXCL2 and ​IL32​. Finally, “Secretory
Cells 5” are unique from other secretory cells by their elevated expression of serine protease
inhibitors ​SERPINB13,​ ​SERPINB4,​ ​SERPINB3​ among other genes and pathways.
Finally, we recovered two unexpected cell types within this dataset, temporarily named
“​CACNA1A high Cells” and “​GIP+ Cells”. Both are defined by expression of ​CACNA1A​, and
GIP​+ cells express ​GIP ​and​ LGR5.​
Analysis of SARS-CoV-2 Viral Transcripts and Host Cells
We found that cells containing UMI aligning to SARS-CoV-2 genomic features were restricted to
swabs from individuals diagnosed with COVID-19, and were not detected in any cells from
control nasal swabs. Among 15 study participants in the current dataset diagnosed with
COVID-19, nasal swabs from 9 contain high quality single-cell transcriptomes with reads
aligning to SARS-CoV-2. Notably, all participants diagnosed with COVID-19 had received a
positive SARS-CoV-2 PCR from nasopharyngeal swab within 3 days of sample collection for
this study. Among the 6 nasal swabs from study participants with COVID-19 where we did not
detect SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA​+ cells, 3 had poor recovery of high-quality single cell
transcriptomes, diminishing our power to detect rare viral reads if present.
Among swabs from the COVID-19 group containing any viral RNA​+ cell, the percentage of
infected cells across all cell types was 12.9 +/- 7.1 % (mean +/- SEM, n=9). This corresponded
to a number of SARS-CoV-2 RNA​+ cells ranging from 1 to 126 per nasal swab, with an average
+/- SEM of 30.2 +/- 13.0 cells. SARS-CoV-2 viral aligning UMI were found in multiple cell types.
The highest proportions of viral RNA​+ cells per cluster were found in “Secretory Cells 5” (23.8%
of cluster, across all COVID19 samples), “Ciliated Cells Interferon Responsive” (20.8%),
“Secretory Cells 1” (8.7%) and “Cytokine Secreting Macrophages” (7.4%), and, to a lesser
extent, “Ciliated Cells Intermediate or Developing” (6.4%), “Macrophages” (6.3%), and “Basal
Cells” (4.3%). Within each of these clusters, we identified cells containing a high total
abundance of viral reads and viral RNA​+ single cells consistently contained UMI aligning to
diverse regions across the viral genome, increasing our confidence for true viral genomic
capture from intact virions or viral RNA completing a replication cycle, rather than spurious viral
RNA derived from ambient pools of RNA. “Ciliated Cells BEST1 high” and “Ciliated Cells BEST4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

high” additionally contained high absolute abundances of SARS-CoV-2 RNA​+ cells, however the
within-cluster proportion of these cells was low (<5%).

4.4 University College London & Wellcome Sanger Institute
Study Overview and Design:
Subjects 18 years and older were included from two large hospital sites in London, United
Kingdom, namely University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust and Royal Free
London NHS Foundation Trust during the height of the pandemic in the United Kingdom (April to
July 2020). Ethical approval was given through the Living Airway Biobank, administered through
UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health (REC reference: 19/NW/0171, IRAS project
ID 261511), as well as by the local R&D departments at both hospitals. At daily virtual COVID19
coordination meetings, suitable patients were chosen from a list of newly diagnosed and
admitted patients within the preceding 24 hours (based on a positive nasopharyngeal swab for
SARS-CoV-2). Patients with typical clinical and radiological COVID19 features but with a
negative screening test for SARS-CoV-2 were excluded. Other excluding criteria included active
haematological malignancy or cancer, known immunodeficiencies, sepsis from any cause and
blood transfusion within 4 weeks. Maximal severity of COVID19 was determined retrospectively
by determining the presence of symptoms, the need of oxygen supplementation and the level of
respiratory support (reference joint table of severity). Nasal brushings and peripheral blood
sampling were performed by trained clinicians prior to inclusion to any pharmacological
interventional trials within 48 hours of positive SARS-CoV-2 nasopharyngeal sampling.
Initial Observations:
The first release of data includes samples from 12 adults, 12 blood with 3 matched nasal
samples. The cohort comprised 5 males and 7 females, aged between 25 and 76 years old.
Disease severity varied from mild to moderate and severe disease, with severity coded
according to WHO standards. Analysis of both the blood and nasal samples is ongoing and cell
type annotation at this stage is very preliminary. More fine-grained annotations will be provided
in future data releases. For the nasal samples a range of epithelial and immune cells were
identified. The immune cell population included B cell, T cells, NK cells, dendritic cells,
macrophages, monocytes, dendritic cells, mast cells and neutrophils, all identified by previously
described marker genes. Using nasal brushes, we also retrieved a variety of epithelial cells,
which included basal cells, cycling basal cells, squamous cells and three populations of
secretory cells. Two populations of ciliated cells could be distinguished, as well as deuterosomal
cells, likely intermediates between secretory and ciliated cells, and ionocytes.

4.5 VIB & Ghent University Hospital
Study Overview and Design​:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

We profiled matching bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) and blood samples from patients who
have been hospitalized with a high clinical suspicion of COVID-19 (n=17) and control individuals
(n=2). The analysis includes single-cell 3’ RNA-sequencing along with the quantitative
measurement of surface proteins using panels of more than 250 oligo-conjugated antibodies
(TotalSeq A - CITEseq). The study population entails adult patients with a diagnostic or
therapeutic need for bronchoscopy and the cohort consists of COVID-19 patients (n=8), control
cases with a non-SARS-CoV-2 respiratory disease (n=9) and healthy controls (n=2). Patients
aged 18-100 years old were eligible for study inclusion if they had clinical symptoms suggestive
of COVID19 and if hospitalization was required. Healthy controls were asymptomatic and were
selected from a group of patients requiring a bronchoscopy with BAL for diagnostic work-up or
follow-up of other diseases. In these cases, lavage was always performed in a healthy lung lobe
and SARS-CoV-2 was formally ruled-out by rRT-PCR. For 5 out of 19 patients, we analyzed
PBMC samples at a secondary time point as well. This study was performed in accordance with
the principles expressed in the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained
from all patients or a legal representative. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of
Ghent University Hospital (Belgium), AZ Jan Palfijn (Belgium) and AZ Maria Middelares
(Belgium), where all samples have been collected.

Initial Observations and Challenges
The first interim dataset of BALF samples consists of 275.056 cells derived from 19 study
participants. The cohort consists of COVID-19 patients (n=8), control cases with a
non-SARS-CoV-2 respiratory disease (n=9) and healthy controls (n=2). The current data
release contains a first cell type annotation based on the gene/antibody expression profiles.
This annotation requires additional verification, both in terms of cell quality and cell identity.
Efforts are underway for updated annotations after further iterations of this dataset, and
inclusion of patient-matched PBMC samples (sampled at the time of the bronchoalveolar lavage
and at later time point, totalling 377.684 cells derived from the blood). Updates and additional
clinical metadata are available through the portals www.single-cell.be/covid19 and
www.covid19cellatlas.org​. Comparison between COVID19 positive and COVID19 negative
patients shows a distinct bias towards more severe disease status, longer time since onset of
symptoms and longer time since hospital admission in the COVID19 positive group.
Furthermore, at the time of collection of BALF samples 75% (6/8) of the COVID19 positive
patients were mechanically ventilated and admitted into an intensive care unit (ICU), whereas
none of the COVID19 patients were admitted into ICU. Therefore, we are currently expanding
this cohort of BALF samples to patients in the ICU with ARDS based on non-COVID-19
pathology, to better control for this bias. After expanding this dataset, we will perform in-depth
compositional analyses across COVID-19 samples and disease groups.
After dimensionality reduction, integration and clustering of the BALF cells, we mapped more
than 60 clusters corresponding with immune and epithelial cell identities in our preliminary
analysis defined by expression of specific marker genes or antibodies . Epithelial cell types

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

include AT1 (​AGER, HOPX​) and AT2 (​NAPSA​, SFTB)​ cells, ciliated cells (​FOXJ1, CAPS​), basal
cells (​KRT5, DAPL1)​ , ionocytes (​FOXI1, ASCL3​), mucous (​MUC5AC, SCGB3A1)​ and serous
(​PRR4, LYZ​) secretory cells, deuterosomal cells (​DEUP1, PLK4)​ . We recovered a CD309​high
SPRR3​high fraction of epithelial cells reminiscent to previously described mouse “hillock” cells
(​Deprez et al., 2020)​ . Three granulocyte subtypes were identified: neutrophils (based on CD16,
CD66b and CD15 protein levels), basophils (​CPA3, ​CD123) and mast cells (​CPA3, C
​ D117). A
preliminary phenotyping of CD4 T cell subsets revealed naive (​CCR7​), exhausted (​LAG3,​
CTLA4​), activated (​TNFRSF9)​ , cytotoxic (​GNLY)​ , regulatory (​FOXP3​, ​CTLA4)​ and follicular
helper-like T cells (​CXCL13​, ​IL21​, ​CD278)​ . Other lymphoid identities include activated, naive
(​CCR7)​ and EMRA (​FGFBP2​) CD8 T cells; MAIT cells (​KLRB1​, ​TRDC)​ ; various subtypes of
NK/iNKT cells; B cells (​CD19,​ ​CD79A)​ , and plasmablasts/plasma cells (​MRB1)​ . The dendritic
cell types include cDC1 (​CLEC9A​), cDC2A (​RUNX3,​ ​SREBF2​), cDC2B (​CD1C​, ​FCER1A​, ​CD5​),
cDC3 (​CD14,​ ​CD163,​ ​CLEC12A​), migratory cDCs (​CCR7​) and pDCs (​MZB1,​ ​IRF8)​ .
Additionally, we recovered mature (​C1QA)​ , resident (​MARCO​) and alveolar (​FABP4​)
macrophages next to recruited activated (​VCAN​, ​CCL2​) and patrolling (​HSPA6​) monocytes.
Thus far, we did not detect reads aligning to the SARS-CoV-2 transcriptome in these or any
cells in this data set.
4.6 Massachusetts General Hospital & Broad Institute
Study Overview and Design
The vast majority of deaths are due to acute lung injury and acute respiratory distress disorder
(ARDS), or direct complications thereof (​Zhou F et al., 2020; Wölfel R et al. 2020; Xu Z et al.
2020; Yang X et al.2020; Yang F et al. 2020; Du et al. 2020)​ . The progression to ARDS is
thought to reflect a combination of increasing viral load, cytopathic effects, translocation of virus
into pulmonary tissue, including infection of pulmonary endothelial cells, and inappropriate or
insufficient immune responses. Since ARDS is an acute inflammatory injury to the lung, we
hypothesize that COVID-19 associated ARDS develops, at least in part, as a direct result of a
dysfunctional host immune response that c​ontributes to clinical deterioration in the acute phase
of systemic illness, leading to ineffective viral clearance and collateral pulmonary or other tissue
damage. Understanding immune signaling that is enhanced or suppressed in patients with
worse outcomes has the potential to identify new therapeutic targets for COVID-19 associated
ARDS, and knowing the kinetics of potentially pathogenic immune responses will inform the
optimal timing of interventions.To address this, the immune and cellular response of infected
patients needs to be analyzed comprehensively. Single-cell multi-omics strategies are uniquely
poised to do this, given the substantial cellular complexity and the minute clinical samples. Our
goals are to rapidly define immune cell states and signaling pathways in COVID-19 that are
associated with ARDS severity and to investigate the role of these pathways in ARDS. ​To
achieve this, ​we enrolled patients in the Emergency Department (ED) in a large, urban,
academic hospital from 3/24/2020 to 4/30/2020 in Boston during the peak of the COVID-19
surge, with an institutional IRB-approved waiver of informed consent. We included patients 18
years or older with a clinical concern for COVID-19 upon ED arrival, and with acute respiratory
distress with at least one of the following: 1) tachypnea ≥ 22 breaths per minute, 2) oxygen
saturation ≤ 92% on room air, 3) a requirement for supplemental oxygen, or 4) positive-pressure
ventilation. A blood sample was obtained in a 10 mL EDTA tube concurrent with the initial

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

clinical blood draw in the ED. We enrolled 384 unique subjects who presented to our ED with
acute respiratory distress suspected or known to be due to COVID-19. 306 patients were
subsequently confirmed to have COVID-19 infection. In addition to blood samples collected in
the ED (D0, n=384 samples), blood draws were also obtained at Day 3 (n=220 samples) and
Day 7 (n=141 samples) of hospitalization, as well as ​at event-driven timepoint (i.e.
decompensation or recovery events) ​(n=43 samples) obtained anywhere within the first 28 days
of enrollment. For every blood sample collected, we isolated and cryopreserved peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) for downstream single-cell RNA-sequencing (​Zheng et al. 2017​)
with paired CITE-seq (​Stoeckius et al. 2017; Peterson et al. 2017)​ , TCR and BCR
measurements. We also cryopreserved plasma to perform proteomics analyses, for which data
is already available for download (​MGH COVID-19 study proteomics data​).
Clinical course for every patient was followed to 28 days post-enrollment, or until hospital
discharge if that occurred after 28 days. Of all 384 enrolled, 78 (20%) tested negative for
SARS-CoV-2 during their hospitalization. Of the patients who tested negative for SARS-CoV-2,
50 (64%) had very low suspicion for COVID-19 based on careful retrospective chart review.
These 50 subjects were categorized as controls, for which single-cell RNA sequencing data is
being generated. For the remaining 28 SARS-CoV-2 negative patients, COVID-19 was a
diagnostic possibility yet most had multiple negative PCR tests throughout their hospital course.
We classified SARS-CoV-2 positive subjects by illness severity and outcome derived from the
World Health Organization (WHO) Ordinal Outcomes Scale (​WHO R&D Blueprint - Novel
Coronavirus, COVID-19 Therapeutic Trial Synopsis.​), which can be on a 6-point scale. We
classified patients by acuity levels on days 0, 3, 7, and 28, derived from the WHO Ordinal
Outcomes Scale. Our primary outcome for confirmed COVID-19 cases was the ​maximal acuity
within 28 days of enrollment: WHO-1, death within 28 days (N=42, 14%); WHO-2, intubation,
mechanical ventilation, and survival to 28 days (N=67, 22%); WHO-4, hospitalized and requiring
supplemental oxygen (N=133, 43%); WHO-5, hospitalized without requiring supplemental
oxygen (N=41, 13%); and WHO-6, discharged directly from the ED without returning within 28
days (N=23, 8%). We note that we did not collect any samples from WHO category 3, consisting
of patients who would have been hospitalized and requiring ​non-invasive ventilation​.
Demographic, past medical history and clinical data were collected and summarized for each
outcome group, using medians with interquartile ranges where appropriate. The meta-data
accompanying the dataset is described in the table below.

Table 3: Metadata summary for MGH COVID-19 acute blood cohort dataset
Meta-data
identifier

Category description

Legend annotation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Time point

Time point at which blood was collected

D0=day visiting the ER; D3=day 3 of hospitalization; D7=day7 of
hospitalization; DE=​event-driven

COVID

COVID status: tested positive prior to enrollment /during
hospitalization

0=negative; 1=positive

Age cat

Age category

1=20-34; 2=36-49; 3=50-64; 4=65-79; 5=80+

BMI cat

Body mass index categories

0=<18.5 (underweight); 1=18.5-24.9 (normal); 2=25.0-29.9 (overweight);
3=30.0-39.9 (obese); 4 = >=40 (severely obese); 5=Unknown

HEART

Pre-existing heart disease: coronary artery disease,
congestive heart failure, valvular disease

0=No; 1=Yes

LUNG

Pre-existing lung disease: asthma, COPD, requiring home
O2, any chronic lung condition

0=No; 1=Yes

KIDNEY

Pre-existing kidney disease: chronic kidney disease,
baseline creatinine >1.5, ESRD)

0=No; 1=Yes

DIABETES

Pre-existing diabetes: pre-diabetes, insulin and
non-insulin dependent diabetes

0=No; 1=Yes

HTN

Pre-existing hypertension

0=No; 1=Yes

IMMUNO

Pre-existing immunocompromised condition: active
cancer, chemotherapy, transplant, immunosuppressant
agents

0=No; 1=Yes

Symp_
Resp

Respiratory symptoms: sore throat, congestion, productive
or dry cough, shortness of breath or hypoxia, or chest pain

0=No; 1=Yes

Fever_
symptom

Fever symptom

0=No; 1=Yes

GI_Symp

Any GI related symptoms at presentation: (abdominal
pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea)

0=No; 1=Yes

WHO 0

WHO score for day 0 study window - enrollment plus 24
hours - highest Acuity within Day 0 window

1 = Death; 2 = Intubated / ventilated, survived; 4 = Hospitalized,
supplementary O2 required, survived; 5 = Hospitalized, no supplementary
O2 required, survived; 6 = Discharged / Not hospitalized, survived

WHO 3

WHO score for day 3 study window

same as WHO 0 legend

WHO 7

WHO score for day 7 study window

same as WHO 0 legend

WHO 28

WHO score on study day 28

same as WHO 0 legend

WHO max

WHO max is the highest Acuity level between Day 0 -28

same as WHO 0 legend

Trop_72h

Cardiac event: hs-cTn =>100 within first 72 hours of
presentation

0=No; 1=Yes

Initial Observations and Words of Caution
The first released dataset includes data from 32 PBMCs collected from 15 patients across
multiple time points. This single-cell dataset includes 59,506 cells after excluding cells of lower

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

quality. ​Importantly, ​the current release contains a preliminary cell type annotation on the
cluster level based only on the gene expression profiles. ​This annotation still requires
additional verification, both in terms of cell quality and cell identity, as well as properly identifying
potential doublets. Future data releases will include additional data as well as an annotation
based on expression profiles of both gene and cell surface markers (i.e. we measured 197
surface proteins through CITE-seq) in relevant subsets of the data. ​Our preliminary analysis of
peripheral blood captured all known populations. The myeloid cell fraction is comprised of
conventional dendritic cells (“cDC”: ​CD1C​, ​FCGR2B​, ​CD1E)​ , plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(“pDC”: ​IL3RA​, ​CLEC4C,​ ​TCF4​), as well as 5 putative monocyte-like populations: “Monocyte_1”
(​CD14,​ ​LYZ​, ​ASGR1)​ , “Monocyte_2” (​S100A8,​ ​S100A9​, ​CD163​, ​IFITM3​), “Monocyte_3”
(​FCGR3A​), “Monocyte_4” (​CD163,​ ​IER3​), “Monocyte_5” (​C1QA,​ ​C1QB,​ ​C1QC)​ . These ​myel​oid
cell populations were notably diverse compared to what has been observed in blood analyzed
from “healthy” individuals. Efforts are underway to provide a more comprehensive annotation of
myeloid subsets in this cohort through additional data generation and subclustering. The T cell
fraction captures CD4+ T cell subsets – including for example naive (​CCR7​) and Treg (​FOXP3,​
IL2RA​) CD4+ T cells – , CD8+ T cell subsets, as well as cycling CD8 T cells (“CD8_T cell 2”;
MKI67​, ​STMN1)​ . B cell initial subsets observed include naive B cells ("B cell_2": ​TCL1A,​
FCER2)​ , memory B cells ("B cell_1": ​CD27,​ ​CD80,​ ​LSP1)​ ; and plasma cells (​JCHAIN,​ ​MZB1)​ .
Additionally, we identified NK cells (​NCAM1,​ ​FCGR3A)​ and platelets (​PPBP​, ​PF4​). Although not
included in our original data release, efforts are underway to provide a more comprehensive
annotation of immune cell subsets in these specimens, including through sub-clustering
analyses. Furthermore, we suspect further iterations of this dataset with the larger sample size
being generated from the entire cohort may identify more diverse immune cell populations.

5. Materials and Methods
UMMC/BCH/Broad
Next Steps:
We are currently expanding this cohort of nasal swabs from 21 participants to at least 40,
across both COVID-19 and Control groups. Where possible, we will also be adding
endotracheal suction samples. After generating data from this expanded cohort, we will revise
our cellular clusters and perform deeper, more powered analyses into differences in cellular
composition across disease groups and within samples from COVID-19 participants. We will
comprehensively analyze SARS-CoV-2 RNA+ cells and identify cell-type-specific host programs
associated with viral genomic material.

Summary of Methods:
Words of Caution:
Nasopharyngeal Swabs: These data represent single cells recovered by nasopharyngeal swab,
and it is important to remember that cell recovery and composition will vary compared to nasal

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

scrapings (which typically access the turbinates) or nasal washes, and may be influenced by
donor specific factors (e.g., age, time since infection, comorbidities, etc). Additionally, this
release represents approximately half of the samples to be included in the complete dataset,
and changes in the diversity of cell types – particularly detection of rare cell subsets – are
expected following creation of a larger dataset. Finally, preliminary analyses of SARS-CoV-2
aligning UMIs identify select cellular clusters thought to harbor the majority of virally targeted cell
types or cell types which have engulfed virus or infected cells. We are in the process of applying
a more robust and conservative statistical procedure to correct for possible ambient RNA
contamination, which will be critical for downstream analyses of the association between
SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA and host biology.
Nasal Swabs​:
Sample collection and tissue dissociation (Sanger/Barcelona)
Detailed sample processing for blood samples and nasal swabs are available through
protocols.io (​dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjinkkde​). Briefly, PBMCs were obtained from
peripheral blood by Ficoll gradient using Lymphocyte Isolation Solution. Once PBMCs were
isolated, all samples were stored at -150°C in fetal bovine serum (FBS) + 10% DMSO.
Cryopreserved PBMCs were thawed rapidly in a 37°C water bath and then slowly diluted in
pre-warmed growth medium, centrifuged and resuspended in fresh FACS buffer (PBS + 3%
FBS) prior to loading them into the 10X Chromium. Additionally, a fraction of the thawed
PBMCs was depleted for CD3+ cells, using anti-CD3+ magnetic beads prior to loading into 10X
Chromium.
Nasal swabs were transported in medium (MEM + 1% penicillin/streptomycin + 0.1%
amphotericin + 0.1% gentamicin) from the hospital to the laboratory. Cell clamps were then
digested with B. licheniformis protease (10 mg/mL) on ice for 30 minutes. After quenching the
protease, single cell suspensions were treated to remove red cells using eBioscience 1x red
blood cell (RBC) lysis buffer (Invitrogen) and filtered using a Flowmi strainer. Finally, cells were
counted to achieve the desired cell concentration.
UMMC/BCH/Broad Team (Nasopharyngeal Swabs Methods)
Sample Collection and Biobanking
Nasopharyngeal samples were collected by trained healthcare providers using FLOQSwabs
(Copan flocked swabs) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Collectors would don personal
protective equipment (PPE), including a gown, non-sterile gloves, a protective N95 mask, a
bouffant, and a face shield. The patient’s head was then tilted back slightly, and the swab
inserted along the nasal septum, above the floor of the nasal passage to the nasopharynx until
slight resistance was felt. The swab was then left in place for several seconds to absorb
secretions and slowly removed while rotating swab. A second swab was then completed in the
other nares. The swabs were then placed into a cryogenic vial with 900 µL of heat inactivated
fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 100 µL of dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). The vials were then placed
into a Thermo Scientific​TM Mr. Frosty Freezing Container for optimal cell preservation. The Mr.
Frosty containing the vials was then placed in cooler with dry ice for transportation from patient

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

area to laboratory for processing. Once in the laboratory, the Mr. Frosty was placed into the
-80°C Freezer overnight and then on the next day, the vials were moved to the liquid nitrogen
storage container.

Dissociation and Collection of Viable Single Cells from Nasal Swabs
Swabs in freezing media (90% FBS/10% DMSO) were stored in liquid nitrogen until immediately
prior
to
dissociation.
A
detailed
sample
protocol
can
be
found
here:
dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjhmkj46 . This approach ensures that all cells and cellular
material from the nasal swab (whether directly attached to the nasal swab, or released during
the washing and digestion process), are exposed first to DTT, followed by an Accutase
digestion. Briefly, nasal swabs in freezing media were thawed, and each swab was rinsed in
RPMI before incubation in 1 mL RPMI/10 mM DTT (Sigma) for 15 minutes at 37ºC with
agitation. Next, the nasal swab was incubated in 1 mL Accutase (Sigma) for 30 minutes at 37ºC
with agitation. The 1 mL RPMI/10 mM DTT from the nasal swab incubation was centrifuged at
400 g for 5 minutes at 4ºC to pellet cells, the supernatant was discarded, and the cell pellet was
resuspended in 1 mL Accutase and incubated for 30 minutes at 37ºC with agitation. The original
cryovial containing the freezing media and the original swab washings were combined and
centrifuged at 400 g for 5 minutes at 4ºC. The cell pellet was then resuspended in RPMI/10 mM
DTT, and incubated for 15 minutes at 37ºC with agitation, centrifuged as above, the supernatant
was aspirated, and the cell pellet was resuspended in 1 mL Accutase, and incubated for 30
minutes at 37ºC with agitation. All cells were combined following Accutase digestion and filtered
using a 70 µm nylon strainer. The filter and swab were washed with RPMI/10% FBS/4 mM
EDTA, and all washings combined. Dissociated, filtered cells were centrifuged at 400 g for 10
minutes at 4ºC, and resuspended in 200 µL RPMI/10% FBS for counting. Cellular recovery,
estimated viability percentages, and representative images are being compiled and will be
shared with final datasets. Cells were diluted to 20,000 cells in 200 µL for scRNA-seq. For the
majority of swabs, fewer than 20,000 cells total were recovered. In these instances, all cells
were input into scRNA-seq.
UCL/Sanger
Samples were collected and transferred to a Category Level 3 facility at University College
London and processed within 2 hours of sample collection. Nasal brushings were enzymatically
digested to a single cell solution and processed further straight away. Peripheral blood was
centrifuged after adding Ficoll Paque Plus and PBMCs, serum and neutrophils separated,
collected and frozen for later processing.
BALF Protocols
Sample Preparation (Columbia)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Detailed sample processing protocols for both airway washes and blood samples have been
deposited on protocols.io (​airway: ​dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjj8kkrw​; ​blood:
dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjm6kk9e​). Briefly, for the airway washes, we treated
samples with Benzonase, filtered, and then isolated mononuclear cells (MNCs) with a
Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient. To remove neutrophils and red blood cells from the MNC
preparation, we treated with biotinylated anti-CD66b and anti-CD235ab, respectively, and
depleted antibody-bound cells with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. We also depleted the
MNCs of dead cells using Dead Cell Removal Microbeads (Miltenyi). For the blood samples, we
isolated MNCs using a Ficoll-Paque PLUS density gradient, but included the RosetteSep
Granulocyte Depletion Cocktail (Stemcell Technologies) to remove neutrophils. We further
purified the MNCs using anti-CD66b/anti-CD235ab magnetic depletion and dead cell removal as
described above for the airway washes.
Single-Cell Capture Method
We used a Next GEM Chromium Controller (10x Genomics) to capture and lyse individual cells
and for co-encapsulation with barcoded primers. We loaded the instrument to target ~5,000
scRNA-seq profiles per lane after cell counting with NucleoCounter NC-3000 (ChemoMetec).

PBMC:
Sanger/IJC Group:
PBMCs and CD3+-depleted PBMCs (CD3N) (​dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjinkkde​)
were stained with CITEseq antibodies and loaded into the 10X Chromium machine. In some
cases, PBMCs or CD3N cells from two different donors were multiplexed under the same
reaction. Detailed sample staining is available through protocols.io. Briefly, for the CITEseq
protocol (​dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjhmkj46​), cells were resuspended in FACS buffer
(PBS + 4% FBS), incubated with Fc Block for 10 minutes and the specific mix of antibodies for
30 minutes at 4ºC. Cells were then washed three times, filtered using a Flowmi strainer and
counted.
Cells were loaded into the instrument to target ~25,000 scRNA-seq profiles per lane. In the case
of nasal swabs, fresh cells were loaded into the 10X Chromium machine to target between
1,000 and 5,000 scRNA-seq profiles.
Library Preparation:
Library Generation and Sequencing (Columbia & Sanger)
We used the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3’ Reagent Kit v3.1 (10x Genomics) for
scRNA-seq library construction and sequenced the resulting libraries on an Illumina NovaSeq
6000. We targeted ~300M raw reads per sample (~60,000 raw reads per cell) with cycle
numbers of 100 for read 1, 100 for read 2, and 100 for the index read.

Blood sample collection and PBMC isolation ​(MGH/Broad Acute Blood Cohort)
Blood samples were collected in EDTA tubes, and processed no more than 3 hours post blood
draw in a Biosafety Level 2+ laboratory on site. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

were isolated from whole blood using Ficoll gradient centrifugation protocol detailed in
protocol.io: dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjhnkj5e. Briefly, whole blood was diluted with
room temperature RPMI medium in a 1:2 ratio to facilitate cell separation for other analyses
using the SepMate PBMC isolation tubes (STEMCELL) containing 16ml of Ficoll (GE
Healthcare). Diluted whole blood was centrifuged at 1200 rcf for 20 minutes at 20​°​C. After
centrifugation and additional washes detailed in the protocol, aliquots of plasma and PBMCs
were prepared and cryopreserved for downstream analyses. ​The PBMC aliquots were placed
into a Thermo Scientific​TM Mr. Frosty Freezing Container for optimal cell preservation overnight
into the -80°C Freezer. The vials were moved to the liquid nitrogen storage container. As
detailed in our protocol in protocol.io: ​dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bjhnkj5e​, neutrophils
were also isolated from every whole blood sample and lysed for downstream bulk-RNA
sequencing analysis.
PBMCs processing for single-cell genomics analysis ​(MGH/Broad Acute Blood Cohort)
We processed every PBMC samples for single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNAseq) with paired
measurements of 197 surface proteins (CITE-seq, using TotalSeq reagents from Biolegend), T
cell receptor (TCR) and B cell receptor (BCR) sequencing using the 10X Genomics ​Next GEM
Single Cell 5’ Reagent Kit v1.1 (see below for further details). PBMC samples were processed
by a batch of 8 samples. For every batch, several clinical meta-data were taken into account to
limit batch effect, including balancing for: gender, age range, WHO groups, and pre-existing
conditions. For each batch of 8 samples, upon thawing up to 1.5M cells per sample and
performing an initial washing step through centrifugation at 300g for 7min at 4​°​C, dead cells
(​EasySep Dead Cell Removal Kit; Stemcell, catalog #17899) and red blood cells (​ErythroClear
Read Blood Cell Depletion Kit; Stemcell, catalog #01738) were depleted from each sample
using commercially available kits. The total number of remaining viable cells were counted
using trypan blue. Up to 250,000 cells per sample were then selected to be stained with ​CD45
selection mastermix ​(MojoSort CD45 Nanobeads, BioLegend, catalog #480030; Human
TruStain FcX, Biolegend, catalog #422302) together with TotalSeq-C Hashtags (BioLegend).
MojoSort CD45 Nanobeads were used to help capture cells over debris for downstream
analyses. Eight distinct TotalSeq-C hashtags were selected for generating data (i.e.
TotalSeq-C0251, C0252, C0254, C0256, C0257, C0258, C0259, C0260). After performing three
washes, cells were counted with trypan blue. 60,000 cells from each of the 8 samples were then
pooled together to a 1.5 ml lo-bind eppendorf tube. Upon filtering the pooled cell suspension
with a 40 um Bel-art Flowmi strainer into a new 1.5 ml lo-bind eppendorf tube, the cell
suspension was stained with a customized TotalSeq-C 197-antibody pool (Biolegend), following
the manufacturer’s instructions for concentration. Pooled cells were incubated on ice for 30
minutes; cells were resuspended every 10 minutes. Four washing steps were then performed.
After completing the last washing steps, the cell pellet was resuspended in 50uL of RPMI-1640
medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 2% human AB serum (Sigma-Aldrich).
Cells were counted and concentration adjusted to load 50,000 cells on the 10X Genomics
Chromium Controller (see below)​.
Library Generation and Sequencing (MGH/Broad Acute Blood Cohort)
A Next GEM Chromium Controller (10x Genomics) was used to capture single cells with a target
of 3,000 scRNAseq profile per PBMCsample. We used the Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 5’

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Reagent Kit v1.1 (10x Genomics) for scRNA-seq library construction, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were multiplexed using individual Chromium i7 Sample
Indices, and then sequenced on NovaSeq S4 Flowcells with custom sequencing metrics
(single-indexed sequencing run, 28/8/0/96 cycles for R1/i7/i5/R2), aiming for 50,000 reads per
cell for gene expression, 7000 reads per cell for TCR, 7000 reads per cell for BCR, and 10,000
reads for the feature barcodes (FBC).
Sample Collection and Processing for CITEseq/scRNAseq (BALF cohort - VIB / Ghent
University Hospital)
Bronchoscopy with BAL was performed bedside using a single use disposable video
bronchoscope. Bronchoscopy was only performed in hemodynamically and respiratory stable
patients. In spontaneously breathing patients, an additional oxygen need of 3L/min in rest was
required. Recommended personal protective equipment was used: full face mask, disposable
surgical cap, medical protective mask (N95/FFP2/FFP3), work uniform, disposable medical
protective gown, disposable gloves. Three to five aliquots of 20 mL sterile normal saline were
instilled into the region of the lung with most aberrations on chest CT. Retrieval was done by
suctioning of the scope. BAL ​fl​uid was collected in siliconized bottles to prevent cell adherence
and kept at 4 °C. BAL ​fl​uid was ​filtered through a 100 μm cell strainer (BD Biosciences) and
centrifuged for 7 min at 1300 rpm at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the BAL fl​uid cells
were counted and subsequently processed fresh for CITEseq/scRNAseq. One million of cells
was used for subsequent single cell RNA sequencing while the remaining cells were frozen in 1
mL 90% fetal calf serum (FCS, Sigma), 10% dimethyl sulphoxide Hybri-Max (DMSO, Sigma) in
a cryovial using a 5100 Cryo 1 °C Freezing Container (Nalgene) to ​− 80 °C. Afterwards the cells
were stored stored in liquid nitrogen (196°C). Whole blood was collected in EDTA tube and
processed within a maximum of 1.5 hours after collection. Whole blood separation was
performed by bringing whole blood, diluted with PBS 7.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, # 20012027),
in a Leucosep™ tube, (Greiner Bio-One, # 227290), prefilled with 15 mL
Lymphoprep™(Stemcell technologies, # 07851), followed by a centrifugation step of 30 minutes
at 1500 rpm (acceleration 5, brake 3). After isolation, the PBMCs were twice washed in PBS 7.2
and centrifuged at 350 xg for 10 minutes in a cooled centrifuge at 4°C. Isolated PBMCs were
counted, cryopreserved in 1mL FCS/DMSO 10% and stored in liquid nitrogen (196°C).
Single-Cell Capture Method and Library Preparation (BALF cohort - VIB / Ghent
University Hospital)
All experiments have been conducted at a containment laboratory with inward directional airflow
(BSL-3). BALF cells have been processed fresh, PBMC cells were frozen first and subsequently
processed. One million of cells was stained with the CITE-seq antibody mix containing >250
barcoded antibodies (TotalSeq™-A, BioLegend), CD45 FITC (Clone HI30, BioLegend,
3040050), and CD235a APC (2.5uL, Clone HIR2, BD Biosciences, 561775). When cell hashing
was applied, TotalSeq™-A hashing antibodies were supplemented to the CITEseq antibody
cocktail. After a 30 min incubation on ice, cells were then washed with PBS/FBS2% and spun
down at 500 rcf at 4°C for 5min. After resuspension in 300uL of PBS and instant staining with
propidium iodide (Company, catalog number, 4uL), PI-/CD235a- viable cells (whilst excluding
red blood cells) were sorted using the BD FACSJazz™. Sorted cells were spun down at 450rcf

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

at 4°C for 8min. Supernatant was carefully discarded and the cell pellet was resuspended in an
appropriate volume of PBS/BSA 0.04%. Sorted cells were loaded on a GemCode NextGEM
Single-Cell Instrument (10x Genomics) to generate single-cell Gel Bead-in-EMulsion (GEMs).
and samples were mixed prior loading on the GemCode instrument. Single-cell RNA-Seq
libraries were prepared using GemCode Single-Cell V3.1 (NextGEM) 3ʹ Gel Bead and Library
Kit (10x Genomics) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing libraries were
sequenced with NovaSEQ S4 flow cell with custom sequencing metrics (single-indexed
sequencing run, 28/8/0/98 cycles for R1/i7/i5/R2) (Illumina). Sequencing was performed at the
VIB Nucleomics Core (VIB, Leuven, Belgium).
scRNA-seq (UMMC/BCH/Broad)
Seq-Well S​3 was run as previously described. Briefly, a maximum of 20,000 single cells were
deposited onto Seq-Well arrays preloaded with a single barcoded mRNA capture bead per well.
Cells were allowed to settle by gravity into wells for 10 minutes, after which the arrays were
washed with PBS and RPMI, and sealed with a semi-permeable membrane for 30 minutes, and
incubated in lysis buffer (5 M guanidinium thiocyanate/1 mM EDTA/1% BME/0.5% sarkosyl) for
20 minutes. Arrays were then incubated in a hybridization buffer (2M NaCl/8% v/v PEG8000) for
40 minutes, and then the beads were removed from the arrays and collected in 1.5 mL tubes in
wash buffer (2M NaCl/3 mM MgCl​2​/20 mM Tris-HCl/8% v/v PEG8000). Beads were
resuspended in a reverse transcription master mix, and reverse transcription, exonuclease
digestion, second strand synthesis, and whole transcriptome amplification were carried out as
previously described. Libraries were generated using Illumina Nextera XT Library Prep Kits and
sequenced on NextSeq 500/550 High Output v2.5 kits to an average depth of 110 million reads
per array: read 1: 21 (cell barcode, UMI), read 2: 50 (digital gene expression), index 1: 8 (N700
barcode).
Single-Cell Computational Pipelines, Analysis & Annotation:
Single-Cell RNA-seq Computational Pipelines, Processing, and Analysis (Columbia)
We pseudo-aligned the raw reads for each sample to a merged human/SARS-CoV-2
transcriptome using kallisto v0.46.2 in “BUS” mode to facilitate demultiplexing (​Bray et al. 2016;
Melsted et al. 2019​). We then corrected for index swapping across all samples that were
sequenced in a given lane at the level of equivalence classes using the algorithm of Griffiths et
al. (​Griffiths et al. 2018​). Finally, we generated a raw count matrix based on the index
swap-corrected BUS file for each sample using bustools v0.40.0 (​Melstad et al. 2019)​ . We
filtered the raw count matrix for each sample using the EmptyDrops algorithm from Lun et al
(​Lun et al. 2019​) and also removed all cells with mitochondrial pseudo-alignment rates >20% or
with counts per gene greater than two standard deviations above the mean for a given sample.
For preliminary cell type annotation, we first analyzed each sample individually. We identified
likely markers of cell types and subpopulations based on the drop-out curve for each sample as
described in Levitin et al. (​Levitin et al., 2019​) We then merged all of the count matrices for
airway and, separately, all of the count matrices for blood for cell type annotation. We performed

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

unsupervised clustering on the merged airway and blood matrices by taking the union of
putative marker genes identified from each sample, creating a submatrix for putative marker
genes, and transforming this into a matrix of Spearman correlation distances. We then used this
distance matrix as input for unsupervised clustering with Louvain community detection as
implemented in Phenograph with k=20 for k-nearest neighbor graph generation (​Levine et al.
2015)​ . We identified specific marker genes for each cluster using the binomial test as described
in Shekhar et al.(​Shekhar et al. 2016)​ The Python code used for this analysis can be found at
https://github.com/simslab/cluster_diffex2018​.
Single-Cell RNA-seq Computational Pipelines and Analysis (Sanger & IJC)
The single cell transcriptome and CITEseq quantification was performed using cellranger 3.1,
using GRCh38 + SARSCoV2 reference and a dictionary of tagged antibodies tags respectively.
Several i7 sample tags were used for pairs of donors for the PBMCs samples, so the
provenance of such cells was resolved using Souporcell ​(​Du et al. 2020)​ ​. This tool produced a
genotype variant for every donor that could be matched to genotyping obtained from the
Infinium Global Screening Array-24 v3.0 BeadChip, and a list of cell doublet was resolved from
observing features that cannot be explained by a single genotype. In addition, Scrublet (​Wolock
et al. 2019​) was used to detect other doublets by detecting cell as outliers for their computed
doublet score, by using a t-test with associate pvalue less than 0.01 after Bonferroni correction
within fine-grained sub-clustering of each cluster produced by the Leiden algorithm from ScanPy
(​Wolf et al. 2018)​, which was performed separately for PMBCs and nasal swabs. Cells detected
as doublet by either method and other cells that have a high mitochondrial content (>15%) were
excluded from downstream analysis.
The cell type identities were resolved using scVI (​Lopez et al. 2018​) ​which only used
transcriptome information. Sample specific batch effects were corrected by a pair of generative
models. For the PBMCs samples, the correction was performed using both cell-wise
deconvolved donor identities and sequencing lane, which resulted in one batch for every 13
PBMcs samples and 13 additional batches for their respective CD3N sorted counterparts. The
second generative model would be trained on the 4 nasal swab samples, which was processed
separately as 4 batches. Genes associated with G1 and S cell stage, which are provided in the
Seurat package (​Stuart et al. 2019)​ ​, ​were excluded and the remaining genes were
downsampled to 5000 genes using scvi native method. The number of latent variables needed
to infer had been set of 64, and the associated generative models were for PMBCs and nasal
swabs trained separately using 500 iterations.
Scanpy (​Wolf et al. 2018)​ was then used on the inferred latent variables to identify cell-type
clusters and render umap coordinates that would be available to browser using cellxgene.
Sub-clustering of the Bcell population and Tcell populations were performed for the PBMCs
sample in order to resolve expected cell-types that were not directly discriminated by the
unsupervised analysis. For instance, the naive Tcell populations could be resolved from high
level of CCR7, and also from having levels of antibody_CD45RA as opposed to
antibody_CD45RO, which is high in other CD4+ Tcells. Similarly, memory Bcells were identified
from having higher levels for CD27.
Data Preprocessing and Quality Control

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Pooled libraries were demultiplexed using bcl2fastq (v2.17.1.14) with default settings
(mask_short_adapter_reads 10, minimum_trimmed_read_length 10). Libraries were aligned
using
STAR
within
the
Drop-Seq
Computational
Protocol
(​https://github.com/broadinstitute/Drop-seq​)
and
implemented
on
Cumulus
(​https://cumulus.readthedocs.io/en/latest/drop_seq.html​). Reads were aligned to a custom
combined genome of human GRCh38 (Ensembl 93) and SARS-CoV-2 RNA genome. The
SARS-CoV-2 viral sequence and gtf are as described in Kim et al. 2020
(https://github.com/hyeshik/sars-cov-2-transcriptome,
BetaCov/South Korea/KCDC03/2020
based on NC_045512.2). The GTF was edited to include all CDS regions (as of this annotation
of the transcriptome, the CDS regions completely cover the RNA genome without overlapping
segments), and regions were added to describe the 5’ UTR (“SARSCoV2_5prime”), the 3’ UTR
(“SARSCoV2_3prime”), and reads aligning to anywhere within the Negative Strand
(“SARSCoV2_NegStrand”). Additionally, trailing A’s at the 3’ end of the virus were excluded
from the SARS-CoV-2 fasta, as these were found to drive spurious viral alignment in
pre-COVID19 samples. Alignment references were tested against a diverse set of
pre-COVID-19 samples and ​in vitro SARS-CoV-2 infected human bronchial epithelial cultures
(Ravindra et al.) to confirm specificity of viral aligning reads (data not shown). Aligned
cell-by-gene matrices were merged across all study participants, and cells were filtered to
eliminate barcodes with fewer than 200 UMI, 150 unique genes, and greater than 50%
mitochondrial reads (cutoffs determined by distributions of reads across cells). A preliminary
clustering analysis as described below was carried out, which identified a subset of cells defined
solely by high mitochondrial alignment, and these cells were removed. As of 07/29/2020, this
resulted in an interim dataset of 32,389 genes and 12,427 cells across 21 study participants (15
COVID-19 individuals, 6 control individuals) with a mean +/- SEM recovery per swab of 565 +/123 cells. 1 additional nasal swab was processed and sequenced, but excluded from analysis
as no high-quality cell barcodes were recovered after sequencing (NB: this sample contained <
5,000 viable cells prior to loading).

Cell Clustering and Annotation
Dimensionality reduction, cell clustering and differential gene analysis were all achieved using
the Seurat (v3.1.5) package in R programming language (v3.0.2). Dimensionality reduction was
carried out by running principal components analysis over the 2,291 most variable genes with
dispersion > 0.9 (tested over a range of dispersion > 0.7 to dispersion > 1.2; dispersion > 0.9
was determined as optimal based on number of variable genes, and general stability of
clustering results across these cutoffs was confirmed). Only variable genes from human
transcripts were considered for dimensionality reduction and clustering. Using the Jackstraw
function within Seurat, we selected a subset of 24 principal components that described the
majority of variance within the dataset, and used these for defining a nearest neighbor graph
and Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP) plot. Cells were clustered using
Louvain clustering, and the resolution parameter was chosen by maximizing the average
silhouette score across all clusters. Differentially expressed genes between each cluster and all
other cells were calculated using the FindAllMarkers function, test.use set to “bimod”. After initial
clustering, we pooled all clusters putatively determined to be of epithelial origin and reanalyzed
this subset to find subclusters, using the methods for dimensionality reduction and clustering as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

above (dispersion cutoff > 0.9, 25 principal components). Within the epithelial cell subcluster, we
then further subclustered cells belonging to the ciliated cell, squamous cell, and secretory cell
Louvain clusters separately, resolving specific subtypes and substates among each cell type.
Similar to epithelial cells, we combined all Louvain clusters containing myeloid cell types and
reanalyzed as above (dispersion > 1, mean expression > 0.3, 6 principal components). After
complete subclustering, all cell type identities were combined together to generate an interim
annotated dataset.

Single-Cell RNA-seq Computational Pipelines, Processing, and Analysis​ (VIB/University
Hospital Ghent):
The raw reads were demultiplexed and mapped to a merged human/SARS-CoV-2 genome
using Cell Ranger v4.0. Empty droplets and outlier cells were identified and removed based on
the gene expression profile. Cells with counts in less than 200 genes and genes expressed in
less than 3 cells were removed from the count matrix. Cells that were more than 5 mean
absolute deviations from the median library size or median number of expressed genes were
also removed, as well as cells where the % of mitochondrial reads exceeded the median by 5
mean absolute deviations. The ensuing count matrix was further processed using Seurat v3.1.5.
The gene expression counts were divided by the library size and after applying a scaling factor
log-transformed to normalize between cells. A centered log-ratio transform was used to
normalize the antibody derived counts. Cells were clustered using the Louvain algorithm on the
50 first principal components of a subset of high variable genes and visualized on a Uniform
Manifold Approximation and Projection of a batch-effect corrected embedding using Harmony
(​Korsunsky et al., 2019)​ . The computational resources (Stevin Supercomputer Infrastructure)
and services were provided by the VSC (Flemish Supercomputer Center), funded by Ghent
University, FWO and the Flemish Government – department EWI.

Single-Cell RNA-seq Computational Pipelines, Processing, and Analysis​ (Sanger/UCL):
The single cell data was mapped to a GRCh38 ENSEMBL 93 derived reference, with an
additional 21 viral genomes (featuring SARS-CoV2) included as additional FASTA sequences
and corresponding GTF entries. A complete list of the included viruses, along with their
respective NCBI IDs and source links, can be found in Supplementary Table X. The alignment,
quantification and preliminary cell calling were carried out via the STARsolo functionality of
STAR 2.7.3a, with the cell calling subsequently refined with Cell Ranger 3.0.2's version of
EmptyDrops (Lun et al., 2019). This algorithm has been made available as emptydrops on PyPi.
Initial doublets were called on a per-sample basis by computing Scrublet (​Wolock et al., 2019​)
scores for each cell, propagating them through an overclustered manifold by replacing individual
scores with per-cluster medians, and identifying statistically significant values from the resulting
distribution, replicating the approach of ​Pijuan-Sala et al. 2019 and ​Popescu et al. 2019​. The
clustering was performed with the Leiden (​Traag et al. 2019)​ algorithm on a KNN graph of a
PCA space derived from a log(CPM/100 + 1) representation of highly variable genes, following
SCANPY protocol (​Wolf et al. 2018​), and overclustering was achieved by performing an

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

additional clustering of each resulting cluster. The primary clustering also served as input for
ambient RNA removal via SoupX (​Young et al. 2020)​ .
Single-Cell RNA-seq Computational Pipelines, Processing, and Analysis (MGH & Broad;
Acute Blood Cohort PBMC Analysis)
We ran Cell Ranger 3.1.0 (10x Genomics) on Terra (Broad Institute) using the
cellranger_workflow WDL file included in Cumulus (​Li et al. 2020​). This pipeline runs the
“cellranger mkfastq'' command to demultiplex raw sequencing reads, and the “cellranger count”
command to align the sequencing reads and generate a counts matrix. We aligned to a
custom-built Human GRCh38 (Ensembl 93) and SARS-COV-2 RNA reference. The
SARS-CoV-2 viral sequence and GTF are as described in ​Kim et al. 2020
(https://github.com/hyeshik/sars-cov-2-transcriptome,
BetaCov/South Korea/KCDC03/2020
based on NC_045512.2). The GTF was edited to include all CDS regions (as of this annotation
of the transcriptome, the CDS regions completely cover the RNA genome without overlapping
segments), and regions were added to describe the 5’ UTR (“SARSCoV2_5prime”), the 3’ UTR
(“SARSCoV2_3prime”), and reads aligning to anywhere within the Negative Strand
(“SARSCoV2_NegStrand”). Additionally, trailing A’s at the 3’ end of the virus were excluded
from the SARS-CoV-2 fasta, as these were found to drive spurious viral alignment in
pre-COVID19 samples. PBMC samples were pooled by multiplexing 8 samples. Donor identity
was ​deconvolved using demuxEM on the hashtagged samples (​Gaublomme et al. 2019)​ .
Performing quality control, data integration of individual samples and clustering analysis
Single-cell RNA-seq data from individual samples were combined into a single large gene
expression matrix and analyzed using R (​https://www.R-project.org​). Cells were removed in
each sample if they met the following criteria:
● <100 UMIs / cell
● <500 genes detected / cell
● >20% mitochondrial UMIs / cell
● <0.01% mitochondrial UMIs / cell
We selected genes with high variation by fitting a Loess regression (log(sd) ~ log(mean)) to the
13,357 genes in the count data with expression in at least 300 cells. We took the 2599 genes
with greatest residual variance from the Loess fit, and ran principal component analysis (PCA)
on these scaled and centered genes to compute the top 30 principal components. To adjust
each of the PCs, we ran Harmony (​Korsunsky et al. 2019)​ for 25 iterations on the 30 PCs,
where each multiplexed sample was considered its own batch. Next, we used the 30 adjusted
PCs to compute the 50 nearest neighbors (Euclidean distance) for each cell with the HNSW
algorithm (​Malkov and Yashunin 2016)​ as implemented in the BiocNeighbors R package. ​The
network of nearest neighbors was used as the input for unsupervised clustering with the Leiden
community detection algorithm (​Traag et al. 2018)​ as implemented in the leidenalg Python
package (​https://github.com/vtraag/leidenalg​) with resolution set to 0.8 for 20 iterations. To
embed the cells in a two-dimensional map, ​we ran UMAP on the nearest neighbor network as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

implemented in the uwot R package (​https://github.com/jlmelville/uwot​) with spread set to 1 and
min_dist set to 0.25.
For preliminary cell type annotation, we identified specific marker genes for each cluster using
the area under the receiver operator curve (AUROC) computed by the Presto R package
(​https://github.com/immunogenomics/presto​). We also used the p-value from the linear model fit
(gene ~ in_cluster) on pseudobulk expression (​Lun et al. 2016)​ using the Limma R package
(​Ritchie et al. 2005​).
Ethics Declarations:
● Columbia
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Columbia University Irving Medical Center
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol AAAS9659
● UMMC/BCH/Broad
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
University of Mississippi Medical Center
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved ​UMMC IRB#2020-0065
● MGH/Broad
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Partners Human Research Committee (now renamed Mass General Brigham
IRB)
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: The addition of the COVID cohort to
2107P001681 was approved via amendment with a waiver of informed consent
for this cohort.
● Wellcome Sanger Institute/Josep Carreras Research Institute (IJC)
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Germans Trias i Pujol Hospital
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol PI-20-129
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Bellvitge Hospital Universitari
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol AC010/20
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Hospital Universitari Vall d’Hebron
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol
PR(AG)282/2020
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Hospital Universitario de la Princesa
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol 4070
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Universitätsklinikun Freiburg
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved IRB protocol 507/16; 282/11
● VIB/Ghent University Hospital

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

○

●

Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Ethics Committee of Ghent University Hospital (Belgium), AZ Jan Palfijn
(Belgium) and AZ Maria Middelares (Belgium)
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: approved reference G0G4520N.
Wellcome Sanger Institute/University College London
○ Full name of Ethics Committee / Institutional Review Board (IRB) for the cohort:
Living Airway Biobank, administered through UCL Great Ormond Street Institute
of Child Health
○ Decision made by ethical oversight body: Approved REC reference: 19/NW/0171,
IRAS project ID 261511

Full Author Table:
Affiliation

Name

Contact/Role

Sanger Genome Center & Josep Carreras Research Institute

Roser Vento-Tormo

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

PI

Esteban Ballestar

Epigenetics and Immune Disease Group,
Josep Carreras Research Institute (IJC),
08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain

PI

Louis-François Handfield

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

Project Lead

Javier Rodríguez-Ubreva

Epigenetics and Immune Disease Group,
Josep Carreras Research Institute (IJC),
08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain

Project Lead

Laura Ciudad
Gerard Godoy-Tena
Tarryn Porter

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

Agnes Oszlanczi
Elena Prigmore
Laura Richardson
Bertie Gottgens

Cambridge Institute For Medical Research,
United Kingdom

Sample prep/data
generation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Fernando Calero-Nieto
Nicola Wilson

Domenica Marchese
Holger Heyn

Eduardo Andrés-León
Marialbert Acosta-Herrera

CNAG-CRG, Centre for Genomic Regulation
(CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and
Technology (BIST), Barcelona, Spain
Institute of Parasitology and Biomedicine
López-Neyra, IPBLN-CSIC, PTS Granada,
Granada, Spain

Genotyping

Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple y
Neuroinmunología

Clinical Team

Javier Martin
Cristina Ramo-Tello
Silvia Presas-Rodríguez
Jorge Carrillo

IrsiCaixa AIDS Research Institute. Hospital
Germans Trias i Pujol, Spain

Eva Martínez-Cáceres

Division of Immunology, Germans Trias i
Pujol University Hospital, LCMN. Germans
Trias i Pujol Research Institute (IGTP),
08916 Badalona, Barcelona Spain

Adolfo Ruiz-Sanmartin

Intensive Care Department, Vall d’Hebron
Hospital Universitari, Vall

Ricard Ferrer-Roca
Juan Carlos​ ​Ruiz-Rodriguez
Mónica Martínez-Gallo

Immunology Division, Hospital Universitari
Vall d'Hebron (HUVH), Vall d'Hebron
Research Institute (VHIR), Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain

Xavier Solanich

Internal Medicine Department. Hospital
Universitari de Bellvitge, Bellvitge
Biomedical Research Institute (IDIBELL),
L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Isidoro González-Álvaro

Rheumatology Service, Instituto de
Investigación Sanitaria La Princesa (IS-IP),
Hospital Universitario de la Princesa,
Madrid, Spain

Ildefonso Sánchez-Cerrillo

Immunology Department, Hospital
Universitario La Princesa, IS-IP, Madrid,
Spain

Baerbel Keller

- Department of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, Medical Center – University
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
- Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency
(CCI), Medical Center - University of
Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany

Klaus Warnatz

Annegrit Decker
Maike Hofmann
Reinhard E. Voll

University of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
Department of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunology, Medical Center – University
of Freiburg, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany
Columbia Medical Center

Donna L. Farber

Dept. of Surgery; Dept. of Microbiology &
Immunology

PI

Peter A. Sims

Dept. of Systems Biology; Dept. of
Biochemistry & Molecular Biophysics

PI

Matthew R. Baldwin

Dept. of Medicine

Thomas J. Connors

Dept. of Pediatrics

Izabela Krupska

Dept. of Systems Biology; Columbia
Sulzberger Genome Center

Peter A. Szabo

Dept. of Microbiology & Immunology

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Steven B. Wells

Dept. of Systems Biology

Boston Children’s Harvard, Broad, MIT & University of Mississippi Medical Center
Sarah C. Glover

University of Mississippi Medical Center

Clinical Lead
Clinical Team

Michal Senitko
George E. Abraham III.
Tanya O. Robinson
Haley B. Williams
Meredith Sloan
Anna Owings
Hannah Laird
Taylor Christian
Yilianys Pride
Kenneth J. Wilson
Mohammad Hasan
Jose Ordovas-Montanes

Boston Children’s Hospital, HMS, Broad,
HSCI

PI

Bruce Horwitz

Boston Children’s Hospital

PI
Sample Processing
& Analysis

Ying Tang
Alex K. Shalek

Broad/MIT/Ragon

PI

Carly G. K. Ziegler

Project Lead

Vincent N. Miao

Sample Processing
and Analysis

Andrew W. Navia
Joshua Bromley

VIB & University of Ghent

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Niels Vandamme

Data Mining and Modelling for Biomedicine, VIB

(Corresponding author)

Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,

Project Lead

Belgium.
Linos Vandekerckhove

HIV Cure Research Center, Department of

(Corresponding author)

Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent

PI/Project Lead

University and Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium.
Ruth Seurinck

Data Mining and Modelling for Biomedicine, VIB

Project Lead

Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,
Belgium.
Jozefien De Clercq

HIV Cure Research Center, Department of

Clinical/Experimental Lead

Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent
Marion Pardons
Basiel Cole

University and Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium.

Clinical/Experimental Lead

PI

Sarah Gerlo
Yvan Saeys

Clinical/Experimental Lead

Data Mining and Modelling for Biomedicine, VIB

PI

Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,
Belgium.
Martin Guilliams

Laboratory of Myeloid Cell Biology in Tissue

PI

Homeostasis and Regeneration, VIB-UGent
Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,
Belgium
Bart Lambrecht

Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology and

PI

Immunoregulation, VIB Center for Inflammation
Research, Ghent, Belgium.
Eva Van Braeckel

Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium

Thomas Malfait
Louis Ide

AZ Jan Palfijn, Ghent, Belgium

Clinical support

Clinical support

Clinical support

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Julie Catteeuw

Clinical support

Karin Vandewalle

Clinical support

Paul Germonpré

Clinical support

An Casneuf

Clinical support

Els Tobback

HIV Cure Research Center, Department of

Clinical support

Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent
University and Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium.
Els Caluwé

Ghent University Hospital,
Ghent, Belgium

Clinical support

Sophie Vanherrewege

Clinical support

Els Merckx

Clinical support

Ytse Noppe

HIV Cure Research Center, Department of

Lab support

Internal Medicine and Pediatrics, Ghent
University and Ghent University Hospital,
Belgium.
Kevin Verstaen

Data Mining and Modelling for Biomedicine, VIB
Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,

Jana Roels

Computational support

Computational support

Belgium.

Quentin Rouchon

Computational support

Arne Soete

Computational support

Ria Roelandt

Lab support

Sofie De Prijck

Laboratory of Mucosal Immunology and

Lab support

Immunoregulation, VIB Center for Inflammation
Research, Ghent, Belgium.
Bavo Vanneste

Laboratory of Myeloid Cell Biology in Tissue
Homeostasis and Regeneration, VIB-UGent

Lab support

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent,
Belgium
Filip Van Nieuwerburgh

Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

Ellen De Meester

Lab support

Lab support

Stefaan Derveaux

VIB Nucleomics Core

Sequencing support

Kizi Coeck

VIB Nucleomics Core

Sequencing support

Rekin’s Janky

VIB Nucleomics Core

Sequencing support

VIB Nucleomics team

VIB Nucleomics Core

Sequencing support

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

Project Team

Covid19cellatlas.org Data Portal

Ni Huang (Sanger)
Martin Prete (Sanger)
Vladimir Kiselev (Sanger)
Sarah A. Teichmann
(Sanger)

University College London & Wellcome Sanger Institute
Masahiro Yoshida

UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK

Project lead

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

Project Lead

Kaylee B. Worlock
Ni Huang

Pi and contact

Kerstin B. Meyer
Marko Z. Nikolić

UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK

PI and Contact

Josephine L. Barnes

UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK

Project Lead

Eliz Kilich

University College London Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK

Clinical support

Angus de Wilton

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Malcolm Avari
Anita Saigal

Royal Free Hospital NHS Foundation Trust,
London, UK

Aarash Saleh
Colin R. Butler

UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, UK

Claire Smith
Marianne Shaw-Taylor

University College London Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK

Jessica Allen-Hyttinen

UCL Respiratory, Division of Medicine,
University College London, London, UK

Henry Yung
Sam M. Janes
Clare Jolly

UCL Division of Infection and Immunity,
University College London, London, UK

Ann-Kathrin Reuschl
Lira Mamanova

Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, UK

Library prep &
informatics

Liam Bolt
Laura Richardson
Elo Madissoon
Krzysztof Polanski
Natsuhiko Kumasaka
Rik Lindeboom
Oversight and
support

Sarah A. Teichmann

Massachusetts General Hospital & Broad Institute Acute Blood Cohort Effort
Kyle R. Kays
Blair A. Parry
Kendall M. Lavin-Parsons
Brendan M. ​Lilly

Department of Emergency Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA,​ USA

Blood sample
collection & clinical
data annotation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Brenna McKaig
Nicole Charland
Hargun Khanna
Carl Lodenstein
Justin Margolin
Anna Gonye
Irena Gushterova
Nihaarika Sharma
Maricarmen Rojas-Lopez
Brian Russo

Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Center for Bacterial Pathogenesis, Division
of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
Department of Microbiology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA

Miguel Reyes

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Department of Biological Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Molly Fisher Thomas

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA​ USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Jessica Tantivit

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA,​ USA

Kasidet Manakongtreecheep

Blood sample
processing

Blood sample
processing & single
cell genomics data
generation

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Tom Lasalle

Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Pritha Sen

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA,​ USA
Division of Infectious Diseases, Department
of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Tom Eisenhaure

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Alice Tirard

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA,​ USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Benjamin Arnold

Kamil Slowikowski
Neal Smith
Rachelly Normand
Swetha Ramesh

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA,​ USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Single cell
genomics data
generation

Computational
analysis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Alexandra-Chloé Villani

Center for Immunology & Inflammatory
Diseases, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston
MA,​ USA
Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

PI and contact

Nir Hacohen

Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

PIs

Michael Filbin

Department of Emergency Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
MA, USA

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Department of Emergency Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Moshe Sade-Feldman

Center for Cancer Research, Department
of Medicine, ​Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,​ USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Paul Blainey

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA
Department of Biological Engineering,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Roby Bhattacharyya

Division of Infectious Diseases, Department
of Medicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Boston, MA,
USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

Marcia Goldberg

Center for Bacterial Pathogenesis, Division
of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA
Department of Microbiology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA
Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA, USA

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References:
Bray NL, Pimentel H, Melsted P, Pachter L. Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq quantification.
Nat Biotechnol. 2016 May;34(5):525-7. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3519. Epub 2016 Apr 4. Erratum in: Nat
Biotechnol. 2016 Aug 9;34(8):888. PMID: 27043002.
Cao Y, Guo Z, Vangala P, et al. Single-cell analysis of upper airway cells reveals host-viral
dynamics in influenza infected adults. bioRxiv; 2020. DOI: 10.1101/2020.04.15.042978.
Chen G, Wu D, Guo W, Cao Y, Huang D, Wang H, et al. Clinical and immunologic features in
severe and moderate Coronavirus Disease 2019. J Clin Invest. 2020. doi:10.1172/JCI137244
Deprez M, Zaragosi LE, Truchi M, Becavin C, Ruiz García S, Arguel MJ, Plaisant M, Magnone
V, Lebrigand K, Abelanet S, Brau F, Paquet A, Pe'er D, Marquette CH, Leroy S, Barbry P. A
Single-cell Atlas of the Human Healthy Airways. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Jul 29. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201911-2199OC. Epub ahead of print. PMID: 32726565.
Du Y, Tu L, Zhu P, Mu M, Wang R, Yang P, Wang X, Hu C, Ping R, Hu P, Li T, Cao F, Chang
C,
Heaton H, Talman AM, Knights A, Imaz M, Gaffney DJ, Durbin R, Hemberg M, Lawniczak MK.
Souporcell: robust clustering of single-cell RNA-seq data by genotype without reference
genotypes. Nature Methods. 2020 Jun;17(6):615-20.
Hu Q, Jin Y, Xu G. Clinical Features of 85 Fatal Cases of COVID-19 from Wuhan. A
Retrospective Observational Study. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2020 Jun 1;201(11):1372-1379.
Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, et al. Clinical features of patients infected with
2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet. 2020;395: 497–506.
García SR, Deprez M, Lebrigand K, Cavard A, Paquet A, Arguel MJ, Magnone V, Truchi M,
Caballero I, Leroy S, Marquette CH, Marcet B, Barbry P, Zaragosi LE. Novel dynamics of
human mucociliary differentiation revealed by single-cell RNA sequencing of nasal epithelial
cultures. Development. 2019 Oct 23;146(20):dev177428. doi: 10.1242/dev.177428. PMID:
31558434; PMCID: PMC6826037.
Gaublomme JT, Li B, McCabe C, Knecht A, Yang Y, Drokhlyansky E, Van Wittenberghe N,
Waldman J, Dionne D, Nguyen L, De Jager PL, Yeung B, Zhao X, Habib N, Rozenblatt-Rosen
O, Regev A. Nuclei multiplexing with barcoded antibodies for single-nucleus genomics. Nat
Commun. 2019 Jul 2;10(1):2907. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-10756-2. PMID: 31266958; PMCID:
PMC6606589.
Griffiths JA, Richard AC, Bach K, Lun ATL, Marioni JC. Detection and removal of barcode
swapping in single-cell RNA-seq data. Nat Commun. 2018 Jul 10;9(1):2667. doi:
10.1038/s41467-018-05083-x. PMID: 29991676; PMCID: PMC6039488.
Kim D, Lee JY, Yang JS, Kim JW, Kim VN, Chang H. The Architecture of SARS-CoV-2
Transcriptome. Cell. 2020 May 14;181(4):914-921.e10. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.011. Epub
2020 Apr 23. PMID: 32330414; PMCID: PMC7179501.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Korsunsky I, Millard N, Fan J, Slowikowski K, Zhang F, Wei K, Baglaenko Y, Brenner M, Loh
PR, Raychaudhuri S. Fast, sensitive and accurate integration of single-cell data with Harmony.
Nat Methods. 2019 Dec;16(12):1289-1296. doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0619-0. Epub 2019 Nov
18. PMID: 31740819; PMCID: PMC6884693.
Levine JH, Simonds EF, Bendall SC, Davis KL, Amir el-AD, Tadmor MD, Litvin O, Fienberg HG,
Jager A, Zunder ER, Finck R, Gedman AL, Radtke I, Downing JR, Pe'er D, Nolan GP.
Data-Driven Phenotypic Dissection of AML Reveals Progenitor-like Cells that Correlate with
Prognosis. Cell. 2015 Jul 2;162(1):184-97. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.05.047. Epub 2015 Jun 18.
PMID: 26095251; PMCID: PMC4508757.
Levitin HM, Yuan J, Cheng YL, Ruiz FJ, Bush EC, Bruce JN, Canoll P, Iavarone A, Lasorella A,
Blei DM, Sims PA. ​De novo gene signature identification from single-cell RNA-seq with
hierarchical Poisson factorization. Mol Syst Biol. 2019 Feb 22;15(2):e8557. doi:
10.15252/msb.20188557. PMID: 30796088; PMCID: PMC6386217.
Li B, Gould J, Yang Y, Sarkizova S, Tabaka M, Ashenberg O, Rosen Y, Slyper M, Kowalczyk
MS, Villani AC, Tickle T, Hacohen N, Rozenblatt-Rosen O, Regev A. Cumulus provides
cloud-based data analysis for large-scale single-cell and single-nucleus RNA-seq. Nat Methods.
2020 Aug;17(8):793-798. doi: 10.1038/s41592-020-0905-x. Epub 2020 Jul 27. PMID: 32719530;
PMCID: PMC7437817.
Lopez R, Regier J, Cole MB, Jordan MI, Yosef N. Deep generative modeling for single-cell
transcriptomics. Nature methods. 2018 Dec;15(12):1053-8.
Lun AT, Bach K, Marioni JC. Pooling across cells to normalize single-cell RNA sequencing data
with many zero counts. Genome Biol. 2016 Apr 27;17:75. doi: 10.1186/s13059-016-0947-7.
PMID: 27122128; PMCID: PMC4848819.
Lun AT, Riesenfeld S, Andrews T, Gomes T, Marioni JC. EmptyDrops: distinguishing cells from
empty droplets in droplet-based single-cell RNA sequencing data. Genome biology. 2019
Dec;20(1):1-9
Malkov YA, Yashunin DA. Efficient and Robust Approximate Nearest Neighbor Search Using
Hierarchical Navigable Small World Graphs. IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell. 2020
Apr;42(4):824-836. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2018.2889473. Epub 2018 Dec 28. PMID: 30602420.
Mehta P, McAuley DF, Brown M, Sanchez E, Tattersall RS, Manson JJ, et al. COVID-19:
consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet. 2020;395: 1033–1034.
Melsted AP, Booeshaghi S, Gao F, Beltrame E, Lu L, Hjorleifsson KE, Gehring J, Pachter L.
Modular and efficient pre-processing of single-cell RNA-seq. bioRxiv 673285; doi:
https://doi.org/10.1101/673285
Muus C, Luecken MD, Eraslan G, Waghray A, Heimberg G, Sikkema L, Kobayashi Y, Vaishnav
ED, Subramanian A, Smilie C, Jagadeesh K, Duong ET, Fiskin E, Triglia ET, Ansari M, Cai P,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Lin B, Buchanan J, Chen S, Shu J, Haber AL, Chung H, Montoro DT, Adams T, Aliee H, Samuel
J, Andrusivova AZ, Angelidis I, Ashenberg O, Bassler K, Bécavin C, Benhar I, Bergenstråhle J,
Bergenstråhle L, Bolt L, Braun E, Bui LT, Chaffin M, Chichelnitskiy E, Chiou J, Conlon TM,
Cuoco MS, Deprez M, Fischer DS, Gillich A, Gould J, Guo M, Gutierrez AJ, Habermann AC,
Harvey T, He P, Hou X, Hu L, Jaiswal A, Jiang P, Kapellos T, Kuo CS, Larsson L,
Leney-Greene MA, Lim K, Litviňuková M, Lu J, Maatz H, Madissoon E, Mamanova L,
Manakongtreecheep K, Marquette CH, Mbano I, McAdams AM, Metzger RJ, Nabhan AN,
Nyquist SK, Ordovas-Montanes J, Penland L, Poirion OB, Poli S, Qi CC, Reichart D, Rosa I,
Schupp J, Sinha R, Sit RV, Slowikowski K, Slyper M, Smith N, Sountoulidis A, Strunz M, Sun D,
Talavera-López C, Tan P, Tantivit J, Travaglini KJ, Tucker NR, Vernon K, Wadsworth MH,
Waldmann J, Wang X, Yan W, Zhao W, Ziegler CGK, The NHLBI LungMAP Consortium, and
The Human Cell Atlas Lung Biological Network. Integrated analyses of single-cell atlases reveal
age, gender, and smoking status associations with cell type-specific expression of mediators of
SARS-CoV-2 viral entry and highlights inflammatory programs in putative target cells. bioRxiv
2020.04.19.049254; doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.19.049254
Ordovas-Montanes J, Dwyer DF, Nyquist SK, Buchheit KM, Vukovic M, Deb C, Wadsworth MH
2nd, Hughes TK, Kazer SW, Yoshimoto E, Cahill KN, Bhattacharyya N, Katz HR, Berger B,
Laidlaw TM, Boyce JA, Barrett NA, Shalek AK. Allergic inflammatory memory in human
respiratory epithelial progenitor cells. Nature. 2018 Aug;560(7720):649-654. doi:
10.1038/s41586-018-0449-8. Epub 2018 Aug 22. PMID: 30135581; PMCID: PMC6133715.
Perricone, C., Valesini, G. Discovering the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases at the 9th
International Congress of Autoimmunity, Nice, France, 2014. ​Immunol Res​ 60, 253–256 (2014).
Ravindra NG, Alfajaro MM, Gasque V, Habet V, Wei J, Filler RB, Huston NC, Wan H,
Szigeti-Buck K, Bao Wang B, Guilin Wang G, Montgomery RR, Eisenbarth SC, Williams A, Pyl
AM, Iwasaki A, Horvath TL, Foxman EF, Pierce RW, van Dijk D, Wilen CB. bioRxiv
2020.05.06.081695; doi: ​https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.081695
Peterson VM, Zhang KX, Kumar N, Wong J, Li L, Wilson DC, Moore R, McClanahan TK,
Sadekova S, Klappenbach JA. Multiplexed quantification of proteins and transcripts in single
cells. Nat Biotechnol. 2017 Oct;35(10):936-939. doi: 10.1038/nbt.3973. Epub 2017 Aug 30.
PMID: 28854175.
Pijuan-Sala B, Griffiths JA, Guibentif C, Hiscock TW, Jawaid W, Calero-Nieto FJ, Mulas C,
Ibarra-Soria X, Tyser RC, Ho DL, Reik W. A single-cell molecular map of mouse gastrulation
and early organogenesis. Nature. 2019 Feb;566(7745):490-5.
Popescu DM, Botting RA, Stephenson E, Green K, Webb S, Jardine L, Calderbank EF, Polanski
K, Goh I, Efremova M, Acres M. Decoding human fetal liver haematopoiesis. Nature. 2019
Oct;574(7778):365-71.
Ritchie ME, Phipson B, Wu D, Hu Y, Law CW, Shi W, Smyth GK. limma powers differential

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Apr
20;43(7):e47. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv007. Epub 2015 Jan 20. PMID: 25605792; PMCID:
PMC4402510.
Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality due to COVID-19
based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. Intensive Care Med. 2020.
doi:10.1007/s00134-020-05991-x
Shekhar K, Lapan SW, Whitney IE, Tran NM, Macosko EZ, Kowalczyk M, Adiconis X, Levin JZ,
Nemesh J, Goldman M ​et al (2016) Comprehensive classification of retinal bipolar neurons by
single-cell transcriptomics. ​Cell​ 166: 1308–1323 e30: ​PMC5003425
Stoeckius M, Hafemeister C, Stephenson W, Houck-Loomis B, Chattopadhyay PK, Swerdlow H,
Satija R, Smibert P. Simultaneous epitope and transcriptome measurement in single cells. Nat
Methods. 2017 Sep;14(9):865-868. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.4380. Epub 2017 Jul 31. PMID:
28759029; PMCID: PMC5669064.
Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E, Mauck III WM, Hao Y, Stoeckius M,
Smibert P, Satija R. Comprehensive integration of single-cell data. Cell. 2019 Jun
13;177(7):1888-902.
Sungnak W, Huang N, Bécavin C, Berg M; HCA Lung Biological Network. SARS-CoV-2 Entry
Genes Are Most Highly Expressed in Nasal Goblet and Ciliated Cells within Human Airways.
ArXiv [Preprint]. 2020 Mar 13:arXiv:2003.06122v1. Update in: Nat Med. 2020
May;26(5):681-687. PMID: 32550242; PMCID: PMC7280877.
Traag VA, Waltman L, van Eck NJ. From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected
communities. Sci Rep. 2019 Mar 26;9(1):5233. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z. PMID:
30914743; PMCID: PMC6435756.
Wolf FA, Angerer P, Theis FJ. SCANPY: large-scale single-cell gene expression data analysis.
Genome biology. 2018 Dec;19(1):15.
Wölfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Müller MA, Niemeyer D, Jones TC,
Vollmar P, Rothe C, Hoelscher M, Bleicker T, Brünink S, Schneider J, Ehmann R, Zwirglmaier
K, Drosten C, Wendtner C. Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019.
Nature. 2020 May;581(7809):465-469.
Wolock SL, Lopez R, Klein AM. Scrublet: computational identification of cell doublets in
single-cell transcriptomic data. Cell systems. 2019 Apr 24;8(4):281-91.PMID
World Health Organization. ​WHO R&D Blueprint - Novel Coronavirus, COVID-19 Therapeutic
Trial Synopsis. ​ World Health Organization 2020.
Xu Z, Shi L, Wang Y, Zhang J, Huang L, Zhang C, Liu S, Zhao P, Liu H, Zhu L, Tai Y, Bai C,
Gao T, Song J, Xia P, Dong J, Zhao J, Wang FS. Pathological findings of COVID-19 associated
with acute respiratory distress syndrome. Lancet Respir Med. 2020, 8(4):420-422.
PMC7164771

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Yang F, Shi S, Zhu J, Shi J, Dai K, Chen X. Analysis of 92 deceased patients with COVID-19. J
Med Virol. 2020 Apr 15:10.1002/jmv.25891. doi: 10.1002/jmv.25891. Epub ahead of print.
PMID: 32293741; PMCID: PMC7262332.
Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, Shu H, Xia J, Liu H, Wu Y, Zhang L, Yu Z, Fang M, Yu T, Wang Y, Pan S,
Zou X, Yuan S, Shang Y. Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill patients with SARS-CoV-2
pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective, observational study. Lancet
Respir Med. 2020, 8(5):475-481. PMC7102538
Young MD, Behjati S. SoupX removes ambient RNA contamination from droplet based single
cell RNA sequencing data. BioRxiv. 2020 Jan 1:303727.
Zheng GX, Terry JM, Belgrader P, Ryvkin P, Bent ZW, Wilson R, Ziraldo SB, Wheeler TD,
McDermott GP, Zhu J, Gregory MT, Shuga J, Montesclaros L, Underwood JG, Masquelier DA,
Nishimura SY, Schnall-Levin M, Wyatt PW, Hindson CM, Bharadwaj R, Wong A, Ness KD,
Beppu LW, Deeg HJ, McFarland C, Loeb KR, Valente WJ, Ericson NG, Stevens EA, Radich JP,
Mikkelsen TS, Hindson BJ, Bielas JH. Massively parallel digital transcriptional profiling of single
cells. Nat Commun. 2017 Jan 16;8:14049. doi: 10.1038/ncomms14049. PMID: 28091601;
PMCID: PMC5241818.
Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, Xiang J, Wang Y, Song B, Gu X, Guan L, Wei Y, Li H,
Wu X, Xu J, Tu S, Zhang Y, Chen H, Cao B. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality of adult
inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. Lancet. 2020 Mar
28;395(10229):1054-1062.
Zhou B, She J, Wang Y, Ma X. Utility of Ferritin, Procalcitonin, and C-reactive Protein in Severe
Patients with 2019 Novel Coronavirus Disease. doi:10.21203/rs.3.rs-18079/v1
Ziegler CGK, Allon SJ, Nyquist SK, Mbano IM, Miao VN, Tzouanas CN, Cao Y, Yousif AS, Bals
J, Hauser BM, Feldman J, Muus C, Wadsworth MH 2nd, Kazer SW, Hughes TK, Doran B,
Gatter GJ, Vukovic M, Taliaferro F, Mead BE, Guo Z, Wang JP, Gras D, Plaisant M, Ansari M,
Angelidis I, Adler H, Sucre JMS, Taylor CJ, Lin B, Waghray A, Mitsialis V, Dwyer DF, Buchheit
KM, Boyce JA, Barrett NA, Laidlaw TM, Carroll SL, Colonna L, Tkachev V, Peterson CW, Yu A,
Zheng HB, Gideon HP, Winchell CG, Lin PL, Bingle CD, Snapper SB, Kropski JA, Theis FJ,
Schiller HB, Zaragosi LE, Barbry P, Leslie A, Kiem HP, Flynn JL, Fortune SM, Berger B, Finberg
RW, Kean LS, Garber M, Schmidt AG, Lingwood D, Shalek AK, Ordovas-Montanes J; HCA
Lung Biological Network. Electronic address: lung-network@humancellatlas.org; HCA Lung
Biological Network. SARS-CoV-2 Receptor ACE2 Is an Interferon-Stimulated Gene in Human
Airway Epithelial Cells and Is Detected in Specific Cell Subsets across Tissues. Cell. 2020 Apr
27:S0092-8674(20)30500-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.035. Epub ahead of print. PMID:
32413319.

Funding
We acknowledge funding from the Chan Zuckerberg Initiative (grants 2017-174169,
2020-216717, 2020-216799, 2020-216949, 2020-216954 and 2020-217820). Work for these

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.20.20227355; this version posted November 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

projects extended far beyond the support of CZI and benefited from many contributions from
institutional resources and other grants. Some of these include the Wellcome
(WT211276/Z/18/Z and Sanger core grant WT206194). MZN acknowledges funding from a
Rutherford Fund Fellowship allocated by the MRC and the UK Regenerative Medicine Platform
(MR/5005579/1 to MZN). MZN and KBM have been funded by the Rosetrees Trust (M944).
Additional direct funding for the MGH COVID-19 Acute Blood Cohort project was provided in
part by two grants from the Executive Committee on Research at MGH (M.B.G, A-C.V.), a grant
from the National Institute of Health (N.H., U19 AI082630), and an American Lung Association
COVID-19 Action Initiative grant (M.B.G.). A.-C.V. and N.H. were funded by an anonymous gift
through the Broad Institute to support the COVID-19 single-cell genomics work. N.H. was also
funded by a gift from Arthur, Sandra and Sarah Irving for the David P. Ryan, MD Endowed Chair
in Cancer Research. ACV acknowledges funding from the National Institute of Health Director’s
New Innovator Award (DP2CA247831) and the Damon Runyon-Rachleff Innovation Award.
J.O.M is a New York Stem Cell Foundation – Robertson Investigator. J.O.M was supported by
the Richard and Susan Smith Family Foundation, the AGA Research Foundation’s AGA-Takeda
Pharmaceuticals Research Scholar Award in IBD – AGA2020-13-01, the HDDC Pilot and
Feasibility P30 DK034854, the Food Allergy Science Initiative, and The New York Stem Cell
Foundation.

