medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

1

A Working Model to Inform Risk-Based Back to Work Strategies

Authors: Kristen Meier1, Kirsten J. Curnow1, Darcy Vavrek1, John Moon1, Kyle Farh1, Martin
Chian1, Robert Ragusa1, Eileen de Feo1, Phillip G. Febbo1

Author Affiliations:
1. Illumina, Inc., San Diego, California, USA

Corresponding author: Kristen Meier; Illumina, Inc., San Diego, California, USA;
kmeier@illumina.com; 301-332-1883

Conflicts of interest: KM, KJC, DV, JM, KF, MC, RR, EdF, and PF are or were employees of and
hold equity in Illumina, Inc.

Funding source: This study was funded by Illumina, Inc.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

2

ABSTRACT
Background: The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has forced many businesses to
close or move to remote work to reduce the potential spread of disease. Employers desiring a
return to onsite work want to understand their risk for having an infected employee on site and
how best to mitigate this risk. Here, we modelled a range of key metrics to help inform return
to work policies and procedures, including evaluating the benefit and optimal design of a SARSCoV-2 employee screening program.
Methods: We modeled a range of input variables including prevalence of COVID-19, time
infected, number of employees, test sensitivity and specificity, test turnaround time, number of
times tested within the infectious period, and sample pooling. We modeled the impact of these
input variables on several output variables: number of healthy employees; number of infected
employees; number of test positive and test negative employees; number of true positive, false
positive, true negative, and false negative employees; positive and negative predictive values;
and time an infected, potentially contagious employee is on site.
Results: We show that an employee screening program can reduce the risk for onsite
transmission across different prevalence values and group sizes. For example, at a pre-test
asymptomatic community prevalence of 0.5% (5 in 1000) with an employee group size of 500,
the risk for at least one infected employee on site is 91.8%, with 3 asymptomatic infected
employees predicted within those 500 employees. Implementing a SARS-CoV-2 baseline screen
with an 80% sensitivity and 99.5% specificity would reduce the risk of at least one infected
employee on site to 39.4% and the predicted number of infected employees onsite (false
negatives) to 1. Repetitive testing is required for ongoing vigilance of onsite employees. The

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

3
expected number of days an infected employee is on site depends on test sensitivity, testing
interval, and turnaround time. If the test interval is longer than the infectious period (~14 days
for COVID-19), testing will not detect the infected employee. Sample pooling reduces the
number of tests performed, thereby reducing testing costs. However, the pooling methodology
(eg, 1-stage vs 2-stage pooling, pool size) will impact the number of employees that screen
positive, thereby affected the number of employees eligible to return to onsite work.
Conclusions: The modeling presented here can be used to help employers understand their risk
for having an infected employee on site. Further, it details how an employee screening program
can reduce this risk and shows how screening performance and frequency impact the
effectiveness of a screening program. The primary factors determining the effectiveness of a
screening program are test sensitivity and frequency of testing.

Disclaimer: This publication is offered to businesses/employers as a model of potential risk
arising from COVID19 in the workplace. While believed to be based on reliable data, the
model described herein has not been prospectively validated and should not be relied upon
for any purpose other than as an aid to understand the potential impacts of a number of
variables on the risk of having COVID19 positive employees on a worksite. Decisions related
to workplace safety; COVID19 related workplace testing; programs and procedures should be
based upon your actual data and applicable laws and public health orders.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

4

INTRODUCTION
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has had a dramatic impact on our
global health and economy. As of Dec 4, 2020, there have been over 64 million confirmed cases
and 1.5 million deaths globally and the numbers continue to climb.1 In order to reduce the toll
on human health, countries and municipalities have embraced social distancing measures to
reduce community-based transmission. These measures forced some non-essential businesses
to close and others to dramatically change their operations. While there is growing evidence
that these measures have reduced the reproductive factor (the “R0”) of SARS-CoV-2, the virus
that causes COVID-19, they have also had a dramatic impact on our global, local, and family
economies.
As transmission was reduced and controlled in some communities, there was increasing
focus on a safe return to work to re-establish economies. However, COVID-19 remains in most
communities, with data from Hong Kong2, China3, and Singapore4 showing continued vigilance
is required to avoid large clusters from arising and second waves. There are a growing number
of voices suggesting that broad-based testing is required to keep numbers under control.
Broad-based testing may be of value to employers where a single infected employee could
result in a site shut down.
Employers are now seeking to understand their optimal return to work strategy, such as
leveraging SARS-CoV-2 testing and evaluating employees for signs and symptoms of COVID-19,
in order to reduce the risk of an employee introducing COVID-19 to the workplace. The optimal
strategy will be dependent on multiple characteristics of the virus, community, and the testing
approach, in addition to the size of the organization and ability to put in place other measures

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

5
such as social distancing. In an ideal world, everyone could be screened any time they came on
site. The results would be fast and 100% certain. In practice, SARS-CoV-2 testing takes time,
costs money, and is less than 100% accurate (sensitive and specific). Further, there are practical
limits to how often testing can be performed and how fast results can be obtained, and there
are many unknowns.
With the broad availability of diagnostic testing, we are getting a better understanding
of community prevalence of SARS-CoV-2, which is critical to any individual’s risk of exposure,
and some of the basic viral characteristics are becoming better known. The clinical course of
viral infection exhibits broad ranges of severity and a significant proportion (~30%) of
confirmed patients remain asymptomatic.5, 6 It is estimated that the average incubation period
between exposure and onset of symptoms is 5 days, with 98% of those that will eventually
exhibit symptoms doing so within 12 days of exposure.7 Current reporting of the onset and
duration of the infectious period suggests it may be quite variable between patients8-10.
Further, as most available data on the infectious period is based on symptomatic patients, the
transmissibility and infectious period in asymptomatic patients is even less certain11. Finally,
with the clarity of the clinical course and reference method testing modality, the analytic and
clinical performance of testing (e.g., sensitivity, specificity) is better defined.
There are some general concepts that help in understanding the benefits and limitations
of screening. Screening is effective and useful when the disease prevalence is not too low (if no
one in the community has the disease, screening will have no impact) or too high (wide
community spread, so screening has limited benefit). The goal of screening is to keep the
number of accepted individuals under the maximum number considered acceptable and/or

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

6
achievable. For example, an intuitively appealing goal would be to keep the max number of
infected individuals in a group below 1, with the number of infected employees calculated as
the Number of Employees x Employee prevalence. Employee prevalence is basically community
prevalence unless some form of frequent screening is performed to isolate infected employees.
Another important concept is that to reduce the prevalence in the employee group by
screening, tests must be performed more frequently than the course of the disease. Thus, the
interval between employee screens must be substantially shorter than the 14 to 21 day disease
progression time7, 8, 10-12 to be effective; sampling at a time interval longer than once a week
won’t be expected to have a substantial impact. For example, universities in the US that have
implemented testing are sampling twice a week.13, 14 Other studies have shown that with
measures that reduce the disease R0 to ~1.5, testing once per week may be sufficient.15
However, as sampling is only ever going to be every day at best (and probably every other day),
the most we can expect to be able to reduce employee prevalence using screening is by around
10 fold. That sets the upper bound of prevalence where no amount of screening will be
effective at keeping Number of Employees x Employee prevalence below 1.
In this paper, we modelled a range of key metrics to enable development of a return to
work policy for our employees. We evaluated factors such as prevalence, group size, screening
performance, screening frequency, and sample pooling on the risk of an infected person
coming on site (and therefore potentially transmitting the virus to other employees or group
members). Using this information, we can estimate, for a given moment in time, the number of
employees that would screen negative and could return to work and those that would screen
positive and therefore not return to work (Figure 1). We leverage available literature – both

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

7
peer-reviewed and pre-print articles – to provide ranges for each variable. In addition, we are
currently developing an online version of a tool where a user can provide the number of
employees, the pre-test prevalence of SARS-CoV-2, test performance (sensitivity and specificity)
and their threshold of risk in order to explore different testing schedules for a safe return to
work. The goal of the modeling presented here is to provide information that can be used to
answer questions and inform decisions around employee screening programs including testing
frequency, testing schemes, individual versus sample pooling, and test performance.

METHODS
Models are provided for metrics that can enable decision makers to understand the
implications of different screening options (different test performance, individual vs pooled
samples, and testing frequency) under different scenarios (prevalence and employee group
size). These models will help a user understand the following: 1, how many employees would
screen positive versus negative and the likelihood of them being infected versus uninfected
(positive predictive value, negative predictive value); 2, impact of test performance on the risk
or probability of an infected employee arriving at work on site; 3, influence of group size on the
risk of having any (at least one) infected person(s) on site; 4, implications of screening interval
(eg, daily vs weekly screening) on the length of time an infected person is on site; and 5, how
local prevalence rates can impact the decision on whether to screen or not. Screening
approaches explored include symptom screening alone (no SARS-CoV-2 testing) and screening
asymptomatic employees using SARS-CoV-2 testing, including testing before returning on site

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

8
(baseline testing) and frequent onsite testing. All formulas used as part of the models are
detailed in Supplementary Table 1.

Model Inputs – Variable Definitions and Ranges
Model inputs may be uncontrolled or controlled to some degree by the employer. Some inputs
such as community prevalence will differ across communities and change over time during the
pandemic. Other inputs such as test performance (sensitivity and specificity) and turnaround
time for a test result may be somewhat controlled in test development or by the choice of
technology. The range of inputs considered in the model are described in Table 1 below. Where
data were available to guide the ranges, references are indicated.
Prevalence will vary depending on the surrounding work community and will change
over time. Current prevalence estimates may be difficult to obtain. Prevalence estimates can be
made from the percentage of the population undergoing testing in a given (recent) period of
time and the percentage of those that are positive for COVID-19. Nationwide in the US, the CDC
reported 1.8M specimens tested with a positive rate of 8.6% for the week ending July 1816; as a
proportion of the total US population (~330M17), this is a positive rate of around 0.5%.
Importantly, the accuracy of prevalence estimates will be impacted by the proportion of the
population undergoing testing, and to what degree testing is targeted/restricted to
symptomatic people. In the US during the summer of 2020, testing was largely limited to
symptomatic individuals, and with around 30% of infected individuals are asymptomatic5, 6, the
8.6% positive rate above was unlikely to have captured all infected cases. Testing a larger
overall proportion of the population, and including asymptomatic individuals, will provide more

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

9
accurate values. Further, there is large regional variation in COVID-19 prevalence, so national
numbers may not be the best indicator of local prevalence. As such, identifying a local source of
information for testing numbers and positivity rates, such as state public health department
websites18, 19 and county websites,20, 21 will help to more accurately predict prevalence in the
local community encompassing the employee base. In addition, there are a number of online
tools available to help guide estimation of local prevalence22-25. The infectious period is
estimated to be around 14 to 21 days (maybe longer in some cases), with an onset at around a
couple days after exposure11, 26. As such, we modelled time infected (TINF) values of 14 and 21
days.
The sensitivity and specificity of the test will depend on the SARS-CoV-2 screen
technology, sample type, whether testing individual or pooled samples, and test development
optimization (eg, threshold for positivity, sequencing depth)27-31. A pooled sample is one where
individual samples are combined and the pool is tested rather than the individual samples. Test
sensitivity for pooled samples may be reduced compared with individual samples since the viral
RNA is diluted. It is assumed that the specificity would not change with test pooling. However, if
the viral load in most samples is still above the test threshold, the sensitivity may not be greatly
reduced by pooling. Empirical studies of pooling for SARS-CoV-2 have indicated that Ct (PCR
cycle time) increases by approximately log2(pool size) as expected32; as such pooled testing of
5 samples would increase Ct by an expected value of 2.3. Based on empirical distributions of Ct
values, we estimate a decrease in sensitivity of 1.5% if the Ct value of all individuals is shifted by
2.3 (pooling n=5) and assuming a threshold of detection of Ct=40, and 2.5% if the Ct was shifted
by 3.3 (pooling n=10).33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

10
Some tests allow for an indeterminate or equivocal result that is valid (passes quality
control metrics) but is not declared positive or negative. If indeterminate results are excluded
from reported test performance (sensitivity and specificity) estimates, the in-use test sensitivity
and specificity may be lower than what is reported, so lower values should be considered in the
model.

Models and Model Outputs
The testing schemes modelled included: Symptom screening alone (no SARS-CoV-2 testing);
baseline SARS-CoV-2 screening on asymptomatic employees; and repeated SARS-CoV-2 testing.
Models for testing using an imperfect test (sensitivity and specificity < 100%) are described for
individual samples and pooled samples. Different approaches can be taken to manage test
results. Here, employee management was as follows: Test negative, OK to return onsite work;
test positive, self-isolation with or without follow-up testing. Model outputs calculated are
described in Table 2. All formulas used in this modelling are detailed in Supplementary Table 1.

No SARS-CoV-2 testing - individual samples
When no testing is performed prior to an employee returning to work, the expected number of
infected employees out of the number of employees (NE) returning on site is calculated as the
number of employees times prevalence. If employees are prescreened for signs and symptoms
of infection (eg, thermal scanning), then it is the prevalence among asymptomatic individuals
prescreened as negative. The risk of having any infected employee on site is the probability that

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

11
at least 1 employee out of NE employees on site is infected (Supplementary Table 1, Formula
1).

Baseline SARS-CoV-2 testing - individual samples
An employer may consider using SARS-CoV-2 testing as a baseline screen for a group of NE
asymptomatic employees for return to work on site. Some of these employees may be infected
(with probability equal to prevalence), and others will be uninfected or “healthy” with respect
to SARS-CoV-2. Those who test negative may return to work on site while those who test
positive are required to isolate at home. Most of the healthy employees will test negative or
have a true negative [TN] result with probability equal to specificity; most of the infected
employees will test positive or have a true positive [TP] result with probability equal to
sensitivity. A small percentage of the infected employees will test negative or have a false
negative [FN] result; and, a small percentage of the healthy employees test positive or have a
false positive [FP] result. The possible outcomes are depicted in Figure 1.
The expected number of employees with a given result will depend on the number of
employees, prevalence, and the test sensitivity and specificity. The cross tabulation of expected
test results versus true status can be displayed as shown in Supplementary Table 2 and are
calculated using the set of formulas in No. 2, Supplementary Table 1.
The post-test likelihood of a screen negative employee being uninfected (negative
predictive value of the screen) and the post-test likelihood of a screen positive employee being
infected (positive predictive value of the screen) are calculated using Formulas 3 and 4,
respectively, in Supplementary Table 1. The post-test risk of having any infected employee on

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

12
site is the probability that at least 1 employee out of test negative employees on site is
infected, that is, has a false negative result. This risk was calculated using Formula 5 in
Supplementary Table 1.

Baseline SARS-CoV-2 testing - pooled samples
Pooled testing, also known as group testing34, is a procedure that that can be used when
prevalence is small in order to reduce the number of tests performed35, 36. A simple version of
this procedure was proposed by Dorfman37 to screen US soldiers for syphilis during World War
II. The basic idea of this 2-stage approach is to combine individual samples into pools of size k
(eg, 5 or 10) and test each pool. For a pooled sample, the assumed impact on test sensitivity is
summarized in Supplementary Table 1 – Formula 6. If the pool is test negative, then everyone
in the pool is declared test negative. If the pool is test positive, then leftover sample from each
of the k individuals in the pool are tested separately and the declared test result is based on the
individual test. A simplified (1-stage) version of this approach is to use the pooled result as the
declared result for each individual. The impact of the Dorfman (2-stage) and simplified (1-stage)
testing approaches on the probability of an infected employee on site as well as the expected
number of positive results was evaluated. The risk of having any infected employee on site
using the 1-stage and 2-stage pooled sample approach is calculated by simulation assuming
individual outcomes are independent Bernoulli trials.
Calculation of the risk of an infected employee on site based on a pooled sample
approach utilizes the prevalence of infected pools or pre-test probability that a pool is infected

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

13
rather than the pre-test probability that an individual is infected. A pool is infected if at least 1
sample in the pool is from an infected employee (Supplementary Table 1 – Formula 7).

Repeated testing - individual samples
The ability of testing to detect an infected employee arriving at work depends on test sensitivity
and number of tests performed. The time between tests (testing interval) and turnaround time
from sample collection to result will determine the expected number of days an infected
employee will be on site before being detected.
The probability that an infected employee will be detected by each test cycle is
calculated from test sensitivity as described in Supplementary Table 3. The expected number of
days an infected employee will be on site before being detected additionally depends on the
test interval and turnaround time (Supplementary Table 1 – Formula 8, and Supplementary
Figure 1). The intuition for this calculation is depicted in Supplementary Figure 2. These
formulas assume that each testing event is independent, and the employees test result
(positive or not) follows a Bernoulli distribution with probability sensitivity.

RESULTS
No screening modelling
Without any screening, the chance that an infected employee arrives at work on site is equal to
the community prevalence of COVID-19. If employees are screened for temperature or signs
and symptoms, then the COVID-19 prevalence in a group of employees may be reduced. The
implementation of social distancing and use of personal protective equipment (PPE) such as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

14
masks can reduce the chance of transmission should an affected employee return on site. We
modelled the probability of having at least one infected employee on site in the absence of a
broad screening program at different prevalences and for different employee group sizes.
Figure 2 shows that as prevalence and group size increase, there is a higher probability of
having at least one infected employee on site. At a prevalence of 0.1% (or 1 in 1000) and 20
employees, there is a 2% probability of having at least one infected employee on site in the
absence of an employee screening program. However, if the prevalence in asymptomatic
people is 0.5% and 1000 employees come on site, the probability or risk of having at least one
infected employee on site is 99.3%. In this second example, the expected or average number of
infected employees on site is 5. These 5 asymptotic employees would remain on site until signs
and symptom appear or the infection resolves, potentially transmitting the virus to other
employees on site. Without testing or symptom screening, the only way an employer can
reduce the chance of an infected employee returning on site is to limit the group size of
employees returning on site.

Baseline Employee Screening to Reduce Risk before Returning to Work
One way to reduce the risk of workplace transmission is to screen employees using a SARS-CoV2 test before returning to work. This would reduce the workplace prevalence when employees
first return on site. Figure 3 shows the post-test workplace prevalence as a function of (pretest) prevalence and test sensitivity, including a dashed reference at no screening for easy
comparison. At a prevalence of 0.1%, when test sensitivity is 80% (olive line), the post-test
prevalence is reduced to 0.02%, a 5-fold reduction in prevalence (vertical distance between the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

15
pink dashed line and the olive line). If test sensitivity is higher at 90% (green line) the reduction
is greater; the post-test prevalence is reduced to 0.01%, a 10-fold reduction in prevalence.
Expected post-test prevalences depicted in Figure 3 are provided in Supplementary Tables 4-7
for sensitivities 70%, 80%, 90%, and 95%, respectively, under "prevalence in screen negatives
(1‒ NPV).
To understand the impact of the workplace prevalence reduction, we next modelled the
risk of at least one infected employee (a false negative) on site after implementation of a
baseline employee screening program. We used fixed test performance values of 80%
sensitivity and 99.5% specificity. The expected number of screen negatives and screen positives
using this screening example is shown in Supplementary Table 5. In this model, screen positive
employees would stay home while screen negative employees would return to onsite work.
Figure 4 shows the probability of having at least one infected employee on site with the
introduction of a baseline employee screening across three prevalences and a range of group
sizes. With this example baseline test, the introduction of an employee screening program
would reduce the probability on having at least one infected employee on site across group
sizes and prevalences (Figure 4, Figure 5).
For example, at a pre-test community prevalence of 0.01% (or 1 in 10,000), the baseline
screening has reduced the prevalence in the workplace population that would return to work
(screen negative) to 0.002%, an absolute difference of 0.008% (Supplementary Table 5). That is,
for an employee that is screen negative, there is a 0.002% chance they are infected (a false
negative). When applied to an employer testing 1000 employees for return to work (0.01%
prevalence; 80% sensitivity, 99.5% specificity), there would be around 995 test negative

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

16
employees that would return to work. There is a 2.0% chance that at least one of the test
negative employees is infected (false negative) and the expected or average number of infected
employees on site is <1 employee. The chance of an infected employee returning to work has
been reduced from 9.52% (no testing) to 2.0% with a baseline screen, an absolute difference of
7.52% (=9.52-2.0) or fold difference of 4.8 (9.52/2.0). However, if an employer’s risk threshold
for having at least one infected employee on site is 1%, then an employee group size of 1000
would not be acceptable (2.0% risk), whereas a group of 250 employees for return to work
(0.5% risk) may be acceptable.

Impact of Screening Test Performance
Next, we modeled the impact of test performance on a baseline employee screening program.
For the narrow range of specificities considered, specificity has virtually no impact on the
probability of a screen negative employee truly being infected (Figure 6); however, specificity
will impact the number of false positives, and therefore the number of employees that would
be asked to stay home unnecessarily. Subsequent results will consider a single specificity of
99.5%. In contrast, test sensitivity has a marked impact on the post-test probability a single
screen negative employee is infected (false negative). A more sensitive test will also reduce the
risk of having an infected employee return on site. With an employer’s risk tolerance for having
at least one infected employee returning to work on the y-axis, and if prevalence is <0.01% then
an employee group size of 20 employees on site may be acceptable even when test sensitivity is
as low as 70%. If the group size is 500, even a test with 95% sensitivity would not meet the
employer’s needs. Values for a range of prevalence values and group sizes are provided for 70%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

17
(Supplementary Table 4), 80% (Supplementary Table 5), 90% (Supplementary Table 6), and 95%
(Supplementary Table 7) sensitivity. A 10% increase in sensitivity from 80% (Supplementary
Table 5) to 90% (Supplementary Table 6) results in a halving of the post-test prevalence in
screen negative employees.

Impact of Sample Pooling on Screening Performance
The expected number of infected employees on site and the probability of an infected
employee on site were estimated for both the 2-stage Dorfman pooled testing approach and a
1-stage pooled approach (pooled result as the declared result for each individual) for baseline
testing. The expected prevalence of infected pools is greater than the expected prevalence of
infected individuals roughly by a factor of pool size as shown in Table 3. Pooled testing reduces
the number of tests performed, thereby reducing testing costs. However, it is important to also
consider the impact on the number of employees that screen positive and the probability of an
infected employee on site. The chance of an infected employee on site under baseline 1-stage
testing (Supplementary Table 8) is less than that under 2-stage testing (Supplementary Table 9),
but the number of false positives is higher. The 1-stage pooled approach will have a significant
impact on the number of employees that screen positive (increasing by a factor of the pool
size), and as such, will reduce the number of employees that return to work. Thus, the cost
savings of pooling should be balanced against the impact on productivity in terms of the
number of employees able to return on site.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

18
Impact of Repetitive Testing and Testing Interval (time an infected employee remains on site)
While baseline testing can reduce the initial risk on an infected individual returning to work,
until the community prevalence drops substantially or a vaccine is available, there remains a
significant risk for employees to become infected through community transmission. As such,
repetitive testing is required for ongoing vigilance of onsite employees. The ability of testing to
detect an infected employee arriving at work depends on test sensitivity and number of tests
performed. The time between tests (testing interval) and turnaround time to a result will
determine the expected number of days an infected employee will be on site before being
detected (Figure 7). Table 4 shows how test sensitivity impacts the chance of detecting an
infected employee as a function of number of tests performed. If the infected contagious
employee on site is tested twice during the infectious period using a test with 80% sensitivity,
there is an 80% chance that the employee will be test positive by Test 1 and a 96.0% chance
they will test positive by Test 2. If the employee had been tested once prior to coming on site,
the chance they would arrive on site and be detected by the second test on site (3rd test cycle)
is 99.2%.
The expected number of days an employee is on site depends on sensitivity, testing
interval, and turnaround time (Figure 7). If an infected contagious employee is on site and the
testing interval is larger than the infectious period, then testing will not detect the infected
employee. Here, we have modelled 14 and 21 days as that is the current estimated typical
infectious period for SARS-CoV-2. For example, if on average, an infected individual is
contagious for 14 days, the testing interval needs to be less than every 14 days in order to have
a chance to identify the person. If the turnaround time to a test result is 1 day, and the test

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

19
interval is 7 days (weekly) then the expected number of days an infected contagious employee
remains on site is 2.6 days, for a test with 80% sensitivity, as opposed to 14 days with no testing
during the infectious period (Supplementary Table 10). Thus, testing would reduce the time an
infected employee was on site and contagious by 11.4 days (14‒2.6), an 81% (11.4/14)
reduction of the time on site compared to no testing. If instead the test interval is every other
day (2 days), then the expected number of days an infected contagious employee remains on
site is 1.5 days (Supplementary Table 10). Testing has reduced the time on site and contagious
12.5 days (14‒1.5), an 89% (12.5/14) reduction.
Supplementary Table 11 shows the same modeling for a 21-day contagious period.
Supplementary Figures 1 and 2 show a graphical representation of testing over the contagious
period as well as the formula used for calculating the time a contagious person would be onsite.

Management of screen positive employees
For employees that screen positive, initial management would be to instruct the employee to
isolate (not return on site). The percent of screen positive employees will be low when
prevalence is low. Importantly, the chance that the screen positive employee is infected is also
low. The (post-test) probability that the employee is infected (true positive result) is shown as a
function of pre-test prevalence for a range of sensitivity and specificity values in Figure 8. The
expected test results and true status were determined across prevalence’s for a test sensitivity
of 70% (Supplementary Table 4), 80% (Supplementary Table 5), 90% (Supplementary Table 6),
and 95% (Supplementary Table 7).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

20
The implications for management of screen positives can be easier to understand when
applying the modeled variables to a hypothetical population. Following is an example employer
that had 1000 employees isolating before implementing an employee screening program to
return to work. Implementation of a screening program with an 80% sensitivity and 99.5%
specificity with a prevalence of 0.5% would result in ~9 (4 TP + 5 FP) test positive employees
(posttest) (Table 5). The impact of this can be viewed from both the employer’s and employee’s
perspective. For the employer, instead of 1000 employees in isolation, they now have 991
employees that can return on site and only 9 employees self-isolating. For those 9 employees
screening positive, 55.4% are predicted to be false positives, with a 44.6% chance that the
employee is truly infected (Supplementary Table 5). In this case, this means that it is more likely
that a screened positive employee is a false positive than a true positive. A positive screening
result has implications for the employee in terms of triggering isolation and possibly
confirmatory testing. Further, it could also impact any family, friends, and coworkers that have
had recent contact with the screen-positive employee. Thus, it may be important for employers
to message that employees who test positive have a reasonable chance that they are
uninfected. Calculation details for this example are described in Supplementary Materials.

Application of modelling to implement an employee screening program
As a final step, we applied the above modeling to a hypothetical population as an example of
how to devise an example strategy for implement of SARS-CoV-2 screening and employee
return to onsite work. Figure 9 gives an overview of a potential SARS-CoV-2 screening program
for a return to work. To reduce the risk for onsite transmission while the community prevalence

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

21
remains high, employees that can work effectively remotely may continue to do so until such
time as the prevalence drops substantially or a vaccine becomes available. For employees
returning on site, a baseline screen would be performed before returning on site by employees
lacking COVID-19 symptoms and passing a thermal scan. Any employee that has COVID-19
symptoms, fails the thermal scan, or screens positive would self-isolate and follow Employer
Health and Safety protocols for suspected COVID-19 infection. Employees that clear the
baseline screening would return to onsite work and undergo regular SARS-CoV-2 screening.
In a simple example, an employer with 1000 individuals is interested in a return to
onsite work. Their local community has a population of around 3 million, and recent testing
information reports that around 600,000 tests were performed in the last two weeks with a 14day rolling average percentage positive rate of 5%. Assuming these are unique individuals and
that this reflects all current positive cases, this suggests a community prevalence close to 1%.
However, there is likely a significant number of unrecognized asymptomatic cases in the
community, so the true prevalence may be higher. The employer is planning on having
employees displaying symptoms stay home, and thus, the prevalence among his asymptomatic
employees could be lower than the community prevalence estimate. Based on this, the
employer used a prevalence estimate of 1% but evaluated a prevalence range of 0.5% to 2% to
account for potential variation in the true community prevalence. In the absence of an
employee screening program, the probability of having at least one infected employee on site
for a group of 1000 employees is 100% at a prevalence of 1.0% (99.3% at 0.5% prevalence and
100% at a prevalence of 2.0%; Supplementary Table 5). The employee determined that their
threshold of acceptable risk for having at least one infected employee onsite was 10%. As such,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

22
bringing back 1000 employees in the absence of an employee screening program would have
an intolerable level of risk (risk above the established threshold). One way to reduce risk is to
reduce group size, however, the only scenario that would reduce risk below their 10% threshold
would be a group size of 20 and assuming a prevalence of 0.5%. Thus, the employer next
considered the benefit of an employee screening program.
For this example, SARS-CoV-2 testing is performed one time on a group of 1000
asymptomatic employees before returning to work on site. The test has a sensitivity of 80%,
specificity of 99.5%, and a one-day TAT to get results. A baseline screen of the 1000 employees
with a prevalence of 1.0% would result in 13 employees with a positive screen, and 987 with a
negative screen (Supplementary Table 5). Those who are test positive are required to selfisolate and those who are test negative may return to work on site. The probability that at least
one of the 987 screen negative employees that would return on site is infected is 86.5%. The
workplace prevalence on Day 1 on site is reduced from 1.0% to 0.2% by baseline testing prior to
returning on site, but there is still an 86.5% chance than an infected employee will come on
site. If the employer reduced the group size return to onsite work to 50, assuming a 1.0%
prevalence, the probability of at least one false negative (9.5%) would fall below their risk
threshold; at 2.0% prevalence with 50 employees, the risk would be 18.2%, which is above their
threshold. Thus, baseline screening has reduced the risk of an infected person returning on site,
and if having a small group return is feasible, this approach may be acceptable. Figure 5 may be
helpful in visualizing what group sizes can be used to keep the probability of at least one
infected person on site below a set threshold within the prevalence range being considered.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

23
If the employer would like to reduce the risk of an infected screen negative employee in
a fixed group size returning, there are two main options, use a test with higher sensitivity or
repeat testing before return. As shown in Table 4, repeat testing can help increase the
probability an infected employee will be detected by each test cycle, thereby reducing the
chance of an infected person screening negative and returning on site. Using a test with 80%
sensitivity, after a second test, the probability of detecting an infected employee is 96%. For
example, in a baseline screen of the 50 employees with a prevalence of 0.5%, the chance an
infected screen negative employee returns on site is 4.9% (Supplementary Table 5) when test
sensitivity is 80% versus less than 1.2% (Supplementary Table 7) is the test is performed twice
in a row before return to work, resulting in a combined test sensitivity of 96% (>95%) (Table 4).
This strategy would help reduce the probability of an infected person returning on site.
Frequent testing on site reduces the time and infected person is on site (Supplementary Table
10).
To reduce the cost of frequent testing, sample pooling could be considered. For
individual samples at a prevalence of 1.0%, there would be 13 positive screen results, 987
negative screen results, and an 86% risk for at least one infected person on site (Supplementary
Table 8 and 9, grey shaded rows indicate individual samples). In comparison, with 1-stage
sample pooling with 5 samples per pool, there would be 44 positive screen results, 956
negative screen results, and an 86% risk for at least one infected person on site (Supplementary
Table 8). Thus, 1-stage pooling would reduce the number of employees returning to onsite
work with no change in the probability that at least one of them is infected. With 2-stage
sample pooling with 5 samples per pool, there would be 6 positive screen results, 994 negative

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

24
screen results, and a 98% risk for at least one infected person on site (Supplementary Table 9).
Thus, 2-stage pooling would increase the number of employees returning to onsite work but
also increase the probability that at least one of them is infected compared with individual
sample testing.

DISCUSSION
In this paper, we describe statistical modeling we have performed to evaluate the benefit of
introducing an employee SARS-CoV-2 screen to enable a return to onsite work. We evaluated a
range of different variables, to address the limited information on SARS-CoV-2 transmissibility
and prevalence and cover a range of variables involved in implementing a screening test. This
modeling has been instrumental in developing the return to work policy for our employees.
The ability of a business to return to onsite work and their specific policy in the era of
COVID-19 will depend on several factors. First, national and local governing bodies may have
specific rules and regulations that businesses need to follow38, 39, which may preclude some
businesses from returning to onsite work while the community prevalence remains above a
specific threshold. For example, California tracks county-level data for several metrics related to
positivity rates and hospitalizations19. Counties reporting numbers above set thresholds are
placed on a “watch list” for monitoring worsening trends18, 19. Counties on the watch list have
limitations on which indoor businesses can operate. The CDC has released interim guidance for
businesses and employers responding to COVID-1939: Conducting daily health checks;
conducting a hazard assessment of the workplace; encouraging employees to wear cloth face
coverings in the workplace, if appropriate; implementing policies and practices for social

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

25
distancing in the workplace; and improving the building ventilation system. The ability to
implement social distancing and other precautionary measures may influence a given
employer’s return to work policy, as well as the necessity for employees to be on site for
business resumption. Some employers may be able to keep a proportion of their employees
working remotely to reduce the required group size and the risk of workplace infection40.
Finally, the desired degree of risk reduction or risk tolerance threshold will vary between
employers. Employers for whom a single onsite infected employee may trigger a site shutdown
and loss of business may desire to minimize risk to whatever degree is possible.
The strength of this study is in the variety of variables modeled and the range of values
modeled. The findings here are consistent with a recent paper that modeled COVID-19
screening strategies that would allow a safe re-opening of US college campuses15. Multiple
studies have reported test frequency has more impact on reducing COVID-19 infections than
test sensitivity, and that rapid and frequent screening should be prioritized for general
population screening15, 23, 41. Importantly, the optimal screening frequency is reliant upon
successful adoption of behavioral interventions15, 42. Here, the intention is that other employers
or groups could evaluate a scenario with a similar community prevalence and group size to one
presented here to help inform their policy for returning on site. However, it is important to
note that many epidemiological variables related to COVID-19 remain unknown or are based on
limited information. While data suggests that the viral load may be similar in symptomatic and
asymptomatic individuals with COVID-19,43, 44 there is limited data on the viral load over time in
pre-symptomatic and asymptomatic individuals44. As test sensitivity is likely to be strongly
linked to viral load, this supports that a screen in asymptomatic individuals may be able to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

26
achieve similar sensitivities to established diagnostic tests developed for the symptomatic
population. But since this is not yet established and because many other variables remain
uncertain, we recommend consideration across a range for each variable to account for this
limitation.
When implementing a screening program, there are some important considerations and
some potentials for harm that should be considered. With screening tests, there is typically a
balance between sensitivity and specificity. A higher sensitivity (probability that an infected
individual will have a positive test result) can generally be obtained by tolerating a lower
specificity (probability that an uninfected individual will have a negative test result), and vice
versa. There are implications of this for the employer and employees. Thus, while the focus of
screening is to minimize the potential harm due to spread of COVID-19 in employees returning
to work, it is also useful to consider the number of employees unnecessarily self-isolating. With
high sensitivity, the chance of an infected employee returning on site is minimized. However, a
greater proportion of the employee pool will screen positive, and most of these employees
would be false positives and unnecessarily self-isolating. Similarly, more frequent testing would
lead to more false positive results. High test specificity reduces the number of uninfected
employees with a [false] positive test result that self-isolate unnecessarily. Further, a positive
screening result may cause significant personal stress to employees. The harm of unnecessary
self-isolation would impact the individual person and the employer but would not contribute to
the risk of spread of COVID-19 in the workplace. Although baseline screening reduces the initial
risk for an infected employee returning on site, there remains a potential for harm for
employees returning on site. The potential for harm is that one pre-symptomatic or

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

27
asymptomatic infected employee (with a false negative test result) returns on site and the virus
is transmitted to other employees prior to the infected employee subsequently testing positive.
The exact risk of transmission is unknown but could be minimized by workplace procedures
such as social distancing, masks, and contact free doors. Another potential for harm is that an
uninfected individual on site can become infected from the community. The number and time
infectious employees are on site can be minimized though frequent testing and/or using a high
sensitivity test.
A primary concern with implementation of a screening test, particularly one requiring
frequent repeat tests, is the cost. The cost of a screening program needs to be balanced against
the benefit in terms of risk reduction. Since resources and capacity for frequent testing may be
limited, we explored the impact of sample pooling. Here, we evaluated both a 2-stage
(Dorfman) and 1-stage approach to sample pooling. The Dorfman 2-stage pooled testing
procedure will reduce the total number of tests but may have an increased chance of an
infected employee on site compared with individual testing depending on prevalence. Despite
this, it may be beneficial if it permits more frequent testing. It is also important to consider the
logistics and feasibility of pooled sample testing. The Dorfman 2-stage procedure where followup testing is required may be more difficult from a logistics perspective. Importantly, current
guidance from the CDC and FDA is that if sample pooling is used, when a test result for a pool is
indeterminate or positive, all samples in the pool need to be retested individually (Dorfman 2stage approach)35, 36.
In recognition of the fact that organizations may want to incorporate SARS-CoV-2
screening as part of a strategy to reduce workplace risk, the CDC has released guidance related

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

28
to SARS-CoV-2 testing for non-healthcare workplaces45. In turn, the FDA released guidance on
how to validate molecular tests that will be submitted for Emergency Use Authorization (EUA),
including how to evaluate and validate sample pooling35. The FDA notes that for asymptomatic
SARS-CoV-2 screening, a highly sensitive test is desirable but if this is not feasible, then serial
testing on different days or with different tests should be considered44. The FDA encourages
test developers to consider validating their tests intended for screening asymptomatic
individuals46. The first COVID-19 test with EUA for the asymptomatic population was approved
in July of 202047-49. SARS-CoV-2 screens intended for use in the asymptomatic population will be
a key part of broad screening initiatives.
In conclusion, we modeled of a range of key metrics that can be used to guide
development of policy for a return to onsite work. We evaluated factors such as prevalence,
group size, screening performance, screening frequency, and sample pooling on the risk of an
infected person coming on site. We are using this modeling to develop an online resource to
allow users to input their specific variables to enable them to evaluate potential testing
schedules for a safe return to work. There are a multitude of variables and considerations for
employers opting to return to onsite work, and we hope that the work presented here can be
of use in the current COVID-19 pandemic.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Gerry Gray (Data-Fi, LLC) for his input on the modeling and
graphs, Aida Yazdanparast for her work developing the online tool, Lucia Speroni for her

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

29
assistance with reference identification and review of the manuscript, and Johan Surtihadi for
critical review of the manuscript.

REFERENCES
1.

World Health Organization (WHO). WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard.

Accessed Dec 4, 2020. https://covid19.who.int/
2.

Lam HY, Lam TS, Wong CH, et al. The epidemiology of COVID-19 cases and the successful

containment strategy in Hong Kong–January to May 2020. International Journal of Infectious
Diseases. 2020/09/01/ 2020;98:51-58. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.057
3.

Zhang X-M, Zhou H-E, Zhang W-W, et al. Assessment of Coronavirus Disease 2019

Community Containment Strategies in Shenzhen, China. JAMA Network Open.
2020;3(6):e2012934-e2012934. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.12934
4.

Pung R, Chiew CJ, Young BE, et al. Investigation of three clusters of COVID-19 in

Singapore: implications for surveillance and response measures. The Lancet.
2020;395(10229):1039-1046. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30528-6
5.

Byambasuren O, Cardona M, Bell K, Clark J, McLaws M-L, Glasziou P. Estimating the

Extent of True Asymptomatic COVID-19 and Its Potential for Community Transmission:
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. SSRN Electronic Journal. 2020;doi:10.2139/ssrn.3586675
6.

Oran DP, Topol EJ. Prevalence of Asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infection: A Narrative

Review. Annals of Internal Medicine. 2020;doi:10.7326/m20-3012

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

30
7.

Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, et al. The Incubation Period of Coronavirus Disease 2019

(COVID-19) From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases: Estimation and Application. Annals of
Internal Medicine. 2020;172(9):577-582. doi:10.7326/m20-0504 %m 32150748
8.

Arons MM, Hatfield KM, Reddy SC, et al. Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 Infections and

Transmission in a Skilled Nursing Facility. New England Journal of Medicine. 2020;382(22):20812090. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2008457
9.

Wölfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, et al. Virological assessment of hospitalized

patients with COVID-2019. Nature. 2020/05/01 2020;581(7809):465-469. doi:10.1038/s41586020-2196-x
10.

To KK-W, Tsang OT-Y, Leung W-S, et al. Temporal profiles of viral load in posterior

oropharyngeal saliva samples and serum antibody responses during infection by SARS-CoV-2:
an observational cohort study. The Lancet Infectious Diseases. 2020;20(5):565-574.
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30196-1
11.

Hu Z, Song C, Xu C, et al. Clinical characteristics of 24 asymptomatic infections with

COVID-19 screened among close contacts in Nanjing, China. Science China Life sciences. May
2020;63(5):706-711. doi:10.1007/s11427-020-1661-4
12.

Hu S, Wang W, Wang Y, et al. Infectivity, susceptibility, and risk factors associated with

SARS-CoV-2 transmission under intensive contact tracing in Hunan, China. medRxiv.
2020:2020.07.23.20160317. doi:10.1101/2020.07.23.20160317
13.

University of Illinois. University working to contain predicted increase in on-campus

COVID-19 cases. Accessed Sep 1, 2020. https://news.illinois.edu/view/6367/1990170345

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

31
14.

Boston University. BU COVID-19 Testing Data Dashboard. Accessed Sep 1, 2020.

https://www.bu.edu/healthway/community-dashboard/
15.

Paltiel AD, Zheng A, Walensky RP. Assessment of SARS-CoV-2 Screening Strategies to

Permit the Safe Reopening of College Campuses in the United States. JAMA Netw Open. Jul 1
2020;3(7):e2016818. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.16818
16.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). COVIDView. A weekly surveillance

summary of U.S. COVID-19 Activity. Accessed July 30, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/covidview/index.html
17.

United States Census Bureau. U.S. and world population clock. Accessed July 30, 2020.

https://www.census.gov/popclock/
18.

California Department of Public Health. State Officials Announce Latest COVID-19 Facts.

Accessed July 29, 2020. https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/OPA/Pages/NR20-177.aspx
19.

California Department of Public Health. County Data Monitoring. Accessed July 29, 2020.

https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CID/DCDC/Pages/COVID19/COVID19CountyDataTable.aspx
20.

County of San Diego. COVID-19 Percentage Positive. Accessed July 29, 2020.

https://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/dam/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/Epidemiology/COVID19%20Percentage%20Positive.pdf
21.

San Mateo County Health. San Mateo County Health Data. Accessed Sep 1, 2020.

https://www.smchealth.org/coronavirus-health-data
22.

Lu FS, Nguyen AT, Link N, Santillana M. Estimating the Prevalence of COVID-19 in the

United States: Three Complementary Approaches. Accessed Sep 16, 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

32
https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/msantillana/files/lu-et_al_prevalence_covid19_divergence_april_18th.pdf
23.

Larremore DB, Wilder B, Lester E, et al. Test sensitivity is secondary to frequency and

turnaround time for COVID-19 surveillance. medRxiv. 2020:2020.06.22.20136309.
doi:10.1101/2020.06.22.20136309
24.

Benatia D, Godefroy R, Lewis J. Estimating COVID-19 Prevalence in the United States: A

Sample Selection Model Approach. medRxiv. 2020:2020.04.20.20072942.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.20.20072942
25.

Prevent Epidemics. COVID-19 Prevalence Calculator. Accessed Sep 16, 2020.

https://preventepidemics.org/covid19/resources/prevalence-calculator/
26.

Huang L, Zhang X, Zhang X, et al. Rapid asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 during

the incubation period demonstrating strong infectivity in a cluster of youngsters aged 16-23
years outside Wuhan and characteristics of young patients with COVID-19: A prospective
contact-tracing study. The Journal of infection. Jun 2020;80(6):e1-e13.
doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.03.006
27.

Lieberman JA, Pepper G, Naccache SN, Huang M-L, Jerome KR, Greninger AL.

Comparison of Commercially Available and Laboratory-Developed Assays for In Vitro Detection
of SARS-CoV-2 in Clinical Laboratories. Journal of Clinical Microbiology. 2020;58(8):e00821-20.
doi:10.1128/JCM.00821-20
28.

Zhen W, Manji R, Smith E, Berry GJ. Comparison of Four Molecular In Vitro Diagnostic

Assays for the Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in Nasopharyngeal Specimens. J Clin Microbiol. Jul 23
2020;58(8)doi:10.1128/jcm.00743-20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

33
29.

Arevalo-Rodriguez I, Buitrago-Garcia D, Simancas-Racines D, et al. False-negative results

of initial RT-PCR assays for COVID-19: A systematic review. medRxiv.
2020:2020.04.16.20066787. doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20066787
30.

Wang H, Liu Q, Hu J, et al. Nasopharyngeal Swabs Are More Sensitive Than

Oropharyngeal Swabs for COVID-19 Diagnosis and Monitoring the SARS-CoV-2 Load. Original
Research. Frontiers in Medicine. 2020-June-18 2020;7(334)doi:10.3389/fmed.2020.00334
31.

FIND. SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics performance data. Accessed July 29, 2020.

https://www.finddx.org/covid-19/dx-data/
32.

Abdalhamid B, Bilder CR, McCutchen EL, Hinrichs SH, Koepsell SA, Iwen PC. Assessment

of Specimen Pooling to Conserve SARS CoV-2 Testing Resources. Am J Clin Pathol.
2020;153(6):715-718. doi:10.1093/ajcp/aqaa064
33.

Singanayagam A, Patel M, Charlett A, et al. Duration of infectiousness and correlation

with RT-PCR cycle threshold values in cases of COVID-19, England, January to May 2020. Euro
Surveill. 2020;25(32):2001483. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.32.2001483
34.

Malinovsky Y, Albert PS. Revisiting Nested Group Testing Procedures: New Results,

Comparisons, and Robustness. The American statistician. 2019;73(2):117-125.
doi:10.1080/00031305.2017.1366367
35.

US Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). In Vitro Diagnostics EUAs: Molecular Diagnostic

Template for Laboratories (updated July 28, 2020). Accessed July 31, 2020.
https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-emergency-useauthorizations-medical-devices/vitro-diagnostics-euas

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

34
36.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim Guidance for Use of Pooling

Procedures in SARS-CoV-2 Diagnostic, Screening, and Surveillance Testing. Accessed July 30,
2020. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/lab/pooling-procedures.html
37.

Dorfman R. The Detection of Defective Members of Large Populations. The Annals of

Mathematical Statistics. 1943;14(4):436-440. doi:10.1214/aoms/1177731363
38.

Occupational Safety and Health Adminstration. Guidance on Returning to Work.

Accessed July 29, 2020. https://www.osha.gov/Publications/OSHA4045.pdf
39.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Interim Guidance for Businesses and

Employers Responding to Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), May 2020. Plan, Prepare and
Respond to Coronavirus Disease 2019. Accessed June 18, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/guidance-business-response.html
40.

Stanford University. Cardinal Recovery. Principles and Stages of Recovery. Accessed July

28, 2020. https://cardinalrecovery.stanford.edu/stages/
41.

Mina MJ, Parker R, Larremore DB. Rethinking Covid-19 Test Sensitivity - A Strategy for

Containment. The New England journal of medicine. Sep 30 2020;doi:10.1056/NEJMp2025631
42.

Shah M, Ferra G, Fitzgerald S, Barreira P, Sabeti P, Colubri A. Containing the Spread of

Infectious Disease on College Campuses. medRxiv. 2020:2020.07.31.20166348.
doi:10.1101/2020.07.31.20166348
43.

Lennon NJ, Bhattacharyya RP, Mina MJ, et al. Comparison of viral levels in individuals

with or without symptoms at time of COVID-19 testing among 32,480 residents and staff of
nursing homes and assisted living facilities in Massachusetts. medRxiv.
2020:2020.07.20.20157792. doi:10.1101/2020.07.20.20157792

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

35
44.

US Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). FAQs on Testing for SARS-CoV-2. Accessed July

31, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/emergency-situations-medical-devices/faqstesting-sars-cov-2
45.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). SARS-CoV-2 Testing Strategy:

Considerations for Non-Healthcare Workplaces. Accessed July 31, 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/organizations/testing-nonhealthcare-workplaces.html
46.

US Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). Pooled sample testing and screening testing for

COVID-19. Accessed Nov 17, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/coronavirus-covid-19and-medical-devices/pooled-sample-testing-and-screening-testing-covid-19
47.

MedTech Intelligence. LabCorp Wins Reissued EUA for COVID-19 Test, First to Test

Asymptomatic Population. Updated July 28. Accessed July 31, 2020.
https://www.medtechintelligence.com/news_article/labcorp-wins-reissued-eua-for-covid-19test-first-to-test-asymptomatic-population/
48.

US Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). In Vitro Diagnostics EUAs. Accessed July 31,

2020. https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-emergencyuse-authorizations-medical-devices/vitro-diagnostics-euas
49.

US Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). FDA news release (July 24, 2020): Coronavirus

(COVID-19) Update: FDA Authorizes First Diagnostic Test for Screening of People Without
Known or Suspected COVID-19 Infection. Accessed Sep 24, 2020. https://www.fda.gov/newsevents/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-authorizes-first-diagnostic-testscreening-people-without-known-or

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

36
50.

County of San Diego. COVID-19 Percentage Positive. Accessed June 23, 2020.

https://www.sandiegocounty.gov/content/dam/sdc/hhsa/programs/phs/Epidemiology/COVID19%20Percentage%20Positive.pdf

37

TABLES
Table 1. Definitions and ranges of model input variables
Variable
P

Units
percentage

TINF
NE

time
number

se

percentage

sp

percentage

TA

time

TI
m

time
number

k
se.k

number
percentage

sp.k

percentage

Definition
Prevalence of COVID-19 in population of
interest
time infected, asymptomatic but contagious
number of employees in a group that is
screened for returning to work on site
sensitivity of test; probability that infected
employee will have positive test result
specificity of test; probability that uninfected
employee will have negative test result
Turn-around time from sample collection to
result
Testing interval (time between tests); TI≥TA
(Implicit) Number of times individual tested
per time infected; m≤TINF/TI
specimen pool size
sensitivity of test when using pooled
specimens

Range of Values
0.001%, 0.01%, 0.1%, 0.5%, 1.0%, 2.0%

References

14 days, 21 days

7, 8, 10-12

20, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000

N/A

70%, 80%, 90%

29

98%, 99%, 99.5%, 99.9%

27, 28

1 or 2 days

N/A

1-14 days; TI≥TA
1-21

N/A
N/A

5, 10
se-1.5 for k=5
se-2.5 for k=10
sp for k=5 or 10

N/A
N/A

specificity of test when using pooled
specimens
N/A, not applicable indicates no appropriate references were identified or not required for that variable.

16, 50

N/A

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

38
Table 2. Definition of model output variables and typical values
Variable
NI
NH

Units
number
number

Npos
Nneg
NQ
TP

number
number
number
number

FP

number

FN

number

TN

number

PPV

Percent

1‒PPV

Percent

NPV

Percent

1‒NPV
TC

Percent
Time
(day)

Definition
number of infected employees out of NE screened at point in time
number of “healthy” employees, where healthy means uninfected with
respect to SARS-CoV-2
number of test positive employees
number of test negative employees
number of employees quarantined
Number of employees with true positive test result; employee is
infected and has positive test result
Number of employees with false positive test result; employee is
uninfected and has positive test result
Number of employees with false negative test result; employee is
infected and has negative test result
Number of employees with true negative test result; employee is
uninfected and has negative test result
positive predictive value; posttest probability that a person who is
screen positive is infected
posttest probability that a person who is screen positive is
uninfected/healthy
negative predictive value; posttest probability that a person who is
screen negative is uninfected/healthy
posttest probability that a person who is screen negative is infected
Time an infected employee is contagious, on site

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

39
Table 3. Impact of the prevalence of infected individuals on prevalence of infected pools*
Prevalence of
Prevalence across pools by number of samples (k) in pool
infected
k=2
k=5
k=10
k=15
k=20
individual
0.001%
0.002
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.01%
0.02
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.1 %
0.2
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
1%
2
5
10
14
18
5%
10
23
40
54
64
10%
19
41
65
79
88
* Prevalence of infected pools is the probability that a pool is infected. A pool is infected if at
least one sample in the pool is from an infected individual.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

40
Table 4. Probability an infected employee will be detected by each test cycle
Test Cycle* 70% Sens
80% Sens
90% Sens
95% Sens
1
70.0%
80.0%
90.0%
95.0%
2
91.0%
96.0%
99.0%
99.8%
3
97.3%
99.2%
99.9%
100.0%
4
99.2%
99.8%
100.0%
100.0%
5
99.8%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
*Test cycles may consist of any combination of pre-onsite and once onsite testing; Sens,
sensitivity.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

41
Table 5. Cross tabulation of expected SARS-CoV-2 Test Result versus the true status in 1000
employees tested based on 0.5% (5:1000) prevalence, 80% test sensitivity, and 99.5% test
specificity

SARS-CoV-2
Test Result

Test Positive
Test Negative
Total

True Status
Uninfected
Infected
“Healthy”
4
5
1
990
5

995

Total
9
991
1000

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

42

FIGURES AND FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure 1. Return to work screening model.
SARS-CoV-2 screening is performed for asymptomatic employees. Employees that screen
negative are permitted to return to onsite work. Employees that screen positive go into self isolation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

43

Figure 2. Probability of having at least one infected employee on site for different employee
group sizes and at different prevalences in the absence of an employee screening program.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

44

Figure 3. Probability that a single screen negative employee is infected with COVID-19 [false
negative result] versus log10(prevalence) for a range of sensitivity values at set specificity of
99.5%.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

45

Figure 4. Impact of baseline screening on probability of an infected employee being on site.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

46

Figure 5. Probability of at least one infected screen negative employee based on a single
screen of 80% sensitivity and 99.5% specificity.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

47

Figure 6. Probability that at least one screen negative employee returning on site is infected
with COVID-19 [false negative result] versus log10(prevalence) for a range of sensitivity and
specificity values.
Specificity lines are overlapping for each given sensitivity and thus not visible.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

48

Figure 7. Expected time an infected employee remains on site. Based on a 1-day turnaround
time and a contagious period of 14 days.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

49

Figure 8. Probability that a single screen positive employee is infected with COVID-19 [true
positive result] versus log10(prevalence) for a range of sensitivity and specificity values.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.18.20248512; this version posted December 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

50

Figure 9. Return to work workflow incorporating baseline and repeat SARS-CoV-2 screening

