medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Title: Impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the mental health and wellbeing of adults with mental
health conditions in the UK: A qualitative interview study

Abstract
Background
People with mental health conditions have been identified as particularly vulnerable to poor mental
health and wellbeing during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. However, why this
population have faced these adverse effects, how they have experienced them and how they have
coped during the pandemic remains under-explored.
Aims
To explore how the COVID-19 pandemic affected the mental health of people with existing mental
health conditions, and to identify protective factors and coping strategies applied to support positive
mental health.
Method
Semi-structured qualitative interviews and thematic analysis with 22 people with pre-existing mental
health conditions.
Results
Five pandemic related factors contributed to a deterioration in mental health: i) feeling safe but
isolated at home ii) disruption to mental health services, iii) cancelled plans and changed routines iv)
uncertainty and lack of control, and v) rolling media coverage. Five coping strategies and protective
factors were identified for maintaining mental health: i) previous experience of adversity ii) feeling
less accountable to others iii) engaging in hobbies and activities, iv) staying connected with others,
and v) perceived social support.
Conclusions
Particular challenges were identified that were a direct result of the pandemic and people with severe
mental illnesses were particularly negatively affected. However, some participants found this period
a time of respite, were able to draw upon reserves of resilience and adapt their coping strategies to
maintain positive wellbeing.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic caused widespread negative effects on mental
health globally, with large-scale surveys from countries including the UK identifying increases in
mental distress amongst general populations (1-3). Having a pre-existing mental health condition has
been identified as a risk factor for higher reported levels of depression and anxiety during this time
(4-6) and concerns have been raised that people with existing mental health conditions may be at risk
of longer-term effects such as relapse (7).
In considering why this population has been adversely affected, a number of theories have been
proposed including (i) higher concerns about the virus itself, including COVID-19 related delusional
beliefs and health anxieties (8); (ii) a greater propensity to be affected by societal restrictions and
social distancing due to higher baseline risk of loneliness and social isolation (7, 9-11); and (iii)
disruption in mental health service provision (12) as well as reduced availability of informal and
voluntary service support networks (8). However, to date, research into triggers of poorer mental
health during the pandemic amongst people with mental health conditions has been predominantly
quantitative, focusing on pre-assumed hypotheses. There is a lack of qualitative research looking more
broadly at the challenges faced by people with mental health conditions. Further, other sources have
suggested that having an existing mental health condition may not be a precursor to poorer
experiences; feelings of resilience and greater acceptance by others have also been reported,
alongside the use of coping strategies learnt from the prior self-management of mental health such
as engagement in creative activities (13). These findings were however, predominantly taken from
media reports and data obtained from organisational websites. There remains a clear research gap for
understanding these broader mental health experiences and the management of these experiences
during the pandemic from the perspectives of those with lived experience of mental health conditions.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to i) identify the impact of self-isolation, social distancing
measures and the pandemic overall on the mental health and wellbeing of people with mental health
conditions, and ii) identify protective factors and coping strategies that were applied to support
positive mental health.

Method
This was a qualitative descriptive study, based on semi-structured interviews with people with preexisting mental health conditions living in the UK. The study took a phenomenological approach,
focusing on participants lived experiences of the pandemic and their subjective meanings of the
changes brought about by the social distancing restrictions (14). This study was part of the COVID-19
Social Study, which aimed to assess the psychosocial impact of the pandemic in UK residents using
survey methods and qualitative interviews (15).
This study was performed in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. All procedures involving
human subjects were approved by the University College London Research Ethics Committee,
approval number 14895/005.
Participant recruitment
Our inclusion criteria were adults age 18+ living in the UK with a self-reported diagnosis of one or more
mental health conditions who were able to speak English for interview purposes. Participants were
excluded if they lacked capacity to consent. Participants were recruited via social media, the COVID19 Social Study website and newsletter (reaching 3,919 subscribers), and a mail out from third sector
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

organisations working with people with mental health conditions. Participants were purposively
recruited to ensure diversity in gender, age, ethnicity, and mental health diagnosis. Potential
participants were emailed a study information sheet and asked to contact the researcher if they had
any questions about the study. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants prior to
interviews being arranged. Participants also completed a demographics form (See Table 1).
Data collection
Interviews followed a topic guide (See supplementary material) and were conducted by AB (mental
health services researcher), AM (research psychologist), LB (sociologist) and HA (postgraduate
research and medical student) remotely via video call, or telephone depending on participant access
to technology and personal preference. Existing theories on behaviour change (16), social integration
and health (17), and health, stress and coping (18) guided topic guide development alongside
emerging findings from the COVID-19 Social Study survey and patient and public involvement via the
MARCH Mental Health Research Network. Questions explored i) participant adherence to social
distancing guidelines, ii) changes to social lives, iii) impact of the pandemic on mental health and
wellbeing, and iv) worries about the future (see Supplementary Material1).
Interviews average 56 minutes (range = 25-81 minutes) and participants were offered a £10 eshopping voucher to thank them for their time. Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed
verbatim by an external transcription company. Transcripts were checked for accuracy and
anonymised by the lead researcher (AB) before analysis. Data collection continued until theoretical
saturation, whereby no further concepts emerged (19).
Data analysis
Transcripts were entered into Nvivo 12 software for analysis (20). An initial coding framework was
developed using concepts from the interview topic guides. Familiarisation with data was achieved by
reading through each transcript before coding commenced. The coding framework was applied to the
transcripts using line-by-line coding, and codes were added to the framework as new concepts
emerged from participant accounts. Two researchers (AB, AM) independently and systematically
coded three (14%) of the transcripts and discussed emerging codes and themes. AB continued coding
the data using the revised framework, adding new codes to the framework as more transcripts
became available and until no new codes were identified. Codes were then organised into themes
corresponding to the research questions. The research team met weekly to review and discuss codes,
themes and developing findings and to approve the final results.
Results
22 participants were interviewed between May and August 2020. Participants were 23-70 years old
(mean age 43) and were predominantly female (59.1%) and white (68.2%). Just over half of the
participants were single and just under half lived alone. Fifty percent were unable to work due to
illness and the most prevalent mental health condition reported by participants was depression.
Participant characteristics are presented in Table 1.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Participant characteristics
Characteristics
Age (N/Mean)
Female
Ethnicity
White
Asian (Indian/Pakistani)
Mixed White/Asian
Black British/Black African
Marital Status
Single
Married/civil partnership/living with partner
Divorced/separated
Living situation
With others
Alone
Employment
Unable to work due to illness
Employed
Retired
Unemployed
Full time education
Self-reported mental health diagnosis
Depression
Multiple diagnoses*
Bipolar disorder
Depression & anxiety
Schizophrenia
Borderline personality disorder
Anxiety disorder
Bipolar schizoaffective disorder
PTSD with psychotic symptoms
*(1) Bipolar disorder, depression, generalized anxiety &
PTSD; (3) Borderline personality disorder, depression
personality disorder, depression, anxiety & PTSD

Range (%)
23-70 (43.2)
13 (59.1)
15 (68.2)
3 (13.6)
2 (9.1)
2 (9.1)
12 (54.5)
6 (27.3)
4 (18.2)
12 (54.5)
10 (45.5)
11 (50)
5 (22.7)
3 (13.6)
2 (9.1)
1 (4.5)
6 (27.3)
4 (18.2)
3 (13.6)
3 (13.6)
2 (9.1)
1 (4.5)
1 (4.5)
1 (4.5)
1 (4.5)
panic disorder; (2) Borderline personality disorder &
& anxiety; (4) Schizoaffective disorder, borderline

Themes
Five pandemic-related factors contributed to a reported deterioration in mental health. Five coping
strategies and protective factors were also identified (Figure 1).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Key themes corresponding to the research questions

Factors
contributing to
deterioration in
mental health
Coping
strategies and
protective
factors

• Feeling safe but isolated at home
• Disruption to mental health services
• Cancelled plans and changed routines
• Uncertainty and lack of control
• Rolling media coverage

• Previous experience of adversity
• Feeling less accountable to others
• Engaging in hobbies and activities
• Staying connected with others
• Perceived social support

Factors contributing to deterioration in mental health
Feeling safe but isolated at home
Leaving the house was a cause of anxiety for many participants who were worried about
contaminating their homes, about other people getting too close to them, and ultimately catching the
virus.
I have to leave the flat to get my post or to take rubbish out. I’ve noticed an increase in panic attack
lead up symptoms if that makes sense... happening a lot more than it has done for a very long time.
(ID09, male, age 40-44).
Food shopping was a particularly anxiety provoking experience with concerns raised about the
behaviour of others and a perception that others were not following the social distancing rules and
were a risk to their safety.
I hate now going shopping, in any form, because it is just nobody’s aware of distancing, they just go
in their own little world, and it’s just very anxious-making (ID02, female, age 70-74).
Some participants reported feeling happy at home and limiting contact with the outside world,
however they acknowledged that while this felt safe, being isolated for prolonged periods was
detrimental to their mental health. For some, this felt like a step backwards in their recovery.
It was nice not to have to go out, it was like I had an excuse...Lockdown is a good thing for me in the
way that I could isolate...but on the other hand, isolating like that is bad for me because that’s how I
get ill (ID25, female, age 25-29).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Others described prolonged periods spent indoors as challenging because of the lack of physical
contact with others. Those who lived alone or who relied on connecting with friends and family as a
coping strategy to protect their mental health were particularly affected.
I’m a very social person and probably seeing people is the thing that makes me less anxious. Those
are the things that make me feel better. So obviously I couldn’t do any of them, and I think the more
time I spend on my own, the more anxious I am and the more my mental health suffers (ID06,
female, age 30-34).
Disruption to mental health services
Some participants described difficulties accessing mental health services and experienced a perceived
or actual lack of service provision during this time.
In crisis, it’s the local A&E for me…and obviously that’s not on at the moment either, because my
local hospital is the local infectious diseases one and they’ve shut down completely, apart from
COVID (ID09, male, age 40-44).
Those with severe mental health conditions experienced a withdrawal of community services at the
start of the lockdown, which led to reduced practical and emotional support, greater feelings of
isolation and a decline in mental health.
During lockdown (support worker) stopped coming… It wasn’t explained to me, I assumed that during
lockdown that I would receive the same kind of support and it wouldn’t be affected, but it was
unexpected, and it put a lot of pressure, a lot of turmoil, on top of me, living with schizophrenia…
you’re not managing (ID19, male, age 20-24).
For those who were able to book virtual consultations with health professionals, these were often
experienced as inferior to face-to-face appointments.
It’s not the same because you can’t get across your emotions and what’s going on in my head, very
well. Not that I sit there and cry or anything but it’s just not the same (ID07, female, age 45-49).
A small number of participants described the importance of third sector mental health services.
However, for some people, services had closed, or had moved online and no longer perceived as
helpful.
I used to use a mental health service called <anonymised>. And that's probably the thing that hit me
the hardest was not being able to go there….I’m really hoping that it doesn't disappear as a result of
this (ID15, female, age 30-34).
A minority of participants expressed concerns about the future provision of mental health services
and the impact the pandemic might have on their ability to access support longer term.
And, I’m concerned, it is so stretched now getting any support from mental health services, and I’m
frightened it’s going to get even worse now with the increased number of people who will now be
suffering from mental health problems; that I’m not going to get any support at all (ID12, female,
age 50-54).

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Cancelled plans and changed routines
Disruption to holidays and cancelled celebrations and events led to frustration and disappointment
among many participants, with some describing feeling in limbo or trapped.
I think this feeling of entrapment is, just the biggest fear for me not being able to run away from
things... not being able to get away from something like [City] can be really claustrophobic (ID11,
female, age 25-29).
Uncertainty around when social activities could resume safely was a cause of concern, with some
participants unsure as to how they could feel comfortable in close proximity to others within larger
social spaces. There was a sense among participants that social interactions would need to be
conducted differently in the future.
I’ve got a thing on my phone what I was doing this time last year, and I was at a folk festival in the
park…and there were pictures of people all very close together…and that just seems strange
now…like there’s something wrong with it (ID18, male, age 45-49).
Other participants, however, described the importance of making plans even amidst the uncertainty,
to have something to look forward to that resembled normality.
They’ve cancelled <community festival> this year now. So, I might be looking at next year now.
That’s one thing I’ve got for the future (ID20, male, age 50-54).
As well as the cancellation of plans, participants described disruption to daily routines as a trigger for
low mood and anxiety.
It’s hard to stick to a routine, so just keep occupied, try and keep engage in the activity. But I do feel
disengage, little interest. So, I might feel forget about today, and work towards another day, towards
tomorrow (ID19, male, age 20-24).
Some participants found that the lack of activities led them to spend more time ruminating over
negative thoughts. Without the distraction of leaving the house to break up the days, these thoughts
could become overwhelming.
The problems that I would feel have been more brought about by the time to think, which is not
always productive…because we’ve not been going out and not diverting thoughts away from those
sort of situations (ID13, male, age 60-64).
Other participants highlighted the importance of maintaining or developing new routines, either by
adapting ways of working and communicating, or with support from others.
I’ve spoken to my psychologist from DBT days and she and I have worked out a plan to go forward,
for the immediate future. That involves day-to-day routine...just trying to get a routine going again
(ID04, female, age 50-54).
Uncertainty and lack of control
Many participants described the ongoing uncertainty of the pandemic and changing restrictions as
negatively affecting their mental health. In the lead up to lockdown, the speed in which changes were
imposed were experienced as deeply unsettling, with little time to say goodbye to friends or adapt to
new ways of living and working.
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

There was such a panic, for me, because everybody was going back home, and didn’t let me know,
like I didn’t have much contact with them in the pandemic, when we were first told.it was an evolving
situation. It was quite concerning for me…I wasn’t even able to say goodbye (ID17, male, age 25-29).
Participants described feeling a lack of control over the changes that were being made to their daily
lives. At times, this felt “overwhelming” due to “not knowing” how long restrictions would be in place
with a feeling that “nobody really has the answers”. For some, however, the feelings of uncertainty
transformed into a renewed acceptance and a welcome relinquishing of control.
I think it’s the fear of the unknown, so initially, the whole boat is put off course, and you can’t see
where you’re going and what’s going to happen…I certainly don’t react well to change. Once that
becomes the accepted norm for yourself…you can relax into it. It’s really surprised me (ID02, female,
age 70-74).
Most participants described feeling apprehensive about restrictions lifting and felt unsettled by
another sudden change of routine and concerned over infection rates increasing.
Although the death rates have lowered, it’s not stopped. So, we’re not in the clear, by any amount.
I’m worried that the lifting of lockdown and isolation is going to perhaps, bring it back again (ID07,
female, age 45-49).
Others feared the end of restrictions because they had become accustomed to a “new normal”, one
that they had learned to adapt to and feel in control of.
Strangely, there’s part of me that doesn’t want it to end…It’s been a really stressful, horrible time but
there’s also a part of me that when I hear about the potential of it ending, I feel nervous, scared
(ID10, female, age 30-34).
Rolling media coverage
A number of participants described the rolling coverage of the pandemic as overwhelming. Some
described difficulties avoiding the news, even though this was detrimental to their mental health,
while others actively limited engagement with media to protect their mental health.
I try not to spend much time on the news at times, because it can be really, really upsetting (ID14,
male, age 50-54).
For some participants with severe mental health problems, the coverage of the pandemic
manifested itself within their symptoms.
I did get a hallucination of COVID infested bats flying through my window in a giant cloak…It always
seems to be when we’ve had one of the big talks on the daily briefings on the TV. When something
major’s happened with the lockdown that seems to trigger my bad hallucinations (ID12, female, age
50-54).
COPING STRATEGIES AND PROTECTIVE FACTORS
Previous experience of adversity
Participants described drawing on experiences of trauma and turmoil in their lives to make sense of
the pandemic and revisited previously effective coping strategies.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Having a very turbulent childhood has made me very good at dealing with turbulence. So…stuff like
the pandemic, with everything being really strange and different actually is a good thing for me
because it makes me flip my head and go, okay, what can I do to make this better for me? (ID11,
female, age 25-29).
Some reflected on their previous experiences of social isolation to help cope with the restrictions.
I thought oh God, can I cope with this for a long time? Then I remembered that I’d spent nine years
when I didn’t go out much, and I thought yes I can manage it. I drew on that to think the things that I
shouldn’t do and the things that I should do. That experience helped me (ID18, male, age 45-49).
Feeling less accountable to others
Some participants felt liberated by the pandemic restrictions and experienced a reduced sense of
accountability to and judgement from others, less pressure to conform to social norms.
I have this time issue, like a race against everybody else, so I think lockdown gave me that feeling of,
we’re all on the same platform right now; nobody’s doing anything...I know I’m not missing out on
anything, but I’ve felt like I’m on an even platform with all my peers again (ID08, female, age 40-44).
A minority of participants however experienced the lockdown as a time for reflection on missed
opportunities, comparing their lives against the achievements of their peers.
Lockdown has suddenly made it occur to me that I should have set milestones by now. Because I
spent so long in hospital during my life, I haven’t hit the same milestones that my friends or my
sister’s reached. The lockdown’s got me worried about my future plans...and uncertainty in what
they are (ID25, female, age 25-29).
A number of participants described a renewed sense of understanding from friends and family who
now empathised with the impact that having a mental health problem had on participants’ daily
lives. This stemmed primarily from conversations about health anxieties and social isolation.
Quite a few of my friends didn’t really have that problem in the first place, and now they get it,
feeling anxious about meeting people, feeling like you’re missing out, in a way. I feel like there’s been
a lot more understanding, and that’s been a positive thing (ID16, male, age 25-29).
Engagement in hobbies and activities
Most participants described engaging in social activities at home. For some, this was a chance to
increase time spent on existing hobbies, while others discovered new interests.
We’ve been playing a lot of box games and I do a lot of cross-stitching, which is very mindful. I’m
trying to keep my mind occupied so it doesn’t drift down into the abyss, as it were (ID07, female, age
45-49).
Not all participants were able to engage in activities that usually protected their mental health, for
example, accessing community facilities such as museums, theatres or libraries.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A friend was saying to me on the phone, you don’t miss it that much because you weren’t doing
much anyway…well yes, but me getting out once when I did…Getting to a museum, getting to a
gallery, getting to a library was really important (ID09, male, age 40-44).
Connecting with others
Spending quality time with family and connecting with friends and social groups online were
important protective activities. Some participants experienced a renewed appreciation of
friendships, particularly as online socialising required extra effort or patience.
That’s the one thing that we can’t do without. It’s the one thing that has been critical to the way that
I’ve coped and just reinforcing because we’ve had to do things in a different way, I guess it’s made
me much more grateful for those relationships because it’s had to be done differently (ID23, female,
age 50-54).
For others however, social networks reliant on face-to-face contact had collapsed, or virtual ways of
communicating were a poor substitute for meeting in person and contributed to a worsening of
mental health.
I don’t have any sense of identity at the moment. I don’t really know who I am. Because I haven’t
had much face-to-face contact with people, I don’t really get a sense of being real. Speaking through
Zoom and WhatsApp and so on is a bit robotic (ID04, female, age 50-54).
Perceived social support
Participants described the importance of knowing there was someone they could turn to if they
needed emotional support. For some, support from family and friends was important for preventing
relapse and identified as a necessary substitute in the absence of formal services.
The nurse, even after I mentioned I was struggling at the beginning of lockdown, never asked me
again if I was okay or what support I’d got. It was just fortunate that I happened to have the support
outside of the health service (ID23, female, age 50-54).
Participants had mixed perceptions about the practical support available to them. For some, family
and neighbours were available to help with shopping for essentials, however others did not feel they
needed support or felt too guilty to ask for help.
I made the decision that with not having a close family member there was no way I could ask a friend
to do it, because I knew that if she contracted the illness I would feel guilty, I wouldn’t know if she’d
got it through doing my shopping. I just made that decision that I wouldn’t ask for help (ID22, female,
age 60-64).
For some, a breakdown in support networks during the pandemic contributed to a deterioration in
mental health.
I did all the shopping and everything myself. The eldest daughter used to help me to take medication
but then we fell out and that all went out the window and I ended up taking that overdose because
no one’s checking on me (ID12, female, age 50-54).
Being able to provide support to people in the community was an important protective factor for
participants’ own mental health. Participants reported a need to feel useful during a time when
social interactions were limited and others were in need.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A lady who lives at the end of the road did need (medication) picking up…. I found out she was selfisolating, but not technically considered high risk by the government and she was having trouble
getting food…For two weeks (the government) sent (food packages) automatically so I took the
boxes down to her. I felt really nice about being able to help her (ID16, male, age 25-29).
But, when participants were unable to fulfil these support roles due to the social distancing
restrictions or because they were scared of COVID-19 infection, this resulted in guilt and frustration.
I’ve tried to do what I can to help other people while staying in, which has been hugely challenging,
and quite stressful. Because you can’t just rush down to your friend when they feel ill, and that’s been
really hard, to know that your friends are not well, and not just to be able to go and knock on their
door, give them a card, give them a hug, or do anything at all (ID05, female, age 50-54).

Discussion
Our study found that people with mental health conditions were experiencing particular challenges
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Feeling isolated at home, reduced access to mental health services
and the ongoing uncertainty surrounding imposed restrictions all contributed to a deterioration in
mental health. For those with severe mental illnesses this was a particularly difficult time, presenting
unique triggers for relapse, self-harm and COVID-19 related paranoia or hallucinations. However,
negative psychological experiences were not always sustained beyond the initial lockdown period or
indeed uniform across participant accounts; some found this period a time of respite or were able to
use previous experiences of adversity to draw upon reserves of resilience and coping strategies.
Others experienced less social pressure and felt less socially excluded due to empathy from others.
Engagement in hobbies, connecting with loved ones and perceived availability of social support were
identified as important protective factors.

Factors contributing to deterioration in mental health
Triggers of poorer mental health identified in our study echo findings from previous research on risk
factors for mental illness such as social isolation (9, 10), but our findings highlight how the pandemic
exacerbated these triggers including increased uncertainty, overwhelming media coverage and not
feeling in control. Participants acknowledged a conflict between the importance of maintaining
social distancing and isolating at home to feel safe, and the adverse consequences of social isolation
on their mental health. Indeed, people with mental health conditions had a five times higher risk of
severe loneliness during the pandemic (21). Detrimental effects on mental health linked to social
distancing restrictions could be long lasting and have been observed in previous pandemics up to sixmonths after the end of quarantine in people with mental health conditions (22). Other triggers of
poorer mental health included disrupted access to mental health services. Indeed, a reduction in
referrals to mental health services and an increased use of emergency psychiatric services were
reported during the pandemic (23). Further, whilst prior to the pandemic, the provision of mental
health telecare was broadly supported by health professionals as an adjunct to face-to-face care
(24), participants in our study identified the lack of physical presence of the clinician as problematic,
felt less supported, and less able to convey their emotions.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Coping strategies and protective factors
We found some reports of positive mental health outcomes from the pandemic. Shared experiences
of social isolation and health-related anxieties led to a “normalisation” of emotional responses that
may usually be discourage or labelled as symptoms for some participants (25). Further, some
participants found they were able to adapt and form new routines, engage in new meaningful
activities and draw upon previous adversity and isolation to actively cope. Our study also found that
perceived social support and connecting with family and friends were important buffers against
relapse in line with previous research (26). But these benefits required participants to have access to
such support and where it was lacking these psychological benefits were not felt.
Limitations
We relied on people self-identifying for the study, which may have resulted in people taking part who
were particularly motivated or experiencing less severe mental health problems. Half of our sample
were, however, unable to work due to illness and many reported being in contact with mental health
services. People were interviewed while they were experiencing initial lockdown restrictions and the
earlier stages of the pandemic, rather than retrospectively, and the ongoing changes and prolonged
uncertainty may have an impact on mental health and coping strategies in ways that have not been
captured here.
Implications
Overall, this research highlights that many individuals with existing mental health conditions
experienced poor mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, these experiences were
nuanced: certain factors appeared to confer psychological support and mitigate worse experiences.
Future work should explore the changing needs of people’s experiences as the pandemic continues,
the longer-term support that people with mental health conditions may need and how best to provide
support. Such work may require adaptation and tailoring of existing services and interventions to
comply with social distancing restrictions, while remaining acceptable and accessible to those who
have struggled with virtual services and support.
Author details
Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College London, London, UK
Corresponding author: Alexandra Burton, University College London, Department of Behavioural
Science and Health, Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, 1-19 Torrington Place, London, WC1E
7HB
Declaration of interest: None
Funding
The Covid-19 Social Study was funded by the Nuffield Foundation [WEL/FR-000022583], but the
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily the Foundation. The study was also
supported by the MARCH Mental Health Network funded by the Cross-Disciplinary Mental Health
Network Plus initiative supported by UK Research and Innovation [ES/S002588/1], and by the
Wellcome Trust [221400/Z/20/Z]. DF was funded by the Wellcome Trust [205407/Z/16/Z].
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Dr Louise Baxter for support with recruitment and interviews and Dr Anna
Roberts, Dr Tom May, Joanna Dawes and Katey Warran who provided weekly feedback on emerging
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

findings. The research team are also grateful for the support of a number of organisations with their
recruitment efforts including the McPin Foundation, Alzheimer’s Society, Arts Beyond Belief, Taraki
and MQ, and to all of the participants who took part in the study.
Author Contribution
DF conceived the study and DF & AB designed the study. AB, AM & HA collected data for the study,
analysed and interpreted the data. AB wrote the first draft. All authors provided critical revisions,
read and approved the submitted manuscript. All authors had full access to the data in the study and
can take responsibility for the integrity and accuracy of the data.
Data Availability
The data are not publicly available due to their containing information that could compromise the
privacy of research participants.

References
1.
Pierce M, Hope H, Ford T, Hatch S, Hotopf M, John A, et al. Mental health before and during
the COVID-19 pandemic: a longitudinal probability sample survey of the UK population. The Lancet
Psychiatry. 2020;7(10):883-92.
2.
Niedzwiedz CL, Green MJ, Benzeval M, Campbell D, Craig P, Demou E, et al. Mental health
and health behaviours before and during the initial phase of the COVID-19 lockdown: longitudinal
analyses of the UK Household Longitudinal Study. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2020.
3.
Fancourt D, Steptoe A, Bu, F. Trajectories of anxiety and depressive symptoms during
enforced isolation due to COVID-19: longitudinal analyses of 36,520 adults in England. Lancet
Psychiatry. 2020;Accepted for publication.
4.
Iasevoli F, Fornaro M, D'Urso G, Galletta D, Casella C, Paternoster M, et al. Psychological
distress in patients with serious mental illness during the COVID-19 outbreak and one-month mass
quarantine in Italy. Psychol Med. 2020:1-3.
5.
O'Connor RC, Wetherall K, Cleare S, McClelland H, Melson AJ, Niedzwiedz CL, et al. Mental
health and wellbeing during the COVID-19 pandemic: longitudinal analyses of adults in the UK
COVID-19 Mental Health & Wellbeing study. Br J Psychiatry. 2020:1-17.
6.
Iob E, Frank P, Steptoe A, Fancourt D. Levels of Severity of Depressive Symptoms Among AtRisk Groups in the UK During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(10):e2026064.
7.
Holmes EA, O'Connor RC, Perry VH, Tracey I, Wessely S, Arseneault L, et al. Multidisciplinary
research priorities for the COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental health science. The Lancet
Psychiatry. 2020;7(6):547-60.
8.
Johnson S, Dalton-Locke C, Vera San Juan N, Foye U, Oram S, Papamichail A, et al. Impact on
mental health care and on mental health service users of the COVID-19 pandemic: a mixed methods
survey of UK mental health care staff. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2020.
9.
Michalska da Rocha B, Rhodes S, Vasilopoulou E, Hutton P. Loneliness in Psychosis: A Metaanalytical Review. Schizophrenia bulletin. 2018;44(1):114-25.
10.
Wang J, Lloyd-Evans B, Marston L, Ma R, Mann F, Solmi F, et al. Epidemiology of loneliness in
a cohort of UK mental health community crisis service users. Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
Epidemiology. 2020;55(7):811-22.
11.
Yao H, Chen J-H, Xu Y-F. Patients with mental health disorders in the COVID-19 epidemic.
The Lancet Psychiatry. 2020;7(4):E21.
12.
Tromans S, Chester V, Harrison H, Pankhania P, Booth H, Chakraborty N. Patterns of use of
secondary mental health services before and during COVID-19 lockdown: observational study.
BJPsych Open. 2020;6(6):e117.
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.01.20241067; this version posted December 3, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13.
Sheridan Rains L, Johnson S, Barnett P, Steare T, Needle JJ, Carr S, et al. Early impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic on mental health care and on people with mental health conditions: framework
synthesis of international experiences and responses. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr Epidemiol. 2020.
14.
Langdridge D. Phenomenology and Critical Social Psychology: Directions and Debates in
Theory and Research. Social and Personality Psychology Compass. 2008;2(3):1126-42.
15.
https://www.covidsocialstudy.org/ 2020 [
16.
Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new method for
characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. Implement Sci. 2011;6:42.
17.
Berkman LF, Glass T, Brissette I, Seeman TE. From social integration to health: Durkheim in
the new millennium. Social Science & Medicine. 2000;51(6):843-57.
18.
Eriksson M. The Sense of Coherence in the Salutogenic Model of Health. In: Mittelmark MB,
Sagy S, Eriksson M, Bauer GF, Pelikan JM, Lindstrom B, et al., editors. The Handbook of
Salutogenesis. Cham (CH). 2017. p. 91-6.
19.
Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology.
2006;3(2):77-101.
20.
QSR International Pty Ltd. NVivo (released in March 2020).
21.
Bu F, Steptoe A, Fancourt D. Loneliness during a strict lockdown: Trajectories and predictors
during the COVID-19 pandemic in 38,217 United Kingdom adults. Social Science & Medicine.
2020:113521.
22.
Jeong H, Yim HW, Song Y-J, Ki M, Min J-A, Cho J, et al. Mental health status of people
isolated due to Middle East Respiratory Syndrome. Epidemiol Health. 2016;38:e2016048-e.
23.
Mustafa FA. No reduction in psychiatric emergency department visits during COVID-19: A
downside of telepsychiatry? International Journal of Social Psychiatry.0(0):0020764020962533.
24.
Langarizadeh M, Tabatabaei MS, Tavakol K, Naghipour M, Rostami A, Moghbeli F.
Telemental Health Care, an Effective Alternative to Conventional Mental Care: a Systematic Review.
Acta Inform Med. 2017;25(4):240-6.
25.
Watson E. The mechanisms underpinning peer support: a literature review. Journal of
Mental Health. 2019;28(6):677-88.
26.
Wang J, Mann F, Lloyd-Evans B, Ma R, Johnson S. Associations between loneliness and
perceived social support and outcomes of mental health problems: a systematic review. BMC
Psychiatry. 2018;18(1):156.

14

