medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.08.20240382; this version posted December 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Multimodal Data Acquisition at SARS-CoV-2 Drive Through Screening
Centers: Setup Description and Experiences in Saarland, Germany
Philipp Flotho1,∗ , Mayur J. Bhamborae1,∗ , Tobias Grün1 , Carlos Trenado1 ,
David Thinnes1 , Dominik Limbach1 and Daniel J. Strauss1
Abstract— SARS-CoV-2 drive through screening centers
(DTSC) have been implemented worldwide as a fast and secure
way of mass screening. We use DTSCs as a platform for the
acquisition of multimodal datasets that are needed for the
development of remote screening methods. Our acquisition
setup consists of an array of thermal, infrared and RGB
cameras as well as microphones and we apply methods from
computer vision and computer audition for the contactless
estimation of physiological parameters. We have recorded a
multimodal dataset of DTSC participants in Germany for
the development of remote screening methods and symptom
identification. Acquisition in the early stages of a pandemic and
in regions with high infection rates can facilitate and speed up
the identification of infection specific symptoms and large scale
data acquisition at DTSC is possible without disturbing the flow
of operation.
Index Terms— SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, Drive Through
Screening, Non-Contact Medical Assessment, Computer Vision

I. I NTRODUCTION
Research on digital technologies to combat the COVID19 pandemic includes the computational analysis of video
and audio data [1], [2], [3]. Due to their contactless nature,
such methods are particularly promising and needed for mass
screening purposes [3] and besides fever, there are other atypical and non-severe symptoms (e.g. [4], [5], [6], [7]) which
allow for non-contact medical assessment. The value of such
screening systems would of course be directly related to the
achievable sensitivity and specificity for detecting SARSCoV-2 infections. However, it is challenging to acquire
homogeneous data sets for the development and assessment
of such remote systems without interfering with medical
services due to the pressure of the ongoing pandemic.
For the rapid collection of samples for polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) based screening, drive-through screening
centers (DTSCs), e.g., Kwon et al. [8], are already in use
in several countries. There are advantages of DTSCs for the
acquisition of contactless recordings of the patients: They
simulate a scenario, where contactless screening of infectious
diseases might be implemented one day, such as the entrance
of employee parking area. The exposure of equipment and
personnel to patients is minimized and at the same time
the exposure of healthy participants to contaminated air or
equipment is fully controlled and can be completely avoided
as the patients stay seated in their own car.
1

Systems Neuroscience and Neurotechnology Unit, Neurocenter, Saarland University Hospital, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(daniel.strauss@uni-saarland.de)
∗ Equal author contribution.

We propose an acquisition system along with a processing
pipeline for rapidly acquiring such data at DTSC without
disturbing their flow of medical operation and present a
multimodal dataset of DTSC users as well as preliminary
evaluations.
II. M ATERIALS AND M ETHODS
We recorded our dataset between May and July 2020 at
the SARS-CoV-2 DTSC located at the former fairground
area in Saarbrücken, State of Saarland, Germany. The study
was approved by the responsible ethics committee (ethics
commission at the Ärztekammer des Saarlandes, ID No
90/20) and after a detailed explanation of the procedure,
all included participants signed a consent form. Admission
to and recommendation for the tests was given by the
participants’ general practitioner if a patient had a potential
SARS-CoV-2 infection based on the Robert Koch Institute’s
guidelines [9]. The PCR-test result for SARS-CoV-2 from
the individual nose and throat swap was accessible for us
at the responsible public health office. The recordings were
done through an opened window with the participants sitting
in their car. Our multimodal setup consisted of RGB, NIR,
depth and thermal cameras as well as microphones (see
Fig. 1). We recorded at 120fps (face closeups, RGB), 50fps
(thermal camera), 30fps (NIR) and 10fps (high resolution
RGB, stereo) and used custom acquisition routines and frame
grabbers to minimize the user interaction with the recording
systems. The investigators followed the same guidelines for
the personal protective equipment (PPE) as the physicians
taking the swap samples. Participants waiting for the experiment were regularly informed about the estimated waiting
period and had the option to quit the experiment between two
recordings, to reduce the contamination with ambient sound
during audio recordings. The experiment began with a set of
yes/no/unknown questions with the goal to generate uniform
voice samples that can be compared between subjects. These
also provided additional medical history. The second segment
was a free speech sample, where the participants were asked
to tell the circumstances that led to them visiting the DTSC.
Subsequently, we asked the participants to briefly present
their hands from both sides towards the camera, to catch potential cues to skin rashes. In the final segment, participants
were asked to take 10 deep breaths and to breathe normally
for 30s afterwards. The entire study/data acquisition took
around 6 minutes. A total of 436 participants with signed
consent form participated in our study, aged 19—86 (mean
age 45.6 ± 15.2, 215 males, 221 females, 7 participants

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.08.20240382; this version posted December 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

A
Exit

Stereo I
(xiQ MQ013CG-ON)

Due to medRxiv’s general preprint posting
policy, this figure had to be excluded from
the preprint. See additional information at
http://www.snnu.uni-saarland.de/covid19/

Thermal Camera
(Flir A655sc, 25° lens)

Stereo II / 4K

HFR
(xiQ MQ013CG-ON,
35mm macro lens)

Microsoft Kinect

(xiC MC124CG-SY)

Multimodal Measurements

Exit

Due to medRxiv’s general preprint posting
policy, this figure had to be excluded from
the preprint. See additional information at
http://www.snnu.uni-saarland.de/covid19/

Microphone I

Microphone II

(Rode NTG2, directional)

(Superlux ECM999,

omni-directional)

Throat and Nose Swab

Due to medRxiv’s general preprint posting
policy, this figure had to be excluded from
the preprint. See additional information at
http://www.snnu.uni-saarland.de/covid19/

Queue

Due to medRxiv’s general preprint posting policy, this figure
had to be excluded from the preprint. See additional
information at http://www.snnu.uni-saarland.de/covid19/

Lanes 1-3

Fig. 1. Schematic depiction of the flow at the SARS-CoV-2 DTSC (A) and of the multimodal acquisition system (B). Measurements were done through
the opened window of the car with RGB, NIR, depth and thermal cameras as well as microphones. We recorded from the thermal camera at 50fps ((B), top
center), the high framerate (HFR) camera with macro lens for face closeups at 120fps ((B), top right) and the high resolution camera in a stereo setup at
10fps ((B), top left). The stereo cameras covered the same field of view as the thermal camera. The camera setup was calibrated with a heated calibration
board with circular pattern. Of the three possible lanes for the swab tests, the middle one was used during the time of our measurements.

did not provide their age). 34 subjects reported chronical or
acute respiratory diseases or symptoms (see Fig. 3). Despite
a relatively high participation of 36% of the DTSC users
in our study, our data set contained only two subjects with
SARS-CoV-2 positive PCR results from the swab tests at the
DTSC, see discussion.
III. R ESULTS
We have recorded a dataset up to 6 minutes per subject
with HFR or high resolution multimodal cameras and microphones. We applied already available procedures from
computer vision and computer audition for assessment of
the data quality. The evaluations and respective methodology
used as proof of concept are described below. Fig. 2 summarizes the results for each of these modalities, in particular
how the contactless physiological parameters compare to
gender and age specific norm values and grouped them by a
presence/absence of symptoms.

variability than male participants. This agrees with results
from experiments with gold standard contact based sensors
on large sample sizes [11], [12].
B. Remote eye analysis
We precomputed landmarks for the HFR and 4k recordings
using dlib [13]. On the eye, we analyzed the average blinking
rate which can be a marker for drowsiness [14] and redness
of the sclera as an indicator for follicular conjunctivitis [15]
(see Fig. 2 (B)). We calculated the eye-aspect-ratio (Eye-AR)
[16] from the pre-computed landmarks and apply custom
algorithms to detect / count peaks for blinking detection.
We found a significant difference in the blinking rate which
was larger for participants reporting itchy eyes as compared
to fever. We also extracted a region of interest around the
eye and applied segmentation (gray scale based) to calculate
the redness index (RI) from the sclera [15]. We found no
significant difference of the RI between those with fever vs.
itchy eyes.

A. Remote plethysmography
We applied the method of Wang et al. [10] for the
extraction of remote plethysmography (rPPG) signals from
skin segmented super-pixels of the HFR and 4k recordings
and used custom scripts for peak detection and analysis. The
analysis shows that the mean heart rate (MHR) decreases
with age (see Fig. 2 (A)). Female participants show slightly
higher values in MHR and lower values related to heart rate

C. Functional Thermography
From the thermal recordings, we analyzed static temperatures from the orbital, periorbital, maxillary, and nose region
(see Fig. 2 (C)). Vanilla landmark detectors did not perform
consistently for all participants, so we applied a stack of preprocessing methods such as image inversion and unsharp
masking to a set of 5 randomly sampled frames for each

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.08.20240382; this version posted December 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A Remote Plethysmography

B Remote Eye Analysis

Mean Heart rate (HR)

Sclera Segmentation

Sex and age differences in HR

Redness-Index

Standard Deviation of NN
Intervals (SDNN)

Blinking-Rate

Due to medRxiv’s general preprint posting policy, this figure had
to be excluded from the preprint. See additional information at
http://www.snnu.uni-saarland.de/covid19/

𝐸𝑦𝑒𝐴𝑅 =

C Functional Thermography

𝑑2 − 𝑑3 + |𝑑3 − 𝑑5|
2|𝑑1 − 𝑑4|

Temperature Extraction

Temp. Distribution

Mean Temperatures
*

*

a
b
*

c

D Computer Audition

Audio Quality

*

Average Spectrum

Fig. 2. Results obtained in the reported evaluation period from the different modalities. rPPG (A) was used for the extraction of HR and HRV. For
remote optometry (B) we analyzed EYE-AR and sclera redness. For static temperatures from the face (C), we looked at four points of interest. Manual
assessment of our audio recordings (D) shows that 97.6% of our recordings had very good to acceptable sound quality, while for the rest the voice was
rated unintelligible.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.08.20240382; this version posted December 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subject, applied a facial landmark detector [17] to each of
the images with different pre-processing and averaged the
results per frame. Failed detections were manually annotated.
Our results showed a significant difference in temperature
for subjects reporting fever vs. no fever in the maxillary,
periorbital and nose region.
D. Computer Audition
Schuller et al. argue how audio ’in-the wild’ recordings
under unconstrained conditions with various signal degradations can already have value for COVID19 computer audition
[2]. With our platform, we get reproducible quality audio
recordings from uniform hardware (see Fig 3 (D)). For
instance, using established speech feature extraction schemes
[18], the voice quality of our data is sufficient to solve a
gender classification task with above 90% cross-validated
accuracy of a support vector machine.
IV. D ISCUSSION
A major limitation of our study is the marginal number
of participants with positive PCR test result for SARSCoV-2. The reason for this was the generally very low
incidence rate in the study period in the region where the
DTSC was located. In fact, the positive rate was below
0.4% at the DTSC Saarbrücken in the respective period.
Thus, the specificity and sensitivity of the described approach
with respect to SARS-CoV-2 infections cannot be assessed.
However, our proof of concept shows that a remote data
acquisition of SARS-CoV-2 infection related symptoms at
DTSCs is possible. Our experiences and results enable the
installation of similar approaches in regions that do massive
DTSC testing.
Additionally, we have recorded an unprecedented, multimodal dataset with a high number of subjects that can be
used for the development and refinement of computer vision

Yes / No Questionnaire
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

methods. Many state-of-the-art computer vision studies with
isolated modalities have to resort to smaller, publicly available datasets: Considering the development of algorithms
for the detection and classification of micro-expressions, Li
et al. report between 80-210 subjects for common microexpression datasets with evoked micro-expressions and they
present a dataset with 20 subjects for spontaneous microexpressions, recorded at 100fps (RGB) and 25fps (NIR) [19].
Davison et al. record 32 subjects at 200fps for spontaneous
micro-expressions [20]. Our dataset contains recordings of
436 participants at 120fps (RGB), 50fps (thermal) and 30fps
(NIR) over 6 minutes. While some subjects moved out of
frame during various parts for the experiment for the HFR
face close-up recordings, we expect a similar percentage
of successful recordings that allow for micro-expression
annotation as for our HR evaluations (see Fig. 2) and we
can additionally report HFR thermal recordings with wider
field of view.
For a facial landmarking task in the context of functional
thermal imaging, datasets of around 2935 frames from 90
subjects with full manual annotation can be considered
among the state-of-the-art [21]. Our 436 recordings at 50hz
of up to 6 minutes potentially enable the generation of a
dataset with 7-8 million frames which would be multiple
orders of magnitudes larger. Our preliminary results suggest
the possibility of partial, automatic annotation with an appropriate stack of pre-processing methods and together with
tracking approaches could be used for a full annotation of
the dataset in the future. On top of that, the setup potentially
allows for multimodal mapping between NIR and thermal
domain using the depth channel of the kinect and between
RGB and thermal domain with the stereo setup (e.g. compare
Palmero et al. [22]).
Computer vision algorithms require different conditions of
environmental parameters. In the context of rPPG methods,
Wang et al. require constant illumination to reconstruct
PPG signals from videos in talking and static scenarios and
various skin and then achieve high signal to noise ratio of the
spectograms [10]. The employed studio illumination in our
setup at the DTSC fulfills those requirements and allowed
us to record high-quality data for rPPG measurements.
V. C ONCLUSION

yes

no information

Fig. 3. Counts of the symptoms reported by participants during the yes/no
section of our experiment. Because every participant was already admitted to
the DTSC based on the RKI recommendations regarding contact to infected
persons and symptoms, most of our participants showed different flu-like
symptoms or symptoms of a common cold. Most common were fatigue
(306), followed by headache (268), cold (273), and sore throat (208).

We have proposed a setup to record multimodal data and
have recorded a unique dataset of DTSC users across all
age groups. To our knowledge, this is the first time that
a multimodal video and audio dataset has been recorded
at a SARS-CoV-2 DTSC. We have shown in our preliminary evaluations, that the data quality is sufficient for the
application of already available procedures from computer
vision and computer audition. This could allow for SARSCoV-2 infection related symptoms assessment from such data
in the future. While we captured only a marginal number
of PCR positive subjects, our dataset can help with the
development and refinement of computer vision algorithms
beyond the COVID-19 pandemic: After full annotation for

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.08.20240382; this version posted December 11, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

various computer vision tasks such as landmarking or microexpression analysis, it has the potential to rank among the
state-of-the-art in terms of the number of participants and age
statistics. It has been recorded in an out-of-lab setting with
realistic participant interaction, which for example could be
encountered at the entrance of an employee parking area.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the association of statutory health
insurance physicians Saarland (KVSaar), in particular, Dr.
Joachim Meiser and Michael Schneider for supporting the
management with the local medical offices as well as for
equipping us with PPE at the DTSC Saarbrücken. We
thank the Federal Defense Forces of Germany, in particular
Oberstleutnant Christoph Schacht, for their steady support
during the study regarding the logistics and the installation
of our data acquisition station at DTSC. We acknowledge
the support of the ZF Friedrichshafen AG, in particular
Florian Dauth, Volker Wagner, and Dr. Peter Reitz for
supporting us with the research vehicle used for the data
acquisition. A special note of thanks goes to the responsible
authorities at the Regionalverband (regional association of
towns) Saarbrücken, in particular Peter Gillo and Alexander
Birk and the responsible ethics commission at the medical
council Saarland for helping us to resolve all the data security
and ethical issues in an incredible short amount of time. Furthermore, the authors would like to thank Benedikt Buchheit,
Maximilian Becker, Dr. Farah I. Corona-Strauss, Adrian Mai,
Richard Morsch, Patrick Schäfer, and Elena Schneider from
our research unit for supporting the administration as well as
the data processing. Finally, we would like to thank Professor
Alexander L. Francis from Purdue University for proving
valuable feedback on the first version of this manuscript.
R EFERENCES
[1] A. S. Manolis, A. A. Manolis, T. A. Manolis, E. J. Apostolopoulos,
D. Papatheou, and H. Melita, “COVID-19 infection and cardiac
arrhythmias,” Trends in Cardiovascular Medicine, aug 2020.
[2] B. W. Schuller, D. M. Schuller, K. Qian, J. Liu, H. Zheng, and X. Li,
“COVID-19 and Computer Audition: An Overview on What Speech &
Sound Analysis Could Contribute in the SARS-CoV-2 Corona Crisis,”
mar 2020.
[3] B. J. Quilty, S. Clifford, S. Flasche, R. M. Eggo, and Others,
“Effectiveness of airport screening at detecting travellers infected with
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV),” Eurosurveillance, vol. 25, no. 5, pp.
2000080, 2020.
[4] Y.-F. Tu, C.-S. Chien, A. A. Yarmishyn, Y.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Luo, Y.-T.
Lin, W.-Y. Lai, D.-M. Yang, S.-J. Chou, Y.-P. Yang, and Others, “A
review of SARS-CoV-2 and the ongoing clinical trials,” International
journal of molecular sciences, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 2657, 2020.
[5] R. Wölfel, V. M. Corman, W. Guggemos, M. Seilmaier, S. Zange,
M. A. Müller, D. Niemeyer, T. C. Jones, P. Vollmar, C. Rothe, and
Others, “Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID2019,” Nature, vol. 581, no. 7809, pp. 465–469, 2020.
[6] W.-j. Guan, Z.-y. Ni, Y Hu, W.-h. Liang, C.-q. Ou, J.-x. He, L. Liu,
H Shan, C.-l. Lei, D. S. C. Hui, and Others, “Clinical characteristics of
coronavirus disease 2019 in China,” New England journal of medicine,
vol. 382, no. 18, pp. 1708–1720, 2020.
[7] J.-P. O. Li, D. S. C. Lam, Y. Chen, and D. S. W. Ting, “Novel
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): The importance of recognising
possible early ocular manifestation and using protective eyewear,”
2020.

[8] K. T. Kwon, J.-H. Ko, H. Shin, M. Sung, and J. Y. Kim, “Drivethrough screening center for covid-19: A safe and efficient screening
system against massive community outbreak,” Journal of Korean
Medical Science, vol. 35, no. 11, 2020.
[9] Robert Koch-Institut, “COVID-19-Verdacht: Maßnahmen und Testkriterien - Orientierungshilfe für Ärzte,” 2020.
[10] W. Wang, A. C. Den Brinker, S. Stuijk, and G. De Haan, “Algorithmic
Principles of Remote PPG,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 1479–1491, 2017.
[11] R. Zhao, D. Li, P. Zuo, R. Bai, Q. Zhou, J. Fan, C. Li, L. Wang,
and X. Yang, “Influences of Age, Gender, and Circadian Rhythm on
Deceleration Capacity in Subjects without Evident Heart Diseases,”
Annals of Noninvasive Electrocardiology, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 158–166,
mar 2015.
[12] J. Koenig and J. F. Thayer, “Sex differences in healthy human heart
rate variability: A meta-analysis,” Neuroscience & Biobehavioral
Reviews, vol. 64, may 2016.
[13] D. E. King, “Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit,” Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 10, 2009.
[14] R. Martins and J. M. Carvalho, “Eye blinking as an indicator of fatigue
and mental load—a systematic review,” in Occupational Safety and
Hygiene III. 2015.
[15] I. Sárándi, D. P. Claßen, A. Astvatsatourov, O. Pfaar, L. Klimek,
R. Mösges, and T. M. Deserno, “Quantitative conjunctival provocation
test for controlled clinical trials,” Methods of Information in Medicine,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 238–244, 2014.
[16] J. Cech and T. Soukupova, “Real-Time Eye Blink Detection using
Facial Landmarks,” Center for Machine Perception, Department
of Cybernetics Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical
University in Prague, 2016.
[17] A. Bulat and G. Tzimiropoulos, “How far are we from solving the
2d & 3d face alignment problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial
landmarks),” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2017, pp. 1021–1030.
[18] F. Eyben, M. Wöllmer, and B. Schuller, “OpenSMILE - The Munich
versatile and fast open-source audio feature extractor,” MM’10 Proceedings of the ACM Multimedia 2010 International Conference,
pp. 1459–1462, 2010.
[19] X. Li, T. Pfister, X. Huang, G. Zhao, and M. Pietikäinen, “A
spontaneous micro-expression database: Inducement, collection and
baseline,” in 2013 10th IEEE International Conference and Workshops
on Automatic face and gesture recognition (fg). IEEE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[20] A. K. Davison, C. Lansley, N. Costen, K. Tan, and M. H. Yap, “Samm:
A spontaneous micro-facial movement dataset,” IEEE Transactions on
Affective Computing, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 116–129, 2016.
[21] M. Kopaczka, R. Kolk, J. Schock, F. Burkhard, and D. Merhof, “A
thermal infrared face database with facial landmarks and emotion
labels,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol.
68, no. 5, pp. 1389–1401, 2018.
[22] C. Palmero, A. Clapés, C. Bahnsen, A. Møgelmose, T. B. Moeslund,
and S. Escalera, “Multi-modal rgb–depth–thermal human body segmentation,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 118, no.
2, pp. 217–239, 2016.

