medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025973; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Assessing the impact of a symptom-based mass screening
and testing intervention during a novel infectious disease
outbreak: The case of COVID-19
Running title: COVID-19, Symptom-based MSTI

Authors
Yang Ge1, Brian Kenneth McKay1, Shengzhi Sun2, Feng Zhang3, Andreas Handel1

Affiliations:
1.

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA,
USA

2.

Department of Environmental Health, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston,
MA, USA

3.

Department of Biostatistics and Data Science, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, School of Public Health, Houston, TX, USA

Corresponding author: Yang Ge, Andreas Handel
Corresponding author email: . @.  ,    @.  
Conflict of interest: None
Funding statement: None
Main text words count: 662

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025973; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
Rapid detection and isolation of infected individuals is important for containing infectious
disease outbreaks (1). A symptom-based mass screening and testing intervention (MSTI), is an
approach that can identify a significant fraction of infected individuals. In the current COVID-19
outbreak, several countries such as China, Italy and US are using the MSTI strategy to identify as
many cases as possible. A problem for MSTI is that many novel pathogens show symptoms that
are similar to common infections, e.g., general respiratory symptoms. This can lead to rapid
overload of the health system (2). If testing for MSTI is performed in health facilities, such a
situation might directly lead to a worsening of the outbreak if there is transmission risk
associated with MSTI (3).

Objective
We explore how the potential benefit of MSTI, taking into consideration MSTI associated
transmission risk.

Methods and Findings
We consider a scenario where a novel pathogen causes symptoms that are similar to circulating
pathogens, e.g., general respiratory symptoms. At any given time during an outbreak, a
proportion, , of those showing symptoms will be infected with the novel pathogen. For
symptomatic patients who are asked to stay home (H), the expected number of transmissions of
the novel pathogen caused by that person is the average number of transmissions caused by
someone who is infected with that pathogen (reproductive number, R), multiplied by the
probability the person is infected with the new pathogen, ு   . An alternative option is to
implement MSTI. Mass screening tries to identify all individuals who show symptoms consistent

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025973; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

with the novel pathogen. For individuals who go through an MSTI, there are two possible
scenarios. If the symptomatic individual is infected with the novel pathogen (probability ), we
assume that they are correctly identified and placed under isolation and treatment. Screened
individuals are assumed to have reduced transmission risks, ூ . If the health system is strained,
those patients undergoing testing without being infected with the novel pathogen (probability

1  ) may become infected during MSTI. We denote this probability of becoming infected with
. Since these individuals test negative, we assume they will be sent home and have the same
transmission risk as individuals asked to remain at home. Thus, the total transmission potential
for a person undergoing MSTI (S) is ௌ  ூ  1  . Similar expressions for an
individual’s mortality risk under either scenario are shown in the SM.
We can define the transmission risk ratio (TRR) as   ௌ / ு . If   1, MSTI reduces
overall transmission. As a best-case scenario, we consider a situation where isolation following a
positive test is perfect, ூ  0, (other scenarios are explored in the SM). This gives   1 

/ . Figure 1 shows a heatmap for TRR (on a log scale) for different values of  and . The
solid line is given by   /1  , at which TRR=1 (thus their log is 0). This line marks the
threshold at which MSTI changes from being beneficial to being harmful. While hard numbers
for the quantities  and

are impossible to obtain, we used previously published data to obtain

very rough estimates for  and

ranges for COVID-19, Ebola and Measles (see SM for details).

Our estimates suggest that MSTI is clearly beneficial for Ebola, this is less certain for Measles
and COVID-19.

Discussion
For MSTI to be beneficial, one needs to minimize  and maximize

 is through testing sites separate from the usual healthcare facilities.
3

(4). An approach to reduce
can be increased by

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025973; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

having a more specific case definition (ideally without losing sensitivity). This will also reduce
the total number of individuals going to testing sites, likely reducing . Overall, our analysis
suggests that MSTI can be useful if the probability of transmission at testing sites is less than the
probability that a symptomatic person is infected with the novel pathogen. Both  and

will

likely vary between settings and thus should be evaluated for a specific setting, e.g. a specific
country, if MSTI is considered as a potential control strategy.

Figure: Transmission risk ratio (log scale) as a function of novel pathogen prevalence among
individuals showing symptoms, , and testing-site related infection risk factor, . For TRR the
threshold at which MSTI becomes beneficial is 1, thus for the log shown here this threshold is 0.
Indicated in color are estimates for and  ranges for 3 different pathogens (see SM for details).
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.02.20.20025973; this version posted April 15, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. Fraser C, Riley S, Anderson RM, Ferguson NM. Factors that make an infectious disease
outbreak controllable. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2004;101(16):6146–
51.
2. Lipsitch M, Hayden FG, Cowling BJ, Leung GM. How to maintain surveillance for novel
influenza a h1n1 when there are too many cases to count. The Lancet. 2009;374(9696):1209–11.
3. Chowell G, Abdirizak F, Lee S, Lee J, Jung E, Nishiura H, et al. Transmission characteristics
of mers and sars in the healthcare setting: A comparative study. BMC medicine. 2015;13(1):210.
4. Kucharski AJ, Camacho A, Checchi F, Waldman R, Grais RF, Cabrol J-C, et al. Evaluation of
the benefits and risks of introducing ebola community care centers, sierra leone. Emerging
Infectious Diseases. 2015 Mar;21(3):393–9.

5

