medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Risk factors, symptom reporting, healthcare-seeking
behaviour and adherence to public health guidance: protocol
for Virus Watch, a prospective community cohort study
Andrew Hayward1, Ellen Fragaszy2,3, Jana Kovar1, Vincent Nguyen1,2, Sarah Beale1,2, Thomas
Byrne2, Anna Aryee2, Pia Hardelid4, Linda Wijlaars4, Wing Lam Erica Fong2, Cyril Geismar1,2,
Parth Patel2, Madhumita Shrotri2, Annalan M D Navaratnam1,2, Eleni Nastouli5,6, Moira Spyer6,,
Ben Killingley7,8, Ingemar Cox9, Vasileios Lampos9, Rachel A McKendry9, Tao Cheng11, Anne M
Johnson14, Susan Michie13, Jo Gibbs14, Richard Gilson14, Alison Rodger14,15, Robert W Aldridge2

Affiliations
1 Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, University College London, London, UK
2 Centre for Public Health Data Science, Institute of Health Informatics, University College
London, UK.
3 Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, Keppel Street, London, UK.
4 UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child Health, London, UK.
5 Department of Population, Policy and Practice, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of Child
Health, London, UK.
6 Francis Crick Institute, London, UK.
7 Health Protection and Influenza Research Group, Division of Epidemiology and Public Heath,
University of Nottingham School of Medicine, Nottingham, United Kingdom.
8 University College London Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
9 Department of Computer Science, University College London, London, UK.
10 London Centre for Nanotechnology and Division of Medicine, London, UCL.
11 SpaceTimeLab, Department of Civil, Environmental and Geomatic Engineering, University
College London, London, UK.
12 Centre for Population Research in Sexual Health and HIV, Institute for Global Health,
London, UK.
13 Centre for Behaviour Change, University College London, London, UK.
14 Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, UK.
15. Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Corresponding Author:
Andrew Hayward, Institute of Epidemiology and Health Care, University College London,
London, WC1E 7HB, UK

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Introduction: The Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic has caused significant global mortality
and impacted lives around the world. Virus Watch aims to provide evidence on which public
health approaches are most likely to be effective in reducing transmission and impact of the
virus, and will investigate community incidence, symptom profiles, and transmission of COVID19 in relation to population movement and behaviours.
Methods and analysis: Virus Watch is a household community cohort study of acute
respiratory infections in England & Wales and will run from June 2020 to Sept 2021. The study
aims to recruit 42,500 people, including 12,500 from minority ethnic backgrounds, for an online
survey cohort. Nested within this larger study will be a sub-cohort of 10,000 individuals,
including 3,000 people from minority ethnic backgrounds. This cohort of 10,000 people will have
full blood serology taken between October 2020 and January 2021 and repeat serology
between May 2021 and August 2021. Participants will also post self-administered nasal swabs
for PCR assays of SARS-CoV-2 and will follow one of three different PCR testing schedules
based upon symptoms.
Ethics and dissemination: This study has been approved by the Hampstead NHS Health
Research Authority Ethics Committee. Ethics approval number – 20/HRA/2320. We are
monitoring participant queries and using these to refine methodology where necessary, and are
providing summaries of our preliminary findings to inform public health action by working
through partnerships with our study advisory group, Public Health England, NHS and
Government Scientific Advisory panels.

Keywords: COVID-19; cough; fever; diagnostic testing capacity; UK; cohort study

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has caused millions of deaths
and impacted lives around the world with the closure of schools, workplaces, and
limitations on freedom of movement. Vaccines and effective scalable treatments for
COVID-19 are being discovered, but whilst these are still being approved and further
refined, we will need to rely on other measures to stop the spread of COVID-19. We will
also require studies to examine their effectiveness as they are implemented across
England and Wales.
COVID-19 transmission in the UK has started to increase since the end of August 2020.
Governments, including those of the UK devolved nations, are adopting a wide range of
control measures to limit the spread of infection. These include isolation of people with
COVID-19 symptoms and their household contacts, widespread testing and contact
tracing, digital contact tracing using mobile phone apps, broad social distancing
measures, and local control measures. Environmental cleaning, hand hygiene and face
mask use are also advised.
Much of our current knowledge of COVID-19 comes from observations at the more
severe end of the disease spectrum, in hospitalised patients and individuals who die
having tested positive for the disease.[1–3] Although large-scale studies of prevalence
of PCR positive infection and seroprevalence have been established, there is currently
limited information on symptom profiles through the course of illness in non hospitalised
populations, children, social and behavioural risk factors for infection, strength and
duration of immunity, household and community transmission risk, and population
behaviours during periods of wellness and illness (including social contacts, use of
public spaces, testing behaviours, isolation, mask use, hand and respiratory hygiene).
This information can only be gathered accurately through prospective large-scale
community cohorts. Our experience of the MRC/Wellcome Flu Watch study[4,5] and
ESRC Bug Watch[6] study has allowed us to rapidly establish a national household
cohort study of 42,500 individuals.
Virus Watch aims to provide evidence on which public health approaches are most
likely to be effective in reducing the spread and impact of the virus and will investigate

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

community incidence, symptom profiles, and transmission of COVID-19 in relation to
population movement and behaviour.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Methods
Study design and setting
Virus Watch is a household community cohort study of acute respiratory infections in
England and Wales covering the second and potential subsequent waves of the
COVID-19 pandemic. The study period will be 1st June 2020 to 30th Sept 2021. The
study aims to recruit 42,500 individuals, including 12,500 from minority ethnic
backgrounds for an online survey cohort (study 1). Nested within this larger study will be
a sub-cohort of 10,000 individuals (study 2), including 3,000 people from minority ethnic
backgrounds. Participants in this laboratory sub-cohort will be selected based on their
geographical distance away from one of our blood taking clinics; either a 10km radius
from a clinic in cities, or a 20km radius in rural areas. Participants will be balanced to be
representative of the UK population for sex, age and region. Figure 1 provides an
overview of the study design.

Figure 1. Overview of cohort recruitment and data collection for the Virus Watch
household community cohort study.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Households self-select into the study if they live in England and Wales and all members
of a household need to consent to take part in the study to meet our inclusion criteria.
Households need to have an internet connection on a phone, tablet or computer, email,
and, up until the end of November 2020, at least one adult household member that can
read English. From December 2020 onwards, online surveys will be translated into
multiple languages. A household is defined as one or more people (not necessarily
related) whose usual residence (4 days/week or more) is at the same address. These
householders share cooking facilities, a living room or sitting room or dining area.

Primary outcomes

Study 1: Online Survey Cohort
1. Incidence of respiratory infection symptoms, including COVID-19 disease case
definitions.
2. Effectiveness and impact of recommended COVID-19 control measures including
testing, isolation, social distancing, respiratory and hand hygiene measures on
risk of respiratory infection.
3. Frequency of adherence with public-health recommendations for these control
measures.
4. Proportion of community infections that result in hospital admissions and death.

Study 2: Laboratory testing sub-cohort
1. Incidence of PCR confirmed COVID-19.
2. Incidence of PCR confirmed COVID-19 in those with non-respiratory
presentations.
3. Incidence of hospitalisation among PCR confirmed COVID-19 cases.
4. Proportion of individuals with SARS-CoV-2 antibodies acquired through natural
infection to pandemic coronavirus.
5. Proportion of individuals with cross-reacting antibodies to seasonal
coronaviruses acquiring (or not) SARS-CoV-2.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6. Household secondary attack rates.
7. Protective effect of antibodies on infection and re-infection as well as the severity
and spectrum of presentation.

Recruitment
We will use the Royal Mail Post Office Address File to generate a list of residential
address lists from which households can be sampled and sent Virus Watch recruitment
postcards to. The proposed initial sample design is a single-stage stratified probability
sample where implicit stratification is employed to benefit from the precision gains that
stratified sampling can bring. Within each region, residential addresses are sorted by (a)
quintiles of Index of Multiple Deprivation 2019 (IMD), (b) within quintiles by Local
Authorities, (c) postcodes and (d) address. We will perform this in the 9 Government
Office Regions of England as well as Wales (10 study regions in total).

We will assess recruitment rates and the representativeness of this initial sample
following the mail out of 50,000 postcards. If recruitment is lower than expected or
under-representative of the national population, we will redesign our recruitment
campaign to include a range of methods in order to build the cohort. This mixed
recruitment strategy will be flexible and use a variety of methods including social media,
study leaflet drops, text messaging, personalised letters and incentives. Social media
adverts will be used to inform individuals about the study and direct them to our website
http://ucl-virus-watch.net/ where they can read the participant information sheets and
consent to taking part. Digital invitations will also be created for sharing via WhatsApp.
Text messages and postal letters inviting patients from their General Practitioner clinics
will be organised via Local Clinical Research Networks.[7] We will also work with trusted
community partners and religious organisations to promote recruitment into the study.

In order for a household to be enrolled, they will require an internet connection (Wi-Fi,
fixed or on a mobile phone), email address, and all household members must agree to
take part. Households will nominate a lead householder who will submit study
questionnaires. Up until December 2020, the lead householder will need to be able to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

read English to support other household members in survey completion. From
December 2020 onwards, online surveys will be translated into multiple languages and
this will no longer be an inclusion criteria. A household is defined as one or more people
(not necessarily related) whose usual residence (4 days/week or more) is at the same
address. These householders share cooking facilities, and may share a living room or
sitting room or dining area if available. Households with more than six members will not
be eligible for the study - this criteria was set due to limitations of the REDCap survey
infrastructure which did not function correctly when attempting to work with household
sizes of greater than six during our pilot testing of the survey.

Virus Watch is powered for our primary aims in study 2 and the estimation of
population-level symptomatic COVID-19 attack rate over time. Based on an estimated
clinical attack rate of 30% of whom 20% need hospitalisation, and 0.5% die we expect
the following number of outcome events in our cohort of 10,000 individuals in study 2:
3000 COVID-19 illnesses, 600 hospitalised cases, and 15 deaths. At one month into the
outbreak we would be able to detect a 1.7-fold greater risk of disease in a population
subgroup that constitutes 1/5 of the population, and by 2 months the detectable relative
risk would be only 1.2. At one month we could detect a 4% hospital admission rate
amongst cases with 95% CI of 0.5-6.8, and by 2 months the confidence intervals would
narrow to 3.1-4.1. We have used estimates of the expected number of events over time
to provide an indication of the fact that the cohort is sufficiently large to provide valuable
information through the course of the pandemic. Sample size calculations have been
informed by a realistic assessment of what we can achieve based on our previous
experience[4,6]. For the serology cohort of 3000 people from minority ethnic
backgrounds we assume a modest design effect (DE) due to household and
geographical clustering, and 500 participants for six different minority ethnic
backgrounds to enable the measurement of a cumulative incidence of 10% with 95%
confidence intervals of 3% by each minority ethnic group.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Participant materials and incentives

Participant information sheets will be held on our study website. In order to participate,
the whole household must take part. Each adult participant will need to read through
study information, and provide online informed consent for themselves and any children
they are legally responsible for. Children aged 6-9 and 10-15 years respectively will
also be asked to read through age specific study participant information sheets and
provide online informed assent. For children aged 5 and under, parents/guardians will
consent on their behalf. Copies of translated consent questions will be provided where
possible for those unable to read English. Informed consent data will be securely stored
in UCL’s Data Safe Haven which has been certified to the ISO27001 information
security standard and conforms to NHS Digital's Data Security and Protection Toolkit.
Local study teams will re-consent participants face to face, prior to undertaking blood
sampling, and adult participants in study 2 will be offered a £10 voucher to reimburse
travel costs. We will seek ethical approval for the use of recruitment incentives if levels
of recruitment are lower than expected.

Data collection and follow-up
Study 1: Online Survey Cohort
The online survey cohort will collect data and follow up participants through six different
sources. Survey data will be collected using Research Electronic Data Capture
(REDCap) electronic data capture tools hosted on the UCL Data Safe Haven.[8]
REDCap is a secure, web-based application for research studies. The UCL Data Safe
Haven provides a technical solution for storing, handling and analysing identifiable data.
It has been certified to the ISO27001 information security standard and conforms to
NHS Digital’s Data Security and Protection Toolkit.

1) Baseline Survey. The Lead Householder will be asked to complete an online
baseline survey for each member of their household. Information collected includes:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

demographics, occupation, income, ethnicity, country of birth, year of entry to UK,
chronic medical conditions, medications, pregnancy status, vaccines, mode of transport
to work, any previous contact with someone with COVID-19, previous symptoms of
COVID-19-like illness and infection-prevention behaviours such as social distancing and
hand hygiene.

2) Illness Surveys. Participants will be followed-up weekly via an email with a link to an
illness survey. This is a weekly survey of the presence or absence of symptoms that
could indicate COVID-19 disease including respiratory, general infection symptoms or
gastrointestinal symptoms. During illness, prospective daily symptom recording, quality
of life, health seeking behaviour (NHS 111, GP in person, GP by phone, A&E,
Pharmacy, Hospital), treatments, and NHS investigations will be recorded. This survey
will also include any respiratory and hygiene measures, self-isolation, activities and
social contact, travel and face mask use. The survey includes questions to the
household on activities undertaken in the week prior to symptom onset. The weekly
survey will also be used to capture test results received from outside the study and
requests to self isolate eg. via the UK Test-Trace-Isolate system.

3) Monthly Surveys. A number of questions will be asked every month. The monthly
surveys also provide flexibility to ask additional questions (eg. behavioural changes) to
reflect any new government directives on social distancing, testing, contact tracing, and
vaccine delivery. Core questions will also allow us to follow up reasons for any nonresponse in a given month- (e.g. because of illness, hospitalisation or holiday). We will
also ask about online health information seeking, social distancing, including recent
(week before) contacts, activities, places visited and hand & respiratory hygiene. We will
ask about finances, employment, and mental health to see how the COVID-19 response
is affecting participants’ wellbeing and ability to work. We will ask about access to
healthcare for non–COVID-19 health problems to explore the indirect health impacts of
the pandemic. We will ask about any COVID-19 PCR or antibody test results performed
outside the study and not already reported through baseline surveys. We will ask about
influenza vaccine uptake and COVID-19 vaccination intentions and uptake.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4) Data Linkage. NHS Digital will undertake quarterly data linkage between cohort 1
and Hospital Episode Statistics (HES), which includes admitted patient and critical care
episodes, outpatient department bookings, and emergency care contacts. This linkage
will also include Office for National Statistics mortality data and virology testing data
routinely collected by Public Health England, Public Health Wales, and the Department
of Health and Social Care through ‘Pillar 1’ (testing in hospital patients and health and
care workers) and ‘Pillar 2’ (community testing). These data sources will be linked to
the cohort using name, NHS numbers, dates of birth and postal address. Identifying
variables will be removed before the linked data are transferred back to UCL for
analysis. These data linkages will continue for up to 5 years after the end of the study
as we anticipate COVID-19 will become a recurring winter infection and we wish to
understand its impact on health services in subsequent years. These linkage studies will
identify any participants that have been admitted to hospital or died due to causes that
could be directly or indirectly linked to the COVID-19 pandemic. Indirect causes include
those related to limitations in healthcare access during the pandemic. Reductions in the
use of routine health services will also be monitored via linkage to HES data.

5) Geo-location Tracking. All adult participants will be asked about optional consent to
use a secure geo-location tracking app (Tracker for ArcGIS) installed on their mobile
phone for the duration of the study.

6) Home antibody finger prick tests. 5000 members of the online cohort who are not
part of the Laboratory testing sub-cohort (including 2500 minority ethnic and 2500 White
British people) will be offered home finger prick antibody testing kits as soon as
available after the first wave of the pandemic and after the second wave of the
pandemic.

Study 2: Laboratory testing sub-cohort
All participants agreeing to take part in the main cohort (study 1) will be asked to
provide consent to be contacted and invited to participate in one of the three laboratory
testing sub-groups. This will enable a cohort of 10,000 individuals selected from the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

main cohort of 42,500 individuals to be maximally representative of the population of
England and Wales. All participants taking part in study 2 will be asked to use the
national test, trace and isolation system in addition to providing samples as part of Virus
Watch.

Study 2 will consist of three groups that will follow different schedules of antibody testing
and nasal/throat swabs for PCR testing.

Group 1 (n=7000):
With data from this group we aim to identify infection in those with a wide range of
respiratory symptoms. Participants will be asked to submit a nose/throat swab if they
experience two consecutive days of: fever (>37.8), feeling feverish, or new persistent
cough, or loss or altered sense of smell or taste (COVID-19 suspected case definition),
or shortness of breath, or ear pain or change in hearing, or sore throat, or sneezing, or
blocked nose, or runny nose, or wheeze or sinus pain or congestion (other respiratory
manifestations).

Group 2 (n=1000):
This group aims to identify the importance of non-respiratory presentations. Participants
will be asked to submit a self-taken nasal/throat swab for PCR identification of COVID19 and other respiratory viruses if:

● Either - two consecutive days of respiratory symptoms (e.g. cough, runny nose,
sneezing, shortness of breath, sore throat, blocked nose, sinus pain or
congestion, ear pain or change in hearing, wheezing, loss of or altered sense of
taste or sense of smell).

● OR – two consecutive days of gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g. diarrhoea/loose
stools, abdominal pain, nausea or vomiting, loss of appetite).

● OR - two consecutive days of general infection symptoms (e.g. feeling feverish,
having a high temperature, feelings of severe unexplained tiredness, generalised
muscle or joint aches)

Group 3 (n = 2000):

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

This group aims to identify the extent of household transmission. Participants will be
asked to submit a nose/throat swab if they experience two consecutive days of cough or
fever or loss of sense of taste or smell. Household contacts of the index case will also
be asked to submit a swab on the same day whether or not they have symptoms.

If any of the swabs indicate SARS-COV-2 infection, all household members will be
asked to repeat the swab on Day 7 and Day 14. If there are no new SARS-COV-2
cases in the household arising from swabs on Day 7 and 14 (assumed secondary
cases) then all household members will be asked to undertake a home finger prick
antibody test on Day 21. If there is one or more secondary cases in the household then
the entire household will be asked to take an additional swab on day 21 and then
undertake the fingerprick antibody tests on Day 28.

End of follow-up
Online participant follow-up will end in May 2021 although depending on the
progression of COVID-19 we may ask participants to continue in the study for longer.
Participants will be sent an exit survey via email which will also ask participants for
permission to be contacted for involvement in future related research. Participants will
be contacted to arrange a second blood sample collection from May 2021. Follow-up
through data linkage with Hospital Episode Statistics and Mortality data will continue for
5 years after the end of the study.

Laboratory testing
Antibody testing
Study 2 will be using two different types of antibody tests. First, full blood serology will
be taken between October 2020 and January 2021. We will use experienced health
care professionals, including research nurses from the NIHR Clinical Research
Networks.[9] Depending on local circumstances, visits to participants’ homes to take
blood may also be arranged. Children aged 15 years or less can opt out of having their

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

blood taken but will be offered a finger prick antibody test conducted by a healthcare
worker instead. All participants from laboratory group 3 will additionally be offered a
fingerprick antibody test at the same time as blood taking. From May 2021 until
September 2021, we will invite all participants back for full blood tests or, for children
who do not wish to have a full bleed, healthcare worker-delivered finger prick based
antibody tests.

Families of children who have not been able to attend for a blood test, or for a
healthcare worker-delivered finger prick antibody test, will be provided with postal kits to
perform these at home. We also plan to use finger prick antibody testing where local
clinics are no longer able to undertake full blood tests due to COVID-19 travel
restrictions. Extremely clinically vulnerable participants will be sent home fingerprick
tests instead of being asked to provide a serological sample.
Virus detection
Participants will post swab samples for PCR assays of COVID-19, and subsequent
testing for influenza virus, seasonal coronavirus, rhinovirus and respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). When COVID-19 is identified we will also undertake whole genome
sequencing of the virus. Samples for COVID-19 diagnostics will be handled and
processed according to the NHS and UCL guidance on sample handling during the
COVID-19 pandemic.

COVID-19 PCR and serology results will be returned to participants via text and email
message systems. These messages will include links to official support, information and
advice from NHS and PHE as well as advice on how to interpret results based on
current evidence. In laboratory group 3, where positive test results will trigger further
testing of the household, the results email will also include details explaining the
additional testing requests.

We are currently under a legal duty to notify Public Health England (PHE)/National
Institute of Health Protection/Public Health Wales of positive COVID-19 PCR test
results. The legal duty to report positive COVID-19 test results will be met by using

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

existing reporting systems used by the laboratories undertaking PCR swab testing for
the study. Positive COVID-19 samples will be stored for later sequencing (separate
funding to be sought).

Statistical analysis

Our primary analyses during the winter 2020/21 will focus on estimating age-specific
weekly rates of symptoms and PCR-confirmed COVID-19 illness and hospitalisation.
For this analysis we will use appropriate regression models that account for clustering
by household and we will explore the use of stratification or weighting of the sample by
age and region as necessary to give nationally representative estimates. Weekly rates
will be expressed per 100,000 person-weeks for ease of comparison with national
surveillance data.

We will examine the proportion of the population infected during the first wave (e.g. Feb
2020 to Sept 2020) and second and potentially future pandemics waves. We will
estimate the percentage of the population infected by calculating age and wave-specific
rates of serological infection and PCR-confirmed disease per 100 person-seasons. A
person-season will be defined by the epidemic curve in the cohort and therefore rates
will account for differential follow-up time during each epidemic peak. In these analyses
we will examine risk factors for infection, disease, disease severity and disease
transmission.

We will estimate the proportion of serologically confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infections
leading to symptomatic disease. First, we will calculate age-adjusted attributable rates
of illness due to infection (subtracting rates of respiratory illness in non seroconverters
from those in seroconverters). Second, we will measure the proportion of
seroconverters with PCR-confirmed COVID-19. Analyses plans will be developed prior
to conducting all analyses.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Whilst the study is being conducted, we will produce early, preliminary results for
participants, the general public and policy makers in order to inform the public health
response to the pandemic. These analyses will be reactive to the epidemiological
circumstances and are therefore not defined in this protocol.

Modelling
We will build on our experience of working with PHE, Google, and Microsoft to use
anonymous national or subnational aggregate web search engine data[10,11] to monitor
the spreading of the disease. We will use our study data as ground-truth to train realtime disease prevalence estimation algorithms. We will annotate GPS tracking data into
standard categories including time at work and home, social venues, supermarkets,
hospitals, GPs, and transport mode for incorporation in classical epidemiological
analyses. Integrating the linked survey data, we will develop multi-level spatio-temporal
transmission models predicting the impact of various social distancing strategies.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Patient and public involvement
Due to the urgent nature of this study, we did not involve participants in its original
design. We have previously conducted PPI to support similar community cohort studies
of acute infections using similar methodologies. We have engaged the Young Persons'
Advisory Group for research at Great Ormond Street Hospital to provide feedback on
our Children's Participant Information Sheets. We will provide opportunities for survey
participants to comment on survey methodology at the first monthly survey and consider
revisions based on this. At the baseline survey, and each month, we will ask
participants what questions are important to them (in relation to COVID-19 epidemiology
and response), and what research questions they would like us to answer. We are also
monitoring participant queries through our study email address and using these to refine
methodology where necessary. We have worked with the Race Equality Foundation and
Doctors of the World in advising on the inclusion of people from minority ethnic
backgrounds in Virus Watch and have set up an advisory group to inform the ongoing
design and dissemination of health equity aspects of Virus Watch. This advisory group
(consisting of lay members of the public, community leaders, charities and policy
organisation) will guide our health equity analyses and steer us on its implications for
people, communities and policy.

Data sharing and access
We aim to share aggregate data from this project on our website and via a “Findings so
far” section on our website - https://ucl-virus-watch.net/. We will also be sharing
individual record level data with personal identifiers removed on a research data sharing
service such as the UK Data Archive. In sharing the data we will work within the
principles set out in the UKRI Guidance on best practice in the management of research
data. https://www.ukri.org/files/legacy/documents/rcukcommonprinciplesondatapolicypdf/. Access to use of the data whilst research is being conducted will be managed by
the Chief Investigators (ACH and RWA) in accordance with the principles set out in the
UKRI guidance on best practice in the management of research data. It is the intention
that the data arising from this research will initially be collected, cleaned and validated

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

by the UCL research team and once this has been completed will be shared for wider
use. We aim to make subsets of the data more rapidly available both on our study
website and via the public facing dashboard during the ongoing phase of data
collection. In line with Principle 5 of the UKRI guidance on best practice in the
management of research data, we plan to release data in batches as they become
available or as updated results are published. Individual record data linked using NHS
Digital will not be shared, only aggregated results. HES and mortality data may be
obtained from a third party and are not publicly available. These data are owned by a
third party and can be accessed by researchers applying to the Health and Social Care
Information Centre for England. We will put analysis code on publicly available
repositories to enable their reuse.

Ethics
This is a national study that has been approved by the Hampstead NHS Health
Research Authority Ethics Committee. Ethics approval number – 20/HRA/2320. The
study is compliant with the requirements of General Data Protection Regulation
(2016/679) and the Data Protection Act (2018). All investigators and study site staff will
comply with the requirements of the General Data Protection Regulation (2016/679)
with regards to the collection, storage, processing and disclosure of personal
information, and will uphold the Act’s core principles.

Contributors
Roles: Conceptualization (AH, EF, JK, PH, EN, BK, IC, VL, RAMcK, TC, AMJ, SM, JG, RG, AR,
RWA) Investigation, Methodology (All authors), Project Administration (AH, EF, JK, VN, SB, TB,
AA, PH, LW, WLEF, CG, PP, MSh, AMDN, EN, MSp, RWA) , Writing – Original Draft
Preparation (All Authors), Software (VN, TB, SB, RWA), Resources (AH, EF, JK, PH, EN, BK,
IC, VL, RAMcK, TC, AMJ, SM, JG, RG, AR, RWA), Writing – Review & Editing (All Authors).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Funding
The research costs for the study have been supported by the MRC Grant Ref: MC_PC
19070 awarded to UCL on 30 March 2020 and MRC Grant Ref: MR/V028375/1
awarded on 17 August 2020. The study also received $15,000 of advertising credit to
support a pilot social media recruitment campaign on 18th August 2020.

Competing interests
ACH serves on the UK New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group.
AMJ was a Governor of Wellcome Trust from 2011-18 and is Chair of the Committee for
Strategic Coordination for Health of the Public Research.

1

Official UK Coronavirus Dashboard. https://coronavirus.data.gov.uk/ (accessed 30 Nov
2020).

2

Statistics. Statistics » COVID-19 Daily Deaths.
https://www.england.nhs.uk/statistics/statistical-work-areas/covid-19-daily-deaths/
(accessed 30 Nov 2020).

3

Coronavirus (COVID-19).
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsand
diseases (accessed 30 Nov 2020).

4

Fragaszy EB, Warren-Gash C, Wang L, et al. Cohort Profile: The Flu Watch Study. Int J
Epidemiol 2017;46:e18. doi:10.1093/ije/dyv370

5

Hayward AC, Fragaszy EB, Bermingham A, et al. Comparative community burden and
severity of seasonal and pandemic influenza: results of the Flu Watch cohort study. Lancet
Respir Med 2014;2:445–54. doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(14)70034-7

6

Smith CM, Conolly A, Fuller C, et al. Symptom reporting, healthcare-seeking behaviour and
antibiotic use for common infections: protocol for Bug Watch, a prospective community
cohort study. BMJ Open 2019;9:e028676. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028676

7

Clinical Research Network. https://www.nihr.ac.uk/explore-nihr/support/clinical-researchnetwork.htm (accessed 30 Nov 2020).

8

Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap)--a
metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research
informatics support. J Biomed Inform 2009;42:377–81. doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010

9

Clinical Research Network. https://www.nihr.ac.uk/explore-nihr/support/clinical-researchnetwork.htm (accessed 30 Nov 2020).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.15.20248254; this version posted December 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10 Wagner M, Lampos V, Cox IJ, et al. The added value of online user-generated content in
traditional methods for influenza surveillance. Sci Rep 2018;8:13963. doi:10.1038/s41598018-32029-6
11 Lampos V, Majumder MS, Yom-Tov E, et al. Tracking COVID-19 using online search. arXiv
[cs.SI]. 2020.http://arxiv.org/abs/2003.08086v10

