medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Vitamins D2 and D3 have overlapping but different effects on human gene
expression revealed through analysis of blood transcriptomes in a randomised
double-blind placebo-controlled food-fortification trial
Louise R. Durrant,1, 2, Giselda Buccaa,b, 1,3, Andrew Heskethb, 1, Carla Möller-Leveta,
Laura Tripkovica, Huihai Wua, Kathryn H. Harta, John C. Mathersc, Ruan M. Elliotta,
Susan A. Lanham-Newa & Colin P. Smitha,b, 3*
a

Department of Nutritional Sciences, School of Biosciences and Medicine, Faculty of

Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
b

School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton,

UK
c

Human Nutrition Research Centre, Population Health Sciences Institute, Newcastle

University, UK
1

These authors contributed equally

2

Current address: Yakult UK Ltd., Anteros, Odyssey Business Park, West End

Road, South Ruislip, HA4 6QQ; formerly known as Louise Wilson.
3

Current address: School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Sciences, University of

Brighton, Brighton, UK
*For correspondence: Prof Colin P. Smith, School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular
Sciences, University of Brighton, Huxley Building, Moulsecoomb, Brighton, BN2 4GJ,
UK; Tel. +44 (0)1273 642048. Email: genomics@cpsmith.net
Key words: Vitamin D3, vitamin D2, 25-hydroxyvitamin D, human transcriptome,
immunity, ethnic differences, Covid-19
Abstract
For the first time, we report the influence of vitamin D2 and vitamin D3 on genomewide gene expression in whole blood from healthy women representing two ethnic
groups, white European and South Asian. In this randomised placebo-controlled trial,
participants were given daily physiological doses (15 µg) of either vitamin D2 or D3
for 12 weeks and changes in the transcriptome were compared relative to the
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

transcriptome at baseline. While there was some overlap in the repertoire of
1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

differentially expressed genes after supplementation with each vitamin D source,
most changes were specific to either vitamin D3 or vitamin D2, suggesting that each
form of the vitamin may have different effects on human physiology. Notably,
following vitamin D3 supplementation, the majority of changes in gene expression
reflected a down-regulation in the activity of genes, many encoding components of
the innate and adaptive immune systems. These are consistent with the emerging
concept that vitamin D orchestrates a shift in the immune system towards a more
tolerogenic status. Moreover, divergent changes were observed following
supplementation with either vitamin D3 or vitamin D2 for gene expression associated
with type 1 and type 2 interferon activity. This is particularly intriguing as interferons
play a critical role in the innate response to infection and aberrant type 1 interferon
signalling is implicated in severe COVID-19 disease. The observed differences in
gene expression after supplementation with vitamin D2 compared with vitamin D3
warrant a more intensive investigation of the biological effects of the two forms of
vitamin D on human physiology.
Author Contributions
CPS and SL-N conceived of the study. CPS, GB and SL-N supervised the project.
LD, GB and LT carried out the experiments, AH, GB, CPS, LD, CM-L, HW and RME
analyzed and interpreted the transcriptome data, CPS, AH and GB wrote the first
draft of the manuscript, AH generated the figures and all authors contributed to the
final manuscript.
Significance statements
This study suggests that the influence of vitamins D2 and D3 on human physiology
may not be the same, as deduced from differences in gene expression within whole
blood.
South Asian participants were found to respond differently to vitamin D
supplementation at the transcriptome level from white Europeans.
The differentially expressed immune pathways identified in this study are consistent
with vitamin D orchestrating a more tolerogenic immune status and this could be
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

relevant in the context of the severity of immune response to viral infections such as
Covid-19.
The potential relevance of this study to severe Covid-19 disease is highlighted by our
observed enhancement of type 1 interferon signalling by vitamin D3, but not vitamin
D2.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Vitamin D is a pro-hormone that is critical for good health. While vitamin D’s function
in maintaining the musculo-skeletal system is best understood, it fulfils myriad roles
in human physiology, including maintaining a healthy immune system (Prietl et al.,
2013, Martens et al., 2020). Vitamin D deficiency (defined as serum concentrations
of 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) below 25 nmol/L) or inadequacy (defined as
serum level of 25(OH)D below 50 nmol/L) is considered a global pandemic and a
public health issue of great importance in the human population, especially in older
people, individuals not exposed to sufficient sunlight and, importantly, ethnic minority
groups with dark skin tone (Kohlmeier, 2020, Lanham-New et al., 2020). Vitamin D
deficiency is considered to have many detrimental effects on human health which
include increased risk of osteoporotic and stress fractures, increased risk of
developing cardiovascular diseases and some cancers, and poor modulation of the
immune system (Holick, 2007, Bouillon, 2018). Low vitamin D status is associated
with higher mortality, including death from cancer (Zhang et al., 2019).
Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) is produced in the skin by the action of ultraviolet B
radiation from the sun. Following two successive hydroxylation steps, in the liver and
kidney, respectively, the active form of the vitamin, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25(OH)D3) binds to the intracellular vitamin D receptor (VDR) and, in complex with
the retinoid X receptor (RXR), the heterodimer regulates expression of hundreds of
genes through the vitamin D response element (VDRE) (Long et al., 2015). Vitamin
D can also be obtained from foods or as a supplement. Both the plant/fungusderived vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol) and the animal-derived D3 forms are available as
nutritional supplements. Both can be hydroxylated into their active forms and bind to
the VDR with similar affinity, but there are differences in their catabolism and in their
binding affinity to vitamin D binding protein (DBP), the major vitamin D transport
protein in blood. Vitamin D2 binds DBP with lower affinity and is catabolised faster
(Hollis, 1984, Houghton and Vieth, 2006).
The functional equivalence, or otherwise, of vitamins D2 and D3 for human health has
been a subject of much debate in recent years, with some authors suggesting that
the two compounds have equal efficacy while others provide evidence that vitamin
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

D3 increases circulating serum 25(OH)D concentration more efficiently than vitamin
D2 (Tripkovic et al., 2012, Wilson et al., 2017, Biancuzzo et al., 2010a, Biancuzzo et
al., 2010b, Lanham-New et al., 2010). Current guidance given to the general public
by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH), the UK Department of Health and
Social Care, and other government bodies around the world lack acknowledgement
that the two forms of vitamin D are not considered equivalent or equally effective
when used at nutritional (physiological) doses, while at high doses vitamin D2 is less
potent. The NIH state that most evidence indicates that vitamin D3 increases serum
25(OH)D levels to a greater extent and maintains these higher levels longer than
vitamin D2, even though both forms are well absorbed in the gut (ODS, 2020).
Although vitamin D is best known for its role in maintaining bone health and calcium
homeostasis, it also exerts a broad range of extra-skeletal effects on cellular
physiology and on the immune system (Pilz et al., 2019, Schwalfenberg, 2011,
Christakos et al., 2016, Rosen et al., 2012) and multiple studies have linked poor
vitamin D status with the pathogenesis of immune mediated inflammatory diseases
(Damoiseaux and Smolders, 2018). Vitamin D is essential for human health and it is
recommended that individuals maintain serum concentrations of at least 25 nmol/L of
25(OH)D (the accepted biomarker of systemic vitamin D status), throughout the year
and throughout the life course (SACN, 2016). However, it can be difficult to sustain
such levels of serum 25(OH)D year-round from diet and sunlight alone, particularly
amongst ‘at-risk’ groups, such as those with limited sun exposure or those with
darker skin tone living in northern latitudes (above 40ºN).
In acute studies comparing the efficacy of vitamins D2 and D3 in raising serum
25(OH)D concentration, vitamin D2 is less effective than D3 when given as single
bolus (Tripkovic et al., 2012). However, the findings from studies following the daily
administration of D2 or D3 over longer time-periods are more equivocal, with clinical
trials showing higher efficacy of D3 (Zittermann et al., 2014, Tripkovic et al., 2017) or
equal efficacy (Holick et al., 2008). In a recent meta-analysis, supplementation with
vitamins D2 and D3 were found equally effective in raising 25(OH)D concentrations in
infants up to 1 year of age (Zittermann et al., 2020). It should be noted that
supplementation with one form of vitamin D can reduce circulating concentrations of
the other form. For example, our recent comparative trial of D2 versus D3 revealed
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

that serum 25(OH)D3 concentration was reduced over the 12-week intervention in
participants given vitamin D2, compared with the average 12-week concentration in
participants given placebo ((Tripkovic et al., 2017), see Fig. 1C, for example). The
implications of such reciprocal depletion remain to be explored.
There is limited understanding of the effects of vitamin D supplementation on gene
expression in vivo in humans because of the diversity of experimental designs used.
This includes: (i) diverse sampling intervals, ranging from hours to years following
vitamin D supplementation (Berlanga-Taylor et al., 2018, Neme et al., 2019); (ii) use
of substantially different doses ranging from physiological (moderate) to supraphysiological doses; and (iii) relatively small numbers of participants were recruited
so that most studies were considerably underpowered (Neme et al., 2019, Hosseinnezhad et al., 2013). Currently, there is no robust evidence, from in vivo human
genome-wide expression analysis, about which specific cellular pathways are
influenced by vitamin D supplementation. Moreover, the influence of vitamin D2, as
distinct from vitamin D3, on gene expression in humans has not yet been evaluated,
even though vitamin D2 is used widely as a supplement and food fortificant.
We have addressed this gap in knowledge by investigating gene expression in a
relatively large cohort of healthy white European and South Asian women who
participated in a randomised double-blind placebo-controlled trial that compared the
relative efficacy of vitamins D2 and D3 in raising serum 25(OH)D concentration. The
study concluded that vitamin D3 was superior to vitamin D2 in raising serum 25(OH)D
concentration (Tripkovic et al., 2017). As an integral part of the original study design,
we also investigated gene expression in the participants over the 12-week trial
period. This allowed us to examine the effects of vitamin D supplementation on the
transcriptome and to determine whether these effects might differ depending on
supplementation with vitamin D2 compared with vitamin D3. We therefore sampled
blood at the beginning, middle and end of the 12-week intervention and quantified
changes in the whole blood transcriptome. Surprisingly, we observed that the two
vitamins exerted overlapping but different effects on the human blood transcriptome.
Our findings support the hypothesis that the biological effects of vitamin D2 and D3
may differ in humans and suggest that a more comprehensive analysis of the
biological effects of the two forms of vitamin D on human physiology is warranted. In
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

this context, it is important to note that a recent meta-analysis of vitamin D
supplementation trials found that reduced cancer mortality was seen only with
vitamin D3 supplementation, not with vitamin D2 supplementation, and indicated that
all-cause mortality was significantly lower in trials with vitamin D3 supplementation
than in trials with vitamin D2 (Zhang et al., 2019).
Results
The study volunteers were South Asian (SA) and white European (WE) women
based in the United Kingdom, aged between 20 and 64 years (n=335; (Tripkovic et
al., 2017)) and participation was for 12 weeks over the winter months (October to
March, in Surrey, UK; latitude, 51°14' N). Serum measurements, including
concentrations of total 25(OH)D, 25(OH)D2 and 25(OH)D3, were determined from
fasting blood samples taken at the start (baseline defined as Visit 1 (V1)) and at
weeks 6 (V2) and 12 (V3). To determine whether changes in serum 25(OH)D
concentration as a result of vitamin D supplementation are associated with
physiological changes at the level of gene expression, we investigated the whole
blood transcriptome from a representative subset of the study participants (n=98)
using total RNA isolated from V1 and V3 blood samples and Agilent Human Whole
Genome 8´ 60K v2 DNA microarrays (Fig. 1). Participants for transcriptome analysis
were selected to provide comparable numbers between the placebo and the two
vitamin D treatment groups, covering the full range of serum responses to
supplementation within the D2 and D3 treatment groups, as judged from the
measured changes in serum 25(OH)D2 or 25(OH)D3 concentration between V1 and
V3 (Supplementary Data File 1).
Metadata for the transcriptome analysis cohort
Following microarray data quality control, transcriptome data were available for both
the V1 and V3 samples of 97 study participants (Fig. 1b); the RNA from one
participant failed quality control and was excluded. Similar to data reported
previously for the entire study cohort (Tripkovic et al., 2017), the sub-set of
participants in the present study showed increased concentrations of 25(OH)D2 and
25(OH)D3 only after supplementation with vitamin D2 and vitamin D3, respectively,
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

and higher total 25(OH)D in both treatment groups (Fig. 1c). In the vitamin D3
treatment groups the mean 25(OH)D3 serum levels rose by 59% (WE) and 116%
(SA) over the 12-week intervention. Conversely, mean serum 25(OH)D3
concentrations fell across the 12 weeks of the study in the placebo groups who did
not receive additional vitamin D; 25(OH)D3 baseline vitamin D levels in the SA ethnic
group tended to be lower than for the WE group and dropped, respectively, by 23%
and 29% relative to baseline V1 (Fig. 1c; Supplementary Data File 1). It is notable
that, in the vitamin D2 treatment group, serum 25(OH)D3 concentration decreased to
a greater extent over the 12-week period, by 52% (SA) and 53% (WE); the
implications of this are considered further in the Discussion. Serum 25(OH)D2 was
low in the absence of specific supplementation, typically less than 5 nmol/L (152/162
samples analysed). Serum calcium concentration, appropriately adjusted for serum
albumin concentration, was maintained within a normal clinical range across all
sample groups, while the concentration of parathyroid hormone (PTH) was stable
between V1 and V3 only within the SA placebo group, the WE vitamin D2 and WE
vitamin D3 intervention groups. PTH concentrations showed an increase at V3
compared with V1 in the WE placebo group, but a decrease in both the vitamin D2
and D3 intervention groups in the SA ethnic cohort.
Effects of supplementation with either vitamin D2 or D3 on global gene
expression
Filtering of the normalised microarray data to select for probes showing signals at
least 10% above background in at least 41 (~20%) of the arrays yielded transcript
abundance data from 20,662 probes corresponding to 17,588 different genomic
features (12,436 of which were annotated with an ENTREZ gene identifier). Using
the filtered data, we identified significant differences in the transcriptional responses
occurring across the 12-week V1 to V3 period of the study between the vitamin D2,
vitamin D3 and placebo treatment groups for each ethnic cohort and, in a separate
analysis, to determine significant changes within each group between the V3 and V1
sampling points (Fig. 2; Supplementary Data File 2). The former was tested in a
‘difference-in-difference’ analysis according to the generalised null hypothesis
[treatment1.V3 – treatment1.V1] - [treatment2.V3 – treatment2.V1] = 0 (Fig. 2a, rows
7-12), and the latter using treatment.V3 – treatment.V1 = 0 (Fig. 2a, rows 1-6).
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

No significant changes in probe signals (adj.P.Val<=0.05) were identified in the
‘difference-in-difference’ analysis for the data for the WE ethnic group, but five were
found in the corresponding analysis of the SA cohort (Fig. 2a). Furthermore,
difference-in-difference analysis of the entire study data, ignoring ethnicity, did not
yield statistically significant changes between the D2 or D3 treatment groups and the
placebo control (data not shown). We note that another ‘difference-in-difference’
study on the influence of vitamin D on gene expression (the BEST-D trial) failed to
identify any significant changes in gene expression following long-term vitamin D
treatment in a Caucasian cohort (Berlanga-Taylor et al., 2018). The observed log2
fold-change (log2FC) in signal abundances between V3 and V1 in the study typically
fall well within +/- 1, and in such a context it is likely that the sample sizes used
within the study restrict our ability to reliably identify individual gene expression
responses using this highly conservative approach. We consider that inter-individual
differences in human populations are likely to hinder detection of small statistically
significant gene expression changes across treatment groups from microarrayderived data; however, statistically significant differences are detected when
evaluating gene expression changes within an individual across time (as described
below where we examine paired observations with two time points per subject). The
five significant changes that were identified as occurring in response to treatment of
the SA ethnic group with vitamin D3, relative to the placebo, are summarised in
Supplementary Fig. 1. These are driven primarily by the marked changes in the
placebo group between the V1 and V3 sampling points, and may be associated with
the sustained low serum 25(OH)D3, or high PTH, concentrations observed in this
group of subjects. One of these differentially expressed genes encodes the cAMP
response element binding protein CREB1 (Fig. 2b) which is part of the cAMP-PKACREB signaling pathway in bone cells which contributes to the regulation of skeletal
metabolism in response to PTH concentrations (Zhang et al., 2011).
In contrast to the difference-in-difference analysis, the direct within-group
comparisons of transcript abundance measurements at V3 versus V1 per subject
identified large numbers of significant changes in gene expression, most notably in
the WE D2, WE D3 and WE placebo groups (Fig. 2a and c, Supplementary Data
File 2). These significant gene expression changes in the WE ethnic cohort arising in
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

the vitamin D treatment groups are considered in more detail below. While there is
some overlap in the groups of differentially expressed genes, only 13% of downregulated differentially expressed genes (102 of 774) were common between the two
vitamin D treatment groups, while 28% (216 of 774) and 59% (456 of 774) were
uniquely down-regulated by D2 and D3, respectively (excluding those additionally
down-regulated in the placebo group over the equivalent 12-week intervention)(Fig
2c). As previously noted above, the serum 25(OH)D3 concentration fell over the 12week intervention period in the vitamin D2-treated group; thus, changes in gene
expression observed in this group could a priori either be due to the influence of
vitamin D2 itself, or could be attributable to the depletion of the endogenous
25(OH)D3 reserves. It was therefore important to have included comparative
transcriptomic analysis of the placebo group in this study to distinguish gene
expression changes resulting from vitamin D2 per se from those changes arising due
to the depletion of 25(OH)D3 levels in this vitamin D2 treatment group.
It is notable that expression of a large number of genes was altered between the first
and last visits (V1 to V3) in the non-treated placebo group. While some of these
changes will be attributable to the effects of the vitamin D depletion observed in this
group over the course of the study, there is significant over-representation of genes
known to exhibit seasonal differences in gene expression (Dopico et al., 2015)
(Supplementary Fig. 2). There is however no unique association of seasonally
expressed genes with the data for the WE placebo group; a similar significant
enrichment is also observed for the significant changes in gene expression identified
in the WE D2 and WE D3 treatment groups (Supplementary Fig. 2) and therefore it
is unlikely that this apparent seasonal effect exclusively reflects vitamin D-specific
effects. There was no overlap between genes significantly down-regulated
exclusively in the placebo group and those significantly up-regulated exclusively in
the vitamin D treatment groups (or vice versa). Consistent with the 12-week period of
the study, seasonal changes in gene expression are therefore a background feature
of all the data collected, and is therefore a factor that needs to be considered when
undertaking such time course studies.
In the group of probe signals with significantly reduced abundance in the V3 samples
compared with V1 in the data for the vitamin D2 and D3 supplemented participants,
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

but not in the placebo participants, Probe A_33_P3275751, detecting SEC14L1 gene
transcription showed the largest decrease in response to both forms of vitamin D
(Fig. 2d). This probe was originally designed to detect ‘transcript variant 7’ and
hybridizes to a location at the 3’ end of the SEC14L1 locus, detecting several splice
variants. High expression of SEC14L1 is significantly associated with
lymphovascular invasion in breast cancer patients, where transcript abundance
correlates positively with higher grade lymph node metastasis, and poor prognostic
outcome (Sonbul et al., 2018). Its overexpression is also frequent in prostate cancer
where SEC14L1 has been identified as a potential biomarker of aggressive
progression of the disease (Agell et al., 2012, Burdelski et al., 2015).
Genes significantly down-regulated by both D2 and D3, but not placebo, are
enriched for functions associated with immune responses
Given the relatively small sample sizes used in this study it is considered more
appropriate to examine enrichment of cellular pathways among differentially
expressed genes rather than focusing on changes in individual genes. Functional
enrichment analysis of the genes represented by the probes specifically repressed
by vitamins D2 and D3 (blue data points in Fig. 2d) suggests that both supplements
have suppressive effects on the immune response in the WE ethnic group (Fig. 3
and Supplementary Data File 3). Indeed, a significant (p = 1.98E-06) proteinprotein interaction network derived from the Homo sapiens medium confidence
interactions curated in the STRING database (Szklarczyk et al., 2017b) is centred on
a highly connected group of proteins associated with the innate immune response,
neutrophil degranulation and leukocyte activation (Fig. 3a; all protein groups are
detailed in Supplementary Data File 3). This includes the histone
acetyltransferase, EP300, known to function as a transcriptional coactivator with
VDR, the vitamin D receptor protein (Fetahu et al., 2014). Collectively, these findings
are consistent with the emerging view that vitamin D exposure leads to a shift from a
pro-inflammatory to a more tolerogenic immune status (Prietl et al., 2013, Martens et
al., 2020).
Genes significantly up-regulated by both D2 and D3, but not placebo, include
components of histone H4 and the spliceosome
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

A similar analysis of the probes specifically induced by D2 and D3 (red points in Fig.
2d) produced a significant (p = 4.99E-09) protein-protein interaction network
enriched primarily for mitochondrial and ribosomal proteins, but also involving two
subunits of histone H4 and SNRPD2, a core component of the SMN-Sm complex
that mediates spliceosomal snRNP assembly (Fig. 3b).
Comparative functional enrichment analysis supports roles for vitamins D2 and
D3 in the suppression of immunity, and in chromatin modification and
spliceosome function
As a complementary approach to the functional enrichment analysis of specific
subsets of genes whose expression is altered by supplementation with vitamin D2
and D3 but not by placebo treatment, a comparative functional enrichment analysis
of all significant changes in each treatment group was performed (see Methods).
This aimed to identify functional categories that are more extensively affected by
vitamin D2, or by vitamin D3, or by both vitamins D2 and D3, than by the placebo, and
took into consideration the changes occurring in the placebo treatment group across
the 12 weeks of the study (Figs. 4 and 5; Supplementary Data File 4). Consistent
with the earlier analysis, functional categories associated with immunity and immune
response pathways are prominent among those genes repressed by vitamin D
supplementation (Fig. 4), while mitochondrial, ribosomal and spliceosomal functions
are prominent in the induced genes (Fig. 5). Although the two vitamin treatments
share many common categories identified from this analysis, the results also
highlight some differences between the respective effects of D2 or D3
supplementation. For example, ‘histone exchange’ is significant only in the vitamin
D2 up-regulated genes, and ‘chromatin modifying enzymes’ are significant only in the
D3 down-regulated genes.
Overall, the observed differences in gene expression from the blood transcriptome
presented in this study suggest that the physiological effects of vitamin D3 and D2
may be dissimilar.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Weighted gene correlation network analysis (WGCNA) identifies modules of
co-expressed genes that significantly correlate with serum markers of vitamin
D supplementation in the WE and SA ethnic groups
WGCNA quantifies both the correlations between individual pairs of genes or probes
across a data set, and also the extent to which these probes share the same
neighbours (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008). The WGCNA process creates a
dendrogram that clusters similarly abundant probes into discrete branches, and
subsequent cutting of the dendrogram yields separate co-expression modules,
representing putatively co-regulated sets of genes. The first principal component of
the expression matrix of each module defines the expression profile of the
eigengene for the module, and this can then be correlated with experimental
metadata. By allowing phenotypic traits to be associated with relatively small
numbers (tens) of module eigengenes, instead of thousands of individual variables
(i.e. gene probes), WGCNA both alleviates the multiple testing problem associated
with standard differential expression analysis and also directly relates experimental
traits to gene expression data in an unsupervised way that is agnostic of the
experimental design.
WGCNA was used to construct separate signed co-expression networks for the WE
and SA ethnic groups as described in the Methods, and Pearson correlations
between expression of the module eigengenes and serum 25(OH)D2, 25(OH)D3,
total 25(OH)D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations were calculated (Fig.
6 and Supplementary data files 6 - 8). These results therefore ignore whether the
data originates from the vitamins D2, D3 or placebo treatment groups and focus
solely on the relationship between the serum metabolite concentrations and gene
expression. A significant negative correlation was observed between 25(OH)D2
concentration and expression modules in the WE co-expression network that are
enriched for immune-associated functions (midnight blue and pink modules in Fig.
6a). This is consistent with the results from the different analytical approaches
(presented in Figs 3 and 4). Similarly, the only module exhibiting a significant
positive correlation with 25(OH)D2 (and total 25(OH)D concentration), the red
expression module, is enriched for GO categories associated with the ribosome and

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

mRNA processing (Supplementary Data File 6). No significant correlations with
serum 25(OH)D3 concentrations were detected in the WE cohort.
Interestingly, stronger and more numerous correlations were observed in the coexpression network for the SA cohort (Fig. 6b). In agreement with the WE network,
an expression module significantly associated with the ribosome (black module in
Fig. 6b) showed a general positive correlation with total 25(OH)D concentration
whereas a module enriched for histone binding (turquoise) had a significant negative
correlation with 25(OH)D concentration. Strikingly however, modules enriched for
immune response functions (midnightblue, orange, purple, yellow in Fig. 6b) were
consistently positively correlated with total 25(OH)D and usually 25(OH)D3, but not
25(OH)D2 concentrations in the SA network, and negatively correlated with PTH
concentrations. This raises the possibility that vitamin D supplementation may exert
different effects on the immune system depending on ethnicity of the individual, may
indicate that PTH status has an influence on the outcome and may reflect
physiological differences resulting from the low baseline vitamin D status in SA
women. In this context we observed that PTH concentrations at the V1 sampling
point in the SA cohort were elevated compared with those in the WE cohort (Fig. 1c).
Gene sets that respond to interferon alpha and gamma show divergent
behaviour in the vitamin D2 and D3 treatment groups of the WE cohort
The molecular signatures database (MSigDB) hallmark gene sets represent coherent
gene expression signatures related to well-defined biological states or processes
(https://www.gsea-msigdb.org/gsea/msigdb/). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
was performed to identify statistically significant (padjust<=0.05), concordant
changes in expression of these hallmark sets between the V3 and V1 sampling times
for the placebo, vitamin D2, and vitamin D3 treatment groups (Fig. 7 and
Supplementary Data File 9). Interestingly, in the WE cohort, the gene sets defining
the signature responses to interferon alpha and gamma exhibited divergent
behaviour in the vitamin D2 and D3 treatment groups. This is evident as significant
up-regulation over the course of the intervention study in the D3 group but significant
down-regulation in the D2 group. This differed from the SA cohort where significant
down-regulation was observed in the D3 group.
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Discussion
Vitamin D intake down-regulates expression of many genes including those
encoding multiple pathways involved in innate and adaptive immunity
In the present study we shed light on the physiological effects of the two forms of
vitamin D commonly used as food-fortificants or vitamin supplements. Using data
from the same intervention study, previously we reported that vitamin D3
supplementation is more effective than supplementation with vitamin D2 in raising
serum 25(OH)D concentration (Tripkovic et al., 2017). However, other studies have
reported that the two forms of vitamin D are equally effective in raising serum
25(OH)D concentration (Holick et al., 2008, Zittermann et al., 2020). In the present
study we examined gene expression changes in vivo following supplementation with
either vitamin D2 or D3 (or placebo) in healthy women from the South East of the UK.
Here we extend the results reported by Tripkovic et al. (2017) by conducting whole
genome transcriptome analysis in 97 of the original cohort of 335 women from two
ethnic backgrounds, South Asian (SA) and white European (WE). We characterised
gene expression changes in the human blood transcriptome in response to vitamin
D2 or D3 supplementation over a 12-week treatment intervention over the winter
months; the randomised groups were provided with physiological (15 µg) daily doses
of vitamin D2 or vitamin D3 fortified foods, or identical foods without added vitamin D
(placebo). We found extensive changes in gene expression in all three treatment
groups, some of which were unique to the vitamin D2-treated or D3-treated groups,
with the majority exhibiting downregulation of transcription over the 12-week
intervention period. Our success in detecting statistically significant differential gene
expression in this study stems partly from the longitudinal design where it was
possible to evaluate statistical differences in transcript levels within each group (from
baseline to 12-week measurement). This approach partly circumvents the problems
with inter-individual differences in human studies which make it difficult to detect
robust changes between different groups of individuals. Furthermore, the statistical
analysis approach examined pairwise differences in gene expression from the V1
and V3 samples, which helps to reduce the impact of inter-individual differences on
statistical significance.
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

This in vivo human transcriptome study has demonstrated long-term effects on gene
expression. The majority of differentially expressed genes identified in this study
were suppressed by vitamin D supplementation, and many of these encoded
pathways were involved in immunity. Many of these observed gene expression
changes are consistent with vitamin D exerting a modulating effect on the immune
system, leading towards a more tolerogenic state, a concept reviewed by (Prietl et
al., 2013). The findings from this study are based on an analysis of 97 individuals
divided equally between the three treatment groups. Our ability to detect differences
in the effects of vitamin D2 and vitamin D3 may have been negatively impacted by the
inclusion of two different ethnic groups among the 97 participants, since the
transcriptome results from the two ethnic groups are clearly different. It will be very
important to independently replicate this study using a much larger cohort in order to
verify, or otherwise, the key findings from this study. From power calculations it is
considered that for a whole human microarray-based gene expression study of this
nature, and with gene expression changes of the magnitude we observe, at least
400 participants of each ethnic group should be recruited for each treatment, giving a
total cohort size of 2,400. The biological interpretation of our findings in the present
study should be considered as preliminary in this context, requiring independent
verification.
It is difficult to compare the findings of the present study with other reported in vivo
studies because of the considerable differences in experimental design, including the
use of supra-physiological vitamin D doses (up to 2,000 µg single bolus doses),
different population types and small sample sizes which make statistical analysis not
feasible (e.g. (Hossein-nezhad et al., 2013, Neme et al., 2019)). Furthermore, our
study is unique in that it compared gene expression in participants given either of the
two commonly used forms of vitamin D, vitamin D2 and vitamin D3. Intriguing, this
revealed that there were considerable differences in the gene expression profiles
following each nutritional treatment. For example, excluding genes that were also
differentially expressed over the 12-week intervention in the placebo group, only
13% of down-regulated differentially expressed genes were common between the

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

two treatment groups while 28% and 59% were uniquely down-regulated by vitamins
D2 and D3, respectively (Figure 2c).
It is questionable whether it is useful to extrapolate the results from single high dose
bolus and in vitro studies such as those described by (Koivisto et al., 2020) with this
sustained dietary intake in vivo study. In the former study 15 ‘vitamin D-responsive’
genes were identified as important mediators of innate and adaptive immunity. Five
of these 15 genes are also identified as differentially expressed in our present study
(CD93, CEBPB, THBD, THEMIS2 and TREM1). However, in the present study these
five genes were down-regulated by vitamin D intake (Supplementary Data File 2)
whereas they are reported to be up-regulated in the studies reported by (Koivisto et
al., 2020). These contrasting results highlight the difficulties with comparing data
from different experimental designs. As argued previously, because of the relatively
small sample sizes investigated and the small effect sizes, this study has focussed
on identification of statistically significant pathway enrichment following sustained
vitamin D supplementation, rather than a gene-focussed analysis. Nevertheless, we
consider it useful to consider the respective roles of these five specific gene products
since their down-regulation by vitamin D would make sense from a biological
perspective. In our study the gene encoding thymocyte selection-associated family
member 2 (THEMIS2) is down-regulated after vitamin D2 supplementation, the
CD93-encoding gene is down-regulated following D2 and D3 supplementation, while
the genes encoding thrombomodulin (THBD) and the CCAAT enhancer-binding
protein beta (CEBPB) are down-regulated following D3 supplementation. THBD is a
key vitamin D target in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with the function
of reducing blood clots while at the same time preventing the pro-inflammatory
consequences of NF-kB signalling. The THBD and CD93 genes are next to each
other, share the same super-enhancer, and their transcription start site regions
respond to 1,25(OH)2 D3. CEBPB encodes a transcription factor important in the
regulation of genes involved in immune and inflammatory responses. TREM1
encodes triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells which stimulates neutrophil
and monocyte-mediated inflammatory responses. It triggers release of proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines, as well as increased surface expression of
cell activation markers. TREM-1 amplifies inflammatory responses that are triggered

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

by bacterial and fungal infections and is a crucial mediator of septic shock (Bouchon
et al., 2001).
Another cellular function that is affected by vitamin D2 and D3 supplementation is
chromatin modification and remodelling. The EP300 gene is down-regulated by both
vitamins, but unaffected in the placebo group. EP300 encodes a histone acetylase
that regulates transcription by chromatin remodelling, in particular histone acetylation
of H3 at lysine-27, representing an epigenetic modification which activates
transcription (Hatzi et al., 2013). Importantly, EP300 is also a coactivator of VDR.
Functional categories of genes enriched among the upregulated genes, following
supplementation with either vitamin D2 or D3, include translation, mitochondrial and
spliceosome function (Fig. 3b, Supplementary Data File 4); statistically enriched
biological cellular component terms in these functional categories are ribosomal
proteins, components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, two subunits of the
histone H4 and snRNP Sm protein components of the spliceosome assembly. It is
established that, in addition to influencing transcription, vitamin D can also influence
post-transcriptional events by recruiting co-regulators. In this context it is relevant
that components of the spliceosome such as snRNP Sm proteins that mediate both
transcriptional control and splicing decisions, leading to alternatively spliced
transcripts (Zhou et al., 2015), were upregulated by vitamin D supplementation in
this study. These statistically significant gene expression changes were detected as
temporal differences within each treatment group (differences at baseline (V1)
versus 12 weeks after the intervention (V3) within single individuals). Differences in
gene expression across treatment groups were only found in the South Asian group
(Fig. 2a, b). The SA treatment group that received supplementation with vitamin D3,
revealed three genes significantly upregulated and two down-regulated after the 12week intervention relative to the placebo group (Fig. 2; Supplementary Fig. 1). We
note that the gene encoding cAMP-responsive element binding protein 1 (CREB1) is
one of the three upregulated genes. It encodes a transcription factor that binds as a
homodimer to the cAMP-responsive element. CREB1 protein is phosphorylated by
several protein kinases, and induces transcription of genes in response to hormonal
stimulation of the cAMP pathway. The protein kinase A (PKA) pathways are
activated by the parathyroid hormone PTH in response to low serum calcium levels
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

to maintain serum calcium homeostasis, primarily by promoting vitamin D 1αhydroxylation in the kidney. Both PTH and 1,25 (OH)2 vitamin D have similar effects
in promoting the maturation of osteocytes and opposing the differentiation of
osteoblasts into osteocytes (St John et al., 2015, St John et al., 2014). It is relevant
to note in this context that all treatment groups in the SA cohort showed elevated
serum PTH at the baseline sampling point relative to the WE cohort.
Vitamins D2 and D3 do not influence expression of the same genes
Our results indicate that the cellular responses to the two forms of vitamin D
supplementation have some commonalities but also show some clear differences
(catalogued in Supplementary Data File 4). For example, some biological
processes such as histone modification and covalent chromatin modification are
downregulated following vitamin D3 supplementation only, while spliceosomal
function are upregulated by vitamin D2 only. In light of the finding that vitamins D2
and D3 influence expression of different genes in the human blood transcriptome,
recently we undertook a parallel in vitro study with a model rat cell line (Mengozzi et
al., 2020). We examined the respective influences of the two physiologically active
forms of vitamin D, 1,25(OH)D3 and 1,25(OH)D2 on differentiation and global gene
expression in differentiating rat CG4 oligodendrocyte precursor cells and revealed
considerable differences in the influence of the two types of vitamin D on gene
expression at 24 h and after 72 h following onset of differentiation. We demonstrated
that 1,25(OH)D3 and 1,25(OH)D2 respectively influenced expression of 1,272 and
574 genes at 24 h following addition of the vitamin to the culture, where many of the
changes in expression were specific to one or the other form of the vitamin
(Mengozzi et al., 2020). This study provides evidence of the different direct effects of
the two active vitamin D metabolites on gene expression in vitro in cultured cells and
provides some evidence that the changes we observed in the in vivo study may
reflect the influence of the physiologically active forms of the vitamin, 1,25(OH)D3
and 1,25(OH)D2.
Influence of vitamin D on expression of genes encoding immune pathways

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

In common to both the D2 and D3 treatment groups, but not the placebo group, we
found that many different pathways of the immune system are differentially
expressed (largely down-regulated) by vitamin D, consistent with the emerging
theme that one physiological role of vitamin D is to suppress, or balance, the activity
of the immune system (Prietl et al., 2013, Martens et al., 2020)(Fig 3a, Fig. 4;
Supplementary data files 3, 4 and 5). The immunomodulatory effects of vitamin D on
both innate and adaptive immunity are well documented (Liu et al., 2006, Hayes and
Nashold, 2018, Teles et al., 2013). Vitamin D supplementation has the potential to
ameliorate the symptoms of autoimmune diseases such as multiple sclerosis, as
supported by several lines of evidence: the role in promoting differentiation of
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells and therefore remyelination of CNS neurons
(Gomez-Pinedo et al., 2020); suppression of the differentiation of potentially
pathogenic T-cells and enhancement of regulatory T-cell differentiation (Wasnik et
al., 2020). However, a recent Cochrane review found little benefit of vitamin D in this
context (Jagannath et al., 2018).
In this regard, the observation that vitamin D2 and D3 supplementation in the WE
cohort were associated with divergent patterns of expression for interferon alpha
(type 1) and interferon gamma (type 2) signature gene sets stands out as particularly
interesting. Vitamin D appears to modulate type 1 interferon activity. For example, it
enhances the effects of type 1 interferon treatment on mononuclear cells from
patients with multiple sclerosis(Feng et al., 2019), which parallels evidence for
modest benefits of vitamin D as an adjunct treatment with type 1 interferon in
multiple sclerosis patients(Hupperts et al., 2019, Camu et al., 2019). Vitamin D may
also help suppress symptoms in autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus
erythematosus(Zheng et al., 2019), which are associated with chronic over-activity of
interferon signalling and tentatively designated interferonopathies. Moreover, type 1
interferons play a critical role in defence against viral infections. Basal expression of
type 1 interferon-stimulated genes, in the absence of infection, is key to priming a
rapid and effective response to viral infection when it occurs(Mostafavi et al., 2016).
There is currently intense interest in vitamin D as both a potential prophylactic and a
therapeutic agent for treatment of SARS-CoV-2 infection. One of the proposed
modes of action of vitamin D is modulation of interferon activity(Gauzzi and Fantuzzi,
2020); in this context our observation that vitamin D3 (but not vitamin D2) enhances
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

the expression of genes involved in the interferon alpha response, is highly relevant
to susceptibility to viral infection. Indeed, a recent genome-wide association study
(GWAS) in 2,244 critically ill Covid-19 patients identified genetic variants leading to
reduced interferon type 1 signalling that are associated with severe Covid-19
disease(Pairo-Castineira et al., 2020).
We have also found differences in gene expression response to vitamin D according
to ethnicity (with the caveat that the sample size of the SA group was smaller than
the WE group). Ethnic differences in response are suggested from the Weighted
Gene Correlation Network Analysis (WGCNA) and the Gene Set Enrichment
Analysis (GSEA), where the response to vitamin D3 intake appeared to have the
opposite effect on the type 1 and 2 interferon pathways in the SA group compared
with the WE group (Fig. 7). However, direct correlation between the stimulation of
immune responses, other than the interferon pathways, with an increase in serum
25(OH)D3 concentration was evident in the SA group only. This is the opposite of
that observed in the WE group where the effect of vitamin D supplementation was to
suppress several immune pathways.
Conclusions

The transcriptome results from this study differ from those of previous in vivo studies
which used supra-physiological doses of vitamin D over a short time-frame, or used
in vitro cultured cells. Indeed, where there is overlap in the identity of the
differentially expressed genes identified in the respective studies vitamin D appears
to exert the opposite effect relative to our longer-term repeated physiological dose
study. Short-term responses to large boluses are relatively simple to do, and less
prone to noise, but their effect on gene expression does not seem to be consistent
with that observed with longer term repeated physiological dose studies like the
present study and therefore may not represent the real-world effects of repeated
dietary intake of vitamin D. Thus, despite the challenges and limitations of doing
longer term in vivo human studies, that are complicated by seasonal variation in
gene expression, inter-individual human variation, subtle physiological changes in
gene expression, more ‘noise’ through intake of other vitamin D sources during the
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

treatment intervention, our work suggests it may be important to conduct more such
longer term studies since the results from the shorter term interventions may not be
representative of the influence of vitamin D on normal physiological gene expression.
One potential criticism of whole blood transcriptome studies is that the results may
not represent the gene expression changes that occur in other tissues as a result of
vitamin D supplementation. However, we have shown, in comparable whole blood
transcriptome studies of human sleep physiology, that the changes in the human
blood transcriptome correlate with the changes that are observed in other tissues
and organs in comparable mammalian animal studies, giving us some confidence in
the physiological relevance of the changes identified in this vitamin D transcriptome
study (Archer et al., 2014, Moller-Levet et al., 2013).
The transcriptome results differ considerably between the two different ethnic
groups. While some of the differences may be attributable to differences in sample
sizes studied between the two groups it is also possible that some of the differences
represent genuine differences in the respective physiological responses of the two
ethnic groups. Alternatively, the differences may reflect the starting physiological
status of the SA participant group, who were found to have considerably lower
baseline vitamin D concentrations (and higher PTH concentrations) than the WE
group. The importance of clarifying these different responses is given particular
impetus by the emerging evidence for the interplay between ethnicity, skin tone,
vitamin D status and susceptibility to viral infection, Covid-19 being of particular
current relevance here (Lanham-New et al., 2020, Kohlmeier, 2020, Kmietowicz,
2020, Weir et al., 2020). The transcriptomic data presented in this study might
provide a useful context for further studies aimed at understanding the role of vitamin
D in influencing the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, particularly in
relation to severe Covid-19. It is notable that the recent GenOMICC study of severe
Covid-19 disease highlighted a link between severe Covid-19 and reduced type 1
interferon signalling (Pairo-Castineira et al., 2020). Our finding that vitamin D3
appears to stimulate type 1 interferon signalling could be relevant in the context of its
use as a prophylactic treatment.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

In summary our results indicate that whilst the two forms of vitamin D (D2 and D3)
exert some overlapping roles in human physiology, each form may elicit different
molecular responses, findings which warrant a more detailed consideration of the
system-wide effects of these two forms vitamin D. Clearly, this type of study requires
replication, using a much larger independent cohort, with balanced representation
from different ethnic groups. This is perhaps of particular importance to at-risk ethnic
groups, including black and South Asian populations who reside in northern
latitudes. The studies would need to be time course-based (temporal) to track gene
expression changes within individuals from baseline activity to defined sampling
times and would need in-built control to account for seasonal gene expression
changes. They would need to be designed specifically to answer whether different
ethnicity or different vitamin D baseline levels give rise to different responses to
vitamin D supplementation.
Since some pathways appear to be regulated specifically by vitamin D3, or in some
cases, in opposing directions by vitamin D3 and D2, future studies should investigate
whether vitamin D2 supplementation might counteract some of the benefits of vitamin
D3 on human health. This possibility is prompted by the findings from this cohort that
the circulating concentration of 25(OH)D3 within vitamin D2-treated participants was
significantly lower after the 12-week intervention than in the placebo group who
received no vitamin D supplements – suggesting that the former might be depleted
by the latter. The results from this study suggest that guidelines on food fortification
and supplementation with specific forms of vitamin D may need revisiting.
Materials and Methods
Blood Transcriptome analysis
The recruitment of individuals as part of the BBSRC D2-D3 Study was described
previously (Tripkovic et al., 2017). This study received ethical approval from the
South-East Coast (Surrey) National Health Service Research Ethics Committee
(11/LO/0708) and the University of Surrey Ethics Committee (EC/2011/97/FHMS).
All of the participants gave written informed consent in agreement with the Helsinki
Declaration before commencing study activities. Briefly, 335 women of both South
Asian (SA) and white European (WE) descent were randomised to one of three
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

intervention groups for 12-weeks and provided with daily doses of vitamin D within
fortified foods: placebo, 15 μg/d vitamin D2 or 15 μg/d vitamin D3. Of the 335
participants, 97 were selected for transcriptome analysis (32 were WE, 32 were A
and 33 were selected at random from both ethnic groups to form a balanced placebo
group). High responders (>50% increase in 25OHD concentrations) and low
responders (<50% increase in 25OHD concentrations) were included within both
vitamin D2 and D3 supplementation groups to maximize the chance of observing
differences in gene expression among subjects. The selected time points for
transcriptome analysis were V1 representing the baseline and V3, 12 weeks after
treatment commenced.
Whole peripheral blood (2.5 ml) was collected using PAXgene Blood RNA tubes
(Becton Dickinson). PAXgene Blood RNA Tubes were inverted ten times
immediately after drawing blood, stored upright at 15-25°C for 24 hours, followed by
a -20°C freezer for 24 hours and then into a -80°C freezer for long-term storage.
Transcriptomic analysis was conducted essentially as described in previous studies
(Archer et al., 2014, Moller-Levet et al., 2013). Total RNA was isolated using the
PAXgene Blood RNA Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturers recommendations.
cRNA was synthesised and fluorescently labelled with Cy3-CTP from 200 ng of total
RNA using the Low Input QuickAmp Labelling Kit, One Color (Agilent Technology).
Labelled cRNA was hybridised on a Sure Print G3 Human Gene Expression 8 x 60K
v2 microarray slide (Agilent Technologies). Standard manufacturer’s instructions for
one colour gene-expression analysis were followed for labelling, hybridisation and
washing steps. Extracted RNA was quantified using NanoDrop ND2000
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). RNA quality and integrity was evaluated
using either the Bioanalyzer 2100 or the TapeStation 4200 (Agilent Technologies).
Only RNA samples with an RNA Integrity Number (RIN) of >7.0 were subjected to
DNA microarray analysis. Microarrays were hybridised at 65°C for 17 hours in an
Agilent Hybridization Oven on a rotisserie at 10 rpm. The washed microarrays were
scanned using an Agilent Microarray Scanner with a resolution of 2 μm.
Transcriptome data processing and differential expression analysis.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Raw scanned microarray images were processed using Agilent Feature Extraction
software (v11.5.1.1) with the Agilent 039494_D_F_20140326_human_8x60K_v2
grid, and then imported into R for normalization and analysis using the LIMMA
package (Ritchie et al., 2015). Microarray data were background-corrected using the
‘normexp’ method (with an offset of 50) and quantile normalised, producing
expression values in the log base 2 scale. The processed data were then filtered to
remove probes exhibiting low signals across the arrays, retaining non-control probes
that are at least 10% brighter than negative control probe signals on at least 41
arrays (~20% of the arrays in the analysis). Data from identical replicate probes were
then averaged to produce expression values at the unique probe level. Initial data
exploration identified one sample (participant 0017, V3 time point) with array data
that was a notable outlier from the group and therefore both the V1 and V3
microarrays for this subject were excluded from all subsequent analysis,
reprocessing the data as above in their absence before proceeding.
Tests for differential expression were performed using LIMMA, applying appropriate
linear model designs to identify: (i) significant differences in the transcriptional
responses occurring across the 12-week V1 to V3 period of the study between the
treatment and placebo groups for each ethnic cohort (example contrasts tested, in
the format ethnicity_treatment_time: (WE_D2_V3 - WE_D2_V1) - (WE_P_V3WE_P_V1) = 0 , and (WE_D3_V3 - WE_D3_V1) - (WE_P_V3 - WE_P_V1) = 0); and
ii) to determine significant changes for each ethnic cohort within each treatment
group between the V3 and V1 sampling points, blocking on subject identity (example
contrasts tested: WE_D2_V3 - WE_D2_V1 = 0, WE_D3_V3 - WE_D3_V1 = 0).
Blocking on subject identity was used to control for inter-subject variability.
Significance p-values were corrected for multiplicity using the Benjamini and
Hochberg method, obtaining adjusted p-values (adj.P.Val). Normalised data for all
participants (V3 – V1) was assessed by principal component analysis to screen for
any batch effects (Supplementary Fig. 3).
Functional enrichment and network analysis
Functional enrichment analysis of lists of genes of interest possessing valid ENTREZ
gene identifiers was performed using the R package clusterProfiler (Yu et al., 2012).
The software produces adjusted p-values (p.adjust) using the Benjamini and
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Hochberg correction method. Construction and analysis of protein-protein interaction
networks from sets of genes was undertaken in Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003)
using the STRING plugin (Szklarczyk et al., 2017a). Cytoscape was also used to
construct and visualise commonality in the functional categories identified as being
significantly enriched in the genes responding to the experimental treatments. To
visualise categories identified from the D2 or D3 treatment groups but not from the
placebo (e.g. Figs. 4 and 5) significantly enriched categories (p.adjust < 0.01) from
all groups were imported such that treatment group nodes (D2, D3 and placebo (P))
are linked to functional category nodes by edges assigned the corresponding
p.adjust values. All nodes with an edge connection to the placebo treatment node
were then removed and the resulting networks further filtered to retain only those
nodes with at least one edge connection with p.adjust<=0.001.
Weighted gene co-expression network analysis was performed in R using the
WGCNA (Langfelder and Horvath, 2008) and CoExpNets (Botia, 2019) packages. A
normalised expression data matrix generated by filtering to retain probes with signals
more markedly above background (30% brighter than negative control probe signals
on at least 41 arrays) was used as input, consisting of 12,169 unique probes. Signed
scale-free networks were constructed separately for the data for the SA and WE
ethnic groups using 50 iterations of the k-means clustering option in the CoExpNets
‘getDownstreamNetwork’ function to refine the clustering process (Supplementary
Data File 6). Pearson correlations between cluster module eigengenes and
metadata for serum 25(OH)D2, 25(OH)D3, total 25(OH)D and PTH concentrations
were calculated using pairwise complete observations.
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
GSEA was performed using the R package clusterProfiler (Yu et al., 2012), applying
the default parameters which implement the fgsea algorithm and correct for multiple
testing using the Benjamini and Hochberg method. Gene sets were obtained from
MSigDB via the msigdbr package (Dolgalev, 2020). Ranked gene lists for
interrogation were derived from LIMMA analysis of the unfiltered microarray data,
pre-ranking genes according to their t-statistic.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Data availability: All microarray data are available in the ArrayExpress database
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress) under accession number E-MTAB-8600.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by BBSRC (UK) DRINC award BB/I006192/1 to SLN and
CPS, by a University of Brighton Innovation Seed Fund Award (to CPS). The authors
would like to particularly thank Michael Chowen CBE DL and Maureen Chowen for
their generous philanthropic donation (to CPS).
Declaration of interests
All authors confirm that they have no conflicts of interest.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure legends
Figure 1. (a) Selection of 98 subject participants from the Tripkovic et al. (2017)
study (Tripkovic et al., 2017) for transcriptomic analysis of their V1 (baseline) and V3
(12-week) samples in the present study; (b) Ethnicity and treatment group
membership for the 97 subjects for which transcriptomic data was obtained (data for
one South Asian subject from the placebo group did not pass quality control); (c)
Metadata on serum concentrations of 25(OH)D2, 25(OH)D3, total 25(OH)D, PTH and
calcium (albumin-adjusted) for the 97 subjects (see Supplementary Data File 1 for
details). Participants were selected to provide comparable numbers between the
placebo and the two vitamin D treatment groups, covering the full range of serum
responses to supplementation within the D2 and D3 treatment groups, as judged from
the measured changes in serum 25(OH)D2 or 25(OH)D3 concentrations between V1
and V3.
Figure 2. (a) Summary of limma differential expression test results identifying
significant changes (adj.P.Val<=0.05) in transcript probe abundance within and
between the experimental groups (see Supplementary Data File 2 for full details).
Both the number of unique microarray probes, and the number of unique genome
loci they represent, are indicated. WE = “white European”; SA = “South Asian”; D2 =
vitamin D2 treatment group; D3 = vitamin D3 treatment group; P = placebo group. (b)
The CREB1 gene probe signal is significantly different (adj.P.Val=0.021) between
the vitamin D3-treated group and the placebo group over the course of the V1 to V3
study period in the South Asian cohort (i.e. [SA D3 V3 v V1] v [SA P V3 v V1]
comparison from Fig. 2a). (c) Venn diagrams showing the numbers of probes in the
white European (WE) cohort that are specifically significantly (adj.P.Val<=0.05)
down- or up-regulated in V3 compared to V1 in each treatment group. (d)
Comparison of the log2 fold-changes (FC) in abundance occurring from V1 to V3 in
the WE cohort in the D2 and D3 treatment groups. Probes significantly up-regulated
in both D2 and D3 groups but not the placebo are coloured red, while those similarly
down-regulated are shown in blue (see Supplementary Data File 3). A probe
detecting SEC14L1 shows the largest decreases in abundance in those downregulated by D2 and D3 but not placebo.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. Protein-protein interaction networks for gene products corresponding to
the probes (a) significantly down-regulated or (b) significantly up-regulated in both
the D2 and D3 treatment groups of the WE cohort, but not the placebo group. Details
given in Supplementary Data File 3. The networks were generated using the
STRING database of Homo sapiens medium confidence (0.4) interactions, and only
connected nodes are shown. Networks for both (a) and (b) are significantly enriched
for interactions compared to randomised sets, yielding p-values of 1.98 ´ 10-6 and
4.99 ´ 10-9, respectively.
Figure 4. Networks illustrating the functional categories significantly enriched in the
gene products represented by the probes significantly down-regulated (adj.P.Val £
0.05) in the D2 and D3 treatment groups of the WE cohort, but not in the placebo
group. Gene products represented by the significantly down-regulated probes in the
comparisons WE D2 V3 v V1, WE D3 V3 v V1 and WE P V3 v V1 from Fig. 2(a), and
possessing ENTREZ identifiers, were subjected separately to functional enrichment
analysis using compareCluster (Yu et al., 2012). The details for each group are given
in Supplementary Data File 4. Significantly enriched categories (p.adjust £ 0.01)
from all groups were imported into Cytoscape (Shannon et al., 2003) to visualise
categories identified from the D2 or D3 treatment groups but not by the placebo (see
Methods for details). The thickness of lines (edges) drawn to connect the nodes
shown increases with increasing significance (p.adjust-values) and only categories
where at least one edge is £ 1 ´ 10-3 are shown. The complete networks for each
differentially expressed group of genes are shown in Supplementary Data File 5.
Figure 5. Networks illustrating the functional categories significantly enriched in the
gene products represented by the probes significantly up-regulated (adj.P.Val £
0.05) in the D2 and D3 treatment groups of the WE cohort, but not in the placebo
group. Gene products represented by the significantly up-regulated probes in the
comparisons WE D2 V3 v V1, WE D3 V3 v V1 and WE P V3 v V1 from Fig. 2(a), and
possessing ENTREZ identifiers, were subjected separately to functional enrichment
analysis using compareCluster as detailed in the legend to Fig. 4. The complete
networks for each differentially expressed group of genes are shown in
Supplementary Data File 5.
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 6. Gene co-expression networks for the WE (a) and SA (b) ethnic groups. For
each group of subjects, signed scale-free networks were constructed from the
expression data using WGCNA to cluster probes with similar expression
characteristics across all samples into discrete modules (colours on the y-axis:
colours in (a) and (b) are independent). Module membership for the modules of
genes identified in the WGCNA analysis of the data from the South Asian and white
European cohorts are detailed in Supplementary Data File 6. The colour scale to
the right of each panel represents the Pearson correlation (from -1 to +1) between
the expression profile for each module’s eigengene and the respective serum
25(OH)D2, 25(OH)D3, total 25(OH)D and PTH concentrations (x-axis). The Pearson
correlation coefficients are also provided in each box, followed in brackets by an
adjusted p-value, testing for the significance of each correlation. Statistically
significant correlations (adjusted p-value £ 0.05) are circled in red. A headline
significant GO functional enrichment category (p.adjust £ 0.01) for each significant
module is shown to the right; GO test results for each module are summarised in
Supplementary Data Files 7 and 8).
Figure 7. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis using the MSigDB hallmark gene sets
indicates divergent behaviour for the interferon alpha and gamma response gene
sets following supplementation with vitamin D2 and D3 in the WE cohort. Coloured
tiles in the heatmap correspond to gene sets exhibiting a statistically significant
(padjust<=0.05), concordant change between the V3 and V1 sampling times for the
placebo (P), vitamin D2 (D2) or vitamin D3 (D3) treatment groups in the SA or WE
cohorts. Grey tiles indicate non-significance. A positive normalised enrichment score
(NES) indicates up-regulation of a gene set in V3 relative to V1, and conversely
down-regulation is indicated by a negative NES score. Full results are provided in
Supplementary Data File 9, and the behavior of the leading edge, core genes
accounting for the significant enrichment signals in the interferon alpha and gamma
response sets are illustrated in Supplementary Figs. 4-6.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figures and Supplementary Data Files
Supplementary Figure 1.
Summary of the probes identified as being significantly different in the ‘difference-indifference’ analysis of the SA cohort (comparison [SA D3 V3 v V1] v [SA P V3 v V1]
in Fig. 2a). (A) Differential expression test results; (B) Probe signal abundance (log2)
distribution across the experimental treatments in the SA cohort.
Supplementary Figure 2.
Seasonal gene expression as a feature of the 12-week study (P = placebo, D2 =
vitamin D2, D3 = vitamin D3). (a) Summary of the timing of the V1 samples taken in
the study (for each individual, V3 samples were taken 12 weeks after the V1
sample); (b) Significant over-representation of the seasonal genes identified by
Dopico et al (2015) Nat Commun, 6, 7000 (BABYDIET dataset) in the genes
identified as significantly changing in the white European (WE) placebo, D2 and D3
treatment groups.
Supplementary Figure 3.
Principal component analysis of the transcriptome data for the 97 subjects passing
quality control. Data for samples from visits V1 and V3 are processed as the
difference between V3 and V1 (V3 minus V1) for each subject. The distribution is
relatively random.

Supplementary Figure 4.
The MSigDB Hallmark gene sets “Interferon alpha response” and “Interferon gamma
response” show statistically significant, concordant up-regulation between the V3
and V1 sampling times following supplementation with vitamin D3 in the WE cohort
(adjusted p-values 9.36e-15 and 1.59e-11, respectively). a) Leading edge, core
genes accounting for the enrichment signals in the gene set enrichment analysis of
the D3 data. b) Heatmap showing the log2 fold change between V3 and V1 for each
gene identified in a) , for all the treatment groups in both the SA and WE cohorts (P =
placebo, D2 = vitamin D2, D3 = vitamin D3). Gene membership of the Hallmark
interferon alpha and gamma response gene sets is indicated to the right. Genes
31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

shared between both sets are labelled “alpha & gamma”. Gene PARP14 and ISG20
belong to both sets, but are leading edge genes only for the alpha response.
Supplementary Figure 5.
The MSigDB Hallmark gene sets “Interferon alpha response” and “Interferon gamma
response” show statistically significant, concordant down-regulation between the V3
and V1 sampling times following supplementation with vitamin D2 in the WE cohort
(adjusted p-values 4.22e-02 and 1.61e-04 respectively). a) Leading edge, core
genes accounting for the enrichment signals in the gene set enrichment analysis. b)
Heatmap showing the log2 fold change between V3 and V1 for each gene identified
in a) , for all the treatment groups in both the SA and WE cohorts (P = placebo, D2 =
vitamin D2, D3 = vitamin D3). Gene membership of the Hallmark interferon alpha and
gamma response gene sets is indicated to the right. Genes shared between both
sets are labelled “alpha & gamma”. Gene PARP14 belongs to both sets, but is a
leading edge gene only for the alpha response.
Supplementary Figure 6.
The MSigDB Hallmark gene sets “Interferon alpha response” and “Interferon gamma
response” show statistically significant, concordant down-regulation between the V3
and V1 sampling times following supplementation with vitamin D3 in the SA cohort
(adjusted p-values 1.34e-09 and 8.45e-09 respectively). (a) Leading edge, core
genes accounting for the enrichment signals in the gene set enrichment analysis. (b)
Heatmap showing the log2 fold change between V3 and V1 for each gene identified
in (a), for all the treatment groups in both the SA and WE cohorts (P = placebo, D2 =
vitamin D2, D3 = vitamin D3). Gene membership of the Hallmark interferon alpha and
gamma response gene sets is indicated to the right. Genes shared between both
sets are labelled “alpha & gamma”. Gene PSMB8 belongs to both sets, but is a
leading edge gene only for the alpha response.

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Data Files
Supplementary Data File 1
Metadata on serum concentrations of 25(OH)D2, 25(OH)D3, total 25(OH)D, PTH and
calcium (albumin-adjusted) for the 97 subjects subjected to transcriptomic analysis
(selected from the cohort described by Tripkovic et al. 2017).
Supplementary Data File 2 [Note: data file is 9.1 MB.]
Significant differences in the transcriptional responses occurring across the 12-week
V1 to V3 period of the study between the vitamin D2, vitamin D3 and placebo
treatment groups for each ethnic cohort, and significant changes within each group
between the V3 and V1 sampling points (see Fig. 2).
Supplementary Data File 3
Functional analysis of the genes represented by the probes specifically repressed by
D2 and D3 in the white European cohort (blue data points in Fig. 2d) or induced by D2
and D3 in the white European cohort (red data points in Fig. 2d).
Supplementary Data File 4
Comparative functional enrichment analysis of all significant changes in each
treatment group in the white European cohort (Fig. 2c; and see Figs 4 and 5).
Supplementary Data File 5
Networks illustrating all the functional categories significantly enriched (p.adjust <
0.01) in analysis of the gene products represented by the probes significantly up- or
down-regulated (adj.P.Val < 0.05) in the white European cohort treatment groups
(from data presented in Supplementary Data File 4).
Supplementary Data File 6
Module membership for the modules of genes identified in the WGCNA analysis of
the data from the South Asian and white European cohorts, as presented in Fig. 6.
Supplementary Data File 7

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Gene ontology functional enrichment analysis results for the modules of genes
identified in the WGCNA analysis of the data from the white European cohort.
Supplementary Data File 8
Gene ontology functional enrichment analysis results for the modules of genes
identified in the WGCNA analysis of the data from the South Asian cohort.
Supplementary Data File 9
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis results for the analysis reported in Fig. 7.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

AGELL, L., HERNANDEZ, S., NONELL, L., LORENZO, M., PUIGDECANET, E., DE MUGA, S., JUANPERE, N.,
BERMUDO, R., FERNANDEZ, P. L., LORENTE, J. A., SERRANO, S. & LLORETA, J. 2012. A 12-gene
expression signature is associated with aggressive histological in prostate cancer: SEC14L1
and TCEB1 genes are potential markers of progression. Am J Pathol, 181, 1585-94.
ARCHER, S. N., LAING, E. E., MOLLER-LEVET, C. S., VAN DER VEEN, D. R., BUCCA, G., LAZAR, A. S.,
SANTHI, N., SLAK, A., KABILJO, R., VON SCHANTZ, M., SMITH, C. P. & DIJK, D. J. 2014.
Mistimed sleep disrupts circadian regulation of the human transcriptome. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A, 111, E682-91.
BERLANGA-TAYLOR, A. J., PLANT, K., DAHL, A., LAU, E., HILL, M., SIMS, D., HEGER, A., EMBERSON, J.,
ARMITAGE, J., CLARKE, R. & KNIGHT, J. C. 2018. Genomic Response to Vitamin D
Supplementation in the Setting of a Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. EBioMedicine, 31,
133-142.
BIANCUZZO, R. M., HOLICK, M. F. & WINTER, M. R. 2010a. Reply to S Lanham-New et al. Am J Clin
Nutr, 92, 999-1000.
BIANCUZZO, R. M., YOUNG, A., BIBULD, D., CAI, M. H., WINTER, M. R., KLEIN, E. K., AMERI, A., REITZ,
R., SALAMEH, W., CHEN, T. C. & HOLICK, M. F. 2010b. Fortification of orange juice with
vitamin D(2) or vitamin D(3) is as effective as an oral supplement in maintaining vitamin D
status in adults. Am J Clin Nutr, 91, 1621-6.
BOTIA, J. A. 2019. CoExpNets: Co-expression network management based on WGCNA + k-means. R
package version 0.1.0. 0.1.0 ed.
BOUCHON, A., FACCHETTI, F., WEIGAND, M. A. & COLONNA, M. 2001. TREM-1 amplifies
inflammation and is a crucial mediator of septic shock. Nature, 410, 1103-7.
BOUILLON, R. 2018. Extra-Skeletal Effects of Vitamin D. Front Horm Res, 50, 72-88.
BURDELSKI, C., BARREAU, Y., SIMON, R., HUBE-MAGG, C., MINNER, S., KOOP, C., GRAEFEN, M.,
HEINZER, H., SAUTER, G., WITTMER, C., STEURER, S., ADAM, M., HULAND, H., SCHLOMM, T.,
TSOURLAKIS, M. C. & QUAAS, A. 2015. Saccharomyces cerevisiae-like 1 overexpression is
frequent in prostate cancer and has markedly different effects in Ets-related gene fusionpositive and fusion-negative cancers. Hum Pathol, 46, 514-23.
CAMU, W., LEHERT, P., PIERROT-DESEILLIGNY, C., HAUTECOEUR, P., BESSERVE, A., JEAN DELEGLISE,
A. S., PAYET, M., THOUVENOT, E. & SOUBERBIELLE, J. C. 2019. Cholecalciferol in relapsingremitting MS: A randomized clinical trial (CHOLINE). Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm, 6.
CHRISTAKOS, S., DHAWAN, P., VERSTUYF, A., VERLINDEN, L. & CARMELIET, G. 2016. Vitamin D:
Metabolism, Molecular Mechanism of Action, and Pleiotropic Effects. Physiol Rev, 96, 365408.
DAMOISEAUX, J. & SMOLDERS, J. 2018. The Engagement Between Vitamin D and the Immune
System: Is Consolidation by a Marriage to Be Expected? EBioMedicine, 31, 9-10.
DOLGALEV, I. 2020. msigdbr: MSigDB Gene Sets for Multiple Organisms in a Tidy Data Format. R
package version 7.2.1. .
DOPICO, X. C., EVANGELOU, M., FERREIRA, R. C., GUO, H., PEKALSKI, M. L., SMYTH, D. J., COOPER, N.,
BURREN, O. S., FULFORD, A. J., HENNIG, B. J., PRENTICE, A. M., ZIEGLER, A. G., BONIFACIO, E.,
WALLACE, C. & TODD, J. A. 2015. Widespread seasonal gene expression reveals annual
differences in human immunity and physiology. Nat Commun, 6, 7000.
FENG, X., WANG, Z., HOWLETT-PRIETO, Q., EINHORN, N., CAUSEVIC, S. & REDER, A. T. 2019. Vitamin
D enhances responses to interferon-beta in MS. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm, 6,
e622.
FETAHU, I. S., HOBAUS, J. & KALLAY, E. 2014. Vitamin D and the epigenome. Front Physiol, 5, 164.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97

GAUZZI, M. C. & FANTUZZI, L. 2020. Reply to Jakovac: COVID-19, vitamin D, and type I interferon. Am
J Physiol Endocrinol Metab, 319, E245-E246.
GOMEZ-PINEDO, U., CUEVAS, J. A., BENITO-MARTIN, M. S., MORENO-JIMENEZ, L., ESTEBAN-GARCIA,
N., TORRE-FUENTES, L., MATIAS-GUIU, J. A., PYTEL, V., MONTERO, P. & MATIAS-GUIU, J.
2020. Vitamin D increases remyelination by promoting oligodendrocyte lineage
differentiation. Brain Behav, 10, e01498.
HATZI, K., JIANG, Y., HUANG, C., GARRETT-BAKELMAN, F., GEARHART, M. D., GIANNOPOULOU, E. G.,
ZUMBO, P., KIROUAC, K., BHASKARA, S., POLO, J. M., KORMAKSSON, M., MACKERELL, A. D.,
JR., XUE, F., MASON, C. E., HIEBERT, S. W., PRIVE, G. G., CERCHIETTI, L., BARDWELL, V. J.,
ELEMENTO, O. & MELNICK, A. 2013. A hybrid mechanism of action for BCL6 in B cells defined
by formation of functionally distinct complexes at enhancers and promoters. Cell Rep, 4,
578-88.
HAYES, C. E. & NASHOLD, F. E. 2018. Vitamin D and Multiple Sclerosis. In: FELDMAN, D. (ed.). Elsevier
Inc.
HOLICK, M. F. 2007. Vitamin D deficiency. N Engl J Med, 357, 266-81.
HOLICK, M. F., BIANCUZZO, R. M., CHEN, T. C., KLEIN, E. K., YOUNG, A., BIBULD, D., REITZ, R.,
SALAMEH, W., AMERI, A. & TANNENBAUM, A. D. 2008. Vitamin D2 is as effective as vitamin
D3 in maintaining circulating concentrations of 25-hydroxyvitamin D. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab, 93, 677-81.
HOLLIS, B. W. 1984. Comparison of equilibrium and disequilibrium assay conditions for
ergocalciferol, cholecalciferol and their major metabolites. J Steroid Biochem, 21, 81-6.
HOSSEIN-NEZHAD, A., SPIRA, A. & HOLICK, M. F. 2013. Influence of vitamin D status and vitamin D3
supplementation on genome wide expression of white blood cells: a randomized doubleblind clinical trial. PLoS One, 8, e58725.
HOUGHTON, L. A. & VIETH, R. 2006. The case against ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) as a vitamin
supplement. Am J Clin Nutr, 84, 694-7.
HUPPERTS, R., SMOLDERS, J., VIETH, R., HOLMOY, T., MARHARDT, K., SCHLUEP, M., KILLESTEIN, J.,
BARKHOF, F., BEELKE, M., GRIMALDI, L. M. E. & GROUP, S. S. 2019. Randomized trial of daily
high-dose vitamin D3 in patients with RRMS receiving subcutaneous interferon beta-1a.
Neurology, 93, e1906-e1916.
JAGANNATH, V. A., FILIPPINI, G., DI PIETRANTONJ, C., ASOKAN, G. V., ROBAK, E. W., WHAMOND, L. &
ROBINSON, S. A. 2018. Vitamin D for the management of multiple sclerosis. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev, 9, CD008422.
KMIETOWICZ, Z. 2020. Sixty seconds on . . . vitamin D. BMJ, 371, m3872.
KOHLMEIER, M. 2020. Avoidance of vitamin D deficiency to slow the COVID-19 pandemic. BMJ
Nutrition, Prevention & Health, 3.
KOIVISTO, O., HANEL, A. & CARLBERG, C. 2020. Key Vitamin D Target Genes with Functions in the
Immune System. Nutrients, 12.
LANGFELDER, P. & HORVATH, S. 2008. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation network
analysis. BMC Bioinformatics, 9, 559.
LANHAM-NEW, S., VIETH, R. & HEANEY, R. 2010. Vitamin D2 and vitamin D3 comparisons:
fundamentally flawed study methodology. Am J Clin Nutr, 92, 999; author reply 999-1000.
LANHAM-NEW, S. A., WEBB, A. R., CASHMAN, K. D. & AL, E. 2020. Vitamin D and SARS-CoV-2
virus/COVID-19 disease. BMJ Nutrition, Prevention & Health 3.
LIU, P. T., STENGER, S., LI, H., WENZEL, L., TAN, B. H., KRUTZIK, S. R., OCHOA, M. T., SCHAUBER, J.,
WU, K., MEINKEN, C., KAMEN, D. L., WAGNER, M., BALS, R., STEINMEYER, A., ZUGEL, U.,
GALLO, R. L., EISENBERG, D., HEWISON, M., HOLLIS, B. W., ADAMS, J. S., BLOOM, B. R. &
MODLIN, R. L. 2006. Toll-like receptor triggering of a vitamin D-mediated human
antimicrobial response. Science, 311, 1770-3.
LONG, M. D., SUCHESTON-CAMPBELL, L. E. & CAMPBELL, M. J. 2015. Vitamin D receptor and RXR in
the post-genomic era. J Cell Physiol, 230, 758-66.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
121
122
123
124
125
126
127
128
129
130
131
132
133
134
135
136
137
138
139
140
141
142
143
144
145
146
147
148

MARTENS, P. J., GYSEMANS, C., VERSTUYF, A. & MATHIEU, A. C. 2020. Vitamin D's Effect on Immune
Function. Nutrients, 12.
MENGOZZI, M., HESKETH, A., BUCCA, G., GHEZZI, P. & SMITH, C. P. 2020. Vitamins D3 and D2 have
marked but different global effects on gene expression in a rat oligodendrocyte precursor
cell line. Mol Med, 26, 32.
MOLLER-LEVET, C. S., ARCHER, S. N., BUCCA, G., LAING, E. E., SLAK, A., KABILJO, R., LO, J. C., SANTHI,
N., VON SCHANTZ, M., SMITH, C. P. & DIJK, D. J. 2013. Effects of insufficient sleep on
circadian rhythmicity and expression amplitude of the human blood transcriptome. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A, 110, E1132-41.
MOSTAFAVI, S., YOSHIDA, H., MOODLEY, D., LEBOITE, H., ROTHAMEL, K., RAJ, T., YE, C. J., CHEVRIER,
N., ZHANG, S. Y., FENG, T., LEE, M., CASANOVA, J. L., CLARK, J. D., HEGEN, M., TELLIEZ, J. B.,
HACOHEN, N., DE JAGER, P. L., REGEV, A., MATHIS, D., BENOIST, C. & IMMUNOLOGICAL
GENOME PROJECT, C. 2016. Parsing the Interferon Transcriptional Network and Its Disease
Associations. Cell, 164, 564-78.
NEME, A., SEUTER, S., MALINEN, M., NURMI, T., TUOMAINEN, T. P., VIRTANEN, J. K. & CARLBERG, C.
2019. In vivo transcriptome changes of human white blood cells in response to vitamin D. J
Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 188, 71-76.
ODS, N. 2020. Vitamin D [Online]. National Institutes of Health. Available:
https://ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/VitaminD-HealthProfessional/ [Accessed].
PAIRO-CASTINEIRA, E., CLOHISEY, S., KLARIC, L., BRETHERICK, A. D., RAWLIK, K., PASKO, D., WALKER,
S., PARKINSON, N., FOURMAN, M. H., RUSSELL, C. D., FURNISS, J., RICHMOND, A.,
GOUNTOUNA, E., WROBEL, N., HARRISON, D., WANG, B., WU, Y., MEYNERT, A., GRIFFITHS,
F., OOSTHUYZEN, W., KOUSATHANAS, A., MOUTSIANAS, L., YANG, Z., ZHAI, R., ZHENG, C.,
GRIMES, G., BEALE, R., MILLAR, J., SHIH, B., KEATING, S., ZECHNER, M., HALEY, C.,
PORTEOUS, D. J., HAYWARD, C., YANG, J., KNIGHT, J., SUMMERS, C., SHANKAR-HARI, M.,
KLENERMAN, P., TURTLE, L., HO, A., MOORE, S. C., HINDS, C., HORBY, P., NICHOL, A.,
MASLOVE, D., LING, L., MCAULEY, D., MONTGOMERY, H., WALSH, T., PEREIRA, A., RENIERI,
A., GEN, O. I., INVESTIGATORS, I., INITIATIVE, C.-H. G., ANDME, I., INVESTIGATORS, B., GEN,
C. I., SHEN, X., PONTING, C. P., FAWKES, A., TENESA, A., CAULFIELD, M., SCOTT, R., ROWAN,
K., MURPHY, L., OPENSHAW, P. J. M., SEMPLE, M. G., LAW, A., VITART, V., WILSON, J. F. &
BAILLIE, J. K. 2020. Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in Covid-19. Nature.
PILZ, S., ZITTERMANN, A., TRUMMER, C., THEILER-SCHWETZ, V., LERCHBAUM, E., KEPPEL, M. H.,
GRUBLER, M. R., MARZ, W. & PANDIS, M. 2019. Vitamin D testing and treatment: a narrative
review of current evidence. Endocr Connect, 8, R27-R43.
PRIETL, B., TREIBER, G., PIEBER, T. R. & AMREIN, K. 2013. Vitamin D and immune function. Nutrients,
5, 2502-21.
RITCHIE, M. E., PHIPSON, B., WU, D., HU, Y., LAW, C. W., SHI, W. & SMYTH, G. K. 2015. limma powers
differential expression analyses for RNA-sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids
Res, 43, e47.
ROSEN, C. J., ADAMS, J. S., BIKLE, D. D., BLACK, D. M., DEMAY, M. B., MANSON, J. E., MURAD, M. H.
& KOVACS, C. S. 2012. The nonskeletal effects of vitamin D: an Endocrine Society scientific
statement. Endocr Rev, 33, 456-92.
SACN. 2016. SACN (Scientific Advisory Committee on Nutrition) Vitamin D and Health Report. .
SCHWALFENBERG, G. K. 2011. A review of the critical role of vitamin D in the functioning of the
immune system and the clinical implications of vitamin D deficiency. Mol Nutr Food Res, 55,
96-108.
SHANNON, P., MARKIEL, A., OZIER, O., BALIGA, N. S., WANG, J. T., RAMAGE, D., AMIN, N.,
SCHWIKOWSKI, B. & IDEKER, T. 2003. Cytoscape: a software environment for integrated
models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res, 13, 2498-504.
SONBUL, S. N., ALESKANDARANY, M. A., KUROZUMI, S., JOSEPH, C., TOSS, M. S., DIEZ-RODRIGUEZ,
M., NOLAN, C. C., MUKHERJEE, A., MARTIN, S., CALDAS, C., ELLIS, I. O., GREEN, A. R. &

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

149
150
151
152
153
154
155
156
157
158
159
160
161
162
163
164
165
166
167
168
169
170
171
172
173
174
175
176
177
178
179
180
181
182
183
184
185
186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193
194
195
196
197
198
199

RAKHA, E. A. 2018. Saccharomyces cerevisiae-like 1 (SEC14L1) is a prognostic factor in breast
cancer associated with lymphovascular invasion. Mod Pathol, 31, 1675-1682.
ST JOHN, H. C., BISHOP, K. A., MEYER, M. B., BENKUSKY, N. A., LENG, N., KENDZIORSKI, C.,
BONEWALD, L. F. & PIKE, J. W. 2014. The osteoblast to osteocyte transition: epigenetic
changes and response to the vitamin D3 hormone. Mol Endocrinol, 28, 1150-65.
ST JOHN, H. C., MEYER, M. B., BENKUSKY, N. A., CARLSON, A. H., PRIDEAUX, M., BONEWALD, L. F. &
PIKE, J. W. 2015. The parathyroid hormone-regulated transcriptome in osteocytes: parallel
actions with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 to oppose gene expression changes during
differentiation and to promote mature cell function. Bone, 72, 81-91.
SZKLARCZYK, D., MORRIS, J. H., COOK, H., KUHN, M., WYDER, S., SIMONOVIC, M., SANTOS, A.,
DONCHEVA, N. T., ROTH, A., BORK, P., JENSEN, L. J. & VON MERING, C. 2017a. The STRING
database in 2017: quality-controlled protein-protein association networks, made broadly
accessible. Nucleic Acids Res, 45, D362-D368.
SZKLARCZYK, D., MORRIS, J. H., COOK, H., KUHN, M., WYDER, S., SIMONOVIC, M., SANTOS, A.,
DONCHEVA, N. T., ROTH, A., BORK, P., JENSEN, L. J. & VON MERING, C. 2017b. The STRING
database in 2017: quality-controlled protein–protein association networks, made broadly
accessible. Nucleic Acids Research, 45, D362-D368.
TELES, R. M., GRAEBER, T. G., KRUTZIK, S. R., MONTOYA, D., SCHENK, M., LEE, D. J., KOMISOPOULOU,
E., KELLY-SCUMPIA, K., CHUN, R., IYER, S. S., SARNO, E. N., REA, T. H., HEWISON, M., ADAMS,
J. S., POPPER, S. J., RELMAN, D. A., STENGER, S., BLOOM, B. R., CHENG, G. & MODLIN, R. L.
2013. Type I interferon suppresses type II interferon-triggered human anti-mycobacterial
responses. Science, 339, 1448-53.
TRIPKOVIC, L., LAMBERT, H., HART, K., SMITH, C. P., BUCCA, G., PENSON, S., CHOPE, G., HYPPONEN,
E., BERRY, J., VIETH, R. & LANHAM-NEW, S. 2012. Comparison of vitamin D2 and vitamin D3
supplementation in raising serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D status: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Clin Nutr, 95, 1357-64.
TRIPKOVIC, L., WILSON, L. R., HART, K., JOHNSEN, S., DE LUSIGNAN, S., SMITH, C. P., BUCCA, G.,
PENSON, S., CHOPE, G., ELLIOTT, R., HYPPONEN, E., BERRY, J. L. & LANHAM-NEW, S. A. 2017.
Daily supplementation with 15 mug vitamin D2 compared with vitamin D3 to increase
wintertime 25-hydroxyvitamin D status in healthy South Asian and white European women:
a 12-wk randomized, placebo-controlled food-fortification trial. Am J Clin Nutr, 106, 481-490.
WASNIK, S., SHARMA, I., BAYLINK, D. J. & TANG, X. 2020. Vitamin D as a Potential Therapy for
Multiple Sclerosis: Where Are We? Int J Mol Sci, 21.
WEIR, E. K., THENAPPAN, T., BHARGAVA, M. & CHEN, Y. 2020. Does vitamin D deficiency increase the
severity of COVID-19? Clin Med (Lond), 20, e107-e108.
WILSON, L. R., TRIPKOVIC, L., HART, K. H. & LANHAM-NEW, S. A. 2017. Vitamin D deficiency as a
public health issue: using vitamin D2 or vitamin D3 in future fortification strategies. Proc
Nutr Soc, 76, 392-399.
YU, G., WANG, L. G., HAN, Y. & HE, Q. Y. 2012. clusterProfiler: an R package for comparing biological
themes among gene clusters. Omics, 16, 284-7.
ZHANG, R., EDWARDS, J. R., KO, S. Y., DONG, S., LIU, H., OYAJOBI, B. O., PAPASIAN, C., DENG, H. W. &
ZHAO, M. 2011. Transcriptional regulation of BMP2 expression by the PTH-CREB signaling
pathway in osteoblasts. PLoS One, 6, e20780.
ZHANG, Y., FANF, F., TANG, J., JIA, L., FENG, Y., XU, P. & FARAMAND, A. 2019. Association between
vitamin D supplementation and mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. British
Medical Journal, 366, l4673.
ZHENG, R., GONZALEZ, A., YUE, J., WU, X., QIU, M., GUI, L., ZHU, S. & HUANG, L. 2019. Efficacy and
Safety of Vitamin D Supplementation in Patients With Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: A
Meta-analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. Am J Med Sci, 358, 104-114.
ZHOU, R., CHUN, R. F., LISSE, T. S., GARCIA, A. J., XU, J., ADAMS, J. S. & HEWISON, M. 2015. Vitamin D
and alternative splicing of RNA. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol, 148, 310-7.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.16.20247700; this version posted February 22, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

200
201
202
203
204
205

ZITTERMANN, A., ERNST, J. B., GUMMERT, J. F. & BORGERMANN, J. 2014. Vitamin D
supplementation, body weight and human serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D response: a
systematic review. Eur J Nutr, 53, 367-74.
ZITTERMANN, A., PILZ, S. & BERTHOLD, H. K. 2020. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D response to vitamin
D supplementation in infants: a systematic review and meta-analysis of clinical intervention
trials. Eur J Nutr, 59, 359-369.

39

a)
Selected 32 subjects from each of the D2
and D3 treatment groups, and 34 from the
placebo

Tripkovic et al. participants, n=335
WE n=245 , SA n=90

Subjects for transcriptome analysis, n=98
WE n=67 , SA n=31

For D2 and D3, a range of serum [25OHD]
responses to supplementation were chosen
Placebo subjects were chosen at random

b)
Group

White
Euro (n)

South
Asian (n)

Total (n)

D2

21

11

32

D3

21

11

32

Placebo

25

8

33

c)
25(OH)D2

Fig. 1.

25(OH)D3

Total 25(OH)D

PTH

Adj. calcium

a)

c)
Comparison

Sig. down

Sig. up

WE D2 V3 v V1

523 (498)

369 (350)

WE D3 V3 v V1

997 (943)

342 (329)

WE P V3 v V1

1171 (1096)

605 (565)

SA D2 V3 v V1

1 (1)

0 (0)

SA D3 V3 v V1

1 (1)

0 (0)

SA P V3 v V1

191 (189)

436 (408)

[WE D2 V3 v V1] v [WE P V3 v V1]

0 (0)

0 (0)

[WE D3 V3 v V1] v [WE P V3 v V1]

0 (0)

0 (0)

[WE D3 V3 v V1] v [WE D2 V3 v V1]

0 (0)

0 (0)

[SA D2 V3 v V1] v [SA P V3 v V1]

0 (0)

0 (0)

[SA D3 V3 v V1] v [SA P V3 v V1]

2 (2)

3 (3)

[SA D3 V3 v V1] v [SA D2 V3 v V1]

0 (0)

0 (0)

b)

probes (genes)

probes (genes)

Up, WE V3 v V1

Down, WE V3 v V1

d)

Probe A_33_P3275751 , SEC14L1, transcript 7

Fig. 2.

Comparison

logFC

adj.P.Val

WE D2 V3 v V1

-0.503

2.29E-03

WE D3 V3 v V1

-0.593

5.25E-05

WE P V3 v V1

-0.182

0.209

a)

Significantly down-regulated by D2 and D3, but not
placebo (blue points in Fig. 2d)

Significant functional enrichment (FDR<0.05)
Immune system process
Innate immune system
Transcription factor complex
Neutrophil degranulation
Leukocyte activation

Fig. 3.

b)

Significantly up-regulated by D2 and D3, but not
placebo (red points in Fig. 2d)

Significant functional enrichment (FDR<0.05)
Mitochondrion
Ribosomal protein
snRNP Sm proteins
Histone H4

a)

Fig. 4.

Significant GO BP functional categories associated
with down-regulated probes in the D2 or D3 treatment
groups, but not the placebo

b)

Significant Reactome PA categories associated with
down-regulated probes in the D2 or D3 treatment
groups, but not the placebo

a)

Fig. 5.

Significant GO CC functional categories associated
with up-regulated probes in the D2 or D3 treatment
groups, but not the placebo

b)

Significant GO BP functional categories associated
with up-regulated probes in the D2 or D3 treatment
groups, but not the placebo

a)

Co-expression modules from WE subject data
(n= 67, 134 microarrays)
GO enrichment

b)

Co-expression modules from SA subject data
(n=30, 60 microarrays)
GO enrichment
structural constituent of ribosome

none
mitochondrial matrix

ncRNA processing
RNA splicing
mitochondrial matrix
ubiquitin protease ligase binding

ncRNA processing

histone binding
neutrophil activation

none

neutrophil activation

neutrophil activation
neutrophil activation
neutrophil activation

mRNA catabolic process

structural constituent of ribosome
histone binding
none
neutrophil activation

Fig. 6.

*

Fig. 7.

