medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Extraction of Viral Nucleic Acids with Carbon
Nanotubes Increases SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR
Detection Sensitivity
Sanghwa Jeong1, Eduardo G. Grandio1, Nicole Navarro2, Rebecca L. Pinals1, Francis Ledesma1,
Darwin Yang1, and Markita P. Landry*1,3-5
1

Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720,
United States
2
Department of Chemistry, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, United States
3
Innovative Genomics Institute (IGI), Berkeley, California 94720, United States
4
California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, QB3, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, United
ed
States
5
Chan-Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, California 94158, United States

0
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The global SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus pandemic has led to a surging demand for rapid and efficient viral
infection diagnostic tests, generating a supply shortage in diagnostic test consumables including nucleic
acid extraction kits. Here, we develop a modular method for high-yield extraction of viral single-stranded
nucleic acids by using ‘capture’ ssDNA sequences attached to carbon nanotubes. Target SARS-CoV-2
viral RNA can be captured by ssDNA-nanotube constructs via hybridization and separated from the liquid
phase in a single-tube system with minimal chemical reagents, for downstream quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) detection. This nanotube-based extraction method
enables 100% extraction yield of target SARS-CoV-2 RNA from phosphate buffered saline in comparison
to ~20% extraction yield when instead using a commercial silica-column kit. Notably, carbon nanotubes
enable extraction of nucleic acids directly from 50% human saliva, bypassing the need for further biofluid
purification and avoiding the use of DNA/RNA extraction kits. Carbon nanotube-based extraction of viral
nucleic acids facilitates high-yield and high-sensitivity identification of viral nucleic acids such as the
SARS-CoV-2 viral genome with reduced reliance on reagents affected by supply chain obstacles.

Introduction
The emergence of the novel human coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) in late 2019 rapidly escalated into a
global pandemic. The high transmission rate and high proportion of asymptomatic infections has led to a
massive, global demands for rapid and efficient viral infection diagnostic tests1, 2. The coronavirus
pandemic has unearthed limitations of our diagnostics including insufficient supply, throughput, and
variable accuracy, exacerbated by pipeline limitations in accessing reagents, specialized equipment, and
trained personnel to conduct tests2. Low testing throughput and capacity has resulted in corresponding
3, 4
delays in patients receiving their testing results, an cripples contact tracing efforts . The two main types
of diagnostic tests for virus infections, including SARS-CoV-2, are nucleic acid amplification tests
(NAATs) and serological tests. NAATs are currently the gold standard, mainly using real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR)3-6. NAATs can determine whether a person has an
active infection and enables highly sensitive and quantitative diagnosis of infectious diseases. For PCRbased tests, pathogenic nucleic acid extraction from patient samples is required. However, extracting
nucleic acids from a patient’s biofluid is a complicated and time-consuming task that requires trained
3, 4, 6
. Additionally, specialized materials such as
technicians to perform, involving many processing steps
spin columns with silica membranes or magnetic beads and chemically toxic reagents for lysis, binding,
washing, and elution are needed. Together with supply chain limitations for aforementioned reagents,
nucleic acid extraction constitutes a major bottleneck in current SARS-CoV-2 testing1. An advanced and
simplified extraction methodology could increase diagnostic availability and efficiency, benefitting patient
care and infection control.
Several modified protocols have been developed for extraction of nucleic acids for RT-qPCR including a
chemically driven phenol/chloroform extraction method, and solid-phase extraction techniques based on
7
nucleic acid-adsorbing substrates such as silica and cellulose . For example, Wang et al. reported a DNA
extraction protocol for PCR-based detection by using positively charged polyacrylamide microspheres to
8
adsorb the negatively charged DNA and remove other patient biomolecules . Kolluri et al. reported a
portable nucleic acid extraction protocol from whole blood with a paper-and-plastic device for capture and
purification of nucleic acids on a glass fiber membrane, followed by treatment with a chromatography
9
paper waste pad . In addition to these total nucleic acid extraction methods, affinity-based nucleic acid

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

extraction has been also investigated by using complementary DNA or RNA sequences as capturing
ligands. Selective isolation of mRNA from eukaryotic cells is commercially available with the basis of
hybridization of a (dT) oligo on magnetic bead matrices to capture mRNA with an oligo (dA) tail. The
magnetic beads complexed with mRNAs are next separated from total RNA and genomic DNA with
application of a strong magnetic field10. Gopal et al. reported selective extraction of parasite Onchocerca
volvulus DNA from the black fly by using magnetic beads with sequence-specific oligonucleotides to
capture and immobilize the parasite DNA11. In this work, biotinylated capture oligonucleotides were bioconjugated with streptavidin-coated magnetic beads, and this oligonucleotide based magnetic bead
method improved the efficiency of pool screening of black fly vectors. In similar method, Hei et al.
published the purification of gRNA of SARS-CoV with magnetic beads modified with capturing
oligonucleotide12. While selective nucleic acid extraction with complementary DNA/RNA ligands could
improve the sensitivity of downstream PCR assays for viral detection by enriching target viral nucleic
acids over host DNA and RNA, aforementioned assays have not replaced or been incorporated into RTqPCR workflows owing to their complexity, lower sensitivity, cost, or incompatibility with standard RTqPCR protocols.
Single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) is one dimensional, cylindrically shaped allotropes of carbon
nanostructures with a high surface area and large aspect ratio due to their unique small diameter of 1
13
nm and long lateral dimension up to several micrometers . Colloidal SWCNT dispersions can be
prepared by the self-assembly of amphiphilic biopolymers such as nucleic acids and peptides on SWCNT
surface via pi-pi stacking interactions between the aromatic bases of nucleic acids and the sp2 hybridized
SWCNT lattice, avoiding the need for chemical conjugation of ligands to SWCNT. As such, singlestranded DNA (ssDNA) ligands can be adsorbed to SWCNT in helical configurations via quick few-minute
probe tip sonication,14 avoiding time-consuming and relatively costly site-specific attachment chemistries
needed to attach ssDNA to most other nanoparticles. Following non-covalent conjugation of ssDNA to
SWCNT, the ssDNA on the SWCNT surface is available to hybridize and attach a target oligonucleotide
with a complementary sequence, where this hybridization event can be identified with a change in the
ssDNA-SWCNT fluorescence signal15.



Herein, we develop a high yielding method for extraction of viral single-stranded nucleic acids based on
ssDNA-SWCNT constructs modified with ten unique capturing ssDNA sequences that can bind to target
nucleic acids. These ssDNA-SWCNT constructs can be readily incorporated into commercial RT-qPCR
testing workflows and can either increase the extraction yield of purified target nucleic acids from ~20%
(commercial kit) to ~100% (SWCNT-based protocol), or can enable extraction of target nucleic acids in
crude patient saliva biofluids, the latter of which avoids the need to purify patient samples. This viral
nucleic extraction protocol permits identification of viral nucleic acids (i) with high nucleic acid extraction
yield in complex biofluids, such as unprocessed saliva samples (ii) without reliance on reagents affected
by supply chain obstacles, and (iii) with rapid extraction time.

Results
To enable high-sensitivity extraction of viral nucleic acids, we implemented SWCNT as capture agents for
target viral nucleic acids. SWCNTs were designed to enable (1) complexation with target viral nucleic
acids via sequence-specific capture oligonucleotides on ssDNA-SWCNT constructs and (2) acid
precipitation of SWCNT constructs post-capture of target viral nucleic acid (Figure 1). Ten unique ssDNA
capture oligonucleotide sequences are adhered to SWCNT via (GT)15 anchoring segments, whereby the
ten unique sequences are complementary to different segments of the SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA genome

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(full DNA sequences in Table 1). Each colloidal ssDNA-SWCNT construct was prepared by probe tip
sonication of HiPCo SWCNT and one of the ten unique capture sequences. Of the capture sequences,
nine were chosen to enable hybridization of SWCNT to the nucleocapsid (N) gene region (Target 2 –
Target 10 DNA sequences), and one DNA sequence for the oligo (dA) tail (Target 1 DNA sequence).
Following synthesis, these ten ssDNA-SWCNT constructs were exposed to the SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA
as detailed in several experiments below, to ‘capture’ the viral nucleic acid. We hypothesize that exposing
g
ssDNA-SWCNTs to acidic conditions would neutralize SWCNT surface charges, promoting reversible
SWCNT aggregation due to attractive van der Waals interactions and reduced electrostatic repulsive
forces. Therefore, the addition of hydrochloric acid (HCl) to the mixture induced precipitation of ssDNASWCNT constructs, to which the viral RNA is bound, enabling facile separation of bound viral RNA from
the supernatant solution. The precipitates were repeatedly centrifuged and washed with DNase/RNasefree water to remove the unwanted biomolecules. Lastly, the precipitates containing ssDNA-SWCNT
constructs and viral RNA were dispersed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and heated at 95 °C to
desorb the viral RNA from SWCNT surface. The final PBS solution containing the viral RNA can be
directly used for downstream RT-qPCR for viral detection.

Figure 1. Schematic of single-stranded nucleic acid extraction with ssDNA-SWCNT capturing constructs. (1)
Target viral nucleic acid is incubated with ssDNA-functionalized SWCNT capturing constructs, which results in thee
self-assembly of the target nucleic acid on ssDNA-SWCNTs via nucleic acid hybridization. (2) The self-assembled
ssDNA-SWCNT and the captured target nucleic acid is precipitated by centrifugation in acidic conditions. (3) The
product is purified with nuclease-free water to remove unwanted biomolecules. (4) The product is heated at 95  to
desorb the target nucleic acids from the SWCNT surface. (5) The extracted target nucleic acids can be amplified by
reverse transcription and polymerase chain reaction.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Name
Target1
Target2
Target3
Target4
Target5
Target6
Target7
Target8
Target9
Target10

Sequence (5’->3’)
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTCTTAGAAGCCTCAGCAGC
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTGCGGCCAATGTTTGTAA
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTACTTGATCTTTGAAATTT
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTAGGAAGAAGAGTCACAGT
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTAAACGGAAAAGCGAAAA
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTTCTAGCAGGAGAAGTTC
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTTGAGGAAGTTGTAGCAC
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGCCCAGTTCCTAGGTAGT
GTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTGTTGTCCTCGAGGGAATTTA

Table 1. Sequences of ssDNA used for ssDNA-functionalized SWCNT constructs for SARS-CoV-2 RNA
extraction. From the 5’ end, (GT)15 sequence is for anchoring onto the SWCNT surface, and the subsequent 18-mer
sequence is for capturing SARS-CoV-2 RNA.
We first optimized the number of unique ssDNA-SWCNT capture sequences to maximize extraction of
6
SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA. 4×10 copies of synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA was spiked into a PBS solution to
serve as the RNA standard solution. The RNA from this standard solution was extracted by introducing
ssDNA-SWCNT constructs with different capture regions, precipitating, recovering, and detecting the
recovered RNA by subsequent RT-qPCR with the corresponding SARS-CoV-2 primer/probe set (Table
S2). When four unique ssDNA-SWCNT constructs (Target 1 - Target 4 DNA sequences) were used, 64±8%
of the SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA was extracted from the standard solution (Figure 2A). The extraction
efficiency was improved to 89±7% when ten unique ssDNA-SWCNT constructs (Target 1 - Target 10
DNA sequences) were used. Conversely, only 13±4% of the viral RNA was recovered in the absence of
capturing ssDNA-SWCNT constructs. We hypothesize that the increase in SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA
extraction efficiency with an increased number of unique ssDNA-SWCNT capture sequences is due to the
ability of the viral RNA to hybridize with more than one ssDNA-SWCNT construct. Therefore, when the
number of unique capture sequences increases, the viral RNA bound to multiple ssDNA-SWCNT
constructs can be precipitated more easily during the acid precipitation step of the extraction.
To optimize extraction efficiency at the acid precipitation step, we quantified the amount of ssDNASWCNT found in the solution supernatant as a function of the number of pellet washes, seeking to
maximize the number of washes while minimizing the disturbance of ssDNA-SWCNT from the pellet into
the supernatant. To this end, we used (GT)15 ssDNA-SWCNT as a model case, and quantified the
SWCNT concentration in the supernatant by measuring the absorbance of SWCNT at 632 nm (Figure 2B
and 2C). Following addition of HCl and centrifugation, (GT)15-SWCNT were precipitated, and no trace of
(GT)15-SWCNT was observed in the supernatant. Next, the absorption spectra of the supernatant was
monitored following serial supernatant decantation with distilled water. Up to the second water wash, no
(GT)15-SWCNT were measured in the supernatant, suggesting that two water washes following acid
precipitation of ssDNA-SWCNTs is optimal for the acid wash step. Conversely, 0.59% and 29% of (GT)15SWCNT were lost from the pellet and measured in the supernatant following the third and fourth washes,
respectively, as the solution became less acidic due to consecutive dilutions. Therefore, for our
downstream experiments testing SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA extraction, precipitates were twice-washed
during the acid precipitation step to minimize the loss of viral RNA but maximize the purity of the
recovered nucleic acids.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Optimization of SARS-CoV-2 RNA extraction protocol with ssDNA-SWCNT constructs. (A) RNA
extraction efficiency is dependent on the number of unique ssDNA capture sequences used to sequester the target
viral RNA. Ten or four DNA-SWCNT capturing sequences denotes Targets # 1-10 or Targets # 1-4, respectively,
from Table 1. As a control, the extraction protocol is followed without ssDNA-SWCNT. Error bars are standard
deviation from n = 3 independent trials. (B-C) The loss of (GT)15-SWCNT from the precipitated pellet in acidic
conditions after multiple washing steps. (B) Absorption spectra of (GT)15-SWCNT in the supernatant after each
wash step, and (C) total loss of SWCNT calculated from the absorbance of SWCNT at 632 nm, as a function of the
number of wash steps. (D) RT-qPCR compatibility of (GT)15-SWCNT. RT-qPCR detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA
is unaffected in the presence of 100 ng (GT)15-SWCNT in the reaction tube (n=3). NTC = non template control.
16, 17
. Therefore,
e,
Prior work has suggested that carbon nanotubes can adversely affect the efficacy of PCR
we also investigated whether any remaining SWCNT in the final extracted RNA product hinders the
ct
subsequent RT-qPCR assay. The standard solution spiked with synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA was subject
to RT-qPCR to detect the viral RNA, with and without 100 ng of (GT)15-SWCNT in the reaction tube,
which is equal to the maximum amount of SWCNT used for a single extraction step. The PCR
amplification curve revealed only marginal interference of SWCNT constructs on quantitation cycle (Cq)
values and curve shapes (Figure 2D), and this result confirms the compatibility of SWCNT for
downstream RT-qPCR analysis, in the unlikely event that any were to remain in the supernatant following
g
the acid precipitation and pellet wash step.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The sensitivity of RT-qPCR depends on the efficiency with which the target viral RNA can be extracted. In
the case of SARS-CoV-2, the highly variable viral load between individuals motivates extraction of RNA
from patient samples (nasal swabs, saliva samples) with maximal efficiency. Therefore, the synthetic
SARS-CoV-2 RNA extraction efficiency of our protocol (Figure 1) was compared to that of a commercial
viral RNA/DNA extraction kit (PureLink® Viral RNA/DNA Mini Kit, Invitrogen) which uses silica substrates
s
for viral RNA/DNA extraction18. To evaluate the extraction efficiency in an inhibitor-free solution, the
standard RNA template solution was prepared as described above, by spiking PBS with 2×106 copies
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA. Standard solutions were ten-fold serially diluted to probe the working range
of nucleic acid copy numbers for extraction. The original spiked RNA samples were also amplified by RTqPCR without any extraction steps to calculate the baseline RNA recovery yield (Figure 3C). RT-qPCR
amplification plots and Cq values of RNA extracted from our method vs. the PureLink method are shown
in Figure 3. Our SWCNT-based extraction protocol recovered 100% of the spiked RNA across three
logs of spiked RNA concentration ranging from 2×103 to 2×106 RNA copies per 0.2 mL with a correlation
2
ial
coefficient (R ) of 0.9917 and an amplification efficiency (E) of 95%. Conversely, the PureLink commercial
2
extraction kit showed a significantly lower recovery yield of ~20% with R of 0.9997 and E of 95%. Both
extraction protocols can be completed in an hour.



Figure 3. Synthetic SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA extraction from PBS. RT-qPCR amplification of (A) SARSCoV-2 RNA extracted by a commercial PureLink Viral RNA/DNA extraction kit, and (B) SARS-CoV-2 RNA
extracted by ssDNA-SWCNT-based protocol. RNA templates were serially diluted ten-fold across three orders of

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

magnitude. (C) Comparison of RT-qPCR amplification of original non-extracted RNA (blue), RNA extracted with
ssDNA-SWCNT based protocol (purple), and RNA extracted with a commercial PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit
(yellow), where lower Cq values represent better extraction of RNA. (D) Extraction efficiency of RNA in PBS with
the ssDNA-SWCNT based protocol (purple) and PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit (yellow). Error bars are standard
deviation from n = 3 independent trials.
A major bottleneck for RT-qPCR based detection of viral nucleic acids is the necessity to purify a biospecimen prior to PCR detection. Therefore, we sought to compare the extraction efficiency of synthetic
SARS-CoV-2 RNA from complex human biofluids with our SWCNT-based protocol versus a commercial
n
PureLink kit. We therefore tested the extraction of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from a 50% (v/v) solution of human
saliva in PBS. RT-qPCR amplification and Cq values were obtained as detailed above. Our results show
th
that SWCNT-based extraction protocol enables recovery of >50% of the SARS-CoV-2 synthetic RNA with
R2 of 0.9891 and E of 99% across three orders of magnitude of concentration from 2×103 to 2×106 RNA
copies per 0.2 mL. In comparison, the PureLink column-based kit showed a similar recovery yield of >60
60%
2
with R of 0.9917 and E of 87% (Figure 4). Notably, the PureLink kit relies on supply-chain limited
reagents and requires 15 steps with four tubes to enable extraction of RNA, whereas, SWCNT-based
viral RNA extraction can be done as a ‘one-pot’ protocol in a single tube. Therefore, viral RNA can be
directly extracted and PCR-quantified from crude human saliva biofluids with our SWCNT-based protocol,
ol,
at efficiencies comparable to RNA extraction with commercial DNA/RNA extraction kits.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Synthetic SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA extraction from 50% human saliva. RT-qPCR amplification of
(A) SARS-CoV-2 RNA extracted by a commercial PureLink Viral RNA/DNA extraction kit, and (B) SARS-CoV-2
RNA extracted by ssDNA-SWCNT-based protocol. RNA was extracted from 50% human saliva spiked with
synthetic SARS-CoV-2 genomic RNA. RNA templates were serially diluted ten-fold across three orders of
magnitude. (C) Comparison of RT-qPCR amplification of original non-extracted RNA (blue), RNA extracted with
ssDNA-SWCNT-based protocol (purple), and RNA extracted with a commercial PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit
(yellow). (D) Extraction efficiency of RNA from 50% human saliva with the ssDNA-SWCNT based protocol
(purple) and PureLink Viral RNA/DNA kit (yellow). Error bars are standard deviation from n = 3 independent trials.

Discussion
The ability to first extract and next quantify viral nucleic acids from patients forms the foundation of testing
and tracking viral infections, such as that for the current SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Increasing the extraction
yield of viral nucleic acids, to do so from crude patient biofluids, and with materials and reagents
orthogonal to those in commercial DNA/RNA extraction kits could greatly increase our testing capacity
and could be seamlessly applied to all other DNA or RNA detection workflows. In this study, we
developed a protocol for extraction of single-stranded viral nucleic acids such as SARS-CoV-2 RNA, for
subsequent quantification by RT-qPCR. ssDNA-functionalized SWCNT suspensions with DNA-based
‘capture’ sequences enabled high sensitivity extraction of the SARS-CoV-2 RNA from both PBS and
human saliva biofluids. To bind the viral nucleic acid to substrates, our SWCNT-based extraction protocol
makes use of ssDNA sequences on SWCNT, which contain sequences complementary to specific
regions in the SARS-CoV-2 viral genome, serving as capturing ligands. We demonstrate that our
SWCNT-based viral RNA extraction protocol enables higher RNA extraction efficiency in PBS (~100%
extraction efficiency) as compared to a commercial silica-matrix column PureLink kit (~20% extraction
efficiency). Furthermore, we show that SWCNT-based RNA extraction enables us to bypass the lengthy
protocols associated with nucleic acid cleanup from patient biofluids by simply mixing ssDNA-SWCNT
with human saliva, for facile recovery of viral nucleic acids. Our SWCNT-based extraction protocol
combined with SARS-CoV-2 CDC RUO kit represented the limit of quantification (LoQ) of 6.4 copies/μL in
original PBS buffer, and LoQ of 9.2 copies/μL in original 50% human saliva.
The distinct advantages of our SWCNT-based protocol are in increasing the sensitivity of viral RNA
detection, and in enabling RT-qPCR based viral RNA quantification without silica-column based
purification of patient saliva samples. ssDNA-SWCNTs are produced in a ‘chemistry-free’ system via
sonication-based conjugation of capturing ssDNA to the SWCNT, greatly reducing the cost and time to
prepare this nucleic acid extraction system. Furthermore, the approach described herein requires only
small quantities of SWCNT and HCl in a one-pot system. As such, our protocol enables purification of
viral nucleic acids directly from patient biofluid, avoiding the need for, and time to operate, silica-matrix
columns that require numerous binding, washing, and elution reagents and steps. Lastly, the modularity
of our approach enables the user to choose any specific capturing ssDNA sequences for attachment to
SWCNT, potentially enabling detection of different viral nucleic acids, including ssDNA-genome-based
19, 20
viruses, and positive strand and negative strand RNA viruses.
Taken together, our results demonstrate that ssDNA-SWCNT based extraction of viral nucleic acids is a
modular approach that could serve as a low-cost and rapid method to extract target nucleic acids from
patient biofluids. The manufacturing burden and cost of ssDNA-SWCNTs are significantly lower than
those associated with current viral nucleic acid extraction kits and protocols, enabling this technology to
be potentially implemented in any laboratory with modularity that enables researchers to rapidly substitute
their desired capture sequences on the SWCNT for detection of other viral or diagnostic nucleic acids.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Pertinent to the current pandemic, this SWCNT-based extraction protocol can alleviate the supply
shortages and unprecedented demands for RT-qPCR testing due to its manufacturing simplicity. Lastly,
easy substitution of other capture ssDNA on ssDNA-SWCNTs could find applications in detection of other
viral infections such as influenza, or applications in routine clinical diagnostics such as genetic disorder
testing using cell-free DNA.

Methods
A.

Preparation of ssDNA-SWCNT constructs with capturing target nucleic acids

For SARS-CoV-2 RNA extraction, 10 unique single-stranded DNA sequences (ssDNAs, purchas
ed from Integrated DNA technologies) were used as viral RNA ‘capture’ sequences, each contain
ing 18-mer DNA sequences complementary to different parts of the SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA geno
me, and (GT)15 ‘anchor’ sequences for adsorption to the SWCNT surface. RNA sequences from
SARS-CoV-2 (variant MT007544.1) were used to design the capture ssDNA sequences. Of note,
the complementary sequence region can be changed according to the desired target nucleic acid
sequences to be recovered. Full ssDNA sequences from Target 1 to Target 10 are listed in Tabl
e 1. For each ssDNA, ssDNA-functionalized SWCNT constructs were generated with the followin
g protocol: 1 mg of HiPCo SWCNT (small diameter HiPCo SWCNT, NanoIntegris) was added to
0.9 mL of phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and the solution was mixed with 100 µL of 1 mM ssD
NA. The resulting mixture was bath-sonicated for 2 min and probe-tip sonicated for 10 min at 5 W
power in an ice bath. After sonication, the ssDNA-SWCNT suspension was centrifuged for 30 mi
n at 16,100 g to precipitate unsuspended SWCNT, and the supernatant containing colloidally sus
pended ssDNA-SWCNT was collected. The supernatant was spin-filtered with a 100 kDa MWCO
centrifugal filter at 6000 rpm for 5 min with DNase free water to remove unbound ssDNA, and th
e purified solution at the top of the filter was collected. This spin filtration to remove unbound ssD
NA was repeated three times. The ssDNA-SWCNT suspension was diluted with PBS buffer and
stored at 4 C until further use. The concentration of the ssDNA-SWCNT suspension was calcul
ated by measuring absorbance at 632 nm with an extinction coefficient for SWCNT of 0.036 (mg/
L)-1 cm-1.21
B.

Synthetic SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA extraction by ssDNA-SWCNT constructs

10 unique SARS-CoV-2 RNA-capturing ssDNA-SWCNT suspensions were mixed to make a 1
mg/L ssDNA-SWCNT solution for each unique sequence of ssDNA-SWCNT. The concentration
of total ssDNA-SWCNT was 10 mg/L. For the extraction of target RNA from PBS buffer, 190 μL o
f a known amount of RNA (synthetic SARS-CoV-2 RNA Control 1 (MT007544.1), Twist Bioscienc
e) in PBS buffer was mixed with 10 μL of as-prepared total 10 mg/L ssDNA-SWCNT mixture, and
incubated for 10 min at room temperature to enable target RNA capture by ssDNA-SWCNT con
structs. Next, 5 μL of 5 M hydrochloric acid was added to precipitate the ssDNA-SWCNT constru
cts that had bound target RNA. The solution was gently shaken. The solution was centrifuged at
16,000 g for 3 min, and the supernatant was discarded. The precipitates were resuspended in 20
0 μL DNase/RNase free water. The solution was centrifuged again at 16,000 g for 3 min, and the
supernatant was discarded. The precipitates were resuspended in 200 μL PBS buffer and briefly
sonicated in a bath sonicator (CPX-952-218R, Branson). The mixture solution was incubated at 9
5 °C for 10 min to weaken the adsorption of nucleic acids from the SWCNT surface. The extracte

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

d RNA solution (200 μL) was kept at 4 °C before further use. For downstream RT-qPCR, 5 μL of
the extracted RNA solution (2.5% of the total solution) was mixed with the RT-qPCR master mix.
For the extraction of RNA from human saliva, 100 μL of human saliva (pooled normal human sa
liva, Innovative Research), 85 μL of a known amount of viral RNA in PBS buffer, and 5 μL of 40
U/μL ribonuclease inhibitor (RNaseOUT™ Recombinant Ribonuclease Inhibitor, Thermo Fisher)
was mixed with 10 μL of as-prepared ssDNA-SWCNT mixture and incubated for 10 min at room t
emperature. Ribonuclease inhibitor was added to prevent degradation of unprotected RNAs in sa
liva, which can be replaced with viral lysis buffer in the case of a viral specimen test. The remaini
ng PCR protocol is the same as that for nucleic acid extraction from PBS buffer.
For RNA extraction with a commercial PureLink Viral RNA/DNA Mini Kit (Invitrogen), we followe
d the protocol provided by manufacturer with the proteinase K and carrier RNA included in the kit
.
C.

RT-qPCR protocol
For RT-qPCR, PCR master mix containing GoTaq® 1-Step RT-qPCR System (Promega) master
mix, 500 nM of forward and reverse primers, 125 nM of FAM-based probes, and 40 U of RNaseO
UT™ Recombinant Ribonuclease Inhibitor (Life Technologies, USA) was used. The sequence de
tails of primers and probes are in Table S2. 5 μL of extracted RNA template solution were added
in a total volume of 20 μL in triplicate. All reactions were completed in a 96-well plate format (Micr
oAmp™ Fast Optical 96-Well Reaction Plate with Barcode, 0.1 mL). The RT-qPCR assays were
performed under the following conditions: reverse transcription at 45°C for 15 minutes and initial
denaturation at 95°C for 2 minutes, 45 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 3 seconds, and anneali
ng at 55°C for 30 seconds using a standard benchtop real-time thermocycler (CFX96 Touch Real
-Time PCR System, BIO-RAD). The Cq values and standard deviations obtained were used to cal
culate the limit of quantification (LoQ). The LoQ was determined with the lowest number of detect
able RNA with a coefficient of variation (CV) < 35%, and was estimated by following conventiona
l calculations22.

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support of the IGI LGR ERA and Citris/Banatao Seed Funding. We acknowledge
support of a Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award at the Scientific Interface (CASI) (to M.P.L.), the
Simons Foundation (to M.P.L.), a Stanley Fahn PDF Junior Faculty Grant with Award # PF-JFA-1760 (to
M.P.L.), a Beckman Foundation Young Investigator Award (to M.P.L.), a CZI investigator award (to
M.P.L), a Sloan Foundation Award (to M.P.L.), a Moore Foundation Award (to M.P.L.), a Cisco
Research Center grant (to M.P.L), and a DARPA Young Investigator Award (to M.P.L.). M.P.L. is a
Chan Zuckerberg Biohub investigator. Work at the Molecular Foundry was supported by the Office of
Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DEAC02-05CH11231. R.L.P., F.L., and D.Y. acknowledge the support of NSF Graduate Research
Fellowships (NSF DGE 1752814).

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Author Contributions
S.J. and M.P.L. conceived the idea and designed experiments. S.J. and E.G.G. performed the
experiments and characterized the extraction protocols. All authors discussed the results and wrote the
manuscript.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Bruce, E.A. et al. Direct RT-qPCR detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from patient nasopharyngeal
swabs without an RNA extraction step. PLoS Biol. 18, e3000896 (2020).
Amen, A.M. et al. Blueprint for a pop-up SARS-CoV-2 testing lab. Nat. Biotechnol. 38, 791-797
(2020).
Esbin, M.N. et al. Overcoming the bottleneck to widespread testing: a rapid review of nucleic acid
testing approaches for COVID-19 detection. RNA 26, 771-783 (2020).
Smyrlaki, I. et al. Massive and rapid COVID-19 testing is feasible by extraction-free SARS-CoV-2
RT-PCR. Nat. Commun. 11, 4812 (2020).
Won, J. et al. Development of a Laboratory-safe and Low-cost Detection Protocol for SARS-CoV2 of the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). Exp. Neurobiol. 29, 107-119 (2020).
Sentmanat, M., Kouranova, E. & Cui, X. One-step RNA extraction for RT-qPCR detection of
2019-nCoV. bioRxiv, 2020.2004.2002.022384 (2020).
Ali, N., Rampazzo, R.d.C.P., Costa, A.D.T. & Krieger, M.A. Current Nucleic Acid Extraction
Methods and Their Implications to Point-of-Care Diagnostics. Biomed. Res. Int. 2017, 93065649306564 (2017).
Wang, J. et al. Fast DNA Extraction with Polyacrylamide Microspheres for Polymerase Chain
Reaction Detection. ACS Omega 5, 13829-13839 (2020).
Kolluri, N. et al. SNAPflex: a paper-and-plastic device for instrument-free RNA and DNA
extraction from whole blood. Lab Chip (2020).
Berensmeier, S. Magnetic particles for the separation and purification of nucleic acids. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 73, 495-504 (2006).
Gopal, H. et al. Oligonucleotide Based Magnetic Bead Capture of Onchocerca volvulus DNA for
PCR Pool Screening of Vector Black Flies. PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis. 6, e1712 (2012).
Hei, A.-L. & Cai, J.-P. Development of a Method for Concentrating and Purifying SARS
Coronavirus RNA by a Magnetic Bead Capture System. DNA Cell Biol. 24, 479-484 (2005).
Chio, L. et al. Electrostatic Assemblies of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes and SequenceTunable Peptoid Polymers Detect a Lectin Protein and Its Target Sugars. Nano Lett. (2019).
Gigliotti, B., Sakizzie, B., Bethune, D.S., Shelby, R.M. & Cha, J.N. Sequence-Independent Helical
Wrapping of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes by Long Genomic DNA. Nano Lett. 6, 159-164
(2006).
Harvey, J.D. et al. A carbon nanotube reporter of microRNA hybridization events in vivo. Nat.
Biomed. Eng. 1, 0041 (2017).

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.22.20224675; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

21.
22.

Zhang, Z., Shen, C., Wang, M., Han, H. & Cao, X. Aqueous suspension of carbon nanotubes
enhances the specificity of long PCR. Biotechniques 44, 537-545 (2008).
Williams, R.M., Nayeem, S., Dolash, B.D. & Sooter, L.J. The Effect of DNA-Dispersed SingleWalled Carbon Nanotubes on the Polymerase Chain Reaction. PLoS ONE 9, e94117 (2014).
Sathiamoorthy, S., Malott, R.J., Gisonni-Lex, L. & Ng, S.H.S. Selection and evaluation of an
efficient method for the recovery of viral nucleic acids from complex biologicals. NPJ Vaccines 3,
31 (2018).
Tran, T.L. et al. Detection of influenza A virus using carbon nanotubes field effect transistor based
DNA sensor. Physica E Low Dimens. Syst. Nanostruct. 93, 83-86 (2017).
Tam, P.D., Van Hieu, N., Chien, N.D., Le, A.-T. & Anh Tuan, M. DNA sensor development based
on multi-wall carbon nanotubes for label-free influenza virus (type A) detection. J. Immunol.
Methods 350, 118-124 (2009).
Zhang, J. et al. Molecular recognition using corona phase complexes made of synthetic polymers
adsorbed on carbon nanotubes. Nat. Nanotechnol. 8, 959-968 (2013).
Forootan, A. et al. Methods to determine limit of detection and limit of quantification in quantitative
real-time PCR (qPCR). Biomol. Detect. Quantif. 12, 1-6 (2017).

12

