medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Twitter Discourse on Nicotine as Potential Prophylactic or Therapeutic for COVID-19

Authors: Ramakanth Kavuluru, Ph.D, Jiho Noh M.S., Shyanika W. Rose, Ph.D, M.A.
Corresponding author: Ramakanth Kavuluru, Associate Professor, Division of Biomedical Informatics,
Internal Medicine, 230E MDS Bldg, 725 Rose St, Lexington KY 40506.
Contact email: rvkavu2@uky.edu
Other authors: Jiho Noh, doctoral student, Computer Science Department, Lexington, KY
Shyanika Rose, Assistant Professor, Center for Health Equity Transformation and Department of Behavioral
Science, College of Medicine, Lexington, KY.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Twitter Discourse on Nicotine as Potential Prophylactic and Therapeutic for COVID-19
Ramakanth Kavuluru, Ph.D, Jiho Noh M.S., Shyanika W. Rose, Ph.D, M.A.

ABSTRACT

Objective: The low observed prevalence of smokers among hospitalized COVID-19 patients in certain
cohorts has led to a hypothesis regarding nicotine’s therapeutic role in COVID-19 prevention and
treatment. As new scientific evidence surfaces, premature conclusions about nicotine are rife in social
media, especially unwarranted leaps of such associations to vaping and smoking. This study reports on
the prevalence of such leaps and the nature of authors who are making them.

Methods: We used a Twitter API subscription service to download tweets (n = 17,533) that match terms
indicating nicotine or vaping themes, in addition to those that point to a prophylactic or therapeutic
effect and COVID-19 (January-July 2020). Using a windowing approach, we focused on tweets that are
more likely to convey the therapeutic intent. We hand-annotated these filtered tweets and built a
classifier that identifies tweets that extrapolate a nicotine link to vaping/smoking. We analyzed the
frequently used terms in author bios, top Web links, and hashtags of such tweets.

Results: 21% of our filtered tweets indicate a vaping/smoking-based prevention/treatment narrative. Our
classifier was able to spot tweets that make unproven claims about vaping/smoking and COVID-19 with
a positive predictive value of 85%. Qualitative analyses show a variety of ways therapeutic claims are
being made and user bios reveal pre-existing notions of positive stances toward vaping.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Conclusion: The social media landscape is a double-edged sword in tobacco communication. Although
it increases information reach, consumers can also be subject to confirmation bias when exposed to
inadvertent or deliberate framing of scientific discourse that may border on misinformation. This calls
for circumspection and additional planning in countering such narratives as the COVID-19 pandemic
continues to ravage our world.

INTRODUCTION
The link between nicotine and COVID-19 has garnered significant attention in both scientific and news
media communities. The low prevalence of current smokers among COVID-19 patients and
immunomodulatory effects of nicotine are cited as evidence for therapeutic potential of nicotine for
affected patients1. Although current smokers were found to be at a reduced risk of SARS-CoV-2
infection, meta-analyses reveal that former smokers were at an increased risk of hospitalization, severity,
and mortality due to COVID-192 while no such associations were found with current smoking status.
However, there are several significant limitations of using electronic health record derived determination
of smoking status (including missing data on smoking status and lack of adjustment for the demographic
profile of those tested/admitted to the hospital), and no studies included in the meta-analysis verified
smoking status with biochemical measures. There is at least one clinical trial planned by French
researchers to assess nicotine’s therapeutic and prophylactic potential3. Overall, in current literature on
these themes, authors clearly indicate that smoking’s severe addiction and conclusively harmful health
effects dictate that it shouldn’t be used as a means to prevent/treat COVID-19. Scientific explorations
are ongoing about nicotine and its role as a potential COVID-19 therapeutic in controlled settings4. In
the meantime, it is important to understand how this so called “nicotine hypothesis” plays out in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

consumer discourse on social media regarding beliefs and attitudes towards tobacco products (in the
context of the ongoing pandemic).

In this paper, we examine publicly available tweets that discuss nicotine or vaping as preventative or
treatment options for COVID-19 with associated extrapolations to smoking/vaping’s therapeutic
potential in retrieved messages. To our knowledge, there are only two recent efforts that seemed to have
touched upon the themes of our study: the first offers an anecdotal indication of unsubstantiated health
claims5 and does not focus on the nicotine hypothesis and the latest effort examines sentiment
surrounding vaping and smoking in the context of the pandemic6; this latter effort’s focus on sentiment
has a different purpose of general perceptions of people and not about quantifying misinformation
involving vaping/smoking. Our effort has a deliberate focus on unproven extrapolations of the nicotine
hypothesis for COVID-19 spanning tweets from a seven-month duration.

METHODS
We downloaded ALL publicly available tweets authored between Jan 1, 2020 and July 31, 2020
containing at least one term (or associated hashtag) from each of the three following groups:
1. nicotine, e-cigarette(s), ecig(s), vaping;*
2. prevent(s),

prevented,

preventing,

prevention,

preventative,

preventive,

prophylactic,

prophylaxis, precaution(ary), treat(s), treated, treating, treatment, cure(s), cured, curing;
3. covid, coronavirus, covid19, corona, covid_19, covid-19, SARS-Cov-2.

*

Most of the sample tweets we downloaded that exclusively mentioned smoking or cigarettes without references to nicotine
are genuinely highlighting the dangers of smoking during COVID-19. In light of this and cost effectiveness of our Twitter
API subscription to obtain an exhaustive dataset of tweets, we left out “smoking”, “cigarettes”, and “tobacco”. Our goal was
to study the chatter surrounding the nicotine mentions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

We focused on having at least one term from each group because we wanted to explore discussions that
are portraying nicotine and associated products as helpful in dealing with COVID-19. Before we
proceed, we note that the IRB at the University of Kentucky deemed that this type of research does not
meet the definition of human subjects and thus does not require additional IRB review based on these
two criteria: 1. The data is publicly available; and 2. There is no interaction or intervention with
subjects. Nevertheless, we only report aggregate metrics (e.g., counts, proportions) and show very few
example tweets without author attributions that convey some viewpoints.

Our conjunctive Twitter query outlined earlier in this section led to a total of 17,533 tweets of which
16,064 were in English. We observed several of these tweets were discussing vaping bleach
(misinformation propagated by a radio talk show host) for treating COVID-19 and hence we removed all
tweets containing “bleach”. This further pruned the dataset to 13,718 tweets. Among these, we imposed
a strict constraint that all three terms (one each from three groups above) must occur within a window of
six consecutive words (three additional words on top of the three required terms) after commonly used
stops words† are removed from the tweet. This was needed to weed out tweets that contain the three
terms but are separated by many other terms and whose overall meaning is something quite different
from our search intent. For example, consider the tweet by a public health organization in Oregon
(USA): “Smoking and vaping involve hand-to-mouth contact that may make it easier to spread COVID19 to the user and other surfaces. Prevent the spread of COVID-19, quit today.” Although a term from
each group in our query appears here, they are farther apart and do not convey the intent of our search.
The six consecutive word window constraint removes this tweet from our data as it does not satisfy it.
This window constraint resulted in a smaller subset of 5192 tweets, which is henceforth called the
filtered dataset. From this subset, we (first and second author together) annotated a set of 400 tweets
†

http://ir.dcs.gla.ac.uk/resources/linguistic_utils/stop_words

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

randomly selected to identify if the tweets are actually discussing potential prevention or treatment
aspects of nicotine for COVID-19. Among such tweets, we additionally identified those tweets that were
extrapolating the nicotine connection to vaping or smoking with direct or implicit claims about vaping
or smoking being beneficial in the context of COVID-19. A supervised machine learned model7 was
built and evaluated using cross-validation to identify these tweets that resort to this type of extrapolation
based on tweet text and associated user name. The specific model7 is based on association rules that link
presence of certain key words to classes (extrapolating tweet or the negative class). Subsequently, this
model was applied to the remaining unannotated filtered dataset of tweets to identify tweets that
extrapolated nicotine-related news to smoking and vaping. We ranked top 20 frequent words in the
personal bios of Twitter users who tweet such extrapolating messages as opposed to users in the rest of
the tweets. This is to see if users who tweet such messages had pre-existing viewpoints that may have
led them to extrapolate nicotine research to smoking or vaping. We also looked at top (most frequent)
Web links and hashtags used in extrapolating tweets and the remaining tweets. This was done by just
counting the tweets containing each of the unique URLs and hashtags in the dataset.

RESULTS

Out of the 400 annotated from the 5192 filtered tweets, 337 turned out to be conveying a
treatment/preventative aspect leading to a positive predictive value (PPV) of 84.25% with 95%
confidence interval [80.22%, 87.60%]. Of the 337 tweets, we also found 84 to be linking nicotine with
smoking/vaping as an extrapolation of research surrounding nicotine or (more rarely) discussing
smoking/vaping directly as being therapeutic. This translates to 84/400 = 21% (95% confidence interval:
[17.18%, 24.39%]) tweets making such claims. Some pertinent examples from our dataset are shown in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1 demonstrating the variety of takes on the controversial topic. We only displayed examples here
where the tweet contents cannot be linked back to a real person by searching on Twitter. That is, the user
names (and display names) corresponding to messages in Table 1 and other illustrations in this paper can
only be traced back to personalities not using their real name (e.g., @JohnnyVapes). However, we want
to paraphrase examples of this nature that come from accounts with proper names (and websites of the
authors) without displaying the tweet verbatim. In one instance, a tweeter with over 10,000 followers
wondered if vaping was the only thing that can cure COVID-19. In another case, a physician tweeter
(with over 2000 followers) from a prestigious U.S. Carnegie R1 university states the facts appearing in a
linked news article about the French nicotine clinical trial but also includes a “smoking protects”
phrasing in the message that is unwarranted and prone to misinterpretation. Another doctoral level
researcher (with over 5000 followers) holding a scientific role in a non-profit for smoking cessation
takes a nuanced approach that does not outright claim vaping-driven prevention conclusively but still
indicates that there exists evidence supporting it.

Table 1: Tweets that appear to indicate smoking or vaping as being protective for COVID-19
Example tweet
“Cigarettes can keep coronavirus away?
Researchers test if nicotine could prevent
COVID-19.” Smokers, rejoice! Celebrate by
light up.

Comments
This message clearly extrapolates a potential
nicotine-COVID link to cigarettes, encouraging
smokers to continue their habit. The quoted text
is the title of a news article that discusses the
potential nicotine link to COVID-19.
liberals don't want you to know that coronavirus This is a message that states that vaping Juul
can be cured by vaping mango juul pods! mr.
pods can cure the infection and appeals to the
trump reverse the ban people are dying!
U.S. president at the time to reverse the ban (on
flavored vaping products)
No doubt that vaping could have prevented a
This message directly talks about vaping as a
multitude of Covid19 deaths. PG, the main
prevention method without reference to nicotine.
ingredient in Eliquid was found to kill the flu
It also includes a screenshot of a blog post on
virus (among other microbial viruses) which
vapemate.co.uk (a commercial tobacco product
means it could have prevented individuals from
vendor) that discusses some benefits of
contracting the virus
propylene glycol as a germicide.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

WHOA!! NICOTINE PREVENTS #COVID19
INFECTIONS!! I always knew smoking would
eventually save lives
This new evidence shows nicotine might prevent
smokers from catching coronavirus:
https://on.mktw.net/3541YGO
What if you had a choice between a 5.6% risk of
dying in the next few weeks vs. a 33% chance of
acquiring a nasty disease in your 80s? That's the
risk balance when it comes to #covid19 and
#smoking. The evidence is clear and
overwhelming that #nicotine prevents
#coronavirus
Self-reply: But the good news is you don't have
to choose! There's a #harmless and pleasurable
way to enjoy #nicotine to reduce your risk of
getting #COVID19 by at least a factor of 2 and
possibly as much as 80x. Get yourself a #vape
now!

A direct extrapolation of a potential nicotine
connection to smoking without any justification
or evidence.

This tweeter, with over 5000 followers, self
identifies as a tobacco influencer (in their bio)
and quote-tweets another thread of tweets
indicating low prevalence of smoking among
COVID-19 patients. The tweet compares the
case fatality rate with some other potential future
ailment due to smoking at a much older age,
setting up a false equivalency. It declares a
nonexistent causal link between nicotine and
SARS-Cov-2. Next message in the thread
encourages vaping citing a preprint that is not
peer-reviewed and is based only on self-reported
diagnoses of COVID-19.

The classifier that was built to identify the tweets that involve vaping or smoking (shown in Table 1) as
potential aids to handle COVID-19 had a PPV of 85% with 65% sensitivity. When it was applied to the
filtered dataset, 576 were identified as such, translating to over 11% (576/5192) of the dataset. This
proportion is smaller than 21% observed in the human annotated sample because the classifier’s
sensitivity is only 65%. We preferred the classifier to be more focused on high precision (PPV) because
we wanted to look at the bio text of the Twitter profiles that tweet favorably, involving smoking or
vaping. Outside that purpose of separating bios of extrapolating users, the classifier was not thus applied
for deriving general proportions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Top 20 bio words sorted by proportion of unique users authoring the tweets belonging to each
group (extrapolating vs rest); bold words are tobacco product related.
Top bio words for authors of
tweets that appear to promote
a favorable view of smoking
or vaping for COVID-19
Unique users: 508

Top bio words for
authors of remaining
tweets satisfying the
window constraint
Unique users: 4045

Advocate (6.3%)
Vaping (5.7%)
Harm (3.9%)
Love (3.7%)
News (3.5%)
Reduction (3.3%)
Trump (3.1%)
Tobacco (3.1%)
Free (3.1%)
People (2.8%)
MAGA (2.6%)
Lover (2.6%)
Writer (2.6%)
Fan (2.4%)
Since (2.4%)
Media (2.4%)
Smoking (2.2%)
Vaper (2.2%)
Smoke (2.2%)
Truth (2.2%)

Love (4.4%)
News (3.3%)
Life (3.3%)
Health (2.5%)
World (2.2%)
Like (2.2%)
Views (2.2%)
Fan (2.1%)
Tweets (2.1%)
Music (2.0%)
Free (1.9%)
Politics (1.8%)
Follow (1.8%)
People (1.8%)
Advocate (1.7%)
Lover (1.7%)
Father (1.6%)
Writer (1.6%)
Tobacco (1.6%)
Vaping (1.6%)

Bios are brief descriptions that Twitter users post on their profiles typically talking about themselves.
Table 2 shows a distribution of top bio words that occur in profiles of users of the 576 tweets that were
classified as expressing a favorable view of vaping or smoking for COVID-19 in juxtaposition with
those from authors of remaining tweets. The words in the table are sorted in descending order in terms
of numbers of bios in that group containing them. The percentages in the parentheses in the table
correspond to the proportion of unique users whose bio contains the term. A sample bio of one of the
favorable view authors reads: “#Vaping ends #smoking harms. Advocate #HarmReduction. Stop the
#VapeBan. Deflate nannycrat pseudoscience masquerading as ''#publichealth'' #AbolishFDA”. It is quite

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

evident from Table 2 that “advocate” and “vaping” feature at the very top in the bios of such authors.
Words “advocate” and “vaping” show up in 1.7% and 1.6% of authors in the other group, while
featuring in 6.3% and 5.7% of authors in favorable view group, respectively, clearly indicating over 3X
increase in the latter group.

We also considered a different way of analyzing users generating the vaping/smoking tweets. We begin
with a simple definition that any user bio or username containing the following terms as substrings is
“pro-vaping”: smokefree, "smoke free", "harm reduction", harmreduction, e-cigarette, ecigarette, vape,
vapor, vapour, vaping, ecig, eliquid, ejuice, e-liquid, tobaccofree, tobacco-free, "tobacco free", thr
(acronym for tobacco harm reduction). Note that because we use substrings, bios containing terms such
as vaper, #WeVapeWeVote, #VapingSavesLives, #VapingAdvocate will all match our condition. With
this definition, 6.8% of tweeters in the filtered dataset are pro-vaping but they generated a total of 12.6%
of its tweets. They also author 21.2% of the 576 smoking/vaping tweets.

DISCUSSION
21% of tweets matching our windowing constraint also express a leap from a nicotine-COVID-19 link to
potential benefits of smoking/vaping, even if it is implied. This is clearly an alarmingly non-trivial
proportion. Examples from Table 1 and other paraphrased instances show the variety of such tweets
ranging from indirect/subtle hints to more explicit declarations. When our classifier was run on
unlabeled filtered dataset to identify all such tweets (along with those in the annotated dataset), the
corresponding bios reveal vaping related terms featuring at the top (from Table 2). Additionally, results
based on the pro-vaping user definition showed that despite constituting less than 7% of users, they
authored over 20% of smoking/vaping tweets. This leads us to believe that the tweets that are

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

extrapolating a potential nicotine-COVID-19 link to smoking/vaping as being therapeutic are authored
by those having pre-existing positive views on vaping or smoking. But, there is potential for casual
Twitter users to be exposed to these types of messages providing potentially biased interpretations of
scientific findings. This might encourage them to continue their tobacco product consumption habits or
initiate new habits, both possibilities that may lead to negative consequences for public health overall.
The first column of Table 2 also shows an identification with the current president of the U.S. (Trump)
and his campaign slogan (MAGA) potentially indicating associations with political affiliations.

The most frequently used Web link in the favorable group is a news media piece titled: “This new
evidence shows nicotine might prevent smokers from contracting the coronavirus” making an indirect
link to smoking. The top link in the other group is a news piece titled: “France testing whether nicotine
could prevent coronavirus”. It is straightforward to see this link is positing more of a hypothesis while
the former one claims evidence why smokers may be protected from the virus. Among the top ten links
in both groups, there are only two links that directly refer to published peer-reviewed research articles1 8
both in the favorable view group.

Upon examining the top ten frequently used hashtags in both groups, we did not find much difference
except for one interesting tag #QuitLying that only shows up in the favorable view tweets. This hashtag
is often used in replying to tweets by other users who may be tweeting about the potential risks of
COVID-19 for smokers and vapers. For instance, consider this tweet: “There's compelling evidence that
#nicotine inhalation prevents #COVID19 infection and reduces the severity of symptoms. Whatever
you're #smoking, it's clearly addled your brain. #QuitLying”. This was used as a reply to another tweet
by a verified medical doctor who tweeted: “Thanks to everyone who joined the @voxmedia,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

@TobaccoFreeKids + @Bloombergdotorg panel on tobacco use and #COVID19. With over 5M high
school students using e-cigarettes, there’s never been a more urgent moment to talk about the connection
between tobacco use and the virus”. This hashtag appears to be a mechanism to engage with others who
might be having a non-favorable perspective of tobacco products or nicotine for COVID-19.

Before we conclude, we outline some limitations: only public English language tweets were analyzed;
so the findings cannot be generalized to the entire conversation about COVID-19 and tobacco use on all
social networks especially on platforms like Facebook and WhatsApp where most of the messaging is
not public. The discussion is likely evolving as the pandemic changes and this only captures discussion
during the specific duration of January to July in 2020.

Overall, our results demonstrate that there is a nontrivial amount of chatter on Twitter that promotes the
not-yet-validated nicotine hypothesis for COVID-19 which at times is also extrapolated to vaping and
smoking, spreading false hope to tobacco product consumers without conclusive evidence. Also given
evidence of increased risk of adverse outcomes from COVID-19 among smokers compared with nonsmokers, social media messages conflating the ‘nicotine hypothesis’ with potential benefits of smoking
for COVID-19 may be detrimental to smokers9. On Twitter, studies have shown that false news stories
reach significantly faster and farther than true ones10. Recent findings also show that exposure to
misinformation that smoking helps with COVID-19 actually leads to an increase in tobacco
consumption11. Hence, federal health agencies, healthcare organizations, physicians should all be
extremely vigilant in communicating verified information to the general public and patients in the wake
of nicotine related misinformation about COVID-19. Additionally, engaging credible voices and
approaches to provide balanced information and combat misinformation about vaping and smoking and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

COVID 19 to the public is needed as trust of typical sources of information (e.g., FDA) may also be
weakened through this discourse12.

Highlights:
•

Social media plays an increasingly critical role in tobacco product related communication of both
objectively assessed information and biased disinformation.

•

Low prevalence of smokers among hospitalized COVID-19 patients is leading to a rapidly
evolving scientific discourse on the role of nicotine for COVID-19. It is unclear how this
scientific landscape is being interpreted and communicated on social media.

•

This paper demonstrates that a nontrivial portion of chatter surrounding nicotine’s role in
COVID-19 extrapolates an unproven nicotine hypothesis to vaping and smoking.

•

This favorable view of vaping/smoking appears to be mostly carried out by players with preexisting positive stances regarding the role of vaping in tobacco prevention.

•

Our findings warrant vigilance on part of public health agencies and healthcare professionals as
they communicate accurate and objective findings at the intersection of nicotine and COVID-19
to counter disinformation.

Acknowledgments

This work is primarily supported by the U.S. National Cancer Institute (NCI) through NIH grant
R21CA218231. Partial support is also provided by the U.S. NCI through grant P30CA177558. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of
the NIH.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.05.21249284; this version posted January 6, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1. Farsalinos K, Barbouni A, Niaura R. Systematic review of the prevalence of current smoking among
hospitalized COVID-19 patients in China: could nicotine be a therapeutic option? Internal and
Emergency Medicine 2020:1-8.
2. Simons D, Shahab L, Brown J, et al. The association of smoking status with SARS-CoV-2 infection,
hospitalisation and mortality from COVID-19: A living rapid evidence review. Qeios 2020
3. Changeux J-P, Amoura Z, Rey FA, et al. A nicotinic hypothesis for Covid-19 with preventive and
therapeutic implications. Comptes Rendus Biologies 2020;343(1):33-39.
4. Tizabi Y, Getachew B, Copeland RL, et al. Nicotine and the nicotinic cholinergic system in
COVID‐19. The FEBS Journal 2020
5. Majmundar A, Allem J-P, Cruz TB, et al. Public health concerns and unsubstantiated claims at the
intersection of vaping and COVID-19. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2020
6. Kamiński M, Muth A, Bogdański P. Smoking, Vaping, and Tobacco Industry During COVID-19
Pandemic: Twitter Data Analysis. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 2020
7. Integrating classification and association rule mining. Proceedings of the Fourth International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining; 1998.
8. Tindle HA, Newhouse PA, Freiberg MS. Beyond smoking cessation: Investigating medicinal nicotine
to prevent and treat COVID-19. Nicotine & Tobacco Research 2020
9. Farsalinos K, Barbouni A, Poulas K, et al. Current smoking, former smoking, and adverse outcome
among hospitalized COVID-19 patients: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Therapeutic
advances in chronic disease 2020;11:2040622320935765.
10. Vosoughi S, Roy D, Aral S. The spread of true and false news online. Science 2018;359(6380):114651.
11. Luk TT, Zhao S, Weng X, et al. Exposure to health misinformation about COVID-19 and increased
tobacco and alcohol use: a population-based survey in Hong Kong. Tobacco control 2020
12. Freckelton QI. COVID-19: Fear, quackery, false representations and the law. International Journal
of Law and Psychiatry 2020:101611.

