medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Stages of COVID-19 pandemic and paths to herd immunity
by vaccination: dynamical model comparing Austria,
Luxembourg and Sweden
Françoise Kemp1,* , Daniele Proverbio1 , Atte Aalto1 , Laurent Mombaerts1 , Aymeric
Fouquier d’Hérouël1 , Andreas Husch1 , Christophe Ley2 , Jorge Gonçalves1,3 ,
Alexander Skupin1,4 , and Stefano Magni1,**
1
2

Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
Ghent University, Department of Applied Mathematics, Computer Science and Statistics, Ghent, Belgium
3
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom
4
University California San Diego, La Jolla, USA
*
francoise.kemp@uni.lu
**
stefano.magni@uni.lu
Abstract
Background. Worldwide more than 72 million people have been infected and 1.6 million died with
SARS-CoV-2 by 15th December 2020. Non-pharmaceutical interventions which decrease social interaction have been implemented to reduce the spread of SARS-CoV-2 and to mitigate stress on healthcare
systems and prevent deaths. The pandemic has been tackled with disparate strategies by distinct countries resulting in different epidemic dynamics. However, with vaccines now becoming available, the
current urgent open question is how the interplay between vaccination strategies and social interaction
will shape the pandemic in the next months.
Methods. To address this question, we developed an extended Susceptible-Exposed-InfectiousRemoved (SEIR) model including social interaction, undetected cases and the progression of patients
trough hospitals, intensive care units (ICUs) and death. We calibrated our model to data of Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden, until 15th December 2020. We incorporated the effect of vaccination to
investigate under which conditions herd immunity would be achievable in 2021.
Results. The model reveals that Sweden has the highest fraction of undetected cases, Luxembourg
displays the highest fraction of infected population, and all three countries are far from herd immunity
as of December 2020. The model quantifies the level of social interactions, and allows to assess the level
which would keep Reff (t) below 1. In December 2020, this level is around 1/3 of what it was before
the pandemic for all the three countries. The model allows to estimate the vaccination rate needed for
herd immunity and shows that 2700 vaccinations/day are needed in Luxembourg to reach it by mid
of April and 45,000 for Austria and Sweden. The model estimates that vaccinating the whole country’s
population within 1 year could lead to herd immunity by July in Luxembourg and by August in Austria
and Sweden.
Conclusion. The model allows to shed light on the dynamics of the epidemics in different waves
and countries. Our results emphasize that vaccination will help considerably but not immediately and
therefore social measures will remain important for several months before they can be fully alleviated.

Keywords
COVID-19, Vaccination, Herd immunity, SEIR model, Dynamical model, Cross-country comparison,
Bayesian inference, Markov Chain Monte Carlo, Healthcare system, Mathematical modelling.

1

Introduction

In December 2019, a novel strain of coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2) was identified in Wuhan (China). In severe cases, it causes an acute respiratory distress
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

syndrome (ARDS), which can lead to respiratory failure, septic shock, multi-organ failure and death [1].
Worldwide 72,318,997 confirmed cases and 1,613,742 dead people have been identified to be infected
with SARS-CoV-2 by mid December 2020.
To mitigate the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, mathematical modelling has become a major tool to better understand its spreading [2, 3]. As COVID-19 is currently widely spread
across the globe, short- and medium-term modelling forecasts inform the need for containment and
mitigation strategies. For these purposes, one of the most widely employed models is the standard
Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed (SEIR) model, for which numerous extensions have been developed during the past months. An extension of the SEIR model has been utilized in [4] to model the
COVID-19 epidemic and the implementation of population-wide interventions in Italy. Extensions including compartments for hospitals and dead have been developed e.g. for Italian regions [5] and to
predict hospital demand in Colombia [6]. The model presented in [7] developed an extension of the
standard SEIR model with hospitals, ICUs and age structure specifically tailored to investigate effects
of non-pharmaceutical mitigation in Sweden. SEIR-based models are used to forecast the trajectories of
the pandemic and the effect of non-pharmaceutical interventions in the United States [8] as well.
We have previously investigated the importance and impact of various non-pharmaceutical interventions during the early phases of the pandemic [9]. Therein, with an extension of the SEIR model
applied to data of several countries, we showed that various synergies of different mitigation strategies
could lead to similar results on the suppression of the infection, with potentially different consequences.
We also investigated the interplay between epidemiological and economical aspects of the pandemic in
Luxembourg in [10]. Here, we further extend the SEIR model including a social interaction parameter,
the presence of undetected cases, the disease progression through hospitals, ICU and death and finally
vaccination. The aim is to understand the different phases of the pandemic which occurred in several
countries that employed different policies, and to investigate how the interplay between vaccination
strategies and social interaction might lead us toward herd immunity throughout 2021.
The model is calibrated on available public data collected for Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden.
The model was initially developed for Luxembourg, the country with most detected COVID-19 cases
per 100,000 inhabitants in Europe as of December 2020. It was further applied to Austria to assess its
generality, by proving its ability to capture, with appropriate parameter changes, the evolution of the
pandemic in countries exhibiting similar dynamics. We finally applied it to Sweden to assess what
additional factors need to be accounted for when describing a country with a very different intervention
strategy, which did not impose a full lockdown and is often considered having attempted to reach herd
immunity early on. We utilize our model to compare the epidemic dynamics during multiple infection
waves within and between each of these countries.
We cross-validated the calibration of our model by means of Bayesian inference and Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. These methods have been widely applied in the framework of the
COVID-19 pandemic to infer epidemiological parameters from SEIR-based or other epidemiological
models, e.g. for Spain [11], Germany [12], South Africa [13] and in a comparative study of 11 countries,
including Austria and Sweden [14]. Most of these studies employing MCMC were dealing with models
not including parameters for hospitalisations, ICU, dead and undetected cases like our present paper,
and all of them focus on one country only, except [14] which includes multiple countries but focuses
mostly on estimating the basic reproduction number R0 .
Several vaccines are becoming available by the end of 2020 and systematic vaccination campaigns are
starting or about to start in several countries. Vaccination aims at protecting others from the infection,
as well as the treated individuals [15, 16]. Hence, vaccination is of extreme interest, not only to protect
the most vulnerable, but also to contribute to the eradication of the virus in the population through herd
immunity. Herd immunity would be achieved when a certain fraction of the total population would
become immune to the infectious disease (through recovering from natural infection or through vaccination), so that the infectious agent can no longer generate large outbreaks [17]. Nevertheless, much
remains to be learned regarding immunity to SARS-CoV-2 [18]. Moreover, there are several challenges
in reaching herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2 infection by mass vaccination, including the supplying of
vaccines and the logistic of their deployment to a population. A key question in the current COVID-19
pandemic is thus how and when herd immunity could be achieved and at what cost [17].
To tackle this question, we use our model to investigate the potential impact of various vaccination strategies and their synergy with social measures for the countries considered here. We investigate
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

which conditions on vaccination management would lead to herd immunity by spring and estimate
when it could be reached, depending on the various combinations of vaccination strategies and social
interaction scenarios. It needs to be stressed that the desirable objective would be to achieve herd immunity primarily by mass vaccination, while avoiding the saturation of healthcare systems and having
as few cases and dead as possible. The use of mathematical models in the design of mass immunization
programs is a long standing tradition [19], and [20] has investigated the interplay between social interaction and vaccination with a simple Susceptible-Infectious-Recovered-Susceptible (SIRS) model not
fit to real countries. Also [21] investigates under which conditions herd immunity could be reached,
focusing on vaccination alone and with a simple model that, while including vaccine efficacy and duration of protection, is not fit to data from real countries. Thus, to the best of our knowledge, the model
we present here is to date the first one, calibrated on COVID-19 data from multiple countries and including compartments for disease progression and undetected cases, which systematically investigates
the interplay of vaccination strategies and plausible social interaction scenarios in the pursuit of herd
immunity.
The paper is organized as follows. The mathematical model is introduced in Sec. 2.1, its calibration to
available data for the selected countries in Sec. 2.2. Model comparison with data, in order to confirm the
validity of our modelling approach, is shown in Sec. 3.1, together with projections for possible future
scenarios under different social interaction conditions and an estimate of undetected cases over time.
In Sec. 3.2 we present our estimates of social interaction and its effect on the effective reproduction
number Reff (t) over time. In Sec. S5.4 we present how data for Sweden can be fit with the same model
structure. In Sec. 3.3 we fit subsequent waves of infection with parameter changes in the same model.
We further use our model in Sec. 3.4 to investigate the potential effects of vaccination and the interplay
between alternative vaccination strategies and social interaction levels. In Sec. 3.5, we estimate when
herd immunity might be reached, depending on the vaccination strategy and social interaction level
for each country. We discuss these results in Sec. 4 and we draw conclusions in Sec. 5. The detailed
mathematical model is described in the supporting material (from Sec. S1), along with the employed
data (from Sec. S5) and Bayesian Inference methods (from Sec. S7).

2 Model and Methods
2.1 Mathematical model
We develop a new mathematical model of the transmission of COVID-19 within a country’s population,
extending the standard Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed (SEIR) model [22] to include 1) undetected cases; 2) varying social interaction; 3) the progression of severe cases through hospitalization,
intensive care and eventually death or recovery and 4) vaccination.
The model, whose structure is depicted in Fig. 1, is implemented through a set of ordinary differential equations Eq. (S2). The total population N of the considered country is streamed at time t into 16
compartmental variables, summarized in Tab. S1. Each variable represents the number of individuals at
a particular stage, normalized by the total country population. The parameters of the model represent
either probabilities pi of going to one compartment or another (with i being an index over parameters, specified in Tab. S2), or rates τi describing how fast individuals flow through compartments. The
parameter ρ (t) is a tuning for the average contact rate β. These parameters are detailed in Tab. S2.
An important fraction of infected people is usually not detected [23], so we introduced a separation
between detected and undetected cases. One branch (detected cases) can lead to quarantine and possibly
to hospital and/or ICU. The one of undetected cases (either because they are asymptomatic or simply
due to lack of testing) continues spreading the infection until recovery or death. The probability of an
infected individual to be detected is indicated as p1 and assumes different values for each country and
wave of infections, cf. Tab. S2 and Tab. S6.
The population flow from one compartment to another is governed by rates multiplied by probabilities. While the use of rates is inherited from the SEIR model, probabilities are not employed therein
because in the SEIR individuals can follow only one path. Probabilities determine which fraction of the
population goes to one branch, which to the other. Rates, representing the inverse of the average length
of stay in a compartment, capture how fast individuals flow from one pool to the next (on average).

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 1 Scheme of the mathematical model. Each compartment is associated to a variable (cf. Tab. S1 and Eq. (S2)).
Each variable represents the fraction of individuals being in that state at a given time; arrows represent the flow
of individuals between states, with associated probabilities and rates (Tab. S2). Their values (for each country and
wave) are summarized in Tab. S6.

The parameter ρ (t) represents the fraction of social interactions taking place at any given time, with
respect to the one pre-pandemic. Thus, a value of ρ (t) = 1 means the same level of social interaction
than in the beginning of 2020. This parameter incorporates all non-pharmaceutical interventions and
changes in population behaviour that affect the dynamics in a similar manner. It changes whenever
new measures or major updates in social interactions take place (lockdown, schools opening/closure,
summer vacation, etc.) and is further discussed in Sec. 3.2.
We include additional compartments to model the different phases of the disease for infected individuals. In particular, we consider the progression to more severe states, requiring hospitalisation and
intensive care (ICU), and eventually death in a fraction of cases.

2.2 Model calibration and fit to public data
The model is fitted as described in Sec. S6 to available public time-series data (from February to 15th December 2020), separately for each wave of infection and for each of the countries mentioned in the introduction: Luxembourg (data and dates discussed in Sec. S5.1), Austria (Sec. S5.2) and Sweden (Sec. S5.3).
These data are displayed in Fig. 2 for total cases (A, B, C) and corresponding daily new cases (D, E,
F), hospital occupation (G, H, I), ICU occupation (J, K, L) and deaths (M, N, O). Subsequent waves of
infections have occurred; we refer to them as 1st and 2nd wave for Austria and Sweden, respectively for
the ones starting in February and September. In Fig. 2 D, we notice that Luxembourg had an additional
wave during July, which appears distinct from the one in March and the one in September (though
this separation is somewhat arbitrary). So, we refer to it as 2nd wave, and we will refer to the rise in
September as 3rd wave.
For each country and each epidemic wave, we initially calibrated manually a set of parameters that
allow the model simulations to fit the data (cf. Sec. S6). Rates and probabilities used are listed in Tab. S6
and the values of the social interaction parameter, and its changes over time, are displayed in Fig. 3 and
listed in Tab. S3 for Luxembourg, Tab. S4 for Austria and Tab. S5 for Sweden. Model simulations based
on these parameters are shown in Fig. 2, where we can appreciate that our country-specific models fit
remarkably well the weekly moving average of data. This supports our choice of parameters, as for each
country and wave our model is able to fit simultaneously several time-series data.
We further cross-validated the calibration of our models by means of Bayesian inference and Markov
Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods in Sec. S7. A set of MCMC simulations was performed to obtain,
within a Bayesian framework, an estimate of the parameters of our model and to quantify their uncer-

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

tainties. The choice of prior probability distributions for the parameters is specified in Sec. S7.2 and the
convergence of the MCMC chains is verified in Sec. S7.5. As we can see from Sec. S8.1, Fig. S2, the values
of the manual fit are usually included within the Bayesian credible intervals, which are rather wide, thus
the manually calibrated parameter sets are consistent with the Bayesian estimates.
We observe in Sec. S8.2, Fig. S3, that there is high degeneracy between parameters, with combinations (e.g. ratios) of parameters being better constrained than the individual parameters. The MCMC is
extremely useful to estimate the uncertainty that affects our estimate of parameters and their potential
ranges of values. Nevertheless, it does not provide a unique parameter set due to poor identifiability,
common to SEIR models [24]: the two parameter sets obtained respectively from the maxima of the posteriors (maximum a posteriori estimate, MAP) and from the means of the posteriors are rather different
from each other due to asymmetric posteriors. Moreover, certain parameters are poorly constrained
by the data, resulting in rather flat posterior probability distributions. For the simulations, we thus employed the manually calibrated parameter set, which is unique, consistent with the results of the MCMC
as explained above, and incorporates domain knowledge from literature.

2.3 Time-dependent probabilities of detection and hospitalisation for Sweden
In order to investigate the model properties, we applied it to Luxembourg and Austria, which implemented similar strategies resulting in similar epidemic dynamics, and furthermore for comparison we
apply it to Sweden, which choose very different strategy and thus experienced a different epidemic dynamics. We then compare the simulations and the model-building process among the three countries.
To fit Swedish data with the same model structure as above, it was not sufficient to consider a different
set of parameter values. Instead, it was necessary to introduce time-dependent probabilities of being
detected p1Swe (t) and of being hospitalized p2Swe (t), within an epidemic wave. These are derived in
Sec. S5.4 and are depicted in Fig. S1.
We estimated p1 , the probability of an infected individual being detected, from prevalence data [25,
26]. While the particular functional form chosen for p1Swe (t) is somewhat arbitrary and multiple forms
could be employed (cf. Sec. S5.4), for Sweden a time-dependent p1Swe (t) increasing with time seems
indeed necessary in order for the model to fit the available data, which was not the case for Luxembourg
and Austria, where p1 and p2 values constant within each wave were sufficient.
We further need to incorporate in the model the observation that during the early phases of the
pandemic in Sweden the majority of the detected cases were people needing hospitalization. This can
be clearly seen from Fig. S1, panel C, which shows data for daily new detected cases, people entering
hospital and people entering ICU (not to be confused with the number of people currently occupying
hospitals and ICUs) publicly available on [27] and 1 . It becomes obvious that in March and April the
daily number of people entering hospital was more than half of the daily number of detected cases,
leading us to employ a time-dependent p2Swe (t). This clearly changed in May and June, likely due to
the change in testing strategy ordered by the government on May the 3rd [28].

3 Results
3.1 The model accounts for undetected cases and provides future projections of
potential scenarios
We use our model to simulate potential future developments of the epidemic in each country. While
very instructive, it should be stressed that projections might be accurate for few weeks, but much less
on longer time periods, because small changes in e.g social interactions and corresponding parameters
can lead to large changes in the simulated outcome. Consequently, their main goal is to inquire potential
scenarios that might unfold from the current situation [11]. In Fig. 2, we simulate the potential evolution
of the epidemic in the coming months until spring. After the last data-point, we simulate three scenarios,
to illustrate alternative potential outcomes, namely one corresponding to no change in social interaction,
an optimistic scenario where the social interaction parameter becomes as low as during the lockdown
1 https://www.icuregswe.org/en/data--results/COVID-19-in-swedish-intensive-care/

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in March, and a pessimistic scenario where it becomes as high as in October. These three scenarios are
meant to represent an average outcome and two extreme but plausible cases.
Such projections are sensitive to the fraction of the population that has already been infected, but
has not been detected. Our model includes compartments to describe that fraction, which is mostly
controlled by the probability p1 of being detected. This was estimated for each country and wave based
on the available prevalence data, as discussed in Sec. S6 and reported in Tab. S6. Panels A, B and C also
report the cumulative number of undetected cases in the model, obtained as the sum of the variables
A + N II + DA + RA , for each country. We can see that, over time, this number (violet dashed curve)
is approximately between one and two times the number of detected cases for Luxembourg and Austria, while it is up to three to four times for Sweden. Nevertheless, for Austria and Sweden the sum of
the number of detected cases and the estimated number of undetected cases until December remains
more than an order of magnitude smaller than the population of the country, while for Luxembourg it
is higher. In fact, our model estimates that until the 15th December, the percentage of the population
having been infected by SARS-COV-2 in Luxembourg is about 18.3% (7.2% detected and 11.1% undetected); in Austria 9% (3.7% detected and 5.3% undetected) and in Sweden 14.5% (3.5% detected and
11% undetected). For all three countries, this makes herd immunity still far from being reached.

3.2 Social interaction drive epidemic dynamics and Reff (t), across countries
In this section, we present our estimates of the social interaction parameter ρ (t), and how it affects the
effective reproduction number Reff (t) over time, for Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden.
The parameter ρ (t) tunes social interactions, and can evolve when new measures or major behavioural changes occur. Hence, it is implemented as a piece-wise constant function. Its value changes
at specific dates tn when modifications in policies took place. We assume a mean constant value ρn over
the subsequent period of time. For the three countries considered, measures, dates and values of ρn are
summarized in Tab. S3 for Luxembourg, Tab. S4 for Austria and Tab. S5 for Sweden. The evolution of
ρn is depicted in Fig. 3 respectively for Luxembourg (panel A), Austria (panel C) and Sweden (panel E),
for both the manually calibrated parameter set and the Bayesian inference results.
These panels show values of ρn from manual calibration (Sec. S6) and from Bayesian inference
(Sec. S8.1 and Fig. S2), which are proportional to the number of daily cases (cf. Fig. 2). Our manually calibrated social interaction values are consistent with our Bayesian estimates, as they are usually
very close to the mean or the maximum of the Bayesian estimate, or fall within the 50% credible interval
(dark green bands), or the 90% (light green bands). This supports the validity of the social interaction
values from our manually calibrated parameter set, which was obtained by requiring that model simulations fit reasonably well the moving average of the data of Fig. 2, panels A, B, C. Changes in the social
interaction parameter lead to a very good fit of the model to the data of detected cases. This identifies
the social interaction as an essential parameter for the model. In turn, this underlines the importance of
social interaction management for epidemic control.
Next, we investigated the dependency of the effective reproduction number Reff (t) on the social
interaction parameter and on the fraction of population still being susceptible. The time evolution of
Reff (t) obtained by Eq. (S6) (cf. Sec. S4) for each country is displayed in Fig. 3, panels B, D and F.
Step-wise changes in Reff (t) arise from changes of ρ (t), while gradual changes in Reff (t) are instead
associated to the depletion of the pool of susceptible individuals.
.
The value of Reff (t) at the beginning of the epidemic provides the basic reproduction number R0 =
Reff (t = 0). We obtain estimates of R0LUX ≈ 3.38 for Luxembourg, R0AUT ≈ 3.16 for Austria and R0SWE ≈
4.00 for Sweden. Such values can be compared with those obtained from independent methods. R0AUT
and R0SWE are consistent with those obtained from previous Bayesian estimates [14], within credible
LUX
intervals. In addition, the complete time evolution of Reff
(t) is consistent with what is reported on the
2
official Luxembourg Government website , which is assessed with independent methods. Panels B, D
and F of Fig. 3 depict Reff (t) evolution over time, for each country.
Finally, from our estimate of Reff (t) depicted in panels B, D and F we can evince the value of Reff
at the date of the last data-point, namely 15th of December, which we find to be 1.07 for Luxembourg,
0.97 for Austria and 1.01 for Sweden. Interestingly, all three countries seems to be, as of mid December,
2 https://covid19.public.lu/fr/graph.html

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Luxembourg

B

Austria

C

Sweden

Total Cases

A

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

N

O

Dead

ICUs

Hospitals

Daily Cases

D

Fig. 2 Data, model simulations and projections of total cases, daily cases, hospital and ICU occupation and dead,
for each country. Luxembourg (A, D, G, J, M), Austria (B, E, H, K, N) and Sweden (C, F, I, L, O). Total cases (A, B,
C) and daily new cases (D, E, F) from Eq. (S8). Hospital occupation (G, H, I) from Eq. (S9). ICU occupation (J, K, L)
from Eq. (S10). Dead (M, N, O) representing the sum of Eq. (S11) and Eq. (S12). In addition to model simulation,
raw data are shown, together with their weekly moving average. Panels A, B, C also report the cumulative number
over time of undetected cases in the model, obtained as the sum of the variables A + N II + DA + RA , in violet.
Projections for several months after the last data point illustrate potential simulated scenarios, corresponding to
no change in social interaction, an optimistic scenario where the social interaction parameter is as low as during
lockdown/March, and a pessimistic scenario where the social interaction parameter is as high as in October.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Reff (t)

B

Luxembourg

A

Social Interaction

D

E

F

Sweden

Austria

C

Fig. 3 Social interaction parameter ρ (t) and effective reproduction number Reff (t), for each country. Panels
A,C,E: Social interaction parameter ρ (t), manual and MCMC fits for Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden respectively.
Dates of change and parameter values are reported in Tab. S3 for Luxembourg, Tab. S4 for Austria and Tab. S5 for
Sweden. Panels B, D, F: Effective reproduction number Reff (t), computed from Eq. (S6) analytically derived in
Sec. S4, corresponding to the values of the social interaction parameter for Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden, from
their manually calibrated parameter sets.

very close to Reff ≈ 1. We further estimate the percentage of social interaction that is currently needed
to have Reff (t) ≈ 1; this is similar across countries: 36% (w.r.t. before the pandemic and corresponding
measures) in Luxembourg and 34% in both Austria and Sweden.

3.3 Parameter fitting reveals probability of hospitalization decreases between waves
The social interaction parameter ρ (t) changes a limited number of times to represent changes in policies
or population behaviour. To fit the first waves of Luxembourg and Austria, all other parameters are constant (though somewhat different between the two countries). This results from the fact that the time
evolution of daily new cases, hospital and ICU occupation are alike in these two countries, although
scaled and delayed. However, the same parameters from the first wave overestimate the hospital pro8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

gression during the second wave.

A

Luxembourg, 2nd vs 1st Wave

B

C

Austria, 2nd vs 1st Wave

D

Luxembourg, 3rd vs 2nd Wave

Sweden, 2nd vs 1st Wave

Fig. 4 Fold-changes (FC) of the point-estimates of each parameter, between a wave and the subsequent, for each
country. A: 2nd wave versus 1st wave, Luxembourg. B: 3rd wave versus 2nd wave, Luxembourg. C: 2nd wave
versus 1st wave, Austria. D: 2nd wave versus 1st wave, Sweden. The values for the parameters employed are
displayed in Fig. S2 and summarized in Tab. S6 for the manual fit. The vertical axes indicate log2 (F C) for each
parameter. The green small dots depict the fold changes for the manually calibrated parameter sets. Errors on the
means were computed by the standard error of the mean, but are too small to be noticeable in the figure.

Fig. 4 reports the parameter changes between one wave and the subsequent, in terms of the log-2 of
τ
. Thus, F C = 0 means no change, F C = 1 means that
the fold change, i.e. log2 (F C), with F C = τi,2ndWave
i,1stWave
the parameter in the second wave is twice as big as in the first wave, F C = −1 means that the parameter
in the second wave is half of its value in the first wave, and so on.
As we can see, in the manual fit parameter sets (green circles) we considerably decreased p2 , the
probability of being hospitalized (when detected positive) between each wave and the subsequent, both
in Luxembourg and in Austria (together with other parameter changes). We also compute the foldchanges arising from the two sets of parameters obtained by Bayesian inference, namely the one from
the maxima of the posterior probability distributions, and the one from their means, and we display
them in Fig. 4. We see that the parameter p2 decreases considerably also in the maximum a posteriori
estimate (MAP, blue dots) from the MCMC both between the 2nd and 3rd wave of Luxembourg (panel
B), and between the 1st and 2nd wave of Austria (panel C). Only from the 1st to 2nd wave of Luxembourg the MCMC shows a slight decrease for the maximum of the p2 estimate, but conversely a slight
increase in the mean. A large decrease in p2 is also what we assume in Sweden, where as introduced in
Sec. 2.3, detailed in Sec. S5.4 and displayed in Fig. S1 panel D, we assume (based on data of new daily
cases and hospital admissions) a decrease in p2 (t) from 0.9 in March to 0.1 from June onward. These
findings altogether underline the fact that, overall, the probability of being hospitalized when detected
(p2 ) decreased for subsequent waves of a country, and this for all three countries investigated.
More in general, the means supposedly provide more robust information than the maxima. It should
be reminded that the maxima are representative of the posterior distribution only when the posterior
has a clear peak and is not almost flat, otherwise the maxima are not particularly representative. This
leads to some of the FCs obtained from the maxima (large blue dots) having rather extreme values,

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in particular those associated with rates τ4 , τ5 , τ6 and τ7 , the rates involved in the patient progression
through hospital and ICU, as depicted in Fig. 1. Instead, as we can see in the figure, the fold changes
computed employing the means tend to be very often close to 0, meaning no significant change in the
posterior mean for that parameter between subsequent waves.
The MCMC estimate does not fully reflect the changes in all parameters that we performed between
one wave and the next in the manually calibrate parameter set (cf. Tab. S6). We interpret these discrepancies in the fold-change for few parameters between manual fit and MCMC parameters sets (cf. Fig. 4)
as indicating that, due to the large uncertainty in the identification of the parameter values which our
Bayesian inference approach underlined, multiple parameter sets could provide an equally good fit of
the model to the data.

3.4 Simulations show that social measures still have significant impact on the infection curve in early 2021, along with vaccination
The model is extended as summarized in Sec. S3 to include fully protective vaccination and to investigate the interplay between its dynamics and social interaction. Three potential vaccination strategies
starting from 1st January 2021 are simulated: vaccinating all the population of the country within the
first 6 months of 2021, within one year, or within 1.5 years. These represent three strategies among the
potential timelines that various countries might attempt to implement. For the countries considered, 6
months could represent the scenario of a very fast vaccination, 1 year an average assumption and 1.5
years could correspond to envision a slow process of vaccination of the population. We assume that
the vaccination capability scales with country size (cf. Sec. S3). To compare future projections, we also
consider the baseline case where no vaccination is performed. The results are displayed in Fig. 5. Panels A, B, C report the time evolution of the number of vaccinated people for the various scenarios and
strategies, panels D, E, F display Reff (t) and panels K, L and M the number of total detected cases.
Dashed curves symbolize the four different vaccination strategies. The objective being to investigate
the interplay between social contacts and vaccination strategies, we report the curves corresponding to
combinations of the two. We consider two alternative values of the social interaction parameter ρ: a
value corresponding to the pessimistic scenario of Fig. 2 (which corresponds to going back to the social
interaction level of October) in red, and a value corresponding to the average scenario of Fig. 2 (which
corresponds to no changes in the social interaction w.r.t. the value of November) in blue. The optimistic
scenario for social interaction is not included because it corresponds to a full lockdown, unlikely to be
applied for several months consecutively, and for visual clarity.
Panels A, B and C in Fig. 5 demonstrate that, for each vaccination strategy, a smaller number of
people will be left to be vaccinated if the social interaction parameter is higher, since more people already
got infected naturally. We also appreciate that slower vaccination strategies will result in less people to
be vaccinated as more people will by then have acquired immunity naturally. These observations are
consistent across the three countries considered.
Panels D, E and F report the simultaneous effects of social interaction and of the shrinking of the pool
of susceptible, due to both infection and vaccination, on Reff (t). In each country, for any vaccination
strategy as well as for no vaccination, the pessimistic scenario (red) starts with a higher Reff (t) than the
“no change” scenario (blue). However, the situation is soon inverted due to the larger shrinking of the
susceptible pool associated with a higher social interaction parameter. This suggests that the interplay
between the two measures (social interaction and vaccination) is non-trivial, and will require deeper
investigation, which we will perform in the next section.
Panels G, H and I illustrate the changes in the dynamics of total detected cases for the same scenarios and strategies. We observe that the faster the vaccination strategy, the smaller the number of total
detected cases reached asymptotically. We also remark that any vaccination strategy (vaccinating all
population in 6 months, 1 year or 1.5 years) lead to a considerable reduction of the number of detected
cases w.r.t. the case of no vaccination, larger than the difference in cases between the three strategies.
On the other hand, for all three countries the number of total cases is impacted more, or with similar magnitude, by the different social interaction scenarios (red and blue curves) than by vaccination
(different dashing for the same color of the curve).
Overall, panels G, H and I indicate that, on the short term until spring 2021, vaccination will be
important to protect the lives of the most vulnerable, but it is going to impact the curve of infections
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Luxembourg

B

Austria

C

Sweden

Vaccinated

A

E

F

G

H

I

Total Cases

Reff (t)

D

Fig. 5 Simulations of different vaccination scenarios: projections of number of vaccinated people, Reff (t) and
total detected cases for each country. Luxembourg (A, D, G), Austria (B, E, H) and Sweden (C, F, I) are reported.
Projections for several months after the last data point illustrate potential simulated scenarios, for three alternative
vaccination strategies and for no vaccination, both in the case of the ”pessimistic” scenario (red, corresponding to
social interaction as high as in October) and the ”no change” scenario (blue, corresponding to no change in the
social interaction) from Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. For each social interaction scenario, we show the curves for no vaccination
and for 3 alternative vaccination strategies, which correspond to vaccinating all the population of a country in,
respectively, 6 months, 1 year or 1.5 years, starting from January 1st, 2021. Panels A, B and C show the number of
vaccinated people as a function of time. Panels D, E and F show Reff (t). Panels G, H and I show the number of
total detected cases.
less or as much as the social interaction, depending on the evolution of the epidemic. Thus, social
interaction still remains crucial for the time being. Both vaccination strategies and social interaction play
a significant role of comparable magnitude to suppress the infection wave. Notably, social interaction
could still play a dominant role depending on the context. This triggers the following questions: which
combinations of social interaction and vaccination strategy would be needed to achieve herd immunity
already e.g. in spring? More broadly, when might herd immunity be reached in the different scenarios?
To tackle these questions we further investigate in the next section how will the dynamics of social
interaction and vaccination interplay, in a more systematic and complete manner.

3.5 Simulations suggest that vaccinating whole population in a year could provide
herd immunity not before mid summer
Herd immunity means that, when a certain fraction of the total population become immune to an infectious disease (through recovering from natural infection or through vaccination), the infectious agent
can no longer generate large outbreaks [17]. The population fraction that needs to be immune, in order to reach herd immunity in the absence of control measures, is pc = 1 − 1/R0 [17]. To answer the
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

question “which combinations of social interaction and vaccination speed would be needed to achieve
herd immunity already in April?”, we first compute this quantity for the three countries we investigate.
Using the values of R0 previously estimated in Sec. 3.2, we obtain: pc,Lux = 1 − 1/3.38 ≈ 0.70 = 70%
for Luxembourg, pc,Aus = 1 − 1/3.16 ≈ 0.68 = 68% for Austria and pc,Swe = 1 − 1/4.00 ≈ 0.75 = 75%
for Sweden. These values are plausible, because similar to the fraction of people which needed to get
infected before the epidemic stopped supposedly by naturally achieved herd immunity in Manaus, capital of the Brazilian Amazon. There, 76% of the population was estimated having antibodies in October
[29], as the result of a largely unmitigated COVID-19 epidemic, with catastrophic losses of lives. Our
estimates means that the pool of susceptible individuals needs to shrink to, respectively for the three
countries considered here, 30%, 32% and 25% of the total population. This can be achieved either by
vaccination or by surviving natural infection. A reasonable goal should be to achieve this objective as
much as possible by vaccination, minimizing the natural infection [30] which can lead to disease and,
in a fraction of the cases, to death. Among other reasons [17], this signify that vaccination presents the
safest way to reach herd immunity.
Luxembourg

B

Austria

C

Sweden

What needed for
Herd Immunity in April

A

F

E

Time to
Herd Immunity

D

Fig. 6 Systematic investigation of the interplay between vaccination strategies and social interaction scenarios,
to estimate the time by which herd immunity might be reached. Luxembourg (A, D), Austria (B, E) and Sweden
(C, F) are reported. Panels A, B and C report the number of people who will still be susceptible by April 2021, for
all relevant combinations of the social interaction parameter ρ and of the number of vaccinations performed per
day. The area covered with a black dashing identifies the combinations of social interaction and vaccination speed
that would lead to herd immunity by April. We indicate by vertical lines the three alternative vaccination strategies
considered in Sec. 3.4, which correspond to vaccinating the whole population of a country in, respectively, 6 months,
1 year or 1.5 years, starting from January 1st, 2021. Panels D, E and F report the time at which herd immunity might
be reached, depending on the combinations of the social interaction parameter ρ and of the number of vaccinations
performed per day. These dates have to be considered as indicative, since the parameters employed are subject to
uncertainty and changes. We indicate with a black grid the combinations of social interaction and vaccination speed
that would not allow to achieve herd immunity until 2022. Vertical lines indicate the three vaccination strategies
considered.

In Fig. 6, we display the percentage of the country’s population who will still be susceptible to the
virus in April, for all possible values of the social interaction parameter from 16th December on, and of
the vaccination speed (assuming vaccination would start on January the 1st), i.e. how many vaccinations
per day will be performed. By requiring the percentage of people still susceptible by that date to be
equal to or smaller than the fraction pc needed for herd immunity, we can identify the combinations
of parameters for which herd immunity will have already been reached by then. This is shown in the
panels by the dashed black areas. Herd immunity can be either reached purely by natural infection

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(by moving along the vertical axis), or purely by vaccination (by moving along the horizontal axes),
or by a combination of the two. This is the most plausible scenario, because for each of the countries
presented here the social interaction parameter during the various phases of the pandemic was never
0 and assumed values approximately between 0.05 and 0.5 (cf. Fig. 3), corresponding to a reduction
of social activity of 5% to 50% w.r.t. before the pandemic. The three vertical lines in the panels of
Fig. 6 show the number of vaccinations per day required to immunize the country’s whole population
respectively within 6 months, 1 year or 1.5 years, which are computed in Sec. S3. From Fig. 6, panels A,
B and C we can see that vaccinating a country’s population within 1 year at a constant rate could lead
to herd immunity by July in Luxembourg and by August in Austria and Sweden. In order to reach herd
immunity by mid April primarily by vaccination, we see that Luxembourg needs approximately 2700
vaccinations/day, Austria and Sweden 45000.
A broader question we tackle next is: when might herd immunity be reached in the different scenarios? To estimate this, we simulate the time-evolution of our model for all combinations of social
interaction parameter and number of vaccinations within the values of interest. We then assess, for each
combination of values, at which time the fraction of susceptible population reaches the above mentioned
values necessary for herd immunity. We display in Fig. 6, panels D, E and F the dates at which these
thresholds for herd immunity are reached in the corresponding simulations. Such dates are indicative
and depend on the assumptions of the present model. Thus, they provide an estimate rather than a
prediction. The black grid in Fig. 6 highlights the ranges of parameter values for which herd immunity
is not reached within 2021. The three vaccination strategies considered are reported on the plots with
vertical lines. We see that without vaccination herd immunity cannot be reached within 2021 with the
typical levels of social interaction which we observed so far in any of the three countries considered
(usually below, or considerably below, 0.5).
For Luxembourg, all three vaccination strategies might well reach herd immunity within 2021, for
Austria and Sweden the 1.5 years strategy would be borderline insufficient, while the other two strategies would do it for each country. If herd immunity had to be reached purely by vaccination, the 6
months strategy would take approximately until April for Luxembourg, and May for Austria and Sweden, and the 1 year strategy until July for Luxembourg and August for Austria and Sweden. Higher
(undesired) values of social interaction might anticipate it, but with their undesired consequences. For
reference, the assumed vaccination would start on January the 1st, 2021.
Several factors might influence these estimates one way or another. For instance, we assumed reinfections are negligible. Cases of re-infection have been documented [31], if widespread this would
create an additional challenge for achieving herd immunity. Nevertheless, re-infection by SARS-Cov2 has only been conclusively documented in a very limited number of cases so far and it is unclear
whether this is a rare or common phenomenon [17]. We extensively discuss it in Sec. 4.7. On the other
hand, a recent study [32] based on a model including age distribution has found that the percentage
of population necessary to achieve herd immunity might be considerably lower than the typical values
proposed, thus making herd immunity potentially less difficult to reach.

4 Discussion
4.1 Model projections
We have developed a mathematical model extending the standard SEIR model to incorporate 1) the
impact of social interaction, 2) the presence of a non-negligible quantity of undetected cases, 3) the
progression of the disease for infected individuals and 4) the effects of vaccination. Our model allows
us to create projections by simulating potential scenarios and their evolution in the time to come.
For our projections in Fig. 2, the potential evolution of the epidemic is simulated in three alternative
scenarios, namely one corresponding to no change in social interaction, an optimistic scenario where
the social interaction parameter is as low as during lockdown/March, and a pessimistic scenario where
it is as high as in October, for each country. The infection curves for the three scenarios are well separated from each others for all three countries, indicating that each country might still further reduce
its infection curves by decreasing its social interactions (by new measures or by changes in population
behaviour) to values close to those during the first lockdown. In Luxembourg and Austria, the current

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

level of social interactions seems to be sufficient to maintain a sub-linear growth of number of total
cases (blue dashed curves in panels A, B, i.e. the number of daily cases decreases (panels D, E and F).
However, for any of the three countries, an increase of the social interaction parameter to the levels of
October would likely trigger a considerable rebound of the infection curve (red dotted curves in e.g.
panels D, E and F). This will likely be associated with a rebound in the hospital (panels G, H and I) and
ICU (panels J, K and L) occupation curves.
We see (panels G, H, I for hospitals, G, H, I for ICUs) that such a rebound to the social interaction
levels of October could still lead to reach a peak in hospitals and ICUs occupations higher than those
achieved in any of the past waves in the same country, and thus calls for the maximum caution by
population and policy-makers alike.
It’s worth reminding that the number of dead is not only related to the height of the peak of daily
cases, hospital or ICU occupations, but most importantly it is proportional to the area under these
curves. This is obvious confronting panels M, N and O with the previous ones. We clearly see that
keeping daily cases enough contained to avoid hospitals and ICU saturation, while necessary, does not
prevent a steady growth of the cumulative number of dead. This number still grows significantly by
spring in the simulations for all scenarios and countries, in particular it could still grow dramatically in
the pessimistic scenario where we would go back to the social interaction levels of October.

4.2 Cross-validation of the model calibration and evaluation of parameter uncertainties
Complex epidemiological models often suffer from poor identifiability of their parameters [24]. This
is associated with data quality as well as fitting methods. To account for this and provide consistent
estimates, we employed two methodologies. First, we manually calibrated one parameters set for each
wave and country, to fit the available time series data reasonably well. This is the parameter set we
employ for the simulations of this work. Then, we cross-validated such choice with Bayesian inference,
by means of Markov Chains Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulations. This elucidates parameters uncertainties, quantified by credible intervals, and their cross-correlation. A complete description of the Bayesian
inference approach is reported in the Supplementary Material: Sec. S7 explains the methodology, and
its detailed results are presented in Sec. S8 and figures therein.
Out of that analysis, three remarks are particularly relevant. First, that the uncertainties associated to
each parameter are non negligible, and rather large for certain parameters (Fig. S2), possibly due to the
large number of parameters. Second, that many parameter combinations are often better constrained
than the corresponding single parameters (see e.g. Fig. S3). Third, that the manual fit is in good agreement with the Bayesian estimate (Fig. S2), but its set of parameters correspond to one possible choice
and shouldn’t be considered fully exhaustive. These characteristics are common to any epidemiological model; here, we carefully investigated them, we incorporated domain knowledge from literature
and we quantified their impact on our projections. Consequently, we recall that our estimates are not
forecasts of the future, but rather likely assessments of potential scenarios.

4.3 Social interactions drive the dynamics of the epidemic and of Reff (t)
The main parameter controlling the model behaviour is the social interaction ρ (t) (values in Tab. S3 for
Luxembourg, Tab. S4 for Austria and Tab. S5 for Sweden), displayed in Fig. 3, left column. This modelling approach allows to fit available data, thus supporting the fact that, while any model is of course
a simplification of the reality to its bare-bone crucial components, we could here confirm the well established fact that social interaction is a major driver necessary to understand the observed dynamics of
the epidemic. In the model, this parameter represents both measures applied by policy-makers and behaviour of the population, thus underlining once more the importance of social behaviour in controlling
the pandemic.
The values of the social interaction are inferred from model fit to available data. In turn, via Eq. (S6)
derived analytically in Sec. S4, we can estimate variables and parameters the effective reproduction
number Reff (t), shown in Fig. 3, right column. The dynamics, i.e. the time-dependence, of this quantity
is driven by only two factors: the social interaction parameter ρ (t) (causing step-wise changes in Reff (t)),
and the shrinking of the pool of susceptible S (t) (causing gradual changes in Reff (t)). We see that so
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

far the primary driver has indeed been the social interaction, in all three countries. The shrinking of
S (t) starts to have a noticeable effect in Fall 2020 (cf. panels B, D, and F of Fig. 3), as for early times
the population fraction (detected and undetected) who contracted the virus was still small compared to
the entire population of the country. The effect of S (t) on Reff (t) is more pronounced for Luxembourg
than for Austria and Sweden, reflecting that a larger fraction of the total population has been infected in
Luxembourg.
The reduction of the susceptible pool had a negligible effect during the first wave (even for countries
not having imposed a lockdown as Sweden) and a mild effect at present. Nevertheless, the impact of
shrinking S (t) is predicted to become visibly more relevant in the coming months as more people get
infected, as can be seen from the stronger gradual bending of the curves in winter and spring 2021,
especially for the pessimistic scenario in Fig. 3.

4.4 The epidemics in Luxembourg and Austria show similar dynamics, while Sweden exhibits very different dynamics
Our model could well fit Luxembourg and Austria, with parameter (probabilities and rates) changes
only between subsequent waves, not during a wave. This is different for Sweden, which applied different policies than Luxembourg and Austria. We observed in Sec. 2.3 and Sec. S5.4 that in order to fit the
data for Sweden with the same model structure, considering a different set of parameter values was not
enough, instead we needed to introduce time-dependent probabilities of being detected p1,Swe (Fig. S1,
panel B) and being hospitalized p2,Swe (Fig. S1, panel D), as detailed in Sec. S5.4.
From Fig. 2, we see that for Luxembourg and Austria the curves of new daily cases (panels D and
E) follow the same dynamics as the curves of hospital and ICU occupations (panels G, H, J and K).
This indeed supports our modelling choice, i.e. a model structure leading to the same dynamics for
these compartments, simply scaled and delayed. On the other hand, for Sweden we see that during the
first wave the dynamics of new daily cases (panel F) was very different than that of hospital and ICU
occupation (panels I and L, having similar dynamics between each other).
These different dynamics between detected cases and hospitalisations in Sweden does not reflect
a rise in infections, but rather a major change in testing strategy in Sweden which changed dramatically during May 2020, leading to an increase in detected cases. As observed in [33], the peak recorded
towards the end of June reflects an extension of the testing strategy to include everyone with the symptoms of COVID-19, as well as testing to take place in cases of contact tracing. Furthermore, the number
of daily tests performed increased significantly in late May and the following weeks, due to a decision
by the government [28]. In order to incorporate this, we had to make the parameter p1 time-dependent.
Moreover, for our model to fit the data of Sweden, we also had to make the probability of being
hospitalized when detected positive p2 time-dependent. In fact, for Sweden the ratio of people entering hospitals divided by new daily detected cases two days earlier (Fig. S1, panels C, D) seemed to be
considerably above 50% (close to 100% at times) during March and April, meaning that in the early
weeks/months of the epidemic in Sweden mainly severe cases requiring hospital treatment were detected. This clearly changed in May and June, likely due to the change in testing strategy [28].

4.5 First and subsequent waves exhibit differences in hospitalization probability
For Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden, the set of fitting parameters for the first wave does not allow to
fit the second one, despite the model structure being conserved.
With the manually calibrated parameter sets, we test if such a change could be explained primarily
by lowered values of p2 , and observe that indeed this could be the case. For Luxembourg (cf. Tab. S6
and Fig. 4), it decreased from 15.3% in 1st wave to 8.0% in 2nd wave to 4.2% in 3rd wave. For Austria,
it was decreased from 16.2% in the 1st wave to 6.5% in the 2nd wave. In Sweden, we assumed for it a
time-dependent (piecewise linear) behavior, decreasing from 90% in March to 10% from June onward.
These changes where also supported by similar changes in the maxima of the Bayesian estimates for 3rd
versus 2nd wave in Luxembourg and 2nd versus 1st wave in Austria. We hypothesise that this considerable decrease of the probability of being hospitalized once detected might reflect the combination of
considerably increased testing efficiency and better prognosis linked to younger patient age.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.6 Vaccination might lead to herd immunity in 2021, the timing will depend on
vaccination strategy and social interaction
After extending the model with a vaccinated compartment, we quantified how much time is plausibly
necessary until enough people are vaccinated for herd immunity.
Our model contains compartments for the undetected cases, the parameters of which are estimated
based on prevalence data. Luxembourg and Austria display (cf. Fig. 2) a similar fractions of undetected,
which are approximately 1.5 to 2 times bigger than the number of detected, depending on the date, while
Sweden has a larger number of undetected cases, approximately 4 times the detected cases, accumulated
mostly during the first wave. This is important to assess the true infected population fraction, towards
herd immunity. Until 15th December in our model, in Luxembourg about 18.3% (7.2% detected and
11.1% undetected) of the population had SARS-COV-2; in Austria 9% had the virus (3.7% detected and
5.3% undetected), while for Sweden 14.5% had the virus (3.5% detected and 11% undetected). Despite
the different policies, Sweden is actually not only far from herd immunity, but also further than e.g.
Luxembourg.
We observed in Fig. 5 that the difference between the detected cases curves of the two considered
social interaction scenarios is larger than the difference between the different vaccination strategies, or
of comparable size at best. This indicates that during the vaccination process, reduced social interaction
is still going to be crucial in order to keep under control the number of cases, and thus not to saturate
hospitals and ICUs and to reduce the number of deaths. Therefore, even during the initial months of
vaccination, social behaviour should not be relaxed too much.
Considering herd immunity by vaccination only, we observe in the first row of Fig. 6 that for Luxembourg the strategy under which everyone get vaccinated within 6 months allows to reach herd immunity
by April, while in Austria and in Sweden this strategy is not enough to get it in April. Slower strategies
will not lead to herd immunity in April unless values of the social interaction parameter are at least as
high as in October. However, such values are undesirable due to their consequences.
We further found that, to reach herd immunity by mid April primarily by vaccination (starting on
January 1st) , Luxembourg will need approximately a bit less than 3000 vaccinations/day, Austria and
Sweden approximately 45000. Considering average (w.r.t. March-December 2020) social interaction,
Luxembourg needs at least 2500 vaccinations/day, Austria and Sweden 45000. If social interaction
would go back to the (high) levels of October, at least 2000 vaccinations/day would anyway be needed
for Luxembourg and 30000 for Austria and Sweden. Nevertheless, at a more fine grained look we see
that the combination of social interaction and vaccination leads to subtle differences between these last
two countries. If the social interaction parameter would be 0.4, Austria would need approximately
13000 vaccinations/day, thus more than Sweden needing 12000, in order to reach herd immunity by
mid April. Conversely, for a social interaction parameter of 0.5 Austria would need approximately
38000 while Sweden a smaller number, namely 32000.
Moreover, in the second row of Fig. 6 we see that for Luxembourg the strategy of vaccinating everyone in 6 months, alone, would provide herd immunity by April, while for Austria and Sweden it will
hardly be enough. The other two strategies will not suffice for herd immunity by April, except in the
case where the social interaction parameter would be as high as in October, which would on the other
hand lead to an undesirably large wave of infections with its consequences in terms of dead and so on.
We also find that, if vaccinating all country’s population within 1 year at a constant rate, to reach herd
immunity by vaccination alone Luxembourg would take until July, Austria until August and Sweden
early September. With an average value of social interaction together with this vaccination strategy, herd
immunity could be reached in June in Luxembourg and July in Austria and Sweden. If social interaction
would go back to the levels of October 2020, it would anyway take until April for all three countries to
reach herd immunity, but with a much greater burden for the health care system and in term of lives.
Overall, while vaccination will surely be helpful in protecting the vulnerable, limiting social interactions will still play a major role until the vaccination effects become relevant in the pursuit of herd
immunity during the course of 2021.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.7 Limitations of this work and potential future extensions
In this study we investigated three countries: Luxembourg, Austria with a similar dynamics, and Sweden having a different dynamics. While this already showcase a range of interesting situations, we could
extend the model to other countries, in particular those with very different properties.
In our cross-validation of the model calibration, we assumed flat prior probability distributions over
a parameter space as wide as reasonably possible, cf. Sec. S7.2, in order to investigate the constraints on
the parameters provided by the available data. A different set of priors could have been considered, e.g.
Gaussian priors centered around the manually fit parameter values. Nevertheless, we didn’t perform
this as we didn’t want to introduce bias in the Bayesian parameter estimate meant to provide crossvalidation of the manually calibrated parameter set. The likelihood function we built from the sum of
square residuals attribute the same weight to all time-series data. While this choice is the simplest, it is
not unique and more complex weighting approaches could have been considered.
Moreover, we should stress here that our model projections, while potentially accurate in the short
term, for longer time-periods are to be intended as a way to compare potential scenarios and gain insight. In fact, SEIR-based model simulations are known [11] to be sensitive to parameter values which
can either change in time or be affected by large uncertainties in their estimate.
While SEIR-like models were already investigated before the pandemic for their interesting mathematical properties e.g. in [34], alternative approaches to differential equation based SEIR-like models
have been widely employed, as e.g. the age-stratified discrete compartment model for Switzerland
including the different phases of disease progression for infected individuals [35]. Models based on
ordinary differential equations, as the SEIR and most of its extensions as ours, are deterministic in nature. Thus, they do not accurately describe the stochastic aspects of epidemics, e.g. super-spreading
events. These are better captured by agent-based models [36], which have widely been used in modelling COVID-19 epidemic. Deviations from mean-field effects are expected to play an important role
during periods of low numbers of infections, where e.g. one or few super-spreading events can make
the difference between starting or not a wave of infections. However, with high case numbers we expect a deterministic description to be accurate enough, especially when it comes to the progression of
infected individuals into more severe stages as hospitalisation, ICU and death.
Each country is here modelled as a closed system, which might be a limitation particularly for Luxembourg, due to the small size of the country and the high cross-border mobility. The data employed
for Luxembourg only include cases that are detected and resident in Luxembourg. For considerations
about cross-border workers in Luxembourg and interplay with economical features, refer to [10].
In the present model, people who recover from the infection are considered to be immune and thus
cannot be re-infected. While it seems that individuals who have been infected with COVID-19 tend to
develop some level of immunity to the disease for a certain time [18], the duration of this immunity
is not yet clear. Cases of re-infection of the same individual have been reported [37]. Re-infection by
coronaviruses in general was found to occur frequently [38], but the same study stresses that there is
limited evidence of reinfection by SARS-CoV-2. Persistence and decay of antibodies to SARS-Cov-2 was
investigate in [39], and [31] found that asymptomatic individuals had a weaker immune response to
SARS-CoV-2 infection. The assumption that appearance of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies provides protection
from reinfection, implicit in SEIR-like models, is questioned in [40]. Nevertheless, overall re-infection by
SARS-Cov-2 has only been conclusively documented in a very limited number of cases, and it is unclear
to date whether this is a rare phenomenon or may prove to become a common occurrence [17]. We
have here considered reinfection to play a negligible role for the purposes of this work. Nevertheless,
reinfections might be relevant on the time scale of years.
Furthermore, the model could also be extended to include age-distribution, particularly relevant
when focusing on ICUs and dead. Moreover, it has been shown in a model including age-structured
community with mixing rates fitted to social activity [32] that the disease-induced herd immunity level
can be lower than what we considered here, in particular around 43% for R0 ≈ 2.5. This would frame
our estimates as a worst-case. On the other hand, vaccine efficacy and duration of protection are key
issues, which we do not include here (thus assuming a vaccine with 100% efficacy that gives life-long
protection). Both would eventually contribute to make herd immunity more challenging to reach [21],
and little is known on the duration of protection, even if in principle vaccination could be repeated
regularly.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Finally, we remark that our estimates of herd immunity being achieved by vaccination assume that
the current vaccines successfully prevent the vaccinated individuals from spreading the virus, on top of
protecting them from developing the COVID-19 disease. Up to date, this is not yet fully assessed, but it
is a main goal of a vaccination campaign and it is therefore of the out-most importance to investigate it.

5

Conclusions

An extended SEIR model was developed in order to incorporate social interaction, undetected cases,
progression through hospital, ICU, recovery, death and vaccination. It was used to provide projections,
gain insights on the different wave dynamics comparing within and between countries, and investigating the interplay of social interaction and vaccination in the pursuit of herd immunity by vaccination.
We fit the model independently to Sweden, Luxembourg and Austria. The epidemics in Luxembourg
and Austria show similar dynamics, with the model fitting both with appropriate changes in parameter
values. The epidemic in Sweden exhibits instead a very different dynamics. In order to fit Sweden
with the same model structure, time-dependent probabilities of being detected and being hospitalized
are necessary. This highlight, first, a major change in test strategy occurring in Sweden in May 2020,
and second, that the majority of the detected cases in the early months in Sweden were people needing
hospital care.
While several parameters can be used across waves and countries, some parameter values need adjustments between subsequent waves in the same country. In particular, we remark that the probability
of being hospitalized if detected might have become lower with subsequent waves, in all three countries
considered here, possibly due to considerably improved testing strategies and improved prognosis of
patients due to their younger age.
Our model provides projections for potential future scenarios. We observe that an increase of the
social interaction parameter to the levels of October (e.g. due to relaxation of measures or major relaxation in people’s behaviour) could still result for all three countries in dramatic increase in the number
of detected cases, hospital and ICU occupation and dead.
Finally, we employed our model to investigate the interplay between social interaction and vaccination, in view of obtaining herd immunity. While vaccination will surely help to protect the most
vulnerable, during the early months of 2021 social interaction will still contribute more or as much as
vaccination to mitigate the infection curve. The estimated number of undetected cases, accounted for
in the model, turns out to be larger for Sweden than for Austria and Luxembourg, while Luxembourg
is the country with the highest fraction of people (detected and undetected) who have been infected
so far. Nevertheless, all three countries are far from herd immunity on 15th December 2020, having an
estimated 14.5 % of the population having been infected in Sweden, 9% in Austria and 18.3% in Luxembourg. Herd immunity is within reach for 2021, but it will unlikely be reached in the early months of
the year, and it might take until the end of the year or even until 2022 to reach it, depending on how fast
countries can vaccinate their population. Meanwhile, social interaction will still be a major driver of the
pandemic.
On the one hand, the challenge over the coming year will be for governments and populations to
use COVID-19 vaccines efficiently to create herd immunity to protect all. On the other hand, it will be
to keep social interaction limited, as this will still remain crucial during 2021 before vaccination might
be able to provide us with herd immunity.

Ethics
The application of anonymized data for the purpose of epidemic modelling has been endorsed by the
accessed databases.

Code accessibility
The code implementing the model and analysis will be released upon journal publication.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Authors’ contributions
FK, SM and DP designed the study. FK, SM and DP developed the model. FK and SM implemented
the model and performed the simulations. FK, SM, DP, AH, AA, AFDH, LM, AS, JG, CL analyzed and
interpreted the results. SM, AH, AS, JG, CL supervised and coordinated the project. FK, SM, JG, AS, CL
wrote the first draft. All authors contributed to the final draft. All authors gave their final approval for
publication.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Funding
FK’s work is supported by the Luxembourg National Research Fund PRIDE17/12244779/PARK-QC.
DP and SM’s work is supported by the FNR PRIDE DTU CriTiCS, ref 10907093. A.H. work was partially
supported by the Fondation Cancer Luxembourg. JG is partly supported by the 111 Project on Computational Intelligence and Intelligent Control, ref B18024. AA is supported by the Luxembourg National
Research Fund (FNR) (Project code: 13684479).

Acknowledgments
The authors thank the Research Luxembourg - COVID-19 Taskforce for mutual collaborations. We are
also grateful to Matı́as Nicolás Bossa for useful discussion.

References
[1] Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (sars-cov-2) and coronavirus disease 19 (covid19) - anatomic pathology perspective on current knowledge. Diagn Pathol., 15 (1):103, 2020. URL
doi:10.1186/s13000-020-01017-8.
[2] Christine S.M. Currie, John W. Fowler, Kathy Kotiadis, Thomas Monks, Bhakti Stephan Onggo,
Duncan A. Robertson, and Antuela A. Tako. How simulation modelling can help reduce the impact
of covid-19. Journal of Simulation, 14(2):83–97, 2020. doi: 10.1080/17477778.2020.1751570. URL
https://doi.org/10.1080/17477778.2020.1751570.
[3] Herbert W. Hethcote. The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM Review, 42(4):599–653, 2000.
doi: 10.1137/S0036144500371907. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/S0036144500371907.
[4] G Giordano, F Blanchini, R Bruno, P Colaneri, A Di Filippo, A Di Matteo, and M Colaneri. Modelling the covid-19 epidemic and implementation of population-wide interventions in italy. Nature
Medicine, 26:855–860, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-0883-7.
[5] C. Reno, J. Lenzi, A. Navarra, E. Barelli, D. Gori, A. Lanza, R. Valentini, B. Tang, and M. P. Fantini.
Forecasting covid-19-associated hospitalizations under different levels of social distancing in lombardy and emilia-romagna, northern italy: Results from an extended seir compartmental model.
ournal of clinical medicine, 9:1492, 2020. doi: 10.3390/jcm9051492.
[6] Claudia Rivera-Rodriguez and Beatriz Piedad Urdinola. Predicting hospital demand during the
covid-19 outbreak in bogotÃ¡, colombia. Frontiers in Public Health, 8:710, 2020. ISSN 2296-2565.
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2020.582706. URL https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/
fpubh.2020.582706.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[7] Henrik Sjoedin, Anders F Johansson, Åke Brännström, Zia Farooq, Hedi Katre Kriit, Annelies
Wilder-Smith, Christofer Åström, Johan Thunberg, Mårten Söderquist, and Joacim Rocklöv.
COVID-19 healthcare demand and mortality in Sweden in response to non-pharmaceutical mitigation and suppression scenarios. International Journal of Epidemiology, 09 2020. ISSN 0300-5771.
doi: 10.1093/ije/dyaa121. URL https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyaa121. dyaa121.
[8] Robert C. Reiner, Ryan M. Barber, James K. Collins, Peng Zheng, Christopher Adolph, James Albright, Catherine M. Antony, Aleksandr Y. Aravkin, Steven D. Bachmeier, Bree Bang-Jensen, Marlena S. Bannick, Sabina Bloom, Austin Carter, Emma Castro, Kate Causey, Suman Chakrabarti,
Fiona J. Charlson, Rebecca M. Cogen, Emily Combs, Xiaochen Dai, William James Dangel, Lucas
Earl, Samuel B. Ewald, Maha Ezalarab, Alize J. Ferrari, Abraham Flaxman, Joseph Jon Frostad,
Nancy Fullman, Emmanuela Gakidou, John Gallagher, Scott D. Glenn, Erik A. Goosmann, Jiawei
He, Nathaniel J. Henry, Erin N. Hulland, Benjamin Hurst, Casey Johanns, Parkes J. Kendrick,
Apurva Khemani, Samantha Leigh Larson, Alice Lazzar-Atwood, Kate E. LeGrand, Haley Lescinsky, Akiaja Lindstrom, Emily Linebarger, Rafael Lozano, Rui Ma, Johan Månsson, Beatrice Magistro, Ana M. Mantilla Herrera, Laurie B. Marczak, Molly K. Miller-Petrie, Ali H. Mokdad, Julia Deryn Morgan, Paulami Naik, Christopher M. Odell, James K. O’Halloran, Aaron E. OsgoodZimmerman, Samuel M. Ostroff, Maja Pasovic, Louise Penberthy, Geoffrey Phipps, David M.
Pigott, Ian Pollock, Rebecca E. Ramshaw, Sofia Boston Redford, Grace Reinke, Sam Rolfe,
Damian Francesco Santomauro, John R. Shackleton, David H. Shaw, Brittney S. Sheena, Aleksei Sholokhov, Reed J. D. Sorensen, Gianna Sparks, Emma Elizabeth Spurlock, Michelle L. Subart, Ruri Syailendrawati, Anna E. Torre, Christopher E. Troeger, Theo Vos, Alexandrea Watson,
Stefanie Watson, Kirsten E. Wiens, Lauren Woyczynski, Liming Xu, Jize Zhang, Simon I. Hay,
Stephen S. Lim, Christopher J. L. Murray, and IHME COVID-19 Forecasting Team. Modeling
covid-19 scenarios for the united states. Nature Medicine, 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41591-020-1132-9.
URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1132-9.
[9] Daniele Proverbio, Françoise Kemp, Stefano Magni, Andreas Husch, Atte Aalto, Laurent Mombaerts, Alexander Skupin, Jorge Gonçalves, Jose Ameijeiras-Alonso, and Christophe Ley. Dynamical spqeir model assesses the effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions against covid-19
epidemic outbreaks. medRxiv, 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.22.20075804. URL https://www.
medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/11/24/2020.04.22.20075804.
[10] Michal Burzynski, Joel Machado, Atte Aalto, Michel A. R. Beine, Jorge Goncalves, Tom Haas, Francoise Kemp, Stefano Magni, Laurent Mombaerts, Pierre M. Picard, Daniele Proverbio, Alexander
Skupin, and Frédéric Docquier. Covid-19 crisis management in luxembourg: Insights from an epidemionomic approach. Luxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic Research (LISER) Working Paper Series
2020-08, Available at SSRN, 06 2020. URL http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3651024.
[11] Mario Castro, Saúl Ares, José A. Cuesta, and Susanna Manrubia. The turning point and end of
an expanding epidemic cannot be precisely forecast. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
117(42):26190–26196, 2020. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2007868117. URL https://www.
pnas.org/content/117/42/26190.
[12] Jonas Dehning, Johannes Zierenberg, F. Paul Spitzner, Michael Wibral, Joao Pinheiro Neto, Michael
Wilczek, and Viola Priesemann. Inferring change points in the spread of covid-19 reveals the effectiveness of interventions. Science, 369(6500), 2020. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.abb9789.
URL https://science.sciencemag.org/content/369/6500/eabb9789.
[13] Marwala T Mbuvha R. Bayesian inference of covid-19 spreading rates in south africa. PLoS ONE,
15:e0237126, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0237126.
[14] Elofsson A. Bryant P. Estimating the impact of mobility patterns on covid-19 infection rates in 11
european countries. PeerJ 8:e9879, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.9879.
[15] Thomas May. Vaccines as community-focused therapy. Expert Review of Vaccines, 2(3):341–343, 2003.
doi: 10.1586/14760584.2.3.341. URL https://doi.org/10.1586/14760584.2.3.341.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[16] Harunor Rashid, Gulam Khandaker, and Robert Booy. Vaccination and herd immunity: What
more do we know? Current opinion in infectious diseases, 25:243–9, 06 2012. doi: 10.1097/QCO.
0b013e328352f727.
[17] Arnaud Fontanet and Simon Cauchemez. Covid-19 herd immunity: where are we? Nature reviews.
Immunology, 20, 09 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41577-020-00451-5.
[18] G. A. Poland, I. G. Ovsyannikova, and R. B. Kennedy. Sars-cov-2 immunity: review and applications to phase 3 vaccine candidates. Lancet, 396:1595–1606, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0140-6736(20)32137-1.
[19] David Nokes and Roy Anderson. The use of mathematical models in epidemiological study of
infectious diseases and in the design of mass immunization programmes. Epidemiology and infection,
101:1–20, 09 1988. doi: 10.1017/S0950268800029186.
[20] Michael F. Good and Michael T. Hawkes. The interaction of natural and vaccine-induced immunity
with social distancing predicts the evolution of the covid-19 pandemic. mBio, 11(5), 2020. doi:
10.1128/mBio.02617-20. URL https://mbio.asm.org/content/11/5/e02617-20.
[21] Roy M Anderson, Carolin Vegvari, James Truscott, and Benjamin S Collyer. Challenges in creating herd immunity to sars-cov-2 infection by mass vaccination. The Lancet, 396(10263):1614–
1616, 2020/12/30 2020. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)32318-7. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(20)32318-7.
[22] William Ogilvy Kermack, A. G. McKendrick, and Gilbert Thomas Walker. A contribution to the
mathematical theory of epidemics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing
Papers of a Mathematical and Physical Character, 115(772):700–721, 1927. doi: 10.1098/rspa.1927.0118.
URL https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/rspa.1927.0118.
[23] Ruiyun Li, Sen Pei, Bin Chen, Yimeng Song, Tao Zhang, Wan Yang, and Jeffrey Shaman. Substantial undocumented infection facilitates the rapid dissemination of novel coronavirus (sarscov-2). Science, 368(6490):489–493, 2020. ISSN 0036-8075. doi: 10.1126/science.abb3221. URL
https://science.sciencemag.org/content/368/6490/489.
[24] Weston C. Roda, Marie B. Varughese, Donglin Han, and Michael Y. Li. Why is it difficult to accurately predict the covid-19 epidemic? Infectious Disease Modelling, 5:271 – 281, 2020. ISSN 24680427. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.idm.2020.03.001. URL http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2468042720300075.
[25] Folkhalsomyndigheten.
Påvisning av antikroppar efter genomgången covid19 i blodprov från öppenvården (delrapport 1),
.
URL https://www.
folkhalsomyndigheten.se/contentassets/9c5893f84bd049e691562b9eeb0ca280/
pavisning-antikroppar-genomgangen-covid-19-blodprov-oppenvarden-delrapport-1.
pdf.
[26] Folkhalsomyndigheten.
Påvisning
av
antikroppar
efter
genomgången
covid-19
hos
blodgivare
(delrapport
2),
.
URL
https://www.
folkhalsomyndigheten.se/contentassets/376f9021a4c84da08de18ac597284f0c/
pavisning-antikroppar-genomgangen-covid-19-blodgivare-delrapport-2.pdf.
[27] Socialstyrelsen.
Utvecklingen över tid, nyinskrivningar, avlidna och smittade på särskilt
boende. URL https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/statistik-och-data/statistik/
statistik-om-covid-19/sammanfattande-statistik-over-tid/.
[28] Jonas F. Ludvigsson. The first eight months of sweden covid-19 strategy and the key actions and
actors that were involved. Acta Paediatrica, 109(12):2459–2471, 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/
apa.15582. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/apa.15582.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[29] Lewis F. Buss, Carlos A. Prete, Claudia M. M. Abrahim, Alfredo Mendrone, Tassila Salomon, Cesar de Almeida-Neto, Rafael F. O. França, Maria C. Belotti, Maria P. S. S. Carvalho, Allyson G.
Costa, Myuki A. E. Crispim, Suzete C. Ferreira, Nelson A. Fraiji, Susie Gurzenda, Charles Whittaker, Leonardo T. Kamaura, Pedro L. Takecian, Pedro da Silva Peixoto, Marcio K. Oikawa,
Anna S. Nishiya, Vanderson Rocha, Nanci A. Salles, Andreza Aruska de Souza Santos, Martirene A. da Silva, Brian Custer, Kris V. Parag, Manoel Barral-Netto, Moritz U. G. Kraemer, Rafael
H. M. Pereira, Oliver G. Pybus, Michael P. Busch, Márcia C. Castro, Christopher Dye, Vitor H.
Nascimento, Nuno R. Faria, and Ester C. Sabino. Three-quarters attack rate of sars-cov-2 in
the brazilian amazon during a largely unmitigated epidemic. Science, 2020. ISSN 0036-8075.
doi: 10.1126/science.abe9728. URL https://science.sciencemag.org/content/early/
2020/12/07/science.abe9728.
[30] M. De la Sen and S. Alonso-Quesada. Vaccination strategies based on feedback control techniques for a general seir-epidemic model. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 218(7):3888 –
3904, 2011. ISSN 0096-3003. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amc.2011.09.036. URL http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0096300311012082.
[31] Quan-Xin Long, Xiao-Jun Tang, Qiu-Lin Shi, Qin Li, Hai-Jun Deng, Jun Yuan, Jie-Li Hu, Wei
Xu, Yong Zhang, Fa-Jin Lv, Kun Su, Fan Zhang, Jiang Gong, Bo Wu, Xia-Mao Liu, Jin-Jing Li,
Jing-Fu Qiu, Juan Chen, and Ai-Long Huang. Clinical and immunological assessment of asymptomatic sars-cov-2 infections. Nature Medicine, 26(8):1200–1204, 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41591-020-0965-6.
[32] Tom Britton, Frank Ball, and Pieter Trapman. A mathematical model reveals the influence of population heterogeneity on herd immunity to sars-cov-2. Science, 369(6505):846–849, 2020. ISSN 00368075. doi: 10.1126/science.abc6810. URL https://science.sciencemag.org/content/
369/6505/846.
[33] Andrius Kavaliunas, Pauline Ocaya, Jim Mumper, Isis Lindfeldt, and Mattias Kyhlstedt. Swedish
policy analysis for covid-19. Health Policy and Technology, 9(4):598 – 612, 2020. ISSN 22118837. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlpt.2020.08.009. URL http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2211883720300812. The COVID-19 pandemic: Global health
policy and technology responses in the making.
[34] Xinyu Song Jinhong Zhang, Jianwen Jia. Analysis of an seir epidemic model with saturated incidence and saturated treatment function. The Scientific World Journal, 2014. doi: 10.1155/2014/
910421.
[35] Fadoua Balabdaoui and Dirk Mohr. Age-stratified discrete compartment model of the covid19 epidemic with application to switzerland. Scientific Reports, 10(1):21306, 2020. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-020-77420-4. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-77420-4.
[36] Melissa Tracy, Magdalena CerdA¡, and Katherine M. Keyes. Agent-based modeling in public
health: Current applications and future directions. Annual Review of Public Health, 39(1):77–94,
2018. doi: 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-040617-014317. URL https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-publhealth-040617-014317. PMID: 29328870.
[37] R. L. Tillett, J. R. Sevinsky, P. D. Hartley, H. Kerwin, N. Crawford, A. Gorzalski, C. Laverdure,
S. C. Verma, C. C. Rossetto, D. Jackson, M. J. Farrell, S. Van Hooser, and M. Pandori. Genomic
evidence for reinfection with sars-cov-2: a case study. The Lancet. Infectious Diseases, Advance online
publication, 2020. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30764-7.
[38] Arthur W. D. Edridge, Joanna Kaczorowska, Alexis C. R. Hoste, Margreet Bakker, Michelle Klein,
Katherine Loens, Maarten F. Jebbink, Amy Matser, Cormac M. Kinsella, Paloma Rueda, Margareta
Ieven, Herman Goossens, Maria Prins, Patricia Sastre, Martin Deijs, and Lia van der Hoek. Seasonal
coronavirus protective immunity is short-lasting. Nature Medicine, 26(11):1691–1693, 2020. doi:
10.1038/s41591-020-1083-1. URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-1083-1.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[39] Anita S. Iyer, Forrest K. Jones, Ariana Nodoushani, Meagan Kelly, Margaret Becker, Damien
Slater, Rachel Mills, Erica Teng, Mohammad Kamruzzaman, Wilfredo F. Garcia-Beltran, Michael
Astudillo, Diane Yang, Tyler E. Miller, Elizabeth Oliver, Stephanie Fischinger, Caroline Atyeo,
A. John Iafrate, Stephen B. Calderwood, Stephen A. Lauer, Jingyou Yu, Zhenfeng Li, Jared Feldman, Blake M. Hauser, Timothy M. Caradonna, John A. Branda, Sarah E. Turbett, Regina C.
LaRocque, Guillaume Mellon, Dan H. Barouch, Aaron G. Schmidt, Andrew S. Azman, Galit Alter, Edward T Ryan, Jason B. Harris, and Richelle C. Charles. Persistence and decay of human antibody responses to the receptor binding domain of sars-cov-2 spike protein in covid19 patients. Science Immunology, 5(52), 2020. doi: 10.1126/sciimmunol.abe0367. URL https:
//immunology.sciencemag.org/content/5/52/eabe0367.
[40] Peter Simmonds, Sarah Williams, and Heli Harvala. Understanding the outcomes of covid-19 does
the current model of an acute respiratory infection really fit? 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.
1099/jgv.0.001545. URL https://www.microbiologyresearch.org/content/journal/
jgv/10.1099/jgv.0.001545.
[41] A. C. Hindmarsh. Odepack: A systematized collection of ode solvers. IMACS Transactions on
Scientific Computation, 1:55–64, 1983.
[42] Linda Petzold. Automatic selection of methods for solving stiff and nonstiff systems of ordinary
differential equations. SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical Computing, 4(1):136–148, 1983. doi:
10.1137/0904010. URL https://doi.org/10.1137/0904010.
[43] O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and M. G. Roberts. The construction of next-generation matrices
for compartmental epidemic models. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 7(47):873–885, 2010. doi:
10.1098/rsif.2009.0386. URL https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/abs/10.1098/
rsif.2009.0386.
[44] van den Driessche P. Reproduction numbers of infectious disease models. Infect Dis Modelling, 29;2:
288–303, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.idm.2017.06.002.
[45] Julie C. Blackwood and Lauren M. Childs. An introduction to compartmental modeling for the
budding infectious disease modeler. Letters in Biomathematics, 5(1):195–221, 2018. ISSN 23737867.
doi: 10.1080/23737867.2018.1509026.
[46] Chantal J. Snoeck, Michel Vaillant, Tamir Abdelrahman, Venkata P. Satagopam, Jonathan D. Turner,
Katy Beaumont, Clarissa P. C. Gomes, Joelle Veronique Fritz, Valerie E. Schröder, Anne Kaysen,
Lukas Pavelka, Lara Stute, Guilherme Ramos Meyers, Laure Pauly, Maxime Hansen, Claire Pauly,
Gloria A. Aguayo, Magali Perquin, Anne-Marie Hanff, Soumyabrata Ghosh, Manon Gantenbein,
Laetitia Huiart, Markus Ollert, and Rejko Krüger. Prevalence of sars-cov-2 infection in the luxembourgish population: the con-vince study. medRxiv, 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.05.11.20092916. URL
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/early/2020/05/18/2020.05.11.20092916.
[47] Emma Larsson, Olof Brattström, Christina Agvald-Öhman, Jonathan Grip, Francesca Jalde, Kristoffer Strålin, Pontus Nauclér, Anders Oldner, David Konrad, Björn Persson, Lars Eriksson, Johan
Mårtensson, and For Group. Characteristics and outcomes of patients with covid-19 admitted to
icu in a tertiary hospital in stockholm, sweden. Acta Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica, 09 2020. doi:
10.1111/aas.13694.
[48] Eleanor Rees, Emily Nightingale, Yalda Jafari, Naomi Waterlow, Samuel Clifford, Carl Pearson, CMMID Group, Thibaut Jombart, Simon Procter, and Gwenan Knight. Covid-19 length of
hospital stay: A systematic review and data synthesis. BMC Medicine, 18:270, 09 2020. doi:
10.1186/s12916-020-01726-3.
[49] Ying Liu, Albert A Gayle, Annelies Wilder-Smith, and Joacim Rocklöv. The reproductive number
of COVID-19 is higher compared to SARS coronavirus. Journal of Travel Medicine, 2020. doi: https:
//doi.org/10.1093/jtm/taaa021.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[50] Joseph T Wu, Kathy Leung, and Gabriel M Leung. Nowcasting and forecasting the potential domestic and international spread of the 2019-nCoV outbreak originating in Wuhan, China: a modelling
study. The Lancet, 395(10225):689–697, 2020. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30260-9.
[51] Dankmar Böhning, Irene Rocchetti, Antonello Maruotti, and Heinz Holling. Estimating the undetected infections in the covid-19 outbreak by harnessing capture-recapture methods. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 97:197 – 201, 2020. ISSN 1201-9712. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.009. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S1201971220304446.
[52] Paul R. Miles. pymcmcstat: A python package for bayesian inference using delayed rejection adaptive metropolis. Journal of Open Source Software, 4(38):1417, 2019. doi: 10.21105/joss.01417. URL
https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01417.
[53] Paul Miles. prmiles/pymcmcstat: v1.9.0, July 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.
3342988.
[54] William A. Link and Mitchell J. Eaton. On thinning of chains in mcmc. Methods in Ecology and Evolution, 3(1):112–115, 2012. doi: 10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00131.x. URL https://besjournals.
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.2041-210X.2011.00131.x.
[55] Andrew Gelman and Donald B. Rubin. Inference from iterative simulation using multiple sequences. Statist. Sci., 7(4):457–472, 11 1992. doi: 10.1214/ss/1177011136. URL https://doi.
org/10.1214/ss/1177011136.
[56] Stephen Brooks and Andrew Gelman. General methods for monitoring convergence of iterative
simulations. J. Comput. Graphi. Stat., 7:434–455, 12 1998. doi: 10.1080/10618600.1998.10474787.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supporting material: model and methods
In this supporting material, we illustrate the model we developed, the data we considered from Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden, and the procedures we employed to provide an estimate of the parameters
and their uncertainties.

S1

Mathematical model

In this study, we developed a mathematical model of the transmission of COVID-19 within a population,
building upon the standard SEIR model [22]. Our extension of the SEIR model is described by Fig. 1 in
the main text. First, we introduce in the model a separation between detected and undetected cases
of COVID-19, to represent the fact that a non-negligible fraction of infected people is not detected [23],
e.g. for lack of testing or because asymptomatic. Next, we include compartments to model the progression of the disease in individuals who have been infected, in particular the progression to more severe
states, requiring hospitalisation, intensive care (ICU) or leading to death, and finally compartments for
recovered people.
The total population N of the modelled country at time t is divided into 16 compartments. The variables are summarized in Tab. S1 and represent the number of individuals in different stages, normalized
by the total population of the modelled country. Susceptible (S) and exposed (E) compartments are in
common with the standard SEIR model. An exposed person might be detected (via a PCR test), thus
entering the “infectious and detected” (II) compartment, and subsequently the “quarantined” (Q) compartment, from where the person cannot infect others any further. At this point, a person might (or
not) become “hospitalized” (H), and then either simply “require longer hospitalization” (Hl) or require
“intensive care treatment” (ICU ). If the health improves, the individual can return to “regular hospital
treatment after ICU” (AICU ). At any of these hospitalization stages, the person can “die in hospitals or
ICUs” (DI,hos ), or “recover from hospital or ICUs” (RII ). People who are either recovered or dead are
the equivalent of the removed compartment of a standard SEIR model, and thus do not get reinfected
a second time in the model. Most detected people are not hospitalized, so they recover at home (N I),
or alternatively they can die at home (DI,hom ). Finally, the fraction of people who got infected but do
not get detected are represented by the infectious and undetected compartment (A). Being unaware of
their state, they can continue to spread the infection without constraints. These people spend some time
recovering outside hospitals (NII ), and eventually they end up either recovered undetected (RA ), or
dead undetected (DA ).
We assume conservation of the total population N (people can die, thus entering the dedicated compartments, but there is no removal of individuals from the system, and we neglect birth), such that for
each country:
1 = S + E + I + Q + H + Hl + ICU + AICU + N I + DI,hos + DI,hom + RI + A + N II + DA + RA , (S1)
where the variables have been normalized by N to represent the fraction of the total population being
in the corresponding state.
We initialise every simulation with the initial conditions detailed in Tab. S1. For any simulation in
this work, to numerically solve the set of ordinary differential equations which implements the model
we employ the python (version 3.6.1) solver odeint from the package scipy (version 1.5.2), which uses
the LSODA method for numerical integration. This is an Adams/BDF method with automatic stiffness
detection and switching, which we have chosen for both speed and precision. It is in turn a wrapper to
the Fortran solver from ODEPACK [41]. It switches automatically between the non-stiff Adams method
and the stiff BDF method. The method was originally detailed in [42].

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The dynamics of our model is described by the following system of ordinary differential equations:
dS
dt
dE
dt
dI
dt
dQ
dt
dH
dt
dHl
dt
dICU
dt
dAICU
dt
dRI
dt
dRI1
dt
dN I
dt
dDI,hom
dt
dDI,hos
dt
dA
dt
dN II
dt
dDA
dt
RA
dt

S2

= −ρβ(A + II)S ,

(S2a)

= ρβS(A + II) − αE ,

(S2b)

= αp1 E − τ1 I ,

(S2c)

= τ1 I − Qτ2 p2 − (1 − p2 )τ2 Q ,

(S2d)

= p2 τ2 Q − p3 Hτ3 − (1 − p3 )Hτ3 ,

(S2e)

= p3 Hτ3 − Hlτ5 (1 − p5 ) − τ5 p5 Hl ,

(S2f)

= (1 − p3 )Hτ3 − p4 τ4 ICU − (1 − p4 )ICU τ4 ,

(S2g)

= τ4 p4 ICU − p6 AICU τ6 − AICU (1 − p6 )τ6 ,

(S2h)

= p6 τ6 AICU + p5 τ5 Hl ,

(S2i)

= p7 τ7 N I ,

(S2j)

= (1 − p2 )τ2 Q − τ7 (1 − p7 )N I − p7 τ7 N I ,

(S2k)

= (1 − p7 )τ7 N I ,

(S2l)

= (1 − p6 )τ6,d AICU + (1 − p5 )τ5 Hl + τ4 (1 − p4 )ICU ,

(S2m)

= (1 − p1 )αE − τ8 A ,

(S2n)

= τ8 A − τ9 (1 − p9 )N II − p9 τ9 N II ,

(S2o)

= τ9 (1 − p9 )N II ,

(S2p)

= τ9 p9 N II .

(S2q)

Model parameters

The parameters of the model and their interpretation are detailed in Tab. S2. The parameters can be
divided in three categories, based on what type of physical quantity they describe: rates, probabilities
and social interaction.
When individuals can move from one compartment to one of two different compartments, the probability pi controls which fraction of people will go to one compartment and which to the other. These
parameters represent the probability of going into a compartment from the previous, and thus the probability of going to the alternative compartment is given by 1 − pi . Their value is bounded to be between
0 and 1. The parameters pi are indexed with i = 1, . . . , 9.
The parameters α, β and τi represent rates. The parameters τi are indexed with i = 1, . . . , 9. Each
rate represents the inverse of the average time that takes for an individual to move from one compartment to the next. Of particular relevance are the rates α and β, which have the same meaning as the
corresponding parameters of a standard SEIR model: α represents the inverse of the mean incubation
period of the disease, and β represents the average contact rate.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Variable

Representing
fraction of people

Value at
t = 0 days

S (t)
E (t)
I (t)
Q (t)
H (t)
Hl (t)
ICU (t)
AICU (t)
N I (t)
DI,hos (t)
DI,hom (t)
RI (t)
A (t)
N II (t)
DA (t)
RA (t)

Susceptible
Exposed
Infectious (Detected)
Quarantined
Hospitalized
Hospitalized - Longer
in ICU
Hospitalized after ICU
Recovering at Home (Detected)
Dead in hospitals (Detected)
Dead at home (Detected)
Recovered (Detected)
Infectious (Undetected)
Recovering at Home (Undetected)
Dead at home (Undetected)
Recovered (Undetected)

1 − 1/N
1/N
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table S1: Variables employed in the model and their initial conditions. The 16 variables represent the fraction
of population of a country being in each of the compartments. The initial conditions are the standard ones usually employed for SEIR-like models, with all the population susceptible except one person already exposed to the
virus. They are the same for every simulation and country, except for the country’s population being N = 623180
individuals for Luxembourg, N = 8901064 for Austria and N = 10230000 for Sweden.

The average contact rate β is then multiplied by the additional parameter ρ, in order to model any
measure or change in people’s behaviour that can lead to a change (decrease or increase) in the average
contact rate. Thus, β is a constant and it represents the “natural” average contact rate, while ρ (t) β represents an effective average contact rate which considers the measures or social behaviours in place. We
assume ρ0 = 1 for any country, before any measure was implemented at the beginning of the pandemic
in February 2020. Afterwards, we assume ρ = ρ (t) to be a piece-wise constant function of time, where
each value is indicated by ρn , with n = 0, . . . , 13 for Luxembourg and Sweden and n = 0, . . . , 16 for
Austria. We assume that changes in ρ occur whenever a major new measure is implemented or lifted
by the authorities of a country, or in case of a major happening (e.g. schools starting in September in
Luxembourg). The dates employed for every country, and which measures where taken/lifted on that
date, are summarized in Tab. S3 for Luxembourg, Tab. S4 for Austria and Tab. S5 for Sweden.

S3 Incorporating vaccination in the model
To include in the model vaccination, which we investigate in Sec. 3.4, we add one additional compartment V (t) representing the fraction of vaccinated population. We assume that a fixed number of people
will be vaccinated every day. Thus, the equation for the number of people vaccinated reads:
dV
= τvac ,
dt

(S3)

with τvac being the parameter representing how many people will be vaccinated per day. Correspondingly, the equation for the susceptible compartment becomes:
dS
= −ρβ(A + II)S − τvac ,
dt

(S4)

since we assume that only people who did not already naturally develop antibodies by being infected
will be vaccinated.
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter Description

Units

ρn

social interaction (n = 0, 1, . . . , N ) adim.

β
α

average contact rate
(mean incubation period)−1

days−1
days−1

τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
τ7
τ8
τ9

(mean time in I)−1
(mean time in Q)−1
(mean time in H)−1
(mean time in ICU )−1
(mean time in Hl)−1
(mean time in AICU )−1
(mean time in N I)−1
(mean time in A)−1
(mean time in N II)−1

days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1
days−1

p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
p9

probability of E → I
probability of Q → H
probability of H → Hl
probability of ICU → AICU
probability of Hl → RII
probability of AICU → RII
probability of NI → RII
probability of N II → RA

adim.
adim.
adim.
adim.
adim.
adim.
adim.
adim.

Table S2: Parameters of the model. The parameters of the model with their description and unit of measure.

For each country, the following assumptions have been made: τ8 = (1/τ1 + 1/τ2 )−1 , p9 = p7 , τ9 = τ7 . The
same assumption is made for each wave. This is motivated by the fact that these parameters are relative to the
undetected branch, and thus cannot be inferred from data. Thus, we assumed that undetected cases would evolve
with the same parameter values as detected cases not entering hospitals/ICUs. N represents the number of times
that the social interaction parameter changes: N = 13 for Luxembourg and Sweden and N = 16 for Austria. The
values of the manual fit of all the rates and probabilities for each country and wave are summarized in Tab. S6.
The values and dates of change for the social interaction parameter ρn are reported in Tab. S3 for Luxembourg, in
Tab. S4 for Austria and in Tab. S5 for Sweden.

In order to simulate three potential vaccination strategies, i.e. 3 speeds at which countries might
manage to perform vaccination, we fix the parameter τvac to three values that, if all the population
would still be susceptible, would lead to vaccinating all the population of a country within respectively 6 months, 1 year and 1.5 years. These are typical timescales potentially envisaged by different
countries. Thus, we consider the three values τvac = 1/ (365/2) days−1 , τvac = 1/365 days−1 and
τvac = 1/ (1.5 · 365) days−1 . It should be recalled that model variables are normalized by the total country population N , so they sum up to 1. These three values of τvac correspond, respectively, to perform
approximately 3415, 1707 and 1138 vaccinations/day in Luxembourg, 48773, 24386 and 16258 vaccinations/day in Austria and finally 56055, 28027 and 18685 vaccinations/day in Sweden.
When numerically integrating the system of ordinary differential equations from Eq. (S2), that constitutes the model, with the addition of vaccination (Eq. (S3) and Eq. (S4)), we also need to add an
additional constraint to prevent the variable S (t) to decrease below 0, which would happen otherwise
due to Eq. (S4). We employed everywhere else in this work the odeint routine from the scipy python
library to perform numerical integration. Nevertheless, that routine does not allow to dynamically interrupt the integration when a certain condition is met (S = 0) to prevent it from decreasing further by
setting τvac = 0 from that time on. Thus, in all the simulations involving vaccination we instead perform
numerical integration by means of the forward Euler method. In fact, in order to compute the integral
of the ODE system for a given time this method does not need to evaluate the system at subsequent
times, and thus allows changing a parameter at a time-step based on the outcome of the integration
at the previous time-step. We employed a time-step of integration dt = 0.01 days and verified before-

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

hand that further decreasing it would not lead to any significant change in the integration result, while
significantly increasing computation time.

S4

Analytical derivation of the effective reproduction number Reff (t)
for the model

To obtain Reff (t) from the model we used the next generation matrix method [43, 44, 45]. From the next
generation matrix, we find its eigenvalues R0 and 0. In our case, R0 is given by:


(1 − p1 ) p1
+
.
(S5)
R0 = β
τ8
τ1
From R0 , we can deduce Reff (t), given by

Reff (t) = βρ (t)


(1 − p1 ) p1 S (t)
+
.
τ8
τ1
N

(S6)

By substituting the values of the parameters for each country and scenario, we obtain the Reff (t)
curves depicted in Fig. 3, panels B, D, F.

S5

Data and analyzed countries

We employ our model to describe the progression of the pandemic in three different countries: Luxembourg, Austria and Sweden. The model structure described above is maintained unchanged across the
three countries. In order to make the model describe appropriately each of the countries, we instead
change the value of the total country population N , and the parameter values used in the model so that
the model fits the data of the corresponding country. We consider data of total detected cases, hospitalized people, people in ICUs and dead people. We gathered these data from3 and integrated them for
each country with further data from public repositories listed below. Moreover, for each country we
allow the social interaction parameter ρ to change when major changes in measures took place. We list
below also the sources of information for the changes in measures.

S5.1 Luxembourg
For Luxembourg, we obtained the dates at which major changes in policy took place in Luxembourg
from 4 , and summarize them in Tab. S3. The time-series data of total cases, hospitalised people, people in ICU and dead people for Luxembourg are publicly available on5 . They are reported in Fig. 2,
along with their 7-days moving average. This moving average is necessary, not only to smooth noise
due to detection and to the nature of the data itself, but mainly to remove the effect of a considerable
under-testing on weekends, and in particular on Sundays, which has been observed every week in the
reported daily detected cases and which is confirmed by the considerably lower number of tests performed (positive or negative) over these weekend days. We point out that we employ a moving average
which, for each day, computes the average between the values from 3 days before to three days after,
thus not introducing any shift of the features (like the peaks) of the time-series.
According to the public data mentioned above, the first positive case was detected in Luxembourg
on February 29, 2020. Considering the lag between being susceptible, being exposed and being detected,
we initialize the model at its initial conditions reported in Tab. S1 with time t = 0 on February 24.
Data about the prevalence in Luxembourg’s population were obtained from the Con-Vince study
[46].
3 https://www.acaps.org/covid19-government-measures-dataset, public independent database recognised by
the WHO, last accessed on 03/12/2020.
4 https://covid19.public.lu/fr/mesures-sanitaires-en-vigueur.html, last accessed 15/12/2020.
5 https://covid19.public.lu/fr/graph.html, last accessed on 15/12/2020.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ρn

Starting Measure or change in social activites
Date

Manual Which
Fit value Wave

ρ0
ρ1
ρ2
ρ3
ρ4
ρ5
ρ6
ρ7
ρ8
ρ9
ρ10
ρ11
ρ12
ρ13

−
16.03
23.03
20.04
04.05
10.06
29.06
13.07
31.07
12.08
23.08
14.09
01.11
26.11

1
0.4902
0.1984
0.1918
0.2507
0.5298
0.4804
0.3101
0.2203
0.3457
0.3351
0.4333
0.341
0.39

No restrictions
Lockdown
Measures fully effective
Opening construction sector
Opening high schools
Relaxation of measures
End of classes splitting
School holidays
Start holidays
Change mobility (Google mobility data)
End holidays of construction sector
Opening schools
Restrictions, including curfew (11 p.m.)
Stricter measures, HORESCA closure

−
1st
1st
1st
1st
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
3rd
3rd
3rd

Table S3: Changes in the piece-wise constant social interaction parameter ρ (t) of the model for Luxembourg.

S5.2 Austria
We obtained the dates at which major changes in policy took place in Austria from 6 , and we summarize
the dates and the policy changes in Tab. S4. The time-series data of total cases, hospitalised people,
people in ICU and dead people for Austria come from7 . They are reported in Fig. 2, where we also
report their 7-days moving average.

ρn

Starting Measure or change in social activites
Date

Manual Which
Fit value Wave

ρ0
ρ1
ρ2
ρ3
ρ4
ρ5
ρ6
ρ7
ρ8
ρ9
ρ10
ρ11
ρ12
ρ13
ρ14
ρ15
ρ16

−
16.03
30.03
14.04
01.05
15.05
29.05
15.06
11.07
21.07
13.08
14.09
21.09
25.09
23.10
03.11
07.12

1
0.52
0.155
0.22
0.27
0.31
0.33
0.38
0.36
0.32
0.385
0.415
0.405
0.395
0.385
0.27
0.34

No restrictions
Closure schools/universities, limitations in shops/restaurants
Wearing masks
Opening small shops
Opening malls and hairdressers
Opening certain school classes
Opening additional schools
Mask obligation in public area, no mask in shops/schools
School holidays
Mask obligation everywhere
Increase of infections due to people returning from holidays
Opening schools
Extended mask obligation / 10 people invitations
Curfew (10 p.m.) Salzburg, Voralberg and Tirol
Private gatherings limited to 6 people inside, 12 outside
Lockdown
Relief of lockdown

−
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd
2nd

Table S4: Changes in the piece-wise constant social interaction parameter ρ (t) of the model for Austria.
6 https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/COVID-19-Pandemie_in_\unhbox\voidb@x\bgroup\accent127O\
protect\penalty\@M\hskip\z@skip\egroupsterreich (collection of various sources), accessed on 15/12/2020.
7 https://covid19-dashboard.ages.at/dashboard_Hosp.html, accessed on 15/12/2020.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

According to the data mentioned above, the first positive case was detected in Austria on February
26, 2020. Considering the lag between being susceptible, being exposed and being detected, we initialize
the model at its initial conditions reported in Tab. S1 on February 21. Similar starting dates for modelling
the epidemic in Austria have been used elsewhere, with [14] starting their modelling for Austria on
February 22, see Tab. I in [14].
Data about the prevalence in Austria were obtained from8 .

S5.3 Sweden
We obtained the dates at which major changes in policy took place in Sweden from [28] until August
and from 9 later on, and we summarize them in Tab. S5. The time-series data of total cases, hospitalised
people, people in ICU and dead people for Sweden are available on10 . They are displayed in Fig. 2,
where we also report their 7-days moving average.
Swedish policy has been analysed e.g. in [33, 47, 48]. While the very first case detected was on 31st
January, no other case was detected until February 26. It is likely that the first case was isolated and did
not infect others, otherwise most likely a second case would have been detected earlier; in addition, the
first case was reported from a woman who had traveled to Wuhan and was isolated upon detection. On
the other hand, following the second detected case on February 26, 9 more cases were detected in the
next 2 days. To account for potential further lag in the uncertain starting time of the epidemic in Sweden,
we initialise the model at its initial conditions reported in Tab. S1 on February 16. Similar starting dates
for modelling the epidemic in Sweden have been used elsewhere, with [14] starting their modelling on
February 18, see Tab. I in [14].

ρn

Starting Measure or change in social activites
Date

Manual Which
Fit value Wave

ρ0
ρ1
ρ2
ρ3
ρ4
ρ5
ρ6
ρ7
ρ8
ρ9
ρ10
ρ11
ρ12
ρ13

−
11.03
16.03
27.03
30.03
02.04
10.06
13.06
01.07
17.08
01.10
27.10
03.11
16.11

1
0.52
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.277
0.265
0.28
0.23
0.37
0.395
0.41
0.375
0.345

No restrictions
Gatherings of more than 500 people forbidden
Home office, school above 17 initiate distance learning
Gatherings of more than 50 people forbidden
Visits to the elderly care are banned
Certain students aged >17 allowed to go back to classroom
Starting holidays
Ease of travel restriction
Further ease of travel restriction
Opening of schools for children
Visit ban lifted
Stricter guidelines for Skåne
Stricter recommendations in Jönköping , Halland & Örebro
Stricter recommendations in Gävleborg & Västernorrland

−
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
1st
2nd
2nd
2nd

Table S5: Changes in the piece-wise constant social interaction parameter ρ (t) of the model for Sweden.

8 https://www.sora.at/nc/news-presse/news/news-einzelansicht/news/COVID-19-praevalenz-1006.
html, accessed on 15/12/2020.
9 https://www.krisinformation.se/en/news, accessed on 15/12/2020.
10 https://www.folkhalsomyndigheten.se/smittskydd-beredskap/utbrott/aktuella-utbrott/covid-19/
statistik-och-analyser/bekraftade-fall-i-sverige/, https://www.icuregswe.org/en/data--results/
covid-19-in-swedish-intensive-care/, https://c19.se, accessed on 15/12/2020.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

S5.4 To fit Sweden, the model needs time-dependent probabilities of detection and
hospitalisation, unlike for Luxembourg or Austria
We extend our model to Sweden and compare its simulations and the model-building process, to gain
insight on a country which applied different policies than Luxembourg and Austria (which adopted
similar policies). To fit Swedish data with the same model structure as the other countries, it was
not sufficient to consider a different set of parameter values. Instead, it was necessary to introduce
time-dependent probabilities of being detected p1Swe (t) and of being hospitalized p2Swe (t), within an
epidemic wave.
The parameter p1 corresponds to the probability of an infected individual being detected. To obtain
an estimate of this parameter for Sweden, we considered prevalence data estimated weekly through
antibody test for 8 consecutive weeks between mid April and mid June 2020, obtained from [25, 26] and
depicted in Fig. S1 panel A. The prevalence went from about 4% to 6%, growing over the course of these
two months, likely resulting from more infections. Due to the large error bars, multiple functional forms
could be considered a reasonable fit, so we chose the simplest linear fit.

A

B

C

D

Fig. S1 Derivation of the time-dependent probabilities of detection p1Swe (t) and hospitalization p2Swe (t), for
Sweden. A: prevalence data for Sweden from [25, 26], with three alternative fits: a linear, a Gompertz and an
exponential. B: number of detected cases divided by number of total cases inferred based on prevalence, as a
function of time, for the three fits to prevalence of panel A. In green we report our final functional form for p1Swe (t),
i.e. the probability of being detected if infected. C: data for daily new detected cases, people entering hospital and
people entering ICU (not to be confused with the numbers of people occupying hospitals and ICUs displayed in
Fig. 2). D: in blue the ratio of people entering hospitals divided by new daily detected cases two days earlier, which
we employ to build the piece-wise linear function in green which we assume for p2Swe (t), i.e. the probability of
being hospitalized when detected positive.
The prevalence represents the total percentage of the country’s population that is estimated to have
contracted the virus, including detected and the undetected individuals. We thus can obtain an estimate
of p1Swe (t) as the ratio between the measured detected cases and the total cases estimated from the
prevalence. We do so in Fig. S1, panel B, which reports the number of detected cases divided by the
32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

number of total cases inferred based on prevalence, as a function of time, for the three fits to prevalence
of panel A. In green we report our final assumption for the functional form for p1Swe (t), i.e. the probability of being detected if infected, which for Sweden we needed to be time-dependent. We assumed
p1Swe (t) to be piece-wise linear, approximately following the behaviour of the linear fit to prevalence,
and saturating after the last available data point (as we do not want to introduce further assumptions).
We stress here that, while the particular functional form chosen for p1Swe (t) is somewhat arbitrary, and
alternative functional shapes could have been considered, for Sweden a time-dependent p1Swe (t) increasing with time seems indeed necessary in order for the model to fit the available data, which was
not the case with Luxembourg and Austria, where p1 and p2 values constant within each wave were
sufficient.
The second observation we need to incorporate in the model is that in the early phases of the pandemic in Sweden the majority of the detected cases were people needing hospitalization. This can be
clearly seen from Fig. S1, panel C, which shows data for daily new detected cases, people entering
hospital and people entering ICU (not to be confused with the number of people currently occupying
hospitals and ICUs). The data of people entering hospital and ICU are publicly available on [27] and 11 .
From them, we can clearly see that in March and April the daily number of people entering hospital was
more than half of the daily number of detected cases. We plot this ratio on panel D, reporting in blue the
ratio of people entering hospitals divided by new daily detected cases two days earlier. We utilize this to
build the piece-wise linear function in green which we assume for P2Swe (t), i.e. the probability of being
hospitalized when detected positive. This seemed to be between approximately 50% and 100% during
March and April, as can be seen by both panels C and D, meaning the the majority of the cases that
were detected positive in the early weeks/months of the epidemic in Sweden were those that required
hospital treatment. This clearly changed in May and June, likely due to the change in testing strategy
ordered by the government on May the 3rd [28].

S6 Manual calibration of model parameters
We determine the values of the model parameters such that the model simulations provide a good fit to
the available data, while having reasonable values w.r.t. the literature. We first in this section explain
the manual calibration which we employ to get reasonable values, later on cross-validated with Markov
Chain Monte Carlo methods.
The following methodology was applied similarly for Luxembourg and Austria, and to Sweden
with some differences described in Sec. S5.4 and Sec. S5.3. We recall that most of the parameters have
values ∈ [0; 1] due to their interpretation as rates or probabilities. The only exception is β, for which we
considered values between 0 and 2, thus assuming a minimum average time of half a day. We initially
set up α and β following literature values [49, 50]. When possible, we chose for the other parameters
a tentative initial value based on domain knowledge. For example, average length of stay in hospitals
or ICUs observed [48] are typically of a considerable number of days, leading to correspondingly small
initial values of the rates for exiting these compartments. For the remaining parameters, e.g. those
concerning non-hospitalized individuals, an initial educated guess was made based on the information
available and what seemed reasonable at the time.
Next, we manually tuned the parameter values in order for the simulated model output to fit the
available data. It must be stressed that, due to the model structure, individuals can only flow in one
direction in the model, i.e. from being initially in the susceptible compartment, to eventually end up in
either one of the recovered or dead compartments. Due to this structure, several of the parameters only
influence the variables appearing downstream in the flow, not upstream. For instance, while α, β and
ρ influence all compartments, the probabilities of being hospitalised or the probability of entering ICU
do not influence the total detected cases. Thus, we start the manual fit by fixing those parameters that
impact on the total detected cases, so that the simulated curve fits the moving average of the available
data. Unlike all the others, the parameter ρ changes value every time that a new measure is implemented. Each value is thus fixed in order to improve the model fit to the data of total detected cases
(averaged over a week) until the next change, before moving to the next value. Eventually, parameters
downstream in the flow of individuals are also changed in order for the model to fit the data of the
11 https://www.icuregswe.org/en/data--results/COVID-19-in-swedish-intensive-care/

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

corresponding boxes. In particular, first parameters impacting total cases, then parameters impacting
hospitalisations, than parameters impacting ICU and eventually those impacting death. The procedure
was repeated until a satisfactory fit was achieved. The final values of parameters from our manual fit,
for each country and wave of infection, are reported in Tab. S6.
Parameter
β
α
τ1
τ2
τ3
τ4
τ5
τ6
τ7
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7

Manual fit Luxembourg
1st wave
2nd
3rd
1.287
0.4433
0.6808
0.5979
0.5246
0.0513
0.1050
0.106
0.0617
0.1514
0.1605
0.0853
0.1514
0.1590
0.1084
0.1084
0.31
0.41
0.1534
0.08
0.042
0.7906
0.86
0.78
0.7906
0.9048 0.8868
0.8717
0.9814 0.8692
0.9072
0.9816 0.8868
0.9876
0.9979
0.997

Manual fit Austria
1st wave
2nd
1.287
0.4433
0.6808
0.5979
0.5246
0.5246
0.0991
0.0948
0.1047
0.1240
0.1073
0.0856
0.1084
0.1084
0.41245
0.162
0.065
0.72
0.82
0.6972
0.8345
0.8499
0.9275
0.8292
0.8946
0.99
0.992

Manual fit Sweden
1st wave
2nd
1.287
0.4433
0.6808
0.5979
0.5246
0.5246
0.1875
0.0933
0.2383
0.1247
0.1093
0.0838
0.1084
0.1084
p1Swe (t) 0.27389
p2Swe (t)
0.1
0.72
0.88
0.6667
0.8965
0.9021
0.9820
0.7866
0.9731
0.99
0.992

Table S6: Parameter values for manual fit of each wave and country. All rates (α, β and each τ ) are
expressed in days−1 , the other parameters are dimensionless. The symbol “-” means the parameter is
not changed w.r.t. the value to its left in the table.
We performed this procedure for Luxembourg and for the first wave, which we conventionally assume to end with the minimum of the moving average of new daily cases occurring on June 4. It is here
crucial to stress that, with the parameter set employed to fit Luxembourg simulations to data for the first
wave, the model simulations once fit to the daily detected cases of the second wave lead to a significant
over-prediction of the number of people in hospital and ICU for the second wave, with respect to what
is observed in the data. Thus, some of the parameter values need to be changed in order for the model
to fit the data of the second wave. Similarly for the third wave. For both, we repeat the procedure of
manual parameter calibration described above starting from the values of the parameters for the previous wave, and incorporating any further domain knowledge about average length of stay in hospitals
and so on that might have become available in the meantime.
It has to be stressed that most parameters were initially tuned for Luxembourg, and then employed
for Austria and Sweden with changes in all those parameters that needed to be changed to achieve a
reasonably good fit to the data, or where literature was available reporting a country-specific estimate, as
it is the case for the probability of being detected p1 , inferred from country-specific prevalence studies
as detailed below. We further repeat the same procedure for the other countries we investigate. We
consider as starting parameter values those that were employed for Luxembourg, and we further build
upon that. This procedure is repeated for Austria with only changes in parameter values. However,
this is not sufficient to fit Sweden. For Sweden, we further need to derive time-dependent probabilities
of detection p1,Swe (t) and of hospitalizations p2,Swe (t), as described in detail in Sec. S5.4. these two
functions are depicted in Fig. S1.
Similarly to Luxembourg, we assume the 1st wave to end with the minimum of the moving average
of new daily cases on June 12 for Austria and on August 31 for Sweden. We further assume the 3rd wave
in Luxembourg to start from the re-opening of schools on September the 15th. We do not split Austria
or Sweden data in a third wave as only the data for Luxembourg show clearly three waves of infections,
see Fig. 2. The final values of parameters from our manual fit, for each country and wave of infection,
are reported in Tab. S6.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A key parameter for each country is the probability of being detected if infected, which has been
derived from prevalence studies. For Luxembourg we consider this probability to be p1 = 0.31 in the
first wave thanks to the Con-Vince study [46], and we assume it to be p01 = 0.4 for the second and
third wave based on internal communication. These numbers correspond to values for total cases over
detected cases of respectively 1/0.31=3.2 and 1/0.4=2.5, which are close to the value 2.3 reported as an
approximated estimate for several countries by [51]. For Austria, p1 ≈ 0.41 has been as well derived
from prevalence data12 . For Sweden we describe how we obtain p1,Swe (t) and p2,Swe (t) in Sec. S5.4.
This estimate is also based on the prevalence data from [25, 26] displayed in Fig. S1, panel A. As we
depict in Fig. S1, panel B, we assume a time-dependent p1Swe (t) which increases from an estimated
value of 0.02 in March to an estimated value of 0.27 from June onward.

S7 Bayesian inference for cross-validation of parameters and evaluation of uncertainties
The parameter sets obtained by manual calibration are used in the manuscript to illustrate a number of
qualitative and quantitative results. Nevertheless, the next question naturally arising is “how unique
is each of these parameter sets, given the available data?”. We thus want to investigate to what extent
the available data constrain the parameters of the model, and to which extent these parameter values
can change, i.e. to quantify the uncertainties in the estimation of these parameters, given the data. A
Bayesian framework provides a natural perspective from which to explore this uncertainty. For this purpose, we apply Bayesian Inference, and in particular Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods to
I) quantify the uncertainty (via credible intervals) of the estimates of each parameter given the data, and
to II) assess uncertainties on combinations of parameters (credible regions), often better identifiable than
the corresponding individual parameters. In order to apply Bayesian inference and MCMC methods,
we employ the dedicated python library pymcmcstat [52], version 1.9.0 [53].

S7.1 Sum of square residuals for the likelihood function
To perform Bayesian inference by MCMC, we need to construct a likelihood function of parameter values given the available data and to provide prior probability distributions for each parameter, which
allows us to incorporate our prior knowledge. The vector of parameters, which will be specific for each
country and wave, is here indicated as τ .
The pymcmcstat package employs for the Likelihood L (τ |data) function the sum of square residuals
(SSR), which is a measure of the distance between model simulation and data, such that the minimum
of the SSR corresponds to the maximum of the Likelihood. This choice of the likelihood function corresponds to assume that deviations of data from the model are due to Gaussian errors, which is the
simplest assumption to make when we have no additional knowledge of the potential sources of errors.
12 https://www.sora.at/nc/news-presse/news/news-einzelansicht/news/covid-19-praevalenz-1006.
html, accessed on 15/12/2020.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The SSR for Luxembourg reads:
SSR (τ |data) =

Tf
X
 data
2
C
(ti ) − C model (ti , τ ) +
i=T0
Tf
X
2
 data
H
(ti ) − H model (ti , τ ) +
i=T0

Tf

X
2
ICU data (ti ) − ICU model (ti , τ ) +

(S7)

i=T0
Tf
X
 data
2
model
Dhome (ti ) − Dhome
(ti , τ ) +
i=T0
Tf
X
2
 data
model
Dhosp (ti ) − Dhosp
(ti , τ ) ,
i=T0

where τ is the array of parameters, ti = T0 , T0 + 1, . . . , Tf − 1, Tf indicates the number of days from the
beginning of the epidemic (assumed for that country), T0 and Tf are respectively the first and last day of
the wave under investigation (1st wave, 2nd wave or, for Luxembourg, 3rd wave), C is the cumulative
total number of detected cases, H is the number of people in hospital, ICU is the number of people in
ICU, Dhosp and Dhome are respectively the number of people dead in hospital (including ICU) or outside
hospital (Dhome includes also nursing houses). The same SSR was employed for Austria and Sweden
(with the corresponding data and model variables), except that the two compartments for dead were
merged into one compartment due to lack of more fine-grained data.
The quantities in Eq. S7 derived from the model, omitting the dependencies on time and parameters
for ease of notation, in terms of the model variables (Tab. S1) are given by:
.
C model = R + II + Q + DI,hos + DI,hom + H + Hl + ICU + AIU C + N I ,
.
H model = H + Hl + AICU ,
.
ICU model = ICU ,
model .
Dhome
= DI,hom ,
model .
Dhosp
= DI,hos .

(S8)
(S9)
(S10)
(S11)
(S12)

S7.2 Prior probability distributions
The goal of our Bayesian inference approach is to assess, given the model structure and the public data
which we consider in this work, which are the constraints that these data impose on the parameter
values, i.e. how much freedom we would have in selecting alternative parameter sets. This is a way
to assess the uncertainties on the estimates of these parameters and the uncertainties on combination
of parameters, sometimes better identified than the individual parameters. For the Bayesian inference
approach, for each country and wave we assume flat prior probability distributions on each parameter
over a parameter space as large as possible, within reason. The reasons in doing so are mainly two.
First, flat priors are the simplest choice which does not require any additional knowledge except the
intervals over which these priors should be extended. Second, flat priors are the less informative choice
we can make, thus we are not introducing any bias toward a particular parameter set. We choose not
to introduce any bias by means of the priors because we want to use this approach to cross-validate the
manually calibrated parameter set, thus we only want the result to depend on the public time-series
data, and on a reasonable limitation of the available parameter space by means of the priors.
We select a flat prior probability distribution which for each step of the social interaction parameter
ρn ranges from 0 to 1. For each rate, it ranges from 0 days−1 to 1 days−1 , except for beta where it
ranges from 0 days−1 to 2 days−1 , and for each probability from 0 to 0.5 or 0.5 to 1 depending what
36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the probability represents. We opt for these somewhat reduced parameter space w.r.t. the interval from
0 to 1 because, without loss of generality (we do not expect probabilities of dying being above 0.5, i.e.
50%, and so on), it is less demanding in terms of time and computational resources needed for the
MCMC chains to converge. Similarly, we further restricted the priors between 0 and 0.5 for those rates
associated to an average length of stay which is known to be considerably larger than a day, e.g. for
the rate of exiting ICU. These flat prior probability distributions are reported for each country and wave
as the light gray area in Fig. S2, where we can appreciate the extent to which the posterior probability
distributions are shrunk w.r.t. the priors. The posteriors are depicted via their 50% and 90% credible
regions, respectively in blue and cyan.

S7.3 Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method
After defining the likelihood function and the priors, we calculated the posterior probability distribution
over the parameter space (for each country and wave separately) by means of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) methods available via the dedicated python library pymcmcstat.
Among the different Metropolis based sampling techniques provided by pymcmcstat, we employ
the Delayed Rejection Adaptive Metropolis (DRAM) algorithm. It is a combination of the DelayedRejection (DR) algorithm, which delays rejection by sampling from a narrower distribution, and the
Adaptive-Metropolis (AM) algorithm, which adapts the covariance matrix of the proposal Gaussian
distribution at specified intervals.
In order to increase the speed of our sampling, we run in parallel 8 chains (except for Sweden, where
6 chains for the first wave and 4 chains for the second were run, due to limited available computational
resources). Each chain is initialized at random initial conditions extracted from the flat prior probability
distribution for each parameter, which ensures that no bias is introduced by the choice of the chains’
initial conditions. As we will see in the next section, having multiple chains will also be useful to assess
convergence of the chains. We run each chain for 500000 iterations, as such high number of iterations
appeared to ensure chain convergence, as measured by the method described in the next sections. The
first half of each chain is automatically discarded as burn-in (default settings of the package, which were
kept), while the second half is employed to determine the posterior probability distributions.

S7.4 Thinning of the chains only for visualization
Thinning of chains (only considering one sample every several) is not usually appropriate when the goal
is precision of estimates from an MCMC sample [54]. Thus, for the estimate of parameters or credible
intervals we did not employ thinning. Nevertheless, the same study points out that thinning can be
useful for other reasons, such as memory or time constraints in post-chain processing. We employed
thinning for the purpose of generating the figures containing estimates of the posteriors, e.g. Fig. S3.
For generating this type of figures, we thinned the chains keeping only every 100th sample.
The same study [54] suggests that a better course of action than thinning, however, is to generate multiple independent chains. It suggests monitoring different independent chains and assaying whether the
estimates produced by the different chains are suitably similar to each other. This is performed, for example, when implementing the Gelman-Rubin diagnostic [55, 56] to consider the variation among these
independent chains. We thus apply this procedure.

S7.5 Ensuring convergence of MCMC chains through Gelman-Rubin diagnostic
In our case, across countries and waves, visual inspection of the posterior probability distributions estimates derived by each chain independently (a simple approach also performed in [13]) reveals that for
most parameters it appears as though all the chains have converged to about the same distribution (with
the exception of very few parameters where one or few chains lead to somewhat different posteriors).
We nevertheless further employed a more solid approach.
Determining whether or not MCMC chains have converged to the posterior density is a significant
challenge when performing MCMC simulations. There are many diagnostics available for assessing
chain convergence. As stressed by [54], a robust approach is to use the Gelman-Rubin diagnostic [55, 56],
which requires several sets of chains for comparison. The Gelman-Rubin approach essentially performs
37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

an analysis of the variances within each chain set and between each chain set. The same diagnostic has
been employed for the same purpose in the framework of MCMC convergence in modelling COVID-19
in e.g. [12, 14].
When we compute from the full chains the Gelman-Rubin diagnostics, we indeed obtain values
of R, the so-called ”Potential Scale Reduction Factor (PSRF)”, that are extremely close to 1 for most
parameters. In general, R close to 1 indicates the chains have converged [55, 56].

S8

Results from the MCMC

We cross-validated the parameter sets we employed by means of Bayesian inference and Markov Chain
Monte Carlo methods, as described in Sec. S7. In order to confirm the viability of the choice of parameter
values from the manual calibration, we show in Sec. 3.1 that the simulations generated by our model fit
the available data for these countries. Additionally, we show in Sec. S8.1 that the manually calibrated
sets of parameters which we employ for the simulations are consistent with the Markov Chain Monte
Carlo estimates, which in turn shows that the available data constrain parameters only to some extent,
leaving considerable uncertainties. We based our MCMC solely on publicly available time-series data,
which results in wide uncertainties. With the manually calibrated parameter set, we had to some extent
overcome these uncertainties by employing parameter values obtained from literature estimates based
on data other than the publicly available time-series, which we refer to as domain knowledge. Examples
are the estimates of length of stay of patients in ICUs and hospitals. We finally observe in Sec. S8.2 that
there is degeneracy between parameters, with combinations (e.g. ratios) of parameters being better
constrained by the data than individual parameters.

S8.1 Manually calibrated parameter sets compatible with Bayesian inference estimate, which underlines wide uncertainties in parameter values
The parameter sets from the manual calibration of the model discussed in Sec. S6 are summarized in
Tab. S6, Tab. S3, Tab. S4 and Tab. S5 and are employed through the manuscript. Fig. S2 shows the
Bayesian estimates of these parameters given the time series data, obtained by MCMC (credible intervals) and employed to cross-validate them.
Posteriors are indicated by their 50% (blue) and 90% (cyan) credible intervals, and we can appreciate
that for the majority of parameters, these posteriors are considerably shrunk w.r.t. the flat prior probability distributions we assumed for every parameter (in Sec. S7.2). Nevertheless, for some parameters
this is not the case and we obtained posteriors which are almost flat and wide as the priors, which means
those parameters are not well identified based on the available data and model structure. We also report in Fig. S2 point-estimates from the MCMC, i.e. the maximum a posteriori estimate, and the mean
a posteriori estimate of each parameter. These simply are, respectively, the maximum and the mean of
the posterior for each parameter. For rather symmetric distributions the two values tend to correspond,
while for very skewed distributions they happen to be very different. Moreover, for almost flat posterior distributions, like e.g. those for most of the parameters τi with i = 4, 5, 6, the maximum is not that
representative of the distribution.
In Fig. S2 we see that, for all countries and waves, the values of the manual fit (green) mostly are
very close to either the maximum or the mean a posteriori estimate. It is most of the times within the
50% credible interval of the posterior, or at least inside the 90% credible interval, with only a couple of
exceptions. Thus, we see here that our manually calibrated sets of parameters are fully consistent with
our Bayesian estimate based on MCMC.
However, we can also appreciate that for each of those parameters, credible intervals are relatively
wide, which indicates that the uncertainties on the estimate of these parameters based on the data alone
are rather large. In particular we see, at a qualitative level, that the values of the social interaction
parameter ρn seem to be in general better constrained than the other parameters, with the probabilities
pi being slightly better constrained than the rates τi , in general very poorly identified except for α and
β which are affected by smaller uncertainties w.r.t. other rates. We also observe the probability p7 to be
extremely well constrained (to values close to 1) in most of the waves and countries.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

S8.2 Quantifying uncertainties on estimate of parameters by MCMC: wide uncertainties, but degeneracy in parameter estimations
The domain of the posterior probability distribution obtained via the MCMC, Sec. S7, has the same
number of dimensions as the number of parameters considered, which for instance is 19 for the 1st
wave of Luxembourg. When we are interested in one parameter at a time, we project the chains on one
dimension at a time (which, if we had an analytic form for the posterior, would be done by integrating
over all parameters except the one of interest, thus obtaining the marginal posterior distribution). This is
how we obtained the 1D posteriors displayed in Fig. S2. The next question that arises naturally is if the
wide uncertainties affecting some parameters are an effect of having projected to a lower dimensional
space, or if certain parameters are really so poorly identified as it seems. We will see that both types of
situations arise, depending on the parameter.
To investigate this, we thus project the posterior distribution over two parameters at a time, and we
repeat this for each couple of parameters in Fig. S3 for the MCMC run of the 1st Wave of Luxembourg,
and in Fig. S4, S5, S6, S7, S8 and S9 for the other waves and countries. We can clearly see from the above
mentioned figures that, while certain parameter pairs are very well constrained, others are not and we
have parameter pairs that appear to be for instance correlated or anti-correlated. In general we observe
that there is a lot of degeneracy between parameters. This means that there is not a unique combination
of parameters that allow a good fit of the model to the data, but many of them.
We moreover observe combinations (e.g. ratios) of parameters being better constrained than the
individual parameters. Consider e.g. the parameters α, the inverse of the mean incubation period,
and β, the mean reproduction rate, which are in common with a standard SEIR model. Their credible
intervals are displayed in Fig. S2. When we consider the joint posterior over the two parameters, which
is visible close to the center of Fig. S3 for Luxembourg, Fig. S6 for Austria and Fig. S8 for Sweden, we
remark that this posterior is narrow and rotated toward the diagonal direction, showing anti-correlation
between the estimates of the two parameters, meaning that low values of β can only be considered
together with high values of α, and the other way around. These patterns occur for other parameters as
well, and they are conserved to some extent across countries, as they occur with the same properties for
the 1st wave of Austria in Fig. S8, and to some extent for Sweden, so they are likely specific rather to the
model’s structure and parameters than to the country. We also observe other interesting patterns, e.g.
anti-correlation between each ρn and the subsequent in time, clearly visible in the 2nd and 3rd waves
of Luxembourg, the 2nd wave of Sweden and to some extent in the 1st and 2nd waves of Austria. This
can easily be understood in terms of the model: lowering the social interaction one time-period and
increasing it the next, or doing the converse, can equally lead to the same good agreement with data.
Very interestingly, while certain couples of parameters seem to be well constrained, at least when
considered two at a time, for other parameters these projected posteriors are still close to flat, resulting
in squares that are predominantly red in Fig. S3. This effect is weaker for certain waves and countries,
with the 3rd wave of Luxembourg and the 2nd wave of Sweden providing the more narrow constraints
on parameters. This nevertheless is stronger for others, being the strongest in the 1st wave of Sweden,
where parameters seem to be very poorly identified. This could also be related to the dimension of the
domain of the posterior (the higher the number of parameters, the less constrained), as the 3rd wave of
Luxembourg and the 2nd wave of Sweden both have indeed ”only” 14 parameters each, while the 1st
wave of Sweden has 26 of them.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A

Luxembourg, 1st wave

B

Luxembourg, 2nd wave

C

Luxembourg, 3rd wave

D

Austria, 1st wave

E

Austria, 2nd wave

F

Sweden, 1st wave

G

Sweden, 2nd wave

Fig. S2 Posterior probability distributions from MCMC for each parameter, compared with priors and with
manual fits. Each country and wave. Luxembourg (A: 1st wave, B: 2nd wave, C: 3rd wave), Austria (D: 1st
wave, E: 2nd wave) and Sweden (F: 1st wave, G: 2nd wave). For each parameter, prior probability distributions
are reported as gray areas, while the posteriors are reported by means of their 50% (blue) and 90% (cyan) credible
intervals, with their maxima reported as large blue dots and their means as red squares. The parameter values for
the manual fit (Tab. S6 for probabilities and rates, Tab. S3, Tab. S4 and Tab. S5 for ρn ) are reported as green small
circles.

40

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

p3

p4

p6

0.
0.24
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

7

5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

2

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho4

0.5
1.0
1.5

rho2
rho1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho2

rho2
rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho4

rho4
1

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

3

3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p2

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p3

p3
p2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p4

p4
p5

2

rho1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

p5
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p6

p6
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

7

p7

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

5

p7

1.5
1.0
0.5

6

6
5

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

1

3

6

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p7

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p5

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p2

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.6
0.7
0.
0.89

0.
0.12
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho3

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho1

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

4

4
4

Fig. S3 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each pair of parameters, for the 1st wave
of Luxembourg. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7, corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection
is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with red
being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions
colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three black
contours reported in each panel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions. Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between parameter pairs are visible. The same figures for
other waves and countries are available in the Supplementary Material as Fig. S4 for the 2nd wave of Luxembourg,
Fig. S5 for the 3rd wave of Luxembourg, Fig. S6 for the 1st wave of Austria, Fig. S7 for the 2nd wave of Austria,
Fig. S8 for the 1st wave of Sweden, Fig. S9 for the 2nd wave of Sweden.

41

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p60

0

0

7

5

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p40

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p30

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho10

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho8

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho6
rho5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho6

rho7
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho8

rho9
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

3

3

0

rho10

rho10

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p2'

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p30

p30
p2'

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p40

p40
p50

p50
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p60

p60
p70

p70
0

7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

6

6

0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

rho9

rho8

7

rho7

rho6

0

5

0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

5

rho5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0

0

3

p70

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p50

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p2'

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho9

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho7

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho5

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

4
0

6

Fig. S4 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 2nd
wave of Luxembourg. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7,
corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection
is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with red
being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions
colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

p700

00

00

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

4

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

6

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p500

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p300

00

3

rho11
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho12

p2''
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p300

p300
p400

p400
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p500

p500
p600

p600
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

00

00

6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

00

5

5

00

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

00

7

7

00

p700

p700

6

p2''

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

00

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

00

3

3

rho13

00

00

7

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p600

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p400

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p2''

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho13

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho11

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

4

00

rho13

rho12

4

rho11

rho12
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

00

5

Fig. S5 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 3rd
wave of Luxembourg. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7,
corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection
is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with red
being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions
colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

43

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

2

p3

p4

p6

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.
0.24
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.
0.67
0.8
0.9

0.6
0.7
0.
0.89

7

5
0.1
0.
0.23
0.4

rho6

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho4

0.5
1.0
1.5

rho2
rho1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho2

rho2
rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho4

rho4
rho5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho6

rho6
1

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

3

3
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p2

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p3

p3
p2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p4

p4
p5

2

rho1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

p5
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p6

p6
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

7

p7

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

5

p7

1.5
1.0
0.5

6

6
5

1

3

p7

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p5

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

p2

0.
0.67
0.8
0.9

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

rho5

0.
0.24
0.6
0.8

rho3

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho1

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.
0.46
0.8

4
6

Fig. S6 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 1st
wave of Austria. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7, corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with
red being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

44

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.
0.24
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p30

p40

p60

0

0

7

5

0.1
0.
0.23
0.4

rho16

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho14

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho12

0.6
0.7
0.
0.89

rho10

0.
0.67
0.8
0.9

rho8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho7
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho8

rho9
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho10

rho11
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho13

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho12

rho12
rho13

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho15

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho14

rho14
rho15

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

3

3

0

rho16

rho16

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p30

p30
p20

p20
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p40

p40
p50

p50
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p60

p60
p70

p70
0

7
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

6

6

0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

rho11

rho10

7

rho9

rho8

0

5

0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

5

rho7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0

0

3

p70

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p50

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p20

0.6
0.7
0.
0.89

0.
0.12
0.3
0.4

rho15

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho13

0.2
0.4
0.
0.68

rho11

0.
0.24
0.6
0.8

rho9

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho7

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

4
0

6

Fig. S7 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 2nd
wave of Austria. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7, corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with
red being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

45

rho1

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.2
0
0..46
0.8

1

3

6

4
0
0..12
0.3
0.4

0.2
0.4
0
0..68

p6

0.1
0
0..23
0.4

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

p4

0.2
0
0..46
0.8

0
0..24
0.6
0.8

p2min

0.2
0.4
0
0..68

rho10

0
0..67
0.8
0.9

rho8

0.6
0
0..78
0.9

rho6

0.1
0.2
0
0..34

rho4

0.5
1.
1.05

rho2
0.2
0
0..46
0.8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

rho1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho7

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho2

rho2
rho3

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho4

rho4
rho5

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho6

rho6
rho7

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho9

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho8

rho8
rho9

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho10

rho10
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

p2max
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p2min
p4

p5
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p6

p6
p7

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

1

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p4

2

2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

3
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

3

p5

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p3

7

7
6

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

6

p3

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p7

p2min

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

4

p2max

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

5

5

0.1
0.2
0
0..34

0.1
0
0..23
0.4

p7

0
0..24
0.6
0.8

p5

0.6
0
0..78
0.9

p3

0.6
0.7
0
0..89

p2max

0
0..67
0.8
0.9

0.6
0
0..78
0.9

rho9

0.2
0
0..46
0.8

rho7

0.2
0.4
0
0..68

rho5

0
0..24
0.6
0.8

rho3

0.2
0
0..46
0.8

rho1

0.2
0.4
0
0..68

0
0..24
0.6
0.8

4
2

7

5

Fig. S8 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 1st
wave of Sweden. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7, corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with
red being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.12.31.20249088; this version posted January 4, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

p70

0

0

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

4

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

6

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p50

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

rho11
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

rho12

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

p20

p20
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p30

p30
p40

p40
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

p50

p50
p60

p60
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

6

0

6

0

7

7

0

p70

p70

0

5

5

0

0

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

0

3

3

rho13

0

0

7

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p60

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

p40

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

p20

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho13

0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4

rho11

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8

4

0

rho13

rho12

4

rho11

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2

p30

0

3

0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9

rho12

0

5

Fig. S9 Posterior probability distribution from MCMC projected over each couple of parameters, for the 2nd
wave of Sweden. 2D projections of the posterior probability distribution estimated as described in Sec. S7, corresponding to the 1D projections of Fig. S2. Each square represents the 2D projection of the posterior over two
parameters. The parameter name and scale are reported only at the margins of the figure and on the diagonal, for
visual clarity, but they apply for all subplots. As the figure would be symmetric along the diagonal, each projection is only reported once, leading to the white squares. The heatmap colors represent posterior probability, with
red being high and blue being low, thus the true values of the parameters have a higher probability to be in regions colored in red than in regions colored in blue, with dark blue representing a probability close to 0. The three
black contours reported in each subpanel represent respectively the 25%, 50% and 90% Bayesian credible regions.
Correlations, anti-correlations and more complex degeneracy between couples of parameters are visible.

47

