medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnancy is associated with robust inflammatory response at
the maternal-fetal interface
Alice Lu-Culligan1, Arun R. Chavan1, Pavithra Vijayakumar2, Lina Irshaid3, Edward M.
Courchaine4,5, Kristin M. Milano2, Zhonghua Tang2, Scott D. Pope1, Eric Song1, Chantal B.F.
Vogels6, William J. Lu-Culligan4,5, Katherine H. Campbell2, Arnau Casanovas-Massana6, Santos
Bermejo7, Jessica M. Toothaker8,9, Hannah J. Lee1, Feimei Liu1, Wade Schulz10, John
Fournier11, M. Catherine Muenker6, Adam J. Moore6, Yale IMPACT Team, Liza Konnikova8,2,
Karla M. Neugebauer4, Aaron Ring1, Nathan D. Grubaugh6, Albert I. Ko6, Raffaella Morotti3,
Seth Guller2, Harvey J. Kliman2, Akiko Iwasaki1,12,13*, Shelli F. Farhadian11,*
1

Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

2

Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine,

New Haven, CT, USA
3

Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

4

Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA

5

Department of Cell Biology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

6

Department of Epidemiology of Microbial Diseases, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven,

CT, USA
7

Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Yale School of

Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
8

Department of Pediatrics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

9

Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

10

Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA

11

Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New

Haven, CT, USA
12

Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, New Haven, CT, USA

13

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD, USA

*Correspondence: akiko.iwasaki@yale.edu, shelli.farhadian@yale.edu

1 by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Pregnant women appear to be at increased risk for severe outcomes associated with COVID19, but the pathophysiology underlying this increased morbidity and its potential impact on the
developing fetus is not well understood. In this study of pregnant women with and without
COVID-19, we assessed viral and immune dynamics at the placenta during maternal SARSCoV-2 infection. Amongst uninfected women, ACE2 was detected by immunohistochemistry in
syncytiotrophoblast cells of the normal placenta during early pregnancy but was rarely seen in
healthy placentas at full term. Term placentas from women infected with SARS-CoV-2,
however, displayed a significant increase in ACE2 levels. Using immortalized cell lines and
primary isolated placental cells, we determined the vulnerability of various placental cell types to
direct infection by SARS-CoV-2 in vitro. Yet, despite the susceptibility of placental cells to
SARS-CoV-2 infection, viral RNA was detected in the placentas of only a subset (~13%) of
women in this cohort. Through single cell transcriptomic analyses, we found that the maternalfetal interface of SARS-CoV-2-infected women exhibited markers associated with pregnancy
complications, such as preeclampsia, and robust immune responses, including increased
activation of placental NK and T cells and increased expression of interferon-related genes.
Overall, this study suggests that SARS-CoV-2 is associated with immune activation at the
maternal-fetal interface even in the absence of detectable local viral invasion. While this likely
represents a protective mechanism shielding the placenta from infection, inflammatory changes
in the placenta may also contribute to poor pregnancy outcomes and thus warrant further
investigation.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), due to SARS-CoV-2 infection, is a public health
emergency that has impacted the lives of millions of people around the world. The effect of
SARS-CoV-2 infection in pregnant women is of particular concern: population-based studies
suggest that pregnant women with COVID-19 are at increased risk for severe illness compared
to non-pregnant women with COVID-19(1). SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy has also
been associated with increased risk of pregnancy complications such as preterm birth,
premature rupture of membranes, and preeclampsia(2-4). However, the mechanisms underlying
these poor outcomes are unknown, and their dependence on SARS-CoV-2 infection of the
placenta remains poorly understood.
Studies of other coronaviruses suggest the potential for placental pathology during maternal
coronavirus infection both through direct viral invasion at the placenta and through a secondary
inflammatory reaction. Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV), a coronavirus of laboratory mice, infects
placental cells in vivo(5), leading to placental inflammation and increased susceptibility to
subsequent bacterial infection of the placenta(6). During the SARS pandemic of 2008, maternal
infection with SARS-CoV-1 was associated with histological abnormalities but not with viral
invasion of the placenta(7). Case reports during the current COVID-19 pandemic have
demonstrated that SARS-CoV-2 is capable of infecting the placenta(8-10); however, the
mechanism for viral entry remains unclear. While variable findings have been reported(11-15)
multiple recent transcriptomic analyses of healthy placentas have suggested limited expression
of the canonical SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 in the placenta and little to no co-expression of
ACE2 with its classical co-factor TMPRSS2 at the transcriptional level(11-13). Thus, it remains
unclear whether the placenta is susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection under normal
physiological conditions or under conditions of systemic inflammation, such as that which occurs
with maternal COVID-19. Moreover, it remains unknown whether placental pathology develops
in the absence of viral infection of the placenta(10, 16, 17).
In this study, we investigated the susceptibility of the human placenta to SARS-CoV-2 infection
over the course of pregnancy, through in situ analysis of ACE2 protein expression and through
in vitro studies. Furthermore, we describe in vivo immune responses at the maternal-fetal
interface in response to maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection during pregnancy.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
Clinical, virological, and histological features of COVID-19 cases
A total of 39 women were identified as positive for COVID-19 by SARS-CoV-2 reverse
transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) via nasopharyngeal swab prior to or at the time of
delivery hospitalization. Universal screening of women presenting to Labor and Birth at Yale
New Haven Hospital began on April 2, 2020. Two women were found to be SARS-CoV-2 RTqPCR-positive before the universal screening period began; both were symptomatic with
pneumonia. During the universal screening period, an additional 37 were identified as SARSCoV-2 positive. Twenty-two (56%) of the SARS-CoV-2-infected women had symptomatic
COVID-19. There were five cases of severe COVID-19 disease, requiring the administration of
supplemental oxygen or ICU stay. Thirty-eight of the 39 pregnancies resulted in live births, with
a median Apgar score of 9 (range 4-9). Clinical and demographic information for the COVID-19
cases is presented in Table 1.
Among the 15 placentas tested by RT-qPCR for the presence of SARS-CoV-2, viral RNA was
detected in two (~13%) of the placentas (Supplementary Table 1). One was from a 32-year-old
woman who presented in labor at 38 weeks of gestation with symptoms of pneumonia, not
requiring supplemental oxygen, who progressed to a healthy delivery. The neonate tested
negative for SARS-CoV-2 by nasopharyngeal swab RT-qPCR at the time of delivery. The other
was from a woman who presented at 22 weeks of gestation with severe COVID-19 pneumonia
and developed preeclampsia and fetal demise, resulting in fetal loss at 22 weeks. This case was
excluded from the placental analyses presented here, since the details of this case have been
reported previously(10). Plasma from 12 SARS-CoV-2 infected women was tested for SARSCoV-2 spike S1 protein-specific IgG and IgM antibodies (anti-S1-IgG and -IgM). No apparent
differences in ELISA absorbance values were observed between symptomatic and
asymptomatic infected mothers, or between pregnant and non-pregnant SARS-CoV-2 infected
individuals (Supplementary Figure 1).
A total of 28 placentas from 27 COVID-19 mothers were available for histological analysis (one
COVID-19 case resulted in the delivery of dizygotic twins). The COVID-19 placental cases
available for examination did not differ from the overall cohort of COVID-19 pregnancies during
the study period by maternal age, gestational age, mode of delivery, neonatal outcomes, or comorbidities (Table 1). Placental specimens were examined by two independent pathologists

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

blinded to the patient’s COVID-19 status, and were assessed for the presence of villitis,
chorioamnionitis, intervillositis, for increased decidual lymphocytes, and for fetal and maternal
vascular malperfusion. No significant differences were seen between cases and controls for
these features (Supplementary Table 2). However, increased intervillous fibrin was seen in 33%
of cases (9/27) but in none of the controls (Figure 1; p=0.036). We found no association
between the presence of increased intervillous fibrin and clinical features, including the
presence of COVID-19 symptoms, co-morbidities, mode of delivery, or BMI. Overall, our
analysis suggests that increased intervillous fibrin may be the only distinct histologic feature
observed in placentas from COVID-19 positive mothers.
Decreased ACE2 protein expression in the placenta over the course of normal pregnancy
We assessed the potential for SARS-CoV-2 infection of the placenta by examining placental
expression of ACE2, the canonical receptor required for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Prior
transcriptome studies have suggested that ACE2 is absent or expressed at low levels in
placenta. Consistent with these previous reports, our analysis of bulk and single-cell RNA
sequencing data in placenta from COVID-19 cases and controls demonstrates very low levels of
ACE2 gene expression at the term placenta (Supplementary Figure 2). However, when proteinlevel ACE2 expression was examined by immunohistochemistry, we found ACE2 to be highly
expressed in syncytiotrophoblast cells in first and second trimester placentas, with ACE2 protein
expression virtually absent in normal term placentas obtained from pre-pandemic controls
(Figure 2B-F).
While the expression pattern of ACE2 in the placenta decreased steadily over gestational age in
placentas derived from healthy pregnancies (Figure 2I), we found that ACE2 protein was
present at significantly higher levels in term placenta collected from COVID-19 cases (Figure
2J). These findings suggest that detection of ACE2 mRNA expression is not a reliable surrogate
for ACE2 protein expression in the placenta and, importantly, that ACE2-mediated risk for
placental infection by SARS-CoV-2 may vary over the course of pregnancy, with our detection
of higher ACE2 levels in the first and second trimesters suggesting the most vulnerability may
exist prior to term.
In vitro infection of primary isolated cytotrophoblasts by SARS-CoV-2
To determine whether the low rate of placental infection we observed in our case series was
due to intrinsic resistance to SARS-CoV-2 infection by placental cells, we performed in vitro

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

infections of placental cells to determine the infectious potential of SARS-CoV-2 at the placenta.
We infected primary placental cells isolated from healthy term deliveries with a replicationcompetent infectious clone of SARS-CoV-2 expressing the fluorescent reporter mNeonGreen
(icSARS-CoV-2-mNG)(18) for 24 hours.
We observed no detectable infection of primary isolated syncytiotrophoblasts (derived from
cytotrophoblasts allowed to spontaneously differentiate for 72-96 hours), Hofbauer cells, or
fibroblasts following 24 hours of infection. However, we found infection of primary isolated
cytotrophoblasts, as observed by mNeonGreen reporter detection and staining for SARS-CoV-2
nucleocapsid (NP) (Figure 3A). These findings were consistent with SARS-CoV-2 N1 detection
by RT-qPCR in cells infected at 24 hours (Figure 3B).
Immortalized cell lines are commonly used as a model for placental cell types. The BeWo line, a
human choriocarcinoma line, is used to model villous cytotrophoblasts. The HTR-8/SVneo line
is derived from invasive extravillous cytotrophoblasts isolated from first trimester placenta and
contains two cell populations(19, 20). Neither of these immortalized cell lines, BeWo and HTR8/SVneo, exhibited significant infection with icSARS-CoV-2-mNG at 24 hours (Figure 3A).
While primary syncytiotrophoblasts and BeWo cells were not readily infected by icSARS-CoV-2mNG in vitro, in rare cases, an individual cell exhibiting viral mNeonGreen fluorescence and NP
staining (estimated to be <0.0001%) could be detected. These extremely rare positive cells
were notably isolated cells that, in the case of the syncytiotrophoblast population, appear to be
cytotrophoblast cells defective for syncytialization (Supplementary Figure 3). SARS-CoV-2
infection was thus not observed in any syncytialized placental cells in vitro. These results
indicate that at least in the ex vivo context, cytotrophoblasts, but not other placental cell types,
are infected by SARS-CoV-2.
Transcriptional changes at the placenta during maternal COVID-19 reflect a localized
inflammatory response to systemic SARS-CoV-2 infection
Despite the fact that cytotrophoblasts are permissive to SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro, and that
SARS-COV-2 infection of syncytiotrophoblasts has been demonstrated in isolated cases(10, 16,
21, 22), SARS-CoV-2 infection was not detected in the majority of the placentas tested in our
case series. This was true even in women with high nasopharyngeal viral loads and with
symptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection, including those with severe complications. This absence of

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

placental infection suggested the presence of a localized and effective anti-viral response in the
placenta. We thus used bulk-RNA sequencing of placental villi to examine differences in
placental gene expression between pregnant women with COVID-19 (n=5) and uninfected
controls matched for maternal age, gestational age, maternal comorbidities, and mode of
delivery (n=3).
In our comparison of the placental transcriptome in COVID-19 cases to matched controls,
COVID-19 cases showed increased expression of genes associated with immune responses,
suggesting a robust local response to respiratory infection, even in the absence of localized
placental infection (p<0.05, Figure 4A). These changes in gene expression were largely shared
among COVID-19 cases when compared to controls, as indicated by their grouping upon
hierarchical clustering; placental transcriptomes from COVID-19 cases largely clustered
together, and separately from healthy controls, with the exception of one case (COVID-1)
(Figure 4A). Further analysis of differentially expressed genes by gene ontology indicated an
enrichment in defense and immune response categories in COVID-19 cases compared to
healthy controls (Figure 4B). The most significantly upregulated gene in the placenta during
maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection was HSPA1A, which encodes the heat shock protein Hsp70
(Figure 4C), a proposed alarmin that has been previously implicated in placental vascular
diseases and preeclampsia(23-25).
Single cell transcriptomic profiling of the placenta reveals cell-type specific immune
response to maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection
We next assessed COVID-19 associated transcriptomic changes in the placenta in a cell-type
specific manner. To do so, we characterized placenta cells from hospitalized maternal acute
COVID-19 cases (n=2) and matched controls (n=3) through unbiased, single cell RNA
sequencing. A total of 83,378 cells were included in the analysis, 44,140 from placental villi and
39,238 from decidua parietalis. Placentas from these COVID-19 cases tested negative for
SARS-CoV-2 by RT-qPCR. To further test for the presence of intracellular virus, open reading
frames of SARS-CoV-2 (spike, ORF3a, envelope, membrane glycoprotein, ORF6, ORF7a,
ORF8, nucleocapsid and ORF10) were added to the reference genome before alignment with
CellRanger. No viral transcripts were detected in any of the placenta cells. We next performed
unsupervised cluster analysis and represented single cell transcriptome data from COVID-19
cases and controls in UMAP space (Figure 5A).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The classification of placental cells by single cell RNA sequencing is challenging because the
placenta is comprised of multiple cell types, of both maternal and fetal origin, in highly active
transcriptional states. We overcame this challenge by creating a reference set of cell typespecific transcriptomes for cell types present at the human fetal-maternal interface, using cell
type-averaged expression values from three previously published placenta single cell RNA
sequencing studies(26-28). We then compared single cell transcriptomes in our dataset to this
composite reference dataset, and, after annotating clusters by comparison with the reference
dataset, we manually examined clusters for marker gene expression and annotated remaining
clusters. Through this approach we identified 21 distinct cell types in the placenta (Figure 5A).
Differential gene expression analysis revealed significantly altered gene expression in both
immune and non-immune cell types in the placenta from COVID-19 cases (Figure 5B), including
markedly increased expression of pro-inflammatory genes and chemokines. In placental NK
cells during COVID-19, we found significant enrichment of genes encoding cytotoxic proteins,
including GZMA, GZMB, and GNLY, as well as a tissue-repair growth factor, AREG. T cell
subsets from COVID-19 cases upregulated CD69, a classical activation marker, as well as
genes encoding ribosomal proteins, RPL36A and RPS10. Among endothelial cells, which have
previously been implicated in COVID-19 pathogenesis, including COVID-19 associated
thrombosis and vasculopathy(29), we found evidence for increased innate immune responses in
COVID-19 cases compared to controls, including significant upregulation of ISG15, an
interferon-induced protein that has been implicated as a central player in host antiviral
responses, and NFKBIA and NFKBIZ, critical regulators of the NF-KB pathway. Notably, while
we do not find significant expression of ACE2 or TMPRSS2 in placental cells in either COVID19 cases or healthy controls, we do find widespread expression of CTSL, an alternative SARSCoV-2 entry co-receptor, including in placental immune cells, fibroblasts, and trophoblasts, and
find that CTSL expression is increased in decidual stromal cells and decidual antigen presenting
cells in COVID-19.
Given the increasing evidence that hospitalized patients with COVID-19 demonstrate strong
type-1 interferon responses(30, 31), we used Interferome(32), a database of interferonregulated genes, to determine whether an interferon-driven inflammatory signature is displayed
by the placenta. We find that placental cellular subsets demonstrate significantly increased
expression of interferon-related genes in COVID-19 compared to healthy controls (Figure 5C).
Pathway analysis of all differentially expressed genes likewise shows increased engagement of

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

immune-related pathways in placental subsets from COVID-19 cases, as well as increases in
synthesis of selenocysteine associated with the anti-oxidative response to oxidative stress
(Figure 5D). Finally, we asked whether the transcriptional changes observed in placental tissue
suggested altered cellular interactions in the placenta during COVID-19 compared to healthy
conditions. Using CellphoneDB signaling network analysis(33), we found a significant increase
in the number of interactions between immune cells at the maternal-fetal interface in COVID-19
cases when compared to controls. Among the strongest enriched relationships identified in
COVID-19 cases were the interactions of T cells with monocytes and NK cells (Figure 5E),
suggesting innate to adaptive immune cell communication in the local placental environment
during maternal COVID-19.
Consistent with the bulk RNA-seq data, analysis of single-cell data indicated significant
upregulation of HSPA1A, the gene encoding heat shop protein 70, in select placenta cellular
subsets in COVID-19, including decidual APCs, decidual endothelial cells, and extravillous
trophoblasts (Figure 5F).

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
Immune responses in the placenta can be a double-edged sword. These responses are critical
for protecting the developing fetus from pathogen invasion, but, at the same time, placental
inflammation itself may lead to pathological changes detrimental to pregnancy and fetal
development(34-37). In this study, we demonstrate that a placental cell type is susceptible to
SARS-CoV-2 infection ex vivo; that SARS-CoV-2 infection of the placenta in vivo is rare; and
that a robust maternal immune response is mounted at the placenta even in the absence of
placental infection.
While previous studies analyzing transcriptomic data have yielded mixed results regarding
ACE2 expression at the placenta(11-15), our immunohistochemical analysis conclusively
demonstrated that ACE2 protein is present in the placenta despite low transcript levels.
Furthermore, ACE2 protein expression is highest in the first trimester and decreases over the
course of healthy pregnancy, indicating potential vulnerability to SARS-CoV-2 infection during
early pregnancy. Surprisingly, we found that ACE2 expression appears to be widely expressed
in the placenta of COVID-19 cases at term despite low levels of ACE2 in the placentas of
healthy controls at term. The unique modifying factors that drive placental ACE2 expression
during COVID-19 remain unknown; however, studies of ACE2 expression during other disease
states, including COPD, suggest that ACE2 is upregulated under inflammatory conditions(38).
Our data suggest that the hyperinflammatory state associated with COVID-19 may similarly
increase ACE2 expression at the term placenta.
The presence of ACE2 at the syncytiotrophoblast layer of the placental villi is consistent with the
finding that the in vivo distribution of SARS-CoV-2 in rare cases of placental infection is also
observed predominantly at the syncytiotrophoblasts(10, 16, 21, 22). In contrast, we found that
only cytotrophoblasts are infected by SARS-CoV-2 in vitro. Given that syncytiotrophoblasts
originate from the spontaneous differentiation and fusion of cytotrophoblast stem cells(39), it is
possible that removed from their in vivo context, these terminally differentiated cells are not
capable of supporting a productive viral infection in vitro. Differences in susceptibility to viral
infection in vivo versus in vitro have also been demonstrated for Zika virus(40). Notably, unlike
Zika virus, and many other “TORCH” pathogens capable of causing congenital conditions
following in utero exposure, SARS-CoV-2 does not appear to productively infect placental
Hofbauer cells either in vivo or in vitro(41-43).

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Despite the capacity of cytotrophoblasts to be infected in vitro, SARS-CoV-2 invasion of the
placenta is only rarely observed in vivo. Indeed, only ~13% of maternal COVID-19 cases we
examined demonstrated placental infection with SARS-CoV-2. This may be due to previously
reported low levels of SARS-CoV-2 viremia(44) (i.e., the absence of a direct route of infection to
the placenta in vivo), or to variable ACE2 expression at term. Unfortunately, we were unable to
screen for potential maternal SARS-CoV-2 viremia in our cohort. Nonetheless, even in the
absence of placental infection, we observed localized gene expression differences in SARSCoV-2-affected term placentas indicating a marked immune response to maternal respiratory
infection distinctly manifesting at the maternal-fetal interface. The majority of these differentially
expressed genes are interferon-regulated genes, demonstrating the capacity of the placenta to
sense and respond to both local and distal infection.
We found that HSPA1A (Hsp70), is highly upregulated in the placenta during maternal COVID19. Notably, Hsp70 has been proposed as a potential alarmin that has been shown in vitro to
stimulate proinflammatory processes associated with parturition and pre-term birth(23, 45, 46).
Hsp70 is associated with endothelial activation in placental vascular disease(25) and serum
levels are increased in cases of preeclampsia(24, 47, 48). Hsp70 levels are furthermore
significantly elevated in patients exhibiting hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low platelet
count (HELLP syndrome) compared to patients with severe preeclampsia without HELLP
syndrome(24, 49). Intriguingly, there have been multiple reports of HELLP or HELLP-like
syndrome in pregnant women affected by SARS-CoV-2 infection and COVID(10, 50, 51). While
the interplay between COVID-19 and HELLP-like syndrome remains incompletely understood,
these results suggest a potential common pathway for COVID-19 associated maternal morbidity
and placental vascular diseases, including HELLP and preeclampsia. Moreover, extracellular
Hsp70 is known to stimulate proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-⍺, IL-1β, and IL-6(24).
We found increased intervillous fibrin deposition in the placenta in approximately one third of the
COVID-19 cases. Intervillous fibrin is a pathological finding that increases with decreased
maternal perfusion, increased maternal coagulability, and decreased thrombolytic function of the
trophoblasts(52). Intervillous fibrin has been previously reported in cases of maternal COVID19(10, 53), but the significance of this findings is unclear. One possibility may be that maternal
SARS-CoV-2 infection activates the maternal endothelium, leading to a localized decrease in
fibrinolysis, thereby causing fibrin buildup in a manner similar to that which is observed in
preeclampsia (54). Alternatively, activation of immune cells in the placenta and circulating pro-

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

inflammatory cytokines may trigger pro-coagulant signals in the local environment (55), inducing
tissue factor synthesis from the syncytiotrophoblasts(56), ultimately leading to the accumulation
of fibrin. Our single-cell transcriptomic analysis supports this hypothesis by demonstrating
increased NK cell and endothelial cell expression of genes involved in supramolecular fiber
organization pathways in placenta derived from COVID-19 cases.
This study is subject to several limitations. First, only 15 placentas were available for RT-qPCR
analysis, and thus we had insufficient sample size to understand if specific clinical features
(e.g., severe COVID-19 or duration of symptoms) correlated with the presence of local virus in
the placenta. Furthermore, our analysis is limited in that we only assessed placenta from
women who were infected with SARS-CoV-2 during the third trimester of pregnancy, and thus
does not account for pathological and inflammatory changes at the placenta that result from
infection during the first or second trimester. Indeed, our results demonstrating widespread
ACE2 expression in the placenta during the first and second trimesters indicates that early
pregnancy may be the most vulnerable time for SARS-CoV-2 induced placental pathology, and
additional studies are needed to assess for potential placental and fetal abnormalities
associated with infection during early pregnancy.
By characterizing changes at the maternal-fetal interface in the context of systemic infection, our
research indicated that maternal SARS-CoV-2 infection at term is associated with an
inflammatory state in the placenta that may contribute to poor pregnancy outcomes in COVID19, even in the absence of viral invasion of the placenta(57). These immune responses in the
placenta may serve to protect the placenta and fetus from infection, but they also have the
potential to drive pathological changes with adverse consequences for developing embryos and
fetuses, since in utero inflammation is associated with neurodevelopmental and cognitive
disorders in affected offspring (36, 58). Mouse models of congenital viral infection have also
shown that type I IFN signaling during early embryonic development can cause fetal
demise(59), through the upregulation of IFITM proteins that interfere with cytotrophoblast
fusion(60, 61). Further studies are therefore needed to assess the long-term consequences of
SARS-CoV-2 associated immune activation in pregnant women regardless of local infectious
status of the placenta.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Methods
Study participants
We searched the electronic medical record of Yale-New Haven Hospital for all women who
tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 in the antepartum or peripartum period and presented for
delivery hospitalization during the study period (March 27, 2020 to June 1, 2020). Women who
were admitted to Yale New Haven Hospital Labor and Birth during the study period and who
were positive for SARS-CoV-2 by nasopharyngeal swab RT-qPCR in the antepartum period or
at the time of delivery hospitalization were approached for consent to donate additional tissue
for research studies through the Yale IMPACT study (Implementing Medical and Public Health
Action Against Coronavirus in CT). These participants provided informed consent, including for
research studies of donated placental tissue. SARS-CoV-2 uninfected women (as determined
by negative RT-qPCR testing of nasopharyngeal swab) were recruited during the study period
and provided informed consent to donate placenta tissue to serve as uninfected controls for
transcriptomic studies. Pre-pandemic histological controls were selected from pathology files at
Yale New Haven Hospital and matched to the COVID-19 placental cases by maternal age,
gestational age, and maternal co-morbidities. The study was approved by the Yale Institutional
Review Board (protocol #2000027690 and 2000028550).
SARS-CoV-2 S1 spike protein IgM and IgG serology testing:
ELISA assays for IgG and IgM antibodies towards SARS-CoV-2 were performed on plasma as
described by Amanat et al (62). Screening of 367 total plasma samples from all SARS-CoV-2positive patients enrolled was performed using a 1:50 dilution.
SARS-CoV-2 detection in placenta by RT-qPCR
Placenta samples were homogenized and centrifuged before nucleic acid was extracted using
the MagMax Viral/Pathogen Nucleic Acid Isolation kit. SARS-CoV-2 was detected using a
modified RT-qPCR assay with the N1, N2, and human RNase P (RP) primer-probe sets
developed by the CDC and the NEB Luna Universal Probe One-Step RT-qPCR kit on the BioRad CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System(63). Each sample was extracted and
tested in duplicate to confirm results. Placenta samples were considered positive by RT-qPCR if
cycle threshold (CT) values for N1 and N2 were both <38, and with any value of RP. Samples
were considered negative if N1 and N2 >38, and RP <38. Samples were considered invalid if
N1 and N2 >38 and RP >38.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Histopathological analysis of placenta
Pathology files at Yale New Haven Hospital were searched for placentas corresponding to
cases of maternal COVID-19. All available placental cases were included in the histological
study. Additionally, pathology files were searched for placentas from mothers without SARSCoV-2 infection (pre-June 2019) to serve as historical controls. These controls were matched to
study cases for maternal age, gestational age and maternal comorbidities. A total of 27 cases
and 10 matched controls were assessed histologically. Of those, one case was of a dichorionic
diamniotic twin pregnancy. The placentas of this twin pregnancy demonstrated extremely similar
microscopic features and identical pathologic scores; thus, they were together considered as a
single case in the statistical analysis. All placentas received with a requisition form for
pathologic evaluation were immediately fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for three days. A
total of six sections inclusive of at least two full thickness sections, peripheral membranes and
umbilical cord were submitted for histologic examination.
Two pathologists (LI and RM) blinded to patient information and diagnostic report independently
scored all H&E stained placental tissue for villitis (absent, low-grade or high-grade; if low-grade,
focal or multifocal and if high-grade, patchy or diffuse), intervillositis (absent or present),
increased intervillous fibrin (absent or present, defined as intervillous fibrin occupying >10% of a
full thickness section on 20x low-power magnification), chorioamnionitis (absent or present; if
present, maternal and fetal inflammatory responses were staged and graded), fetal and/or
maternal vascular malperfusion (absent or present; if present, a histologic description was
recorded) and increased decidual lymphocytes (absent or present, defined as clusters of >10
lymphocytes in >3 foci in the placental disc and/or peripheral membranes). Diagnostic criteria
for villitis, chorioamnionitis, fetal vascular malperfusion (FVM) and maternal vascular
malperfusion (MVM) followed those reported in the Amsterdam placental workshop group
consensus statement(64). Cases with discrepant scoring results were reviewed and re-scored
by both pathologists simultaneously. Results were correlated with maternal, fetal and placental
COVID-19 status.
Collection of placentas across gestation
First and second trimester specimens from the elective termination of pregnancy, ranging from 7
to 15 weeks of gestation (based on last menstrual period), were collected from otherwise
healthy women with no known genetic or other abnormalities, as previously described(65). All

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

women who provided first and second trimester placentas signed an informed consent (protocol
#021-06-972) approved by the ethical committee of the Bnai Zion Medical Center, Haifa, Israel
under Helsinki convention guidelines. Samples from normal term placentas were collected
anonymously from healthy patients undergoing elective repeat Cesarean sections. All women
who provided term placental samples signed an informed consent (Yale IRB protocol
1208010742). Specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (NBF) for at least one day
and embedded in paraffin, after which 5 µm sections were placed on coated glass slides
designed for immunohistochemistry (IHC) processing. Placentas of gestational age 18 to 23
weeks were obtained from non-genetic healthy terminations through the University of Pittsburgh
Biospecimen Core (IRB#: PRO18010491).
ACE2 Immunohistochemistry
The following rabbit polyclonal antibodies were used: anti-ACE2 (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, ab10
8252, used at 1 µg IgG/ml); and, as a negative control, normal rabbit serum (Sigma-Aldrich, St.
Louis, MO, R9133, used at 1 µg IgG/ml). Antibody concentrations were chosen to produce
strong staining in the positive cellular structures without background staining.
Slides were immunohistochemically stained as previously described(66) using MACH 2 Rabbit
HRP-Polymer (Biocare Medical, RHRP520L, Pacheco, CA) to mark the sites of antibody binding
with a brown deposit. To minimize run-to-run variability, replicate samples were stained
simultaneously with one antibody. Positive control sections from a de-identified normal human
kidney were analyzed concurrently with each batch of slides. The stained sections were
counterstained with hematoxylin.
For quantification of immunoreactivity, slides were inspected microscopically using a raster
pattern to ensure that the entire histologic section was examined. A modified histology score(67)
was calculated by multiplying the percentage of trophoblasts that stained by the average
staining intensity (ranging from 0-3), resulting in H-scores from 0 and 300.
Preparation of decidua and placental villi for bulk and single-cell sequencing
Placentas were collected from Yale-New Haven Hospital and transferred to the laboratory for
processing. Placental villi were isolated by sampling from midway between the chorionic and
basal plates of the placenta. The decidua parietalis was isolated from the chorioamniotic
membranes as previously described(68). The chorioamniotic membranes were dissected,

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

rinsed in PBS, and placed with the chorion facing upward. Blood clots were removed using finepoint forceps and membranes were rinsed in PBS. A disposable cell scraper was used to gently
remove the decidual layer from the membrane.
Dissected tissues were rinsed thoroughly in PBS and minced with scissors in a tissue digestion
buffer of Liberase TM (0.28 WU/ml) and DNase I (30 μg/ml) in HBSS with Ca2+ and Mg2+. Finely
minced tissue was enzymatically digested at 37°C for 1 hour with agitation, pipetting, and further
mincing every 10 minutes until disaggregated. The suspension was passed through sterile
gauze, centrifuged at 1000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C to pellet cells, and washed with fresh
digestion buffer. After centrifugation, the supernatant was aspirated and the cell pellet was
resuspended in ACK lysing buffer for 5 minutes. Cells were centrifuged and resuspended in
RPMI media before filtering through a 70-μm mesh cell strainer.
Bulk RNA sequencing
Total RNA was prepared from freshly isolated placental villi as previously described(63).
Depletion of rRNA, library preparation, and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform
were performed at the Yale Center for Genome Analysis (YCGA).
FASTQ files from HiSeq 2500 were analyzed using Kallisto v0.46.1(69) using the “-b 100 and -t
20” options to obtain transcript abundances in TPM and estimated counts. The kallisto index
used during transcript quantification was built (31bp k-mer length) from the Homo sapiens
transcriptome GRCh38 downloaded as a FASTA file from Ensembl (Ensembl.org). Transcripts
were annotated using the Bioconductor package biomaRt v2.40.5(70) in R v3.6.2.
Read counts for individual transcripts were summarized for gene-level analysis using the
Bioconductor package tximport with default parameters(71). Differential expression analysis
was performed using DESeq2 with default parameters(72), comparing all 3rd trimester samples
by maternal status.
Single-cell RNA sequencing.
Library preparation, data-preprocessing, and clustering: scRNA-seq libraries were generated
using the 10x Chromium Single Cell 3’ Reagent Kit and libraries were sequenced using the
Illumina NovaSeq platform. Sequencing results were demultiplexed into FASTQ files using the
Cell Ranger (10x Genomics, 3.0.2) mkfastq function. Samples were aligned to GRCh38 10x

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

genome and the count matrix was generated using the count function with default settings. Low
quality cells containing <500 or >6000 genes detected were removed, as well cells with >20% of
transcripts mapping to mitochondrial genes. Genes that were present in less than 3 cells were
excluded from analysis. Gene expression values were then normalized, log-transformed, and
scaled. Single cell transcriptomes from COVID-19 cases and healthy controls were pooled prior
to unsupervised cluster analysis. Seurat version 3.1.5 with R version 3.4.2 was used for
normalization, dimensionality reduction, clustering, and UMAP visualization, while Seurat
version 3.2.2(73) with R version 4.0.2(74) was used for all downstream analyses.
Cluster annotation: Preliminary annotation of all clusters was performed by the similarity of their
gene expression to annotated cell types in published single cell RNA-seq datasets of human
fetal-maternal interface(26-28). For each cluster, mean of SCTransform-normalized(75) gene
expression across cells was used as the cluster’s average gene expression. Spearman
correlation coefficients between the cluster’s average expression and averaged expression of
annotated cell types from all three reference datasets were calculated, and top three cell types
with highest correlation coefficient were assigned as preliminary annotations of the clusters
(Supp. Fig. 4). These annotations were further refined through manual examination of cluster
marker genes (identified using Seurat function FindAllMarkers with options only.pos = TRUE
and logfc.threshold = 0.25). Clusters that are highly similar to each other and have the same
final cell type annotation, were then merged, resulting in the final set of 21 annotated clusters.
Differential gene expression: For each annotated cluster, differentially expressed genes
between control and COVID-19 samples were identified using Wilcoxon rank-sum test as
implemented in the Seurat function FindMarkers. Genes that met the following criteria were
considered differentially expressed: absolute log-fold difference of 0.4 (corresponding to at least
50% difference in expression) and Bonferroni-adjusted two-tailed p-value less than 0.05.
Functional enrichment analyses: Two types of functional gene set enrichment analyses were
performed, Interferome(32) and Metascape(76). For Interferome analysis, lists of differentially
expressed genes in each cluster were searched against Interferome (version 2.01) with the
default parameters except that the search was limited to human genes. Enrichment score for
each cluster was calculated as the ratio between the observed fraction of differentially
expressed genes found in Interferome database and the expected fraction, where the expected
fraction is the ratio of total number of genes in the Interferome database over the total number
of genes used in differential expression analysis. Enrichment p-values were calculated from the

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

hypergeometric distribution using the R function phyper. Functional enrichment with Metascape
was performed on lists of differentially expressed genes using the web application.
Ligand-receptor interactions: Ligand-receptor interactions were inferred using CellPhoneDB(33)
separately for cells from control and COVID-19 samples. CellPhoneDB version 2.1.4 was used
with Python version 3.6. For computational efficiency both control and COVID-19 data were
subsampled to 5000 cells each.
Placental explant preparation
Healthy term placentas were collected from scheduled cesarean sections performed at YaleNew Haven Hospital. Standard clinical criteria were used to exclude cases of infection and
inflammation. 20mg of placental villous tissue was processed and rinsed in PBS. Explants were
plated into a 24-well plate with 0.4-μm permeable transwell cell culture inserts (Corning) and
maintained in F12:DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Primary cell isolations from placenta.
Isolation of Hofbauer cells and cytotrophoblasts from healthy term placentas was performed as
previously described(77). Placentas from uncomplicated term pregnancies were brought to the
laboratory within 30 minutes following elective cesarean section without labor at Yale-New
Haven Hospital and processed immediately. Villous tissue was dissected, minced, and rinsed
with PBS. Minced tissue was subjected to sequential enzymatic digestions in a solution of
0.25% trypsin and 0.2% DNase I at 37°C. Undigested tissue was removed by passage through
gauze and a 100-μm sieve. Cells were resuspended in DMEM:F12 media with 10% FBS and
1% antibiotic/antimycotic.
Cytotrophoblasts were separated on a discontinuous gradient of Percoll (50%/45%/35%/30%)
by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 20 minutes at room temperature. Cells migrating to the
35%/45% Percoll interface were recovered by centrifugation at 300 x g for 10 minutes at room
temperature and immunopurified by negative selection using mouse anti-human CD9 antibody
and mouse anti-human CD45 antibody. Following incubation with goat anti-mouse IgGconjugated Dynabeads, contaminating cells were removed by exposure to a magnet.
Hofbauer cells were isolated from further digestion of trypsin-treated tissue with collagenase A
and DNase I. Cells were pelleted, resuspended in RPMI, and loaded onto a discontinuous
Percoll gradient (40%/35%/30%/20%) and centrifuged for 30 minutes. Cells from the 20%/25%
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

to 30%/35% interfaces were combined and immunopurified by negative selection using
sequential treatment with anti-EGFR and anti-CD10 antibodies conjugated to magnetic beads.
Cells from the supernatant were plated and after 1 hour of incubation, floating and weakly
adherent cells were removed.
Fibroblasts were obtained from cells removed during negative immunoselection of
cytotrophoblasts and Hofbauer cells. Bead-cell mixtures were washed and cultured in media
until confluency was reached. Following trypsinization of first passage cells, magnetic beads
with attached cells (~10% of population) were removed with a magnet. Passage 3 fibroblasts
were used for experiments.
SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Primary placental cells were with icSARS-CoV-2 mNG(18) infected at an MOI of 5 for one hour
at 37°C. Following infection, cells were washed three times in PBS before adding fresh media.
Primary placental cells were maintained in F12:DMEM with 10% FBS supplemented with
antibiotic/antimycotic. BeWo cells were maintained in F12K Kaighn’s modified media, HTR8
cells in RPMI media, and Vero E6 cells in F12:DMEM media, all with 10% FBS and
antibiotic/antimycotic.
Immunohistochemistry.
Following dissection, placental tissue was rinsed in PBS and fixed in 10% neutral buffered
formalin for 48-72 hours. Tissues were paraffin-embedded and cut into 5 μm thickness sections
by Yale Pathology Tissue Services. Paraffin sections were heated for 30 minutes at 60°C and
treated with xylenes followed by rehydration in decreasing concentrations of ethanol (100%,
90%, 80%, 70%). Antigen retrieval was performed by boiling in sodium citrate (pH 6.0) for 15
minutes and peroxidase activity was blocked with hydrogen peroxide for 10 minutes. Blocking
was performed in 2.5% normal horse serum (Vector Laboratories) and incubated in primary
antibody overnight at 4°C. Mouse anti-SARS-CoV-2 spike antibody (clone 1A9, GeneTex
GTX632604) was used at a dilution of 1:400 and rabbit anti-ACE2 (clone EPR4435(2), Abcam
ab108252) was used at 1:200 dilution. Secondary antibody and detection reagents from the
VECTASTAIN Elite ABC-HRP Kit (Vector Laboratories PK-7200) were used according to
manufacturer instructions. Sections were counterstained with Hematoxylin QS (Vector
Laboratories H-3404), dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol, cleared with xylenes,
and mounted with VectaMount permanent mounting medium (Vector Laboratories H-5000).

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Immunofluorescence microscopy sample preparation and imaging.
Placental cells on coverslips were fixed in fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 24 hours.
Coverslips were blocked and permeabilized in 3% BSA (Sigma) and 0.1 % Triton X-100
(American Bioanalytical). Each sample was incubated overnight with anti-SARS-CoV-2-NP
rabbit polyclonal antibody (GeneTex # GTX135357) at a dilution of 1:200. After washing in
PBS, coverslips were incubated for 1 hour in a 1:500 dilution of Alexa 594 anti rabbit secondary
antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch 711-585-152), washed again in PBS and treated with 1
µg/mL Hoechst 33342 for 10 min and washed a final time in PBS. Samples were then mounted
in DABCO/glycerol mounting media (Sigma) and imaged on a Leica Sp8 Laser Scanning
Confocal Microscope equipped with a 40x N.A. 1.3 HC PL APO CS2 objective. Images are
displayed as maximum intensity projections of z-stacks and a color bar is given in arbitrary
digital units.
SARS-CoV-2 S1 spike protein IgM and IgG serology testing:
ELISA assays for IgG and IgM antibodies towards SARS-CoV-2 were performed on plasma as
described by Amanat et al (62). Screening of plasma samples from all SARS-CoV-2-positive
patients enrolled was performed using a 1:50 dilution.
Statistical Analysis
One-way ANOVA was used to compare clinical and demographic features between the three
groups presented in Table 1. Chi-square tests were used for statistical comparisons of histologic
features of cases versus controls. Differences were claimed as statistically significant when the
p value was less than 0.05.
Data availability: Single cell RNA sequencing analysis code is available at
https://github.com/archavan/covid-placenta

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgments
We thank Vikki Abrahams for the contribution of placental cell lines (HTR8, courtesy of Charles
Graham, and BeWo). We also thank Craig Wilen for supplying icSARS-CoV-2-mNG virus.
Research support was provided by the Yale University Reproductive Sciences (YURS) Biobank,
Yale Pathology Tissue Services (YPTS), and the Yale Center for Genome Analysis (YCGA).
This project used the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center (UPMC) Hillman Cancer Center
and Tissue and Research Pathology/Pitt Biospecimen Core shared resource which is supported
in part by award P30CA047904.
ALC is supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) under Medical Scientist Training
Program (MSTP) grant T32GM007205 and National Institute of Child Health & Development
(NICHD) grant F30HD093350. ARC is supported by Irvington Postdoctoral Fellowship from
Cancer Research Institute. AI is an investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute. This
work was supported by NIH K23MH118999 (SFF), R01AI157488 (SFF and AI), U01DA04058805S (KMN), the Beatrice Kleinberg Neuwirth Fund (AK), and Fast Grant funding support from
the Emergent Ventures at the Mercatus Center (AI). No NIH funding was used in the acquisition
of placental tissue derived from healthy terminations.
Yale IMPACT Team Members: Charles Dela Cruz, Allison Nelson, Anne L. Wyllie, Melissa
Campbell, Elizabeth B. White, Rebecca Earnest, Sarah Lapidus, Joseph Lim, Maura Nakahata,
Angela Nunez, Denise Shepard, Irene Matos, Yvette Strong, Kelly Anastasio, Kristina Brower,
Maxine Kuang, Camila Odio, Bertie Geng, Maksym Minasyan, Melissa Linehan, Anjelica Martin,
Tyler Rice, William Khoury-Hanold, Jessica Nouws, David McDonald, Kadi-Ann Rose, Yiyun
Cao, Lokesh Sharma, Mikhail Smolgovsky, Abeer Obaid, Giuseppe Deluliis, Hong-Jai Park,
Nicole Sonnert, Sofia Velazquez, Xiaohua Peng, Michael H. Askenase, Codruta Todeasa, Molly
L. Bucklin, Maria Batsu, Adam J. Moore, Eric Y. Wang.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Author Contributions
ALC contributed to the design and implementation of the research, execution of experiments,
analysis of the results, and writing of the manuscript. ARC analyzed the single cell RNA
sequencing, and edited the manuscript. PV identified and consented cases and controls,
collected biospecimens, and analyzed clinical and demographic information. LI and RM
performed histological analyses. EC, HJL, and KMN contributed to in vitro studies. KM assisted
with IHC experiments. ZT and SG performed placental cell isolations. SP and WJLC contributed
to bulk RNA sequencing analyses. ES contributed to single cell RNA sequencing experiments
and analysis. CBFV and NDG performed and analyzed RT-qPCR on placental tissue. FM and
AR performed plasma antibody assays. KC, SB, JT, WS, JF, MCM, and LK assisted with case
identification and biospecimen collection. ACM assisted with biospecimen collection and
processing. AIK contributed to study design and edited the manuscript. HJK performed and
analyzed IHC experiments, contributed to histological analyses and interpretation of results, and
edited the manuscript. AI and SFF designed and supervised the study.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

Zambrano LD, Ellington S, Strid P, Galang RR, Oduyebo T, Tong VT, et al. Update:
Characteristics of Symptomatic Women of Reproductive Age with Laboratory-Confirmed
SARS-CoV-2 Infection by Pregnancy Status - United States, January 22-October 3,
2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69(44):1641-7.
Ahlberg M, Neovius M, Saltvedt S, Soderling J, Pettersson K, Brandkvist C, et al.
Association of SARS-CoV-2 Test Status and Pregnancy Outcomes. JAMA. 2020.
Abasse S, Essabar L, Costin T, Mahisatra V, Kaci M, Braconnier A, et al. Neonatal
COVID-19 Pneumonia: Report of the First Case in a Preterm Neonate in Mayotte, an
Overseas Department of France. Children (Basel). 2020;7(8).
Zimmermann P, and Curtis N. COVID-19 in Children, Pregnancy and Neonates: A
Review of Epidemiologic and Clinical Features. Pediatr Infect Dis J. 2020;39(6):469-77.
Barthold SW, Beck DS, and Smith AL. Mouse hepatitis virus and host determinants of
vertical transmission and maternally-derived passive immunity in mice. Arch Virol.
1988;100(3-4):171-83.
Cardenas I, Means RE, Aldo P, Koga K, Lang SM, Booth CJ, et al. Viral infection of the
placenta leads to fetal inflammation and sensitization to bacterial products predisposing
to preterm labor. J Immunol. 2010;185(2):1248-57.
Ng WF, Wong SF, Lam A, Mak YF, Yao H, Lee KC, et al. The placentas of patients with
severe acute respiratory syndrome: a pathophysiological evaluation. Pathology.
2006;38(3):210-8.
Baud D, Greub G, Favre G, Gengler C, Jaton K, Dubruc E, et al. Second-Trimester
Miscarriage in a Pregnant Woman With SARS-CoV-2 Infection. JAMA.
2020;323(21):2198-200.
Hecht JL, Quade B, Deshpande V, Mino-Kenudson M, Ting DT, Desai N, et al. SARSCoV-2 can infect the placenta and is not associated with specific placental
histopathology: a series of 19 placentas from COVID-19-positive mothers. Mod Pathol.
2020;33(11):2092-103.
Hosier H, Farhadian SF, Morotti RA, Deshmukh U, Lu-Culligan A, Campbell KH, et al.
SARS-CoV-2 infection of the placenta. J Clin Invest. 2020;130(9):4947-53.
Pique-Regi R, Romero R, Tarca AL, Luca F, Xu Y, Alazizi A, et al. Does the human
placenta express the canonical cell entry mediators for SARS-CoV-2? Elife. 2020;9.
Li M, Chen L, Zhang J, Xiong C, and Li X. The SARS-CoV-2 receptor ACE2 expression
of maternal-fetal interface and fetal organs by single-cell transcriptome study. PLoS
One. 2020;15(4):e0230295.
Ashary N, Bhide A, Chakraborty P, Colaco S, Mishra A, Chhabria K, et al. Single-Cell
RNA-seq Identifies Cell Subsets in Human Placenta That Highly Expresses Factors
Driving Pathogenesis of SARS-CoV-2. Front Cell Dev Biol. 2020;8:783.
Singh M, Bansal V, and Feschotte C. A Single-Cell RNA Expression Map of Human
Coronavirus Entry Factors. Cell Rep. 2020;32(12):108175.
Hikmet F, Mear L, Edvinsson A, Micke P, Uhlen M, and Lindskog C. The protein
expression profile of ACE2 in human tissues. Mol Syst Biol. 2020;16(7):e9610.
Patane L, Morotti D, Giunta MR, Sigismondi C, Piccoli MG, Frigerio L, et al. Vertical
transmission of coronavirus disease 2019: severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus 2 RNA on the fetal side of the placenta in pregnancies with coronavirus
disease 2019-positive mothers and neonates at birth. Am J Obstet Gynecol MFM.
2020;2(3):100145.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

17.
18.
19.
20.
21.

22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.

Vivanti AJ, Vauloup-Fellous C, Prevot S, Zupan V, Suffee C, Do Cao J, et al.
Transplacental transmission of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):3572.
Xie X, Muruato A, Lokugamage KG, Narayanan K, Zhang X, Zou J, et al. An Infectious
cDNA Clone of SARS-CoV-2. Cell Host Microbe. 2020;27(5):841-8 e3.
Graham CH, Hawley TS, Hawley RG, MacDougall JR, Kerbel RS, Khoo N, et al.
Establishment and characterization of first trimester human trophoblast cells with
extended lifespan. Exp Cell Res. 1993;206(2):204-11.
Abou-Kheir W, Barrak J, Hadadeh O, and Daoud G. HTR-8/SVneo cell line contains a
mixed population of cells. Placenta. 2017;50:1-7.
Taglauer E, Benarroch Y, Rop K, Barnett E, Sabharwal V, Yarrington C, et al. Consistent
localization of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein and ACE2 over TMPRSS2 predominance
in placental villi of 15 COVID-19 positive maternal-fetal dyads. Placenta. 2020;100:6974.
Facchetti F, Bugatti M, Drera E, Tripodo C, Sartori E, Cancila V, et al. SARS-CoV2
vertical transmission with adverse effects on the newborn revealed through integrated
immunohistochemical, electron microscopy and molecular analyses of Placenta.
EBioMedicine. 2020;59:102951.
Brien ME, Baker B, Duval C, Gaudreault V, Jones RL, and Girard S. Alarmins at the
maternal-fetal interface: involvement of inflammation in placental dysfunction and
pregnancy complications (1). Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2019;97(3):206-12.
Molvarec A, Tamasi L, Losonczy G, Madach K, Prohaszka Z, and Rigo J, Jr. Circulating
heat shock protein 70 (HSPA1A) in normal and pathological pregnancies. Cell Stress
Chaperones. 2010;15(3):237-47.
Liu Y, Li N, You L, Liu X, Li H, and Wang X. HSP70 is associated with endothelial
activation in placental vascular diseases. Mol Med. 2008;14(9-10):561-6.
Vento-Tormo R, Efremova M, Botting RA, Turco MY, Vento-Tormo M, Meyer KB, et al.
Single-cell reconstruction of the early maternal-fetal interface in humans. Nature.
2018;563(7731):347-53.
Pavlicev M, Wagner GP, Chavan AR, Owens K, Maziarz J, Dunn-Fletcher C, et al.
Single-cell transcriptomics of the human placenta: inferring the cell communication
network of the maternal-fetal interface. Genome Res. 2017;27(3):349-61.
Suryawanshi H, Morozov P, Straus A, Sahasrabudhe N, Max KEA, Garzia A, et al. A
single-cell survey of the human first-trimester placenta and decidua. Sci Adv.
2018;4(10):eaau4788.
Goshua G, Pine AB, Meizlish ML, Chang CH, Zhang H, Bahel P, et al. Endotheliopathy
in COVID-19-associated coagulopathy: evidence from a single-centre, cross-sectional
study. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7(8):e575-e82.
Acharya D, Liu G, and Gack MU. Dysregulation of type I interferon responses in COVID19. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(7):397-8.
Lee JS, and Shin EC. The type I interferon response in COVID-19: implications for
treatment. Nat Rev Immunol. 2020;20(10):585-6.
Rusinova I, Forster S, Yu S, Kannan A, Masse M, Cumming H, et al. Interferome v2.0:
an updated database of annotated interferon-regulated genes. Nucleic Acids Res.
2013;41(Database issue):D1040-6.
Efremova M, Vento-Tormo M, Teichmann SA, and Vento-Tormo R. CellPhoneDB:
inferring cell-cell communication from combined expression of multi-subunit ligandreceptor complexes. Nat Protoc. 2020;15(4):1484-506.
Nadeau-Vallee M, Obari D, Palacios J, Brien ME, Duval C, Chemtob S, et al. Sterile
inflammation and pregnancy complications: a review. Reproduction. 2016;152(6):R277R92.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.

Weckman AM, Ngai M, Wright J, McDonald CR, and Kain KC. The Impact of Infection in
Pregnancy on Placental Vascular Development and Adverse Birth Outcomes. Front
Microbiol. 2019;10:1924.
Lu-Culligan A, and Iwasaki A. The Role of Immune Factors in Shaping Fetal
Neurodevelopment. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2020;36:441-68.
Yockey LJ, Lucas C, and Iwasaki A. Contributions of maternal and fetal antiviral
immunity in congenital disease. Science. 2020;368(6491):608-12.
Leung JM, Yang CX, Tam A, Shaipanich T, Hackett TL, Singhera GK, et al. ACE-2
expression in the small airway epithelia of smokers and COPD patients: implications for
COVID-19. Eur Respir J. 2020;55(5).
Kliman HJ, Nestler JE, Sermasi E, Sanger JM, and Strauss JF, 3rd. Purification,
characterization, and in vitro differentiation of cytotrophoblasts from human term
placentae. Endocrinology. 1986;118(4):1567-82.
Jurado KA, Simoni MK, Tang Z, Uraki R, Hwang J, Householder S, et al. Zika virus
productively infects primary human placenta-specific macrophages. JCI Insight.
2016;1(13).
Reyes L, and Golos TG. Hofbauer Cells: Their Role in Healthy and Complicated
Pregnancy. Front Immunol. 2018;9:2628.
Simoni MK, Jurado KA, Abrahams VM, Fikrig E, and Guller S. Zika virus infection of
Hofbauer cells. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2017;77(2).
Coyne CB, and Lazear HM. Zika virus - reigniting the TORCH. Nat Rev Microbiol.
2016;14(11):707-15.
Kim JM, Kim HM, Lee EJ, Jo HJ, Yoon Y, Lee NJ, et al. Detection and Isolation of
SARS-CoV-2 in Serum, Urine, and Stool Specimens of COVID-19 Patients from the
Republic of Korea. Osong Public Health Res Perspect. 2020;11(3):112-7.
Pockley AG. Heat shock proteins as regulators of the immune response. The Lancet.
2003;362(9382):469-76.
Geng J, Li H, Huang C, Chai J, Zheng R, Li F, et al. Functional analysis of HSPA1A and
HSPA8 in parturition. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2017;483(1):371-9.
Hromadnikova I, Dvorakova L, Kotlabova K, Kestlerova A, Hympanova L, Novotna V, et
al. Circulating heat shock protein mRNA profile in gestational hypertension, preeclampsia & foetal growth restriction. Indian J Med Res. 2016;144(2):229-37.
Saghafi N, Pourali L, Ghavami Ghanbarabadi V, Mirzamarjani F, and Mirteimouri M.
Serum heat shock protein 70 in preeclampsia and normal pregnancy: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Int J Reprod Biomed. 2018;16(1):1-8.
Molvarec A, Rigo J, Jr., Nagy B, Walentin S, Szalay J, Fust G, et al. Serum heat shock
protein 70 levels are decreased in normal human pregnancy. J Reprod Immunol.
2007;74(1-2):163-9.
Figueras F, LLurba E, Martinez-Portilla R, Mora J, Crispi F, and Gratacos E. COVID-19
causing HELLP-like syndrome in pregnancy and role of angiogenic factors for differential
diagnosis. medRxiv. 2020:2020.07.10.20133801.
Futterman I, Toaff M, Navi L, and Clare CA. COVID-19 and HELLP: Overlapping Clinical
Pictures in Two Gravid Patients. AJP Rep. 2020;10(2):e179-e82.
Fox H. Perivillous fibrin deposition in the human placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol.
1967;98(2):245-51.
Shanes ED, Mithal LB, Otero S, Azad HA, Miller ES, and Goldstein JA. Placental
Pathology in COVID-19. Am J Clin Pathol. 2020;154(1):23-32.
Stalker AL. Fibrin deposition in pregnancy. J Clin Pathol Suppl (R Coll Pathol).
1976;10:70-6.
Li M, and Huang SJ. Innate immunity, coagulation and placenta-related adverse
pregnancy outcomes. Thromb Res. 2009;124(6):656-62.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

56.
57.
58.

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.

Aharon A, Brenner B, Katz T, Miyagi Y, and Lanir N. Tissue factor and tissue factor
pathway inhibitor levels in trophoblast cells: implications for placental hemostasis.
Thromb Haemost. 2004;92(4):776-86.
Chaiworapongsa T, Erez O, Kusanovic JP, Vaisbuch E, Mazaki-Tovi S, Gotsch F, et al.
Amniotic fluid heat shock protein 70 concentration in histologic chorioamnionitis, term
and preterm parturition. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2008;21(7):449-61.
Makinson R, Lloyd K, Grissom N, and Reyes TM. Exposure to in utero inflammation
increases locomotor activity, alters cognitive performance and drives vulnerability to
cognitive performance deficits after acute immune activation. Brain Behav Immun.
2019;80:56-65.
Yockey LJ, Jurado KA, Arora N, Millet A, Rakib T, Milano KM, et al. Type I interferons
instigate fetal demise after Zika virus infection. Sci Immunol. 2018;3(19).
Zani A, Zhang L, McMichael TM, Kenney AD, Chemudupati M, Kwiek JJ, et al.
Interferon-induced transmembrane proteins inhibit cell fusion mediated by trophoblast
syncytins. J Biol Chem. 2019;294(52):19844-51.
Buchrieser J, Degrelle SA, Couderc T, Nevers Q, Disson O, Manet C, et al. IFITM
proteins inhibit placental syncytiotrophoblast formation and promote fetal demise.
Science. 2019;365(6449):176-80.
Amanat F, Nguyen T, Chromikova V, Strohmeier S, Stadlbauer D, Javier A, et al. A
serological assay to detect SARS-CoV-2 seroconversion in humans. medRxiv.
2020:2020.03.17.20037713.
Vogels CBF, Brito AF, Wyllie AL, Fauver JR, Ott IM, Kalinich CC, et al. Analytical
sensitivity and efficiency comparisons of SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR primer-probe sets. Nat
Microbiol. 2020;5(10):1299-305.
Khong TY, Mooney EE, Ariel I, Balmus NC, Boyd TK, Brundler MA, et al. Sampling and
Definitions of Placental Lesions: Amsterdam Placental Workshop Group Consensus
Statement. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2016;140(7):698-713.
Kliman HJ, Sammar M, Grimpel YI, Lynch SK, Milano KM, Pick E, et al. Placental protein
13 and decidual zones of necrosis: an immunologic diversion that may be linked to
preeclampsia. Reprod Sci. 2012;19(1):16-30.
Kliman HJ, Quaratella SB, Setaro AC, Siegman EC, Subha ZT, Tal R, et al. Pathway of
Maternal Serotonin to the Human Embryo and Fetus. Endocrinology. 2018;159(4):160929.
Thike AA, Chng MJ, Fook-Chong S, and Tan PH. Immunohistochemical expression of
hormone receptors in invasive breast carcinoma: correlation of results of H-score with
pathological parameters. Pathology. 2001;33(1):21-5.
Xu Y, Plazyo O, Romero R, Hassan SS, and Gomez-Lopez N. Isolation of Leukocytes
from the Human Maternal-fetal Interface. J Vis Exp. 2015(99):e52863.
Bray NL, Pimentel H, Melsted P, and Pachter L. Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq
quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34(5):525-7.
Durinck S, Spellman PT, Birney E, and Huber W. Mapping identifiers for the integration
of genomic datasets with the R/Bioconductor package biomaRt. Nat Protoc.
2009;4(8):1184-91.
Soneson C, Love MI, and Robinson MD. Differential analyses for RNA-seq: transcriptlevel estimates improve gene-level inferences. F1000Res. 2015;4:1521.
Love MI, Huber W, and Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion
for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014;15(12):550.
Stuart T, Butler A, Hoffman P, Hafemeister C, Papalexi E, Mauck WM, 3rd, et al.
Comprehensive Integration of Single-Cell Data. Cell. 2019;177(7):1888-902 e21.
Team RC. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna, Austria: R
Foundation for Statistical Computing; 2020.
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

75.
76.
77.

Hafemeister C, and Satija R. Normalization and variance stabilization of single-cell RNAseq data using regularized negative binomial regression. Genome Biol. 2019;20(1):296.
Zhou Y, Zhou B, Pache L, Chang M, Khodabakhshi AH, Tanaseichuk O, et al.
Metascape provides a biologist-oriented resource for the analysis of systems-level
datasets. Nat Commun. 2019;10(1):1523.
Tang Z, Tadesse S, Norwitz E, Mor G, Abrahams VM, and Guller S. Isolation of
hofbauer cells from human term placentas with high yield and purity. Am J Reprod
Immunol. 2011;66(4):336-48.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Clinical characteristics of COVID-19 cases and histological controls.

COVID-19 cases (n=39)

Subset of
COVID-19
cases with
placenta
histology
available
(n=27)

Histological
controls (n=10)

P

32 (18 - 41)

32.0 (18 - 41)

31.5 (21 - 37)

0.788

38w6d (22w6d - 41w1d)

39w0d (36w6d
- 41w1d)

39w1d (37w 40w6d)

0.650

9 (33%)
5 (19%)
7 (26%)
10 (37%)
Median: 9
Range: 4- 9

4 (40%)
1 (10%)
2 (20%)
3 (30%)
Median: 9
Range: 4 - 9

0.752
0.640
0.932
0.472

Neonatal Apgar (1 minute)

12 (31%)
6 (15%)
10 (26%)
13 (33%)
Median: 9
Range: 4- 9

BMI: Mean (St Dev)

33.0 (7.3)

33.4 (7.7)

27.1 (2.33)

0.0194

22 (56%)

14 (52%)

5 (13%)

3 (11%)

33.2 (17.1 - 43.8)
(n=26)

33.35 (17.1 43.8) (n=18)

Maternal Age: Median
(range)
Gestational Age: Median
(range)
Comorbidities
Hypertension
Preeclampsia
Diabetes*
Mode of delivery (C-section)

COVID-19 features
COVID-19 symptoms at the
time of delivery (%)
Maternal severe COVID-19**
Nasopharyngeal
SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR
CT value*** : median (range)
Positive SARS-CoV-2 RTqPCR of placenta (n=15)

2/15 (13.33%)

*gestational or pre-gestational diabetes
**ICU or need for supplemental oxygenation
***N1 gene

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1. Histopathology of representative COVID-19 (A) and matched control (B) placentas.
(A) COVID-19 placenta at low magnification revealed extensive intervillous fibrin deposition,
with only occasional areas of open intervillous (I) spaces. (A1) High magnification at edge of
blood filled intervillous space (I) and the earliest fibrin deposition (asterisks). Trapped chorionic
villi (V) have become avascular and fibrotic. Initial fibrillar fibrin (arrow heads) can be seen at the
blood-fibrin interface. (A2) Older area of intervillous fibrin (asterisks) and trapped villi (V)
revealing migration of trophoblasts (arrow heads) into the fibrin matrix. (A3) Oldest area of
intervillous fibrin became calcified (green asterisks), encasing villous remnants (V). (B) In sharp
contrast, the control placenta revealed virtually no fibrin in the intervillous space (I). (B1 and B2)
Representative magnified areas revealed normal villi (V) and open, maternal blood containing
intervillous space (I), with only occasional foci of fibrin formation (arrow heads). Bars represents
200 µM for images A and B and 50 µM for images A1-B2.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. ACE2 protein expression in the placenta varies with gestational age. (A) Human
kidney used as a positive control revealed strong apical staining of the proximal tubules (P). The
distal tubules (D) and glomerulus (G) were negative. Inset shows a serial section of the same
kidney stained with non-immune rabbit sera resulting in no staining. (B-D) Placentas derived
from normal pregnancies between 7 and 15 weeks of gestation demonstrated strong, uniform,
apical microvillus syncytiotrophoblast staining (arrow heads), and patchy strong basolateral
staining at the cytotrophoblast–syncytiotrophoblast contact zone (arrows). Intervillous space (I)
and villous core (V). (E) A normal 21-week placenta still exhibited syncytiotrophoblast surface
staining (arrow head), but to a lesser extent than the earlier samples. Cytotrophoblast–
syncytiotrophoblast contact zone staining was still prominent (arrow). (F) A representative
normal placenta at 39 weeks revealed almost no ACE2 staining. Occasionally, staining at the
cytotrophoblast–syncytiotrophoblast contact zone was noted (arrow) (G) Normal extravillous

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

invasive trophoblasts from a 39-week placenta demonstrated strong surface expression of
ACE2, with variable cytoplasmic staining. (H) Representative image of ACE2 expression in a
38-week placenta derived from a case of symptomatic maternal COVID-19. Reappearance of
strong apical microvillus syncytiotrophoblast (arrow heads) and cytotrophoblast–
syncytiotrophoblast contact zone staining (arrows) was observed. All sections were cut at 5 µM,
except panel (E), which was cut at 10 µM. Bar represents 50 µM for images A-H. (I) ACE2 Hscore demonstrated steady loss of placental ACE2 with increasing gestational age in healthy
pregnancies (p<0.001). Linear regression (blue line) was fit to data from healthy controls
(circles). 95% confidence interval is shown with dashed lines. Placentas derived from COVID-19
cases are depicted as red squares. (J) ACE2 H-score was significantly increased in term
placentas from COVID-19 cases (squares) compared to uninfected, matched controls (circles).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. SARS-CoV-2 infection of placental cells in vitro. (A) Representative images of
icSARS-CoV-2-mNG infection of primary placental cells, immortalized placental cell lines, and
Vero E6 cells as measured by mNeonGreen expression and immunofluorescence staining of
SARS-CoV-2 nucleocapsid (NP). Images are displayed as maximum intensity projections of zstacks and grayscale bars indicate measured fluorescence intensity in arbitrary digital units. (B)

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fold-change quantification of SARS-CoV-2 N1 by RT-qPCR at 24 hours post-infection. Cells
were infected at an MOI of 5 for one hour and washed three times with PBS before the addition
of fresh media. Cells were washed and collected at 24 hours post-infection. Data presented are
representative results from one of three replicates.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. HSPA1A is significantly upregulated in maternal COVID. (A) Hierarchal clustering and
heatmap of differentially expressed genes (p<0.05). Bulk RNA-seq was performed on placental
villi isolated from control and maternal COVID cases. (B) Gene ontology of differentially
expressed genes (p<0.05) in bulk RNA-seq. (C) Volcano plot indicating differentially expressed
genes between control and maternal COVID groups from bulk RNA-seq. Significant hits are
depicted in red (padj<0.05) and black (p<0.05). Non-significant genes are shown in gray.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5. (A) UMAP projection of 83378 single placenta cells from COVID-19 cases (n=2
decidual and n=2 villous samples) and uninfected controls (n= 2 decidual and n = 3 villous
samples). Cell type annotations based on correlation with reference datasets(26-28) followed by
manual examination of marker genes. (B) Dotplot of the top 5 genes that are upregulated
between COVID-19 and uninfected control samples for each annotated cell type based on folddifference. Size of dots represents percent of cells in cluster expressing gene of interest;
intensity of color reflects average scaled expression. Significantly altered expression between
COVID-19 cases and controls (Bonferroni-adjusted, two-tailed, Wilcoxon rank-sum test P <
0.05) is marked by a solid black line. (C) Interferome analysis demonstrating the fraction of
differentially expressed genes in each cell type that are interferon-responsive, in COVID-19
cases compared to controls; with p values for enrichment (observed over expected fraction)
calculated using hypergeometric distribution. (D) Clustered heatmap showing the top enriched
functional terms according to Metascape(76) among differentially expressed genes between
COVID-19 and control samples in the annotated placental cell types. bars are colored to
encode p-values of increasing statistical significance. (E) Heat map depicting the logtransformed ratio (COVID-19 cases over controls) of number of ligand-receptor interactions
between all placental cell type pairs, inferred using the CellphoneDB repository of ligands,
receptors and their interactions(33). Red indicates cell type pairs with more interactions in
COVID-19 cases compared to control; blue indicates the opposite. (F) Violin plots of HSPA1A
expression at the placental villi and maternal decidua obtained by scRNA-seq.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Table 1. RT-qPCR results for placenta samples that tested positive by the
modified CDC assay. Total nucleic acid was extracted from each sample and tested by RTqPCR in duplicate. Reported are Ct values for the primer-probe sets N1, N2, and RP.
Sample_ID

Sample_Type

Replicate

N1

N2

RP

Result

#1

Placenta

1

13.9

15.3

21.3

Positive

Umbilical Cord

1

30.6

30.6

28.2

Positive

Placenta Fetal

1

31.6

33.9

17.4

Positive

2

29.3

31.2

17.2

Positive

1

37.2

37.7

18.0

Positive

2

ND

ND

18.6

Negative

1

33.1

33.8

19.4

Positive

2

32.0

32.6

18.8

Positive

1

35.0

35.6

21.2

Positive

2

35.6

35.2

21.0

Positive

#2

Placenta Maternal
Placenta Membrane
Umbilical Cord

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Table 2. Histological features of placenta from COVID-19 cases and
matched controls
Microscopic Features

P-value

Cases
(n=27)

Controls
(n=10)

Increased Decidual Lymphocytes

7/27

2/10

0.71

Maternal Vascular Malperfusion

6/27

0/10

0.10

Fetal Vascular Malperfusion

3/27

0/10

0.27

Chorioamnionitis

5/27

0/10

0.14

Increased Intervillous Fibrin

9/27

0/10

0.04

Intervillositis

0/27

0/10

NA

Villitis

5/27

0/10

0.14

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figure 1. SARS-CoV-2 spike S1 protein-specific IgG and IgM (anti-S1-IgG and
-IgM) ELISA absorbance values in 12 pregnant SARS-CoV-2-positive women compared to 355
non-pregnant SARS-CoV-2-positive individuals.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figure 2. Violin plot of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 expression in placenta cell
subsets.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

DIC

merge

Syn., Inf

anti-NP

Scale bar = 20 μm

Supplementary Figure 3. SARS-CoV-2 infection of primary syncytiotrophoblasts. Primary
syncytiotrophoblasts were derived from primary isolated cytotrophoblasts allowed to
spontaneously differentiate for 72-96 hours. Following the differentiation period, cells were
infected at an MOI of 5 for one hour and washed three times with PBS before the addition of
fresh media. Shown are two individual cells as detected by immunofluorescence following
staining with anti-NP antibody (left panel). Differential interference contrast (DIC, center panel)
image shows these two cells are excluded from the surrounding syncytia. Merged image (right
panel) shows pseudocolor labeling of syncytialized cells in purple and infected NP-labeled
individual cells in pink.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figure 4. Quality control metrics for single cell RNA-seq samples. Violin plots
showing the distributions of (A) the number of unique molecular identifier (UMI) counts per cell
for all samples and (B) the number of detected genes per cell for all samples. (C) Stacked bar
plots showing the cellular composition of each sample. Fraction of total cells made up by each
annotated cell type is plotted on the Y axis. (D) UMAP projection of cells split by COVID-19
status showing that most annotated cell types are represented in both control and COVID-19
samples. (E) UMAP projection of cells colored by the sample of origin.
42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figure 5. Annotation of single cell RNA-seq clusters based on correlation with
reference datasets. (A) Heatmap showing spearman correlation coefficients between averaged
gene expression of each cluster and that of annotated cell types from three single cell RNA-seq
datasets1–3 used as references. For each query cluster, three annotated cell types with highest
correlation from each reference dataset are marked as top three matches, represented by grey
dots. Reference-based annotation of the clusters was refined with manual verification of marker
gene expression. Refined annotations are shown on the right-hand side of the panel. (B)
Annotation of all 35 clusters shown on UMAP projection. (C) Highly similar clusters were
merged to get a final set of annotations resulting in 21 annotated clusters, presented on UMAP
projection.
43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21250452; this version posted January 26, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figure 6. Dotplot showing ligand-receptor interactions, inferred using
CellPhoneDB4, present in COVID-19 samples but absent in control samples. Pairs of cell types
are on the X axis and pairs of ligands and receptors are on the Y axis, such that the first
element of the latter is expressed in the first cell type (shown in red text) and the second
element in the second cell type (shown in blue text). Intensity of the color of the dots represents
mean of the expression of the ligand and the receptor in the respective cell types (mean is set to
zero if either ligand or receptor has zero expression), and the size of the dot represents the pvalue for the specificity of the interaction. Only the interactions with p-value < 0.01 are shown
here.

45

