medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Remote care for mental health:
qualitative study with service users,
carers and staff during the COVID19 pandemic
Elisa Liberati, Natalie Richards, Jennie Parker, Janet Willars, David Scott, Nicola Boydell,
Vanessa Pinfold, Graham Martin, Mary Dixon-Woods, Peter B Jones
Elisa Liberati 1 (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4981-1210)
Natalie Richards 1 (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5673-751X)
Jennie Parker 2 (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5179-729X)
Janet Willars 3 (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7886-3223)
David Scott 4 (https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9083-580X)
Nicola Boydell 5 (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2260-8020)
Vanessa Pinfold 2 (https://orcid.org/0000 0003 3007 8805)
Graham Martin 1 (https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1979-7577)
Mary Dixon-Woods 1 (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5915-0041)
Peter B Jones 6 (https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0387-880X)
1

THIS Institute (The Healthcare Improvement Studies Institute), Department of Public Health
and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
2

McPin Foundation, London, SE1 4YR, UK.

3

Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, UK

4

Population Health and Genomics, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.

5

Centre for Biomedicine Self and Society, Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK
6

Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge; Cambridgeshire & Peterborough NHS
Foundation Trust, Cambridge, CB2 0SZ, UK
Correspondence to: Peter B Jones, Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge;
Cambridgeshire & Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, CB2 0SZ, UK.
pbj21@cam.ac.uk
Word
count:
NOTE: This
preprint6165
reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

ABSTRACT
Objectives: To explore the experiences of service users, carers and staff seeking or
providing secondary mental health services during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Design: Qualitative interview study, co-designed with mental health service users and
carers.
Methods: We conducted semi-structured, telephone or online interviews with a purposively
constructed sample; a peer researcher with lived experience conducted and analysed
interviews with service users. Analysis was based on the constant comparison method.
Setting: NHS secondary mental health services in England between June and August 2020.
Participants: Of 65 participants, 20 had either accessed or needed to access English
secondary mental healthcare during the pandemic; 10 were carers of people with mental
health difficulties; 35 were members of staff working in NHS secondary mental health
services during the pandemic.
Results: Experiences of remote care were mixed. Some service users valued the
convenience of remote methods in the context of maintaining contact with familiar clinicians.
Most participants commented that a lack of non-verbal cues and the loss of a therapeutic
‘safe space’ challenged therapeutic relationship building, assessments, and identification of
deteriorating mental wellbeing. Some carers felt excluded from remote meetings and
concerned that assessments were incomplete without their input. Like service users, remote
methods posed challenges for clinicians who reported uncertainty about technical options
and a lack of training. All groups expressed concern about intersectionality exacerbating
inequalities and the exclusion of some service user groups if alternatives to remote care are
lost.
Conclusions: Whilst remote mental healthcare is likely to become increasingly widespread
in secondary mental health services, our findings highlight the continued importance of a
tailored, personal approach to decisions about remote mental healthcare. Further research
should focus on which types of consultations best suit face-to-face interaction, and for whom
and why, and which can be provided remotely and by which medium.
Key words: mental health services, remote care, COVID-19, peer research, qualitative.
Word count: 6271

ARTICLE SUMMARY
Strengths and limitations of this study


2

Strengths include its qualitative approach in speaking to a large sample of
participants with varied mental health difficulties, carers, and a diverse range of
mental healthcare staff.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .







Its novelty lies in a deep exploration of the views and experiences of remote mental
healthcare during a pandemic.
The methods are strengthened by the involvement of experts-by-experience and the
use of peer research methods.
We did not adopt a narrative method; the interviews were one-off conversations so
we could not explore change as the pandemic progressed and people may have
become accustomed to remote care.
The study used remote methods to comply with UK lockdown regulations; this will
have excluded some groups without the ability to engage remotely.

INTRODUCTION
Difficulties in mental health are very common; they bring long-term challenges for
individuals, families, carers and society.1 People with significant mental health needs may
use secondary health services for specialised healthcare including acute in-patient services
and community-based approaches such as early intervention, crisis resolution or specific
therapeutic interventions for particular concerns. During the COVID-19 crisis in the United
Kingdom (UK) and elsewhere, the number of people in need of mental healthcare increased.
Besides those who suffered physically with COVID-19 itself, fear of infection, worry about
those unwell and bereavement have been widespread, while measures such as lockdowns
and other interventions to reduce transmission increased social isolation, loneliness and
domestic strains; all create adverse conditions for mental health.2-7 Yet, as need increased,
the capacity of mental healthcare provision was severely restricted due to distancing
measures, extra hygiene precautions, abrupt changes to care pathways and reduced staff
availability 8. These changes saw provision and use of mental healthcare decrease 4 9 in the
face of increased need and risk for service users.10
In response to these challenges to the entire healthcare system, many services switched to
different forms of remote care as a way of increasing capacity and reducing face-to-face
contact. Telehealth, where telephone and other technology-based methods are used to
provide care,11 has increased rapidly following years of inertia or slow growth.12
Accompanying this rise has been a rapid expansion in research, evaluation, guidance and
commentary on remote care in a range of fields. This body of literature is largely positive
about the potential of telehealth during, and beyond, the pandemic,13 and is leading some to
suggest that it may, at least in part, replace in-person interaction as a mode of healthcare
delivery for many service users.14
The COVID-19 pandemic forced the introduction of remote care across secondary mental
health services in a matter of weeks. The bulk of research to date, however, has taken place
in primary care and/or physical health. Of 543 papers identified by Doraiswamy et al. in their
rapid scoping review of articles relating to telehealth during COVID-19, for example, only 42
focused on psychiatry and related disciplines.13 Both the advantages and the challenges of
remote care delivery in physical healthcare settings may differ substantially from those faced
in secondary mental healthcare. The use of remote care in mental health has invited debate
for decades.15 Though some have highlighted the potential of telehealth in addressing
mental health difficulties during and beyond the pandemic,16 remote care may also have
important downsides; some are more readily anticipated than others.
Rigorous qualitative studies examining the experiences and needs of service users, carers
and clinical staff involved in remote mental healthcare are needed to understand its impacts,
and guide short and long-term changes to services. This is not only to mitigate problems but
also to take advantage of opportunities to address long-standing concerns about access that
have been exposed by the pandemic. In this article, we respond to this challenge. We report
on a large, interview-based study involving people with direct experience of seeking
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

(including carers) and providing mental healthcare in England during the first wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic.

METHODS
The study was designed and developed with six experts by experience (three service users
and three carers) and a peer researcher from the McPin Foundation, a mental health
research charity.
Between June and August 2020, we undertook a qualitative study involving remote
interviews with 69 adults including:





24 people with mental health difficulties under the care of secondary mental health
services in who either accessed support, including inpatient and community mental
health services, during the pandemic, or who needed services but did not access
them. The interviews (all telephone) of four service users were excluded from this
analysis because they did not fulfil the criterion of accessing the English NHS for
secondary mental healthcare.
10 carers of people who accessed, or needed to access, secondary mental
healthcare during COVID-19.
35 point-of-care staff working in NHS secondary (inpatient and community) mental
health services – particularly those more likely to be involved in critical and timesensitive decisions. They included psychiatrists (trainees and consultants), care
coordinators, mental health nurses, clinical psychologists and psychotherapists;
some had managerial as well as clinical roles.

We recruited people with experience of mental health services in England only. We did not
include individuals seeking to access mental healthcare for the first time through their
general practitioner or staff working in primary mental health services such as GP practices,
community pharmacists, and Improving Access to Psychological Therapy (IAPT) services.
To comply with the UK lockdown regulations, all interviews were conducted remotely.
Participants could choose between being interviewed over the telephone or using online
video-supported secure software:




19 service users were interviewed over the telephone, 5 were interviewed by videoconference.
8 carers were interviewed over the telephone, 2 carers by video-conference; all cared
for a family member with mental health difficulties.
21 members of staff were interviewed over the telephone, 14 by video-conference.

Participants who opted for video conference interviews had the option to turn their camera
off. In both cases (video-conference or telephone call) only the audio was recorded, either
online or using an encrypted audio recorder for telephone interviews. Interviews lasted
between 22 minutes and 95 minutes. Using peer-research methods,17 a researcher from the
McPin Foundation carried out and analysed the service user interviews, drawing on her own
experiences of accessing secondary mental healthcare both before and during the study
period.
We recruited individuals using online network-based approaches: some participants
engaged in response to information circulated through dedicated networks, whilst others
became involved as a result of colleagues or friends alerting them to the study (a technique
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

known as snowball sampling). Multiple channels were used to publicise the study, including
the networks of THIS Institute and the McPin Foundation, Health Education England’s
Heads of Schools of Psychiatry, NIHR Applied Research Collaborations, specialty clinical
networks, and mental health charities including Rethink Mental Illness.
Across participant groups, our recruitment strategy was informed by efforts to maximise
diversity. We adopted a purposive sampling strategy,18 aiming to identify a variety of
experiences related to our research questions. As data collection and analysis progressed in
parallel, the size of the sample was adapted to the variety of experiences captured, in line
with the principle of information power.19
Invitations were circulated through an expression of interest form, and people who wished to
take part were asked to indicate their ethnicity, the gender they identified with, and the first
half of their postcode. We then prioritised invitations accordingly, seeking to increase the
number of those from a minority background, and to achieve balanced gender
representation and widespread geographic cover in England (Table 1).
Table 1: Participants’ demographic information

Number of
eligible
interviews

Gender

Ethnicity

Region

Service Users

Carers

Staff

20

10

35


















8 Female
7 Male
2 Non-binary
3 people did not
provide this
information
8 White
3 Black
2 Asian
4 Mixed ethnicity
3 people did not
provide this
information
1 North West
5 East Midlands
6 Greater London
2 East of England
1 South East
2 South West
3 people did not
provide this
information

Services accessed or
contacted:
Additional
information

6 Female
2 Male
2 people did not
provide this information





19 Female
11 Male
5 people did not provide this
information





7 White
1 Asian
2 people did not
provide this information







24 White
3 Asian
2 Mixed ethnicity
1 from ‘any other ethnic group’
5 people did not provide this
information







1 West Midlands
4 East of England
2 South East
1 South West
2 people did not
provide this information











4 North East
7 North West
2 East Midlands
5 West Midlands
4 Greater London
2 East of England
3 South East
3 South West
5 people did not provide this
information



17 Psychiatrists (13 trainees and 4
consultants)
10 Mental health nurses (including
care coordinators, matrons, nonclinical prescribers)
8 Clinical psychologists (including CBT
therapists and systemic family
therapists)






5





Acute hospital wards
Community Mental
Health Teams
(CMHT)
Crisis Teams



medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .



Specialist services
(self-harm,
personality disorder)

Services covered:

Community Mental Health Teams
(CMHT)

Early intervention for psychosis (EIP)

Crisis Teams

Acute hospital wards

Secure Forensic services

Potential participants were contacted by the researchers via telephone or email, depending
on people’s preferred contact method. Eligible potential participants were provided with a link
to register via Thiscovery, a secure citizen-science platform developed by THIS Institute
according to the AA Web Content Accessibility Guidelines that assure accessibility
standards. Once registered on Thiscovery, potential participants were given further
information and invited to complete the informed consent form. On completion of the consent
form, participants were then able to schedule an interview, with the choice of videoconference (on Thiscovery) or a telephone call. Service users and carers were compensated
£25 for taking part in an interview. EL, NR, JW and JP conducted semi-structured interviews;
JP is a peer researcher with lived experience of accessing secondary mental healthcare
before and during the pandemic. The interview topic guide covered a range of themes we
sought to explore; the guide was deliberately non-directive to allow participants to discuss
areas they perceive as relevant such as feelings of abandonment for service users or moral
injury for staff.
Interview audio files were securely transferred to a third-party transcription service subject to
the University of Cambridge data protection regulations. Anonymised service user, carer and
staff interviews were analysed separately. Analysis of anonymised interview transcripts was
based on the constant comparative method.20 The coding scheme was developed based on
a subset of initial interviews. The initial codes were revised, expanded and collapsed as
analysis progressed, and through whole team discussions. Codes were then were
organised into categories in a thematised coding scheme. Data was processed using NVIVO
software by five coders (four females and one male, DS). JP and NB analysed service user
interviews, EL analysed carer interviews, DS, NB and NR independently analysed staff
interviews.
During the process of write up and dissemination, some interview excerpts were edited
further to protect the identity of participants.
Ethical approval for the study was obtained from the University of Cambridge Psychology
Research Ethics Committee on 15 June 2020. All participants were provided with information
about the study and gave consent. We followed the Standards for Reporting Qualitative
Research recommendations21.
Patient and public involvement (PPI)
We consulted a panel of mental health service users and carers convened by the McPin
Foundation. Members helped us shape the research questions, methods, and risk
management plans for the study. We also gathered the views of these experts-byexperience on the study materials, including the research protocol and our participant-facing
documents. We shared the study documents with these experts-by-experience requesting
their comments and recommendations. We also held a series of online meetings to give
participants a further opportunity to share their views and suggestions for improvement,
providing individual online meetings or a telephone call according to preference. Experts-byexperience provided advice on how best to include carers in the study and suggestions for
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

specific networks for recruitment. They also guided how best to compensate participants for
their time, as well as emphasising the need for an accessible summary of the research to be
made widely available.

RESULTS
Our interviews with service users, carers and staff confirmed a widespread move to remote
care in response to the pandemic. Telephone consultations were, initially at least, reported
to be the most commonly offered form of remote care; setting-up secure video-conferencing
systems took time due, in part to uncertainty as to which, if any, platforms and systems were
allowed by information governance policies of different trusts, and staff and service users
being unfamiliar with how to use them. Initially, it was assumed by service providers that
telephone would be the most widely available to service users, with fewer barriers to access
than online methods. Towards the end of our recruitment period (August 2020), interviews
were beginning to indicate that secure video-supported platforms were in place in various
NHS community mental health services across the country.
Service user choices about remote care
Service users had mixed experiences. Most reported that remote care was adequate or
tolerable, but that face-to-face was much better. Some felt that the use of remote methods
made it more likely that appointment times would be altered or not followed through. This
often led to a sense of uncertainty and frustration. Several reported that trying to build a
therapeutic relationship remotely with a member of staff who they did not know was
problematic, and that they preferred being able to build on pre-established rapport.
I suppose if the AttendAnywhere works… actually, it doesn’t take as long out of your day.
It takes exactly an hour rather than travelling to the appointment. So, it’s an option. But I
still feel that the face-to-face has it for me. (Service user)
I can’t deal with uncertainty and inconsistency and I think they literally did…oh, we’ll call
at 3:00, and then they’ll call at 4:00 and it was, yes, we can, no, we can’t. Then in the
end they discharged me with a letter and then…it was in a way, you know when they
discharge you as well, you don’t know whether to say, yes, that’s a good idea or no
because you’re worried that actually tomorrow I might have a really bad day (Service
user)
I think it’s a very poor service that make an agreement they’ll ring somebody every
week, and then suddenly to fall off a cliff like that, I think it’s a really bad service, I’m
sorry. I think someone should handover and say, well, I’ve got a vulnerable client
that’s actually been working with the [service name] as well, and then just to be
dumped like that for nearly seven weeks, I’m sorry I think it’s really poor. (Service
user)
Positive experiences generally came from service users who had a prior relationship
with a clinician.
[The psychiatrist] was really great across the phone… I was quite worried that the phone
appointment was going to be terrible because I’ve always had it in person, but he was
really good. It was almost like he was in the same room as me. (Service user)
Some service users and carers chose not to receive remote care, particularly for
psychological interventions, because they believed that face-to-face consultations
would be reintroduced soon. Others did not feel that remote consultations would be as
7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

helpful or meaningful as face-to-face ones; they made clear that remote care was their
only option during the pandemic, and was not a choice they would otherwise have
made:
I thought it would be doubly frustrating… doing everything on the telephone and [that
you’d] end up with endless telephone conversations that got nowhere. (Service user)
I certainly feel that I haven’t made the progress with the psychologist… I was getting a lot
more out of the appointments when they were face-to-face, I think. I don’t come away
feeling as if I’ve really taken on board what he’s said to me in the same way. (Service
user)
Staff expressed concerns that breaks in therapy might negatively affect service users’
and families’ mental health during the pandemic. They recognised the challenges in
providing remote care and understood service users’ choices not to engage with it,
some offering face-to-face when allowed:
I did have quite a few drop out… [Some] chose not to continue because they didn’t want
to do remote working… Some people had an idea that [the pandemic] would be short
lived… That was a concern for me because we were in the middle of therapy and I’m
struggling now to get them back. (Family therapist)
I think that people have missed face-to-face contact… I’ve rung and said ‘I’m going to go
back to some places for contact… Do you want to see me, or do you want to just do it
over the phone?’ And everybody has said ‘Yeah, would really love to see you.’
(Care co-ordinator)
Some staff shared the view of many service users that remote care was more suitable for
maintaining continuity in existing relationships than for meeting people who were newly
referred. Conversely, some clinical psychologists and psychotherapists reported that remote
care was more likely to be accepted by service users who had not experienced face-to-face
therapy before, because they did not endure the ‘shock’ of a change in access mode.
The embodied dimension of therapeutic encounters
The move to remote care helped to maintain some form of connection between service
users and services during the pandemic. However, participants reported that remote care
changed the character and depth of clinical encounters and, in turn, their relational quality.
Uniting the accounts of service users, carers and staff was the loss of the embodied
dimension of therapeutic interactions, including the physical space where these used to take
place. Many described remote consultations as ‘not the same’, noting that even where they
were able to see someone’s facial expressions (in online consultations), not being together
in a room meant that building and maintaining a connection was problematic. For example,
when eye contact was mediated by a camera, it hampered the reciprocity normally
experienced in face-to-face interactions, as did the emphasis of verbal communication over
body language. These factors compounded many service users feeling socially isolated
during the pandemic, while for others, the loss of a particular, even sacred, therapeutic
setting undermined the quality of care:
[Remote consultations with psychiatrist] just felt more perfunctory, somehow, and I felt
less like opening up about stuff. It tends to be quick discussions about my medication
and that’s it… It felt like there was a barrier and I was just less inclined to open up.
(Service user)

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

You can’t have simultaneous eye contact with someone. When you look at the camera,
they have the experience that you’re looking in their eyes but you don’t have that
experience because you’re looking at the camera… It just creates a really weird
asynchrony so it’s just not like being in the room with the person… I just find that quite
disconcerting. (Clinical psychologist)
Service users reported not feeling able to make full use of therapeutic interactions in an
environment they shared with other people (commonly, family members). Others felt that
video consultations were ‘invading’ their own private space:
In our home, we have three generations of families who live in a two-bedroom house.
So, picture eight people in a two-bedroom house – you know, it’s quite hard. (Service
user)
There’s something that… has that sacredness about the [consultation] room. (Service
user)
The loss of the journey to and from services was another aspect of remote care that required
adjustment. Some service users felt they were deprived of the opportunity to process the
content of the sessions and gently transition back to their home lives.
After the phone call, he said ‘Bye’ and he put the phone down. I was just like ‘Oh.’ It just
felt slightly surreal. (Service user)
The trip… would at least get me into the headspace of ‘Okay, I’m going into therapy.’
And then, leaving, I would then get on a bus and just chill and let it sink. (Service user)
Similarly, some staff members reported less opportunity to reflect and process after
consultations due to back-to-back appointments. Several therapists also emphasised the
importance of therapy taking place in a safe and bounded physical space (the therapeutic
setting). They saw remote consultations, often being delivered from their homes as removing
a boundary between private life and therapeutic work, compromising the safety of these
consultations. They found some types of therapeutic work, such as trauma processing, to be
so ill-suited to remote care that they paused it.
And I don't have any car journeys anymore. I really appreciated time in the car because it
gave me time to reflect and time to process and time for myself. And in an office, home
office with Microsoft Teams, you get a lot of appointments just back-to-back. (Family
therapist)
I had a girl… who started online, and, probably, about six sessions in, she got quite
emotive… and then she suddenly shut down, and I was like ‘What’s that about?’ And she
said, ‘Well, my mum’s next door and I can’t do that. This isn’t safe.’ (CBT therapist)
Remote assessments and identifying risks
A particular area of concern for all participants related to the effectiveness of remote forms of
care in conducting assessments and identifying risks. Service users reported that the lack of
face-to-face contact made it more challenging for staff to identify – and help them recognise
– signs that their mental health was changing. This was important when, for example, the
nature of their mental health difficulties meant they could transition rapidly from depression
to mania, without being able to understand that this was happening and that a crisis
requiring inpatient admission might follow. In interviews, service users and carers described
video consultations as going some way towards addressing these issues compared with
telephone calls, but mostly they saw them as a poor substitute for face-to-face contact:
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

In the run-up to my becoming very unwell I didn’t see them face to face, and I think that I
was becoming (I have bipolar) …. increasingly hypermanic [sic]. But, because I was still
functioning at my job, I didn’t really recognise it. (Service user)
Before COVID, probably in face-to-face meetings there [was] more of an opportunity to
observe body language and assess mood from the physical presence of somebody that
you’re sitting with. I don’t think that can be really captured over the phone. (Carer)
Some carers felt that the shift to remote care exacerbated a pre-pandemic problem of their
being excluded from assessments, such that risk may not be assessed properly. One carer
felt that the person they supported did not find remote consultations beneficial and tried to
end the interactions quickly. Because the carer was not included in the consultations, some
issues were not recognised, recorded or addressed:
My [family member] just wants people off her back… [She] will say ‘I’m fine’ until she’s
blue in the face. It’s much easier to do that on a half-hour phone call than it is possibly
sitting face-to-face with somebody for an hour, who might actually be able to read further
into things. (Carer)
Staff tended to agree on the inherent limitations of remote consultations for conducting
assessments and identifying mental health risks – especially in the context of COVID, where
service users presenting to community services were more acutely unwell. It appeared that
specific aspects of assessments were particularly compromised by remote contact. For
example, staff and carers said remote consultations made it difficult (or, in the case of
telephone consultations, impossible) to pick up important non-verbal cues, such as body
language and levels of tension. These difficulties were exacerbated for service users who
struggled to verbally communicate how they were feeling. Acknowledging the limitations of
remote consultations for risk assessment, some services used telephone consultations to
evaluate the need for face-to-face contact. Yet sometimes this introduced other problems:
delaying fuller assessments, for example:
What a lot of doctors did was… a short assessment on the phone just to basically check
for risks: it was more of an in-depth triage than a proper assessment. And then they
would say, ‘It is urgent that I see this person’. And they would do face-to-face
assessment. I think what it did was just slow down the process from the point of referral
to the point of deciding that we would take the person on to the caseload. (Care coordinator)
Other factors that limited the depth and appropriateness of remote assessments included an
inability to evaluate service users’ home circumstances. Staff had to rely much more on
service users’ self-report of their mental health without, in addition, picking-up subtle, nonverbal clues that are available during an interview. Staff acknowledged the importance of
carers, family members or friends being physically present at the point of assessment,
reporting that service users who did not have this support (for example, those living in care
homes during the pandemic) may have been particularly disadvantaged. Remote working
and lockdown restrictions also meant that service users in compromising home life
situations, such as those facing domestic abuse, may not have felt comfortable disclosing
how they were coping:
Domestic violence assessments – usually we would go out to the home and try and get a
sense of how things were, whereas obviously on the phone you’re only getting one side
of the story. (Senior clinical psychologist)
Our team would [normally] go to patients’ homes and check their weight… but because
of COVID we had to ask patients to do that. But our patients with anorexia, they have a
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

tendency to falsify their weight. So, in that way, it would be difficult to give them quality
care. (Trainee psychiatrist)
Inequities in access
Participants across the service user, carer and staff groups reported multiple concerns about
the potential for remote care to have disproportionately negative effects for some groups of
service users and carers through intersectionality, thus creating or further amplifying
inequities. These groups included those with hearing difficulties and communication
impairments; people for whom interacting through a screen or a telephone was particularly
challenging (e.g. because of anxiety or autism); people who were unfamiliar with or reluctant
to use technology, including some older people and those experiencing paranoia or
delusions about technology; people who could not afford devices or internet access; and
people who needed support with the English language, often impacting on whole
communities (Table 2).
Table 2: Groups identified as particularly at risk of disadvantage from remote care
Individuals with sensory
(e.g. hearing) difficulties
and communication
impairments.

We work with over 65s, so we know that a lot of those are people who have hearing
difficulties and it can be incredibly difficult for them to get the same out of the
telephone session as they do in person. (Senior clinical psychologist)

Individuals for whom
interacting through a
screen or via telephone
may be particularly
challenging.

I felt really not looked after in the community, the way they were proposing to help us
was just calling, which is not very adequate for me because I have Asperger’s and I
really need something physical. (Service user, early July 2020)

People who may be
unfamiliar with, or
unwilling to use,
technology (‘digital
exclusion’), including older
adults and individuals
experiencing phobias or
delusions regarding IT.

Ours is an older population generally speaking, and not to stereotype, but a lot of the
older population are not technology savvy, a lot don’t have smart phones, a lot don’t
have iPads or computers. So, we haven't video called most of them, or a lot of
them. It tends to be that we're just making lots and lots of telephone calls. (Care
coordinator)

I was working with a family that the [family member] had a stroke and can only write,
and the family do a lot of her communicating in the family sessions. And they said
there's just no way we can do that online, it's going to all… it's just going to stress
her out completely. So people who have got additional needs that don't get met by
the online platform. (Family therapist)

I assessed a person with autism, and it was challenging. 'Cause I think if you
struggle with human interaction in person, you probably struggle even more online.
(Trainee psychiatrist)

[Family member] won’t Zoom. Part of his schizophrenia is he can’t look at live
television so, Zoom, he couldn’t do. This is him personally I’m talking about rather
than in general. But (…) I get to know about a lot of other cases… and we are
unanimous [it’s] not just schizophrenia (…)… Face to face is invaluable. (Carer)
There’s one person who I’m still in contact with over the phone but she’s phobic
about technology, partly due to a previous trauma issues. (Clinical Psychologist)

People who may not have
access to technology or
telephone/ internet
contracts (including those
without a secure
accommodation)

I have people who don’t have internet access, don’t have mobile phones, so if I don’t
go to their house, I’m not going to engage with them. (Care coordinator)

Non-native English
speakers (and those
needing a language
interpreter) for whom

But [remote access] is limited, it relies on people having good English, whereas we
have quite a high Turkish population here. (Trainee psychiatrist)

11

Well, I guess people in social economic kind of situations where they don't allow
them to have the devices, so families that don't have devices or Wi-Fi, that might be
more difficult. (Family therapist)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

relaying only upon verbal
communication may
constitute an obstacle to
mutual understanding.

A lot of our patients, because of the demographic, English may not be their first
language or they may have an accent if they’ve grown up abroad, which can add to
the difficulties in understanding people on the phone. (Trainee psychiatrist)

Some participants emphasised the need to identify and address the inequalities created by
new, as well as traditional, ways of providing support. One carer noted that in evaluating the
appropriateness of remote care, it is important to account for remote consultations that are
missed or cancelled as well as those that do take place, to avoid self-selection bias:
I’m just very fearful that [services] will take from this ‘Oh, we can do it all on Zoom, we
can do it all online, we can do it all on the phone. We don’t need to actually see
people.’… And that would be a very negative [thing] for an awful lot of people…. but
those people would vanish quite rapidly. And then… the people who would be left would
be those who are comfortable with that. And [services] would be able to say, ‘Oh, look,
it’s working fine for these people.’ Well, who have you lost on the way? (Carer)
I hope it doesn’t go the other way and we end up cutting the face-to-face services too
much. I do fear that in a way. I think the technological things would be the main positive
change. I just hope that it doesn’t come at the expense of saying, oh well, the face-toface doesn’t matter, or you can cut that, which in the context of older people is especially
important. (Trainee psychiatrist)
Conversely, remote care appeared to have some role in addressing some inequalities
associated with face-to-face only. For example, during the pandemic, it enabled people who
were shielding or particularly vulnerable to the virus to continue accessing services, reducing
transport costs and logistical difficulties for service users and carers, and benefitted people
with physical impairments who were challenged by having to travel. That said, it did not
benefit all.
For a long time, service users asked us ‘Do we have to come all the way into a site with
no parking, or could you see us by video?’ And the answer’s always been ‘No.’ So I think
some of them are a little bit annoyed because they’ve been asking for this for years and
never received it, and now we’ve said ‘It is possible, after all – who knew?’ So, it’ll be
funny after [COVID-19] to see what people are happy to go back to… My consulting
rooms are on the first floor [with no] parking space, which is hideous for older people with
mobility problems. So, I think a lot of them would prefer telephone or video rather than
having to come in. (Senior clinical psychologist)
The future of remote care
Service users, carers and staff had varying views on the appropriateness of remote care for
secondary mental health services, but generally concurred that shared decision-making
about access modes (face-to-face versus remote care) needed negotiation. As the use of
remote care became more common during the pandemic, such consultation and shared
decision-making became even less commonplace, albeit largely through force of
circumstances. Service users, carers and staff, alike, felt strongly that organisations should
take a tailored approach to introducing remote care once more flexibility returns to the
system. It should take into account the differences between different types of clinical
encounter (for example, psychotherapy, psychiatric reviews, monitoring or changing
medication, or regular care coordinator encounters) and the range of options for remote
contact (including telephone calls, video-supported calls, text messages, emails). They also
highlighted that, in the future, mental health services should attempt to acknowledge the
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

unfamiliarity and potential ‘strangeness’ of accessing services remotely and recognise that
people’s preferences around remote access may shift in response to their changing
circumstances and experiences of mental health:
There wasn’t anything about, ‘You might find this strange initially; it’s going to feel
different’… Something like that would have been really nice, like ‘It’s going to feel
different and maybe these are some of the ways that you and your psychiatrist can
manage that.’ (Service user)
Participants described technology-related and connectivity issues as other key factors to
consider in relation to remote access. Wi-Fi and signal problems could affect sound and
video quality and sometimes prevented consultations from happening altogether. These
issues seemed to be more substantial in rural areas, thus disproportionately affecting
services in specific geographical locations.
I know a lot of people who’ve had technical and/or IT-related issues with [remote care] –
largely due to connectivity or lack of. So that seems to have been the biggest barrier.
(Trainee psychiatrist)
There was one appointment when we tried and tried to get the AttendAnywhere to work
and it just wouldn’t, and it was really frustrating because we could see each other but
either I could hear my psychologist, or he could hear me, but we couldn’t hear each
other. So, we gave up in the end… It does rely on you having a good internet
connection. (Service user)
When staff were asked about the future of remote care, most saw it as having a role in
supplementing face-to-face contact. Its advantages included avoiding unnecessary or
burdensome travel, giving healthcare staff more time to maintain regular contact with service
users, allowing the flexibility to offer shorter, more frequent sessions, and perhaps enhanced
ability to follow up service users who did not attend their scheduled appointments, although
this was not the experience of the service users we interviewed. Staff also reported some
remote sessions as being more intense than face-to-face so they brought them to a close
earlier. Finally, staff emphasised that if remote care was going to be more widely used in the
future, they would need specific and tailored training for delivering psychological
interventions remotely:
Our DNA [did not attend] rate has probably fallen... the standard thing, if somebody
doesn’t turn up to clinic you just mark that down as did not attend. Although a care
coordinator might go out and say to the person… Whereas now what I would do is just
phone them up, and I think that’s what I will be doing in future. Obviously, you won’t
always be able to get through, but sometimes you can. And you can learn useful stuff on
the phone even if it might not be the same as what you’d see face to face. It’s still better
than nothing. (Consultant psychiatrist)
I think the telephone consultations have been good. I think it's nice, it offers flexibility to
the patients as well as the clinicians. Reduces the need for travel if a patient had to take
time off work, et cetera, to come to an appointment, because before we were quite rigid
where we would want them to actually come in. (Trainee psychiatrist)
I was never trained in online therapy… Overnight, you’re having to change your practice
and it’s quite different online… I would always have a piece of paper between me and
the client. Well, that was immediately taken away. So, sharing thoughts and formulations
became more difficult. (CBT therapist)

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

DISCUSSION
This qualitative study of the accounts of 65 service users, carers and healthcare staff about
their experiences of remote care during the COVID-19 pandemic offers much rich learning
(Box 1), including indications of how to optimise service provision in the future and where
evidence and guidance is needed. Participants reported both advantages and
disadvantages to remote care as a means of sustaining capacity and enabling access to
secondary mental health services. Some participants, including both service users and
service providers, valued the flexibility offered by remote care, particularly in the context of
reduced access to face-to-face service provision.22 Nevertheless, there were significant
downsides. Participants found that consultations by telephone and video restricted
therapeutic relationships compared with in-person contact, particularly where service users
and staff could not build on a bond already formed face-to-face. This finding underscores the
limitations of the current evidence on video-based consultations as a substitute for in-person
healthcare that, as Greenhalgh and colleagues note, relates almost exclusively to “highly
selected samples of hospital outpatients with chronic, stable conditions.”23 Our study further
challenges the transferability of the findings of this body of evidence to the mental health
context, particularly for service users whose difficulties are fluctuating or who may find
themselves in crisis.
Our study has strengths and weaknesses. As a qualitative study, it relies on accounts of
behaviours, practices, experiences and opinions as reported by participants, cannot take into
account the clinical or personal outcomes of remote care, or infer causal relationships
between these and the various features of remote care identified. Furthermore, we did not
recruit people attempting to access mental healthcare for the first time. Among the study’s
strengths are its large and varied sample and its novelty in exploring remote care for mental
health during a pandemic from the perspective of service users, service providers and family
carers. We acknowledge that the methods of online recruitment and engagement used in the
study will have created some barriers for some groups; the approach favoured those to
whom we could reach out with information about the study, as well as those with the
necessary resource and capacity to decide whether or not to take part in the interview and to
complete the informed consent process. For this reason, our findings may underplay the
problems. On the other hand, remote methods may also have facilitated involvement of
some people who would not have chosen to take part in a face-to-face study. Further
strengths include the study’s involvement of experts-by-experience and use of peer research
methods, which arguably facilitated more authentic understanding of people’s views and
experiences, valuing the expertise of all those involved while equally valuing difference.
The study is helpful in identifying the distinctiveness of the mental health context compared
with remote care for physical health conditions. Staff and service users alike noted that many
features of a consultation that are taken for granted in face-to-face care become problematic
in remote consultations. From clinicians’ perspectives, the essential non-verbal cues that are
important to their questions, assessments and advice were missing. They sometimes
doubted whether service users were willing or able to disclose all relevant information.
Similarly, service users and carers felt that important aspects of consultations could be
missed or misconstrued, especially by telephone, and even during video consultations. Both
service providers and service users lamented the loss of the ‘sanctity of the consulting
room’, as a space reserved for highly personal, confidential conversations. Neither the
psychological nor the physical features of this space could be replicated in remote
consultations. The lack of boundaries between domestic life and the clinical encounter could
be immensely stressful, and challenges around privacy that have been noted in relation to
physical health may be particularly difficult in remote care for mental health.24 25 For some
service users, aspects relating to their mental health magnified the challenges that have
been noted in remote consultations about physical health.22 26 Sensory difficulties,
communication impairments, digital exclusion and aversion to screen-mediated contact
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

made remote care especially problematic for some service users, and might be caused or
exacerbated by some mental health difficulties.
Though remote care in secondary mental health services is likely to become increasingly
common, perhaps routine, our findings suggest that a blanket approach is not a suitable
long-term solution once the exigencies of the COVID-19 pandemic have passed. While
enhancing access for some groups, it may impede it for others, and the differential impact of
remote care requires careful evaluation, accounting for impacts on those who withdraw from
remote care as well those who engage. This also points to the need to develop tailored,
personalised approaches to remote care that cater for the preferences and needs of
individual service users, as well as for changes in their mental wellbeing. Our data show that
many service users – and indeed professionals – had limited influence or choice about how
care was provided. Identifying the appropriate balance of in-person and remote support for
individuals and for different service user groups requires the input of frontline clinicians,
service users and families who may be involved in their care, and the adoption of rigorous
co-production methodologies that will take careful development. Future research should aim
to provide guidance on exactly which type of clinical consultations best suit in-person
presence, and for whom and why, and which can be offered remotely, and through which
medium, taking into account intersectional challenges regarding access that contribute to the
continuing ‘digital divide’ in mental health27 28. Training and development might focus on
enabling staff, service users and carers to make the most of the advantages offered by
remote care, while identifying and mitigating its challenges. Equally important is to consider
the risks of remote working for members of staff: reduced contact with colleagues in the
structured environment of a shared working space may hinder the kind of informal
knowledge sharing and mutual monitoring that is key to maintaining safety in healthcare
teams. If we can define what good looks like, shared decisions about the option of remote
approaches could support a tailored, personal approach to mental healthcare.

Box 1: Leaning points for remote care
Box 1: Learning points and priorities for improvement for providing remote
mental healthcare

15



While remote consultations allowed secondary mental health services to continue
working at a time of unprecedented crisis, refinement is definitely needed in how
these will be offered in the future.



The availability of remote access technologies does not mean that direct
substitutions are appropriate.



Conducting mental health assessments remotely may be particularly problematic
and could hinder the identification of risks and use of shared decision-making.



Training for staff in leading or supervising clinical interventions remotely is
needed; this must be targeted to the specific remote platform used and be based
upon co-production principles with service users and carers in delivery.



There is a specific need for guidance on use of remote access mental healthcare,
which would be best based upon further research and consultation.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS AND FUNDING
We are very grateful to the service users, carers and staff who so generously took part in
this study, and those who helped us to develop this study.
This project was funded by THIS Institute’s grant from the Health Foundation. The Health
Foundation is an independent charity committed to bringing about better health and health
care for people in the UK. All contracted parties contributed to the study under agreements
through the same funding. We are grateful to colleagues at THIS Institute for developing and
managing the Thiscovery online research platform that facilitated this work, to Joann
Leeding for support with public and patient involvement, to Bethan Everson for assistance
with governance and data management, and to Kim Cannon-Sell for help with reference
management. PBJ is supported by the NIHR Applied Research Collaboration East of
England and by RP-PG-0161-20003. Mary Dixon-Woods is an NIHR Senior Investigator
(NF-SI-0617-10026). The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR, or the Department of Health and Social Care.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Elisa Liberati was lead researcher and managed the project with Natalie Richards. Peter
Jones, Mary Dixon-Woods, Jennie Parker and Vanessa Pinfold contributed to the design of
the study, analysis, and writing-up. EL, NR, JW and JP conducted the interviews. DS, JW
and NB contributed to the analysis and writing-up.
Competing interests
The authors declare they have no competing interests.

REFERENCES
1. McDaid D, Park A-L, Wahlbeck K. The Economic Case for the Prevention of Mental Illness.
2019;40(1):373-89. doi: 10.1146/annurev-publhealth-040617-013629
2. MIND. The mental health emergency. How has the coronavirus pandemic impacted our mental
health? London: MIND. Available at: mind.org.uk.
3. Public Health England. COVID-19: mental health and wellbeing surveillance report. Available at:
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/covid-19-mental-health-and-wellbeingsurveillance-report, 2020.
4. Rethink Mental Illness. Rethink Mental Illness COVID-19 briefings: Access to NHS mental health
services for people living with severe mental illness. Available at:
https://www.rethink.org/media/3793/access-to-mh-services-final-040220.pdf, 2020.
5. O'Connor RC, Wetherall K, Cleare S, et al. Mental health and wellbeing during the COVID-19
pandemic: longitudinal analyses of adults in the UK COVID-19 Mental Health &amp;
Wellbeing study. The British Journal of Psychiatry 2020:1-17. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2020.212
[published Online First: 2020/10/21]
6. Krishnamoorthy Y, Nagarajan R, Saya GK, et al. Prevalence of psychological morbidities among
general population, healthcare workers and COVID-19 patients amidst the COVID-19
pandemic: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res 2020;293:113382-82. doi:
10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113382
7. Johnson S, Dalton-Locke C, Vera San Juan N, et al. Impact on mental health care and on mental
health service users of the COVID-19 pandemic: a mixed methods survey of UK mental
health care staff. medRxiv 2020:2020.06.12.20129494. doi: 10.1101/2020.06.12.20129494

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.18.21250032; this version posted January 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

8. BMA. Pressure points in the NHS: BMA,; 17 November 2020 [Available from:
https://www.bma.org.uk/advice-and-support/nhs-delivery-andworkforce/pressures/pressure-points-in-the-nhs accessed 09 December 2020.
9. NHS Reset. Mental health services and COVID-19: Preparing for the rising tide. Available at
https://www.nhsconfed.org//media/Confederation/Files/Publications/Documents/Report_Mental-health-services-NHSReset_FNL.pdf, 2020.
10. Iob E, Steptoe A, Fancourt D. Abuse, self-harm and suicidal ideation in the UK during the COVID19 pandemic. Br J Psychiatry 2020;217(4):543-46. doi: 10.1192/bjp.2020.130
11. Doughty K. From red buttons to smart technology support: part 1: Independently published,
2018.
12. Fisk M, Livingstone A, Pit SW. Telehealth in the Context of COVID-19: Changing Perspectives in
Australia, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Journal of Medical Internet Research
2020;22(6):e19264.
13. Doraiswamy S, Abraham A, Mamtani R, et al. Use of Telehealth During the COVID-19 Pandemic:
Scoping Review. Journal of Medical Internet Research 2020;22(12):e24087.
14. Hollander JE, Carr BG. Virtually perfect? Telemedicine for COVID-19. New England Journal of
Medicine 2020;382(18):1679-81.
15. Chakrabarti S. Usefulness of telepsychiatry: A critical evaluation of videoconferencing-based
approaches. World journal of psychiatry 2015;5(3):286-304. doi: 10.5498/wjp.v5.i3.286
[published Online First: 2015/10/02]
16. Zhou X, Snoswell CL, Harding LE, et al. The role of telehealth in reducing the mental health
burden from COVID-19. Telemedicine and e-Health 2020;26(4):377-79.
17. Sweeney A, Beresford P, Faulkner A, et al. This is survivor research: PCCS Books 2009.
18. Palinkas LA, Horwitz SM, Green CA, et al. Purposeful Sampling for Qualitative Data Collection and
Analysis in Mixed Method Implementation Research. Adm Policy Ment Health
2015;42(5):533-44. doi: 10.1007/s10488-013-0528-y [published Online First: 2013/11/07]
19. Malterud K, Siersma VD, Guassora AD. Sample Size in Qualitative Interview Studies: Guided by
Information Power. Qual Health Res 2016;26(13):1753-60. doi: 10.1177/1049732315617444
[published Online First: 2015/11/29]
20. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through qualitative analysis. London:
Sage 2006.
21. O’Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, et al. Standards for reporting qualitative research: a synthesis
of recommendations. Academic Medicine 2014;89(9):1245-51.
22. The impact of COVID-19 on telemedicine utilization across multiple service lines in the United
States. Healthcare; 2020. Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
23. Greenhalgh T, Wherton J, Shaw S, et al. Video consultations for covid-19: British Medical Journal
Publishing Group, 2020.
24. Kronenfeld JP, Penedo FJ. Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19): telemedicine and remote care delivery
in a time of medical crisis, implementation, and challenges. Translational behavioral
medicine 2020
25. Bokolo AJ. Exploring the adoption of telemedicine and virtual software for care of outpatients
during and after COVID-19 pandemic. Irish Journal of Medical Science (1971-) 2020:1-10.
26. Kichloo A, Albosta M, Dettloff K, et al. Telemedicine, the current COVID-19 pandemic and the
future: a narrative review and perspectives moving forward in the USA. Family medicine and
community health 2020;8(3)
27. Robotham D, Satkunanathan S, Doughty L, et al. Do we still have a digital divide in mental
health? A five-year survey follow-up. Journal of medical Internet research 2016;18(11):e309.
28. Greer B, Robotham D, Simblett S, et al. Digital exclusion among mental health service users:
qualitative investigation. Journal of medical Internet research 2019;21(1):e11696.

17

