medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Development and external validation of prognostic models for
COVID-19 to support risk stratification in secondary care
Nicola J Adderley PhD,
MD,

1,3

1

Thomas Taverner PhD,

David Greenwood MSc,

Haniffa PhD,
Gallier BSc,

8

Sapey FRCP,

4,5,6

1

Malcolm Price PhD,

Joht Singh Chandan PhD,

Isaac Hosier BMedSci,

Krishna Gokhale MSc,

7,8,11

1

1

1

1

1,2

Christopher Sainsbury

Yemisi Takwoingi PhD,

Carly Welch MRCP,

7,8,9

Dhruv Parekh PhD,

Alastair K Denniston PhD FRCOphth,

Krishnarajah Nirantharakumar MD

1,2

1,11

7,10,11

Rashan

7,8

Suzy

Elizabeth

Affiliations:
1.

Institute of Applied Health Research, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK

2.

NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS
Foundation Trust and University of Birmingham, UK

3.

Department of Diabetes, Gartnavel General Hospital, NHS Greater Glasgow and
Clyde, Glasgow, UK

4.

National Intensive Care Surveillance-MORU, Colombo, Sri Lanka

5.

Mahidol Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit, University of Oxford

6.

University College London Hospitals, London, United Kingdom

7.

Institute of Inflammation and Ageing, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK

8.

University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust, Birmingham, UK

9.

Medical Research Council and Versus Arthritis Centre for Musculoskeletal Ageing
Research, University of Birmingham and University of Nottingham, Birmingham and
Nottingham, UK

10. University College London/Moorfields Eye Hospital National Institute for Health
Research Biomedical Research Centre
11. Health Data Research UK

Corresponding author:
Nicola J Adderley, n.j.adderley@bham.ac.uk
ORCID: 0000-0003-0543-3254

Abstract: 277
Word count: 5404
Tables: 4 (+9 supplementary)
Figures: 1 (+3 supplementary)

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Article Summary
Strengths and limitations of this study
• We developed novel prognostic models predicting mortality and ITU admission
within 28 days of admission for patients hospitalised with COVID-19, using a large
routinely collected dataset gathered at admission with a wide range of possible
predictors (demographic variables, symptoms, physiological measures, imaging,
laboratory test results).

•

These novel models showed good discrimination and calibration in both derivation
and external validation cohorts, and outperformed the existing ISARIC model and 4C
score in the derivation dataset. We found that addition of comorbidities to the set of
candidate predictors included in model derivation did not improve model
performance.

•

If integrated into hospital electronic medical records systems, the model algorithms
will provide a predicted probability of mortality or ITU admission for each patient
based on their individual data at, or close to, the time of admission, which will
support clinicians’ decision making with regard to appropriate patient care pathways
and triage. This information might also assist clinicians in explaining complex
prognostic assessments and decisions to patients and their relatives.

•

A limitation of the study was that in the external validation cohort we were unable
to examine all of the predictors included in the original full UHB model due to only a
reduced set of candidate predictors being available in CovidCollab. Nevertheless, the
reduced model performed well and the results suggest it may be applicable in a wide
range of datasets where only a reduced set of predictor variables is available.

•

Furthermore, it was not possible to carry out stratified analysis by ethnicity as the
UHB dataset contained too few patients in most of the strata, and no ethnicity data
was available in the CovidCollab dataset.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
Objectives
Existing UK prognostic models for patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19 are limited
by reliance on comorbidities, which are under-recorded in secondary care, and lack of
imaging data among the candidate predictors. Our aims were to develop and externally
validate novel prognostic models for adverse outcomes (death, intensive therapy unit (ITU)
admission) in UK secondary care; and externally validate the existing 4C score.

Design
Candidate predictors included demographic variables, symptoms, physiological measures,
imaging, laboratory tests. Final models used logistic regression with stepwise selection.

Setting
Model development was performed in data from University Hospitals Birmingham (UHB).
External validation was performed in the CovidCollab dataset.

Participants
Patients with COVID-19 admitted to UHB January-August 2020 were included.

Main outcome measures
Death and ITU admission within 28 days of admission.

Results
1040 patients with COVID-19 were included in the derivation cohort; 288 (28%) died and
183 (18%) were admitted to ITU within 28 days of admission. Area under the receiver
operating curve (AUROC) for mortality was 0.791 (95%CI 0.761-0.822) in UHB and 0.767
(95%CI 0.754-0.780) in CovidCollab; AUROC for ITU admission was 0.906 (95%CI 0.8830.929) in UHB and 0.811 (95%CI 0.795-0.828) in CovidCollab. Models showed good
calibration. Addition of comorbidities to candidate predictors did not improve model
performance. AUROC for the 4C score in the UHB dataset was 0.754 (95%CI 0.721-0.786).

Conclusions
The novel prognostic models showed good discrimination and calibration in derivation and
external validation datasets, and outperformed the existing 4C score. The models can be
integrated into electronic medical records systems to calculate each individual patient’s
probability of death or ITU admission at the time of hospital admission. Implementation of
the models and clinical utility should be evaluated.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Background
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic has placed exceptional strain on health
care systems globally – in high income as well as low and middle income countries (LMIC).
Health systems, and especially critical care services, can be overwhelmed given the number
of patients, and the duration and severity of their illness. A proportion of patients with
COVID-19 can deteriorate rapidly. Clinicians need to differentiate between those with
COVID-19 who are at high risk of the most severe symptoms (requiring intensive care
treatment/ventilation) or death, and those who can be considered low risk and potentially
managed in the community. Early identification of patients at highest risk of severe
outcomes may provide opportunity to prioritise, intervene and improve outcomes.

Objective prognostic tools for patients with COVID-19 would be of considerable benefit to
clinicians in a secondary care setting. Prognostic models that can accurately discriminate
between patients who will progress to more severe symptoms or death, and those who do
not, can be used by clinicians to triage and manage patients. Such models based on
patients’ initial characteristics, symptoms, biomarkers and imaging at the time of hospital
admission can be used at or just after admission. This could potentially reduce time to
appropriate interventions and improve patient outcomes.

A rapid systematic review has identified a number of prediction models developed for

1

COVID-19, including prognostic models.

However, while these existing studies provided

useful information on candidate predictors for further exploration, there were substantial
limitations: many models were developed exclusively in a Chinese population; many were at
high risk of bias, particularly in terms of inclusion of non-representative control participants,
inappropriate exclusion criteria, and small sample sizes leading to high risk of overfitting;
most models have not considered imaging findings as candidate predictor variables; and
external validation was limited.

More recent models have since been developed,

2,3

some of which overcome a number of

these limitations, including the International Severe Acute Respiratory and emerging
Infection Consortium (ISARIC) model and corresponding (simplified) 4C score, which was
developed in a UK secondary care population representing 260 hospitals in England,
Scotland and Wales (the ISARIC dataset).

3

Whilst the 4C score showed reasonable

discrimination for mortality, there are a number of limitations, including a reliance on
clinicians counting specific comorbidities, which are known to be under-recorded in

4

secondary care,

and an absence of imaging data among the candidate predictors.

Furthermore, it is unclear if this model can help with predicting deteriorating patients
beyond day of admission. The latter is important given the unpredictable clinical course of
COVID-19 patients in the early days after admission. This raises two important research
questions: first, to what extent does the inclusion of comorbidities and additional patient
information (such as imaging and additional biomarkers) improve prognostic models for
hospitalised patients with COVID-19? And second, is there any added value in updating the
clinical parameters with evolving biomarkers to improve prediction of the clinical course of
patients, with patients reassessed in real-time as the disease evolves?

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The overarching aims of this study were to novel develop prognostic models for adverse
outcomes (death, intensive therapy unit (ITU) admission) in a UK secondary care setting; to
externally validate these models in an international dataset (including data from UK

3

hospitals); to externally validate the existing UK ISARIC model and 4C score;

and to

compare performance of the newly developed models with the UK ISARIC model and 4C
score. In addition, we developed daily models using time series data from the first eight
days from admission to explore changes in predictors over time.

Methods
Data source
Data from University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust (UHB) was sourced via
the PIONEER Health Data Research Hub for acute care, and used for model development
and for external validation of the ISARIC model and 4C score. Data from patients with
COVID-19 admitted to Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham (part of UHB), between 1

th

January 2020 and 16

st

August 2020 was included. Data included symptoms recorded at

th

admission, comorbidities (from International Classification of Diseases 10

revision (ICD-10)

discharge codes), vital signs (e.g. blood pressure, oxygen saturation), laboratory results
(biochemistry, haematology, microbiology, pathology), imaging, and outcomes (ITU
admission and death).

External validation of the newly developed models was performed in the CovidCollab
dataset. CovidCollab is an international project utilising routinely collected health care data

5,6

to develop a better understanding of how best to treat and care for adults with COVID-19.
The dataset includes symptoms, comorbidities, vital signs, laboratory results, imaging
findings, and outcomes.

Study population
Patients of all ages diagnosed with COVID-19 and hospitalised were included. Diagnosis was
defined as a positive test result for SARS-CoV-2 from one or more reverse transcription
polymerase chase reaction (RT-PCR) or transcription mediated amplification tests. In the
CovidCollab dataset, COVID-19 diagnosis was by either PCR or antibody test.

Study Design
Retrospective cohort analyses; index date (start of follow-up) was the hospital admission
date. Study period was 1
16

th

st

January 2020 to 12

th

September 2020 (last admission date was

August to ensure a minimum of 28 days of follow-up).

Outcomes
Primary outcome was death within 28 days of admission (in-hospital or post-discharge).
Secondary outcome was ITU admission within 28 days of admission.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Study follow-up
Participants were followed from index (admission) date until the earliest of outcome date or
study end (latest available data, 12

th

September 2020). Participants were censored 28 days

th

after index date. Participants admitted after 16

August 2020 (less than 28 days prior to

study end date) were excluded.

Candidate predictor variables
Candidate predictors were selected a priori following a review of existing literature,
discussion with clinical experts (specialists in acute care, critical care and geriatric medicine),
and based on availability of variables routinely collected in secondary care/UHB. These
included demographic variables, symptoms, comorbidities, physiological measures, imaging
findings and laboratory test results. Comorbidities are not reliably and completely collected
at admission, with the most complete hospital record of comorbidities usually being the
discharge ICD-10 codes; therefore, the development and performance of models with and
without comorbidity predictors were compared in order to explore the potential for
developing models which would require no additional data collection (other than routinely
collected data) at the point of admission.

Model development
Models were trained using UHB data (patients admitted up to and including 16

th

August

2020). We used a multi-stage model building process that assessed the impact of a range of
feature representation and modelling choices to select important candidate predictors. All
analyses were performed in R.

Three sets of models were fitted which incorporated continuous variables in three different
ways, to explore the impact of treating these variables as continuous or categorical, and also
to explore the impact of different methods of handling missing data:
(a) as continuous numeric values, with missing values imputed (“continuous”);
(b) as categorical values derived from the imputed continuous values (“categoricalimputed”).
(c)

and, in secondary analysis, as categorical values, using clinically meaningful
categories and reference ranges, with missing indicators as a separate category
(“categorical”);

To represent continuous variables with nonlinear relationships to the logit of the outcome,
we initially fitted an exploratory predictive model (gam from the mgcv package in R),
representing continuous features as thin-plate smoothed splines with the smoothing factor
(gamma) set to 1.4 to shrink coefficient degrees of freedom. Based on visual inspection for
obvious departure for linearity, if the variable appeared to have a linear relationship with
the response term, we represented it as a linear term in variable selection and model
testing and training. If the relationship between the response and the variable of interest
appeared to be nonlinear, we represented the feature as a spline term ("bs" from splines
package) with the minimum degrees of freedom (3 d.f.) to avoid overfitting.

For the three ways of handling numeric features and missing variables above, we fitted
outcomes of death within 28 days and ITU admission (within 28 days) to candidate

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

predictors using a range of models, which allowed both linear relationships and complex
interactions between variables:
(a) logistic regression with i) all baseline parameters (demographic variables, symptoms,
vital signs/physiological measures, and laboratory test results), ii) demographic
variables only, and iii) all baseline parameters with the addition of recorded
comorbidities (recorded up to the point of discharge);
(b) logistic regression with stepwise AIC minimisation, both forward and backward;
(c)

7

LASSO (l1 penalized) logistic regression using all baseline parameters;

(d) gradient boosted model (GBM) using all baseline parameters with default
hyperparameter values of 150 trees, maximum interaction depth 3, minimum of 10

8

observations in nodes, and shrinkage 0.1.

For each of these four variable selection models, in order to reduce overfitting and selection
bias, we internally validated using 5-fold cross-validation (80/20 train/test split) to derive
the candidate variable list. To avoid sensitivity to imputation, this cross-validation was
repeated for each of the 5 multiple imputations.

Due to the relatively small number of outcome events (<300) we did not attempt to
systematically look for interactions between multiple variables.

Model performance (discrimination) was assessed by calculating the area under the receiver

9

operating characteristics curve (AUROC, or C-statistic).

Calibration was assessed by plotting

observed probability of the outcome against predicted probability, and by calculating the
calibration slope and intercept. We also calculated sensitivity, specificity, positive predicted
value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for the final models. For each feature set
and each model, the final results for cross-validated (optimism-adjusted) AUROC and other
metrics were combined from all the multiple imputations of the data set using Rubin's rules

10

for the mean and confidence interval (derived from the standard deviation).

Missing data
Information on candidate predictors was collected at the point of admission; however,
where information on physiological or laboratory measures was not available on the day of
admission, measures recorded up to 72 hours after admission were used. Candidate
predictors for which >40% of patients had missing data were excluded from the analysis.
Further missing continuous variables (vital signs, laboratory tests) and symptoms were
imputed using the R “mice” (Multiple Imputation using Chained Equations) multiple
imputation package; we performed 5 imputations, using predictive mean matching and a
maximum of 50 iterations.

11

We also explored use of a missing category for missing test

results. Absence of a record of a comorbidity was taken to indicate absence of the
condition.

External validation
To investigate the transferability of models, we performed external validation of logistic
regression models derived from the UHB dataset in the CovidCollab dataset, for predicting
outcomes of 28-day mortality and ITU admission.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Not all candidate predictors were common to both datasets; therefore, new logistic
regression models for death within 28 days and for ITU admission were re-fitted on the UHB
data using only those variables also present in the CovidCollab data. We then performed an
external validation of these UHB models in the CovidCollab dataset, and ascertained the
AUROC in both the UHB and CovidCollab datasets. Based on model performance observed
in the initial model derivation and in the interest of clinical utility, we used only categorical
rather than continuous numeric variables, with imputed missing values (imputed prior to
categorisation). To verify that predictors behaved similarly, we compared logistic
coefficients from UHB to the same models fitted on the CovidCollab dataset. To account for
sensitivity to missing values, we performed training and testing five times on 5-fold multiply
imputed data sets for both UHB and CovidCollab.

External validation of ISARIC and 4C models
An extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost) model using the ISARIC study parameters and
logistic regression using the 4C score was performed in the UHB dataset (following the same
modelling methods used in the original ISARIC study). The ISARIC XGBoost model was
calibrated to the UHB data by deriving UHB-specific coefficients for the included variables.
Model performance was assessed by calculating the AUROC and plotting calibration curves.

Sensitivity analyses
Most patient records had some missing variables; we therefore performed a complete case
analysis, where we re-fitted the best forward stepwise selection model to complete case
data, then data with ≤1, 2, 5, and 10 missing values, imputing missing values in the same
way as above, and examined AUROCs and logistic coefficients for stability.

In addition, we performed a sensitivity analysis within male and female strata by assessing
the final model performance (AUROC) on male and female patients separately, and by
comparing to performance of separate models which were fitted to male and female
patients only.

Time series analysis
The UHB regression models utilised baseline measurement data collected on admission;
where not available at admission, we accepted values up to 72 hours after admission. To
investigate fine-grained temporal effects of data acquisition, we produced a series of
separate logistic regression models using data collected at different time windows from
within 24 hours of admission up to within 7 days of admission, in 1-day increments, for the
mortality outcome. Each dataset included only those patients eligible at the end of the
window (not dead or discharged). This created eight different sets of predictors, including
baseline variables of age, gender, symptoms, and the time-sensitive variables of the latest
physiological and laboratory measurements available.

For missing data, data were carried forward from the first observation (last observation
carried forward, LOCF) and 5-fold multiple imputation was performed for missing data after
LOCF was done, within each separate time-window dataset. Each model was trained and
tested in 5-fold cross validation, within each imputation, and AUROCs averaged using
Rubin’s rule. We compared the AUROCs for each of the eight models for predicting 28-day
mortality from the time of admission and compared the logistic coefficients for the models.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

For additional insight into possible effects of changing measurements, we produced an
additional logistic model for 28-day mortality to time-sensitive data collected within 4 days
of admission, augmented with predictors indicating an increase or decrease in the category
of each time-sensitive predictor relative to the reference category from 0 to 4 days – for
example, whether temperature had crossed from below to above 37.8°C in that period.

Patient and public involvement
We engaged with members of the PIONEER patient and public involvement group during
development of the study protocol. We will further engage with this group, as well as other
local and national patient and public involvement groups, in order to discuss dissemination
of the findings and the best way to communicate these to patients and the public. We also
consulted with several secondary care clinicians before and during the study to ensure that
the tools developed meet the needs of clinicians. We have engaged with local NHS trusts to
ensure that the algorithms developed are implemented/tested in a hospital setting.

Results
Derivation cohort characteristics
A total of 1040 participants with COVID-19 admitted to UHB were included in the derivation
cohort. 288 (28%) died within 28 days of admission and 183 (18%) were admitted to ITU.
Baseline characteristics are presented in Table 1. The mean (SD) age of participants was 68.2
(17.7) years; 57% (589) were male; and almost 90% had at least one comorbidity.

Candidate predictors
After exclusion of 7 candidate predictors with >40% missing data (D-dimer, ferritin, high
sensitivity troponin, fibrinogen, lactate dehydrogenase, vitamin D, haemoglobin A1c), 63
predictors were considered for inclusion in the models:

Demographic characteristics: age, gender, ethnicity;

Symptoms (binary, presence or absence of symptom at admission): breathlessness, chest
pain, cough, fever, headache, malaise, new onset diarrhoea or vomiting, sputum, delirium;

2

Physiological measures and vital signs: body mass index (BMI; kg/m ), systolic blood
pressure (mm Hg), diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg), temperature (degrees Celsius), heart
rate (beats per minute), respiratory rate (respirations per minute), oxygen saturation (%),
partial pressure of CO 2 (kPa), portable oxygen concentrator fraction of inspired oxygen
(FiO2; %);
Imaging: chest X-ray finding (categorised as clear/unchanged, local consolidation, ground
glass opacity/bilateral infiltrates, other/no firm diagnosis, none performed/missing);

Scores: Frailty score (Rockwood Clinical Frailty Scale);

12

Glasgow Coma Scale score;

13,14

Laboratory test results: estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR; ml/min), pH (%), base

9

9

excess (mmol/l), anion gap (mmol/l), white blood cell (WBC) count (10 /l), platelets (10 /l),

9

lymphocytes (10 /l), neutrophil:lymphocyte ratio, mean corpuscular volume (fl), red cell

9

9

distribution width (%), monocytes (10 /l), eosinophils (10 /l), haemoglobin (g/l), glucose
(mmol/l), bicarbonate (mmol/l), C-reactive protein (mg/l), albumin (g/l), bilirubin (μmol/l),

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

alanine aminotransferase (U/l), alkaline phosphatase (U/l), urea (mmol/l), potassium
(mmol/l), sodium (mmol/l), corrected calcium (mmol/l), lactate (U/l) and haematocrit (l/l);

Comorbidities (binary), presence or absence of record in discharge ICD-10 codes):
dementia, cancer, asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, sleep apnoea,
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, diabetes without complications, diabetes with
complications, peptic ulcer, liver disease, rheumatic/inflammatory disease, thyroid disorder.

28-day mortality outcome: UHB model and predictive performance
Area under the ROC curve values for each of the logistic, LASSO and GBM models, treating
continuous variables in one of three ways (as continuous variables with imputed missing
values; as clinically meaningful categorical variables with imputed missing values; and as
categorical variables with missing categories), are presented in Supplementary Table 1.

The final model selected was a logistic regression using stepwise selection of variables with
categorisation of continuous variables (with imputed missing values). The final 18
categorical predictors included in the model were: age, breathlessness, sputum, systolic
blood pressure, temperature, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, FiO2, alkaline
phosphatase, C-reactive protein, corrected calcium, eosinophils, glucose, pH, urea, WBC
count, platelets, and frailty score. AUROC for the UHB cross-validated model was 0.778 (95
% CI 0.741-0.815) (Table 2). At a 20% predicted probability of mortality, sensitivity was 82%
(95% CI 79-85), specificity was 59% (95% CI 56-61), positive predictive value was 43% (95%
CI 41-45), and negative predictive was 90% (95% CI 88-91) (Table 3a). Calibration was very
good at low to medium predicted probabilities, but was poorer at very high predicted
probabilities; a calibration plot is shown in Figure 1A, calibration slope was 0.78 (95% CI
0.66-0.91) (Supplementary Table 2). Model coefficients (model equation) are shown in
Supplementary Table 3.

We used different methods of handling missing data in order to explore the impact on the
model performance: in primary analysis, missing values were imputed; in secondary
analysis, missing categories were used. The model derived using logistic stepwise selection
using categorised variables with a missing category (rather than imputed data) gave a
slightly higher AUROC (0.805, 95% CI 0.777-0.834); however, it was felt the inclusion of
missing categories rather than imputed values might impact generalisability of the model
outside the UHB/derivation data context. Other statistical modelling techniques (LASSO,
GBM) offered no improvement in model performance and the models would be more
difficult to implement in clinical practice. Using continuous predictors modelled using
splines where non-linear relationship with the outcome was observed (Supplementary
Figure 1) rather than categorising offered a small improvement in model performance
(AUROC 0.791, 95% CI 0.759-0.823), but in the interests of clinical utility and interpretability
the categorical model was favoured.

Addition of comorbidities to the candidate predictors included in the model did not improve
performance of the model (Supplementary Table 1). Since comorbidities are known to be
under-reported during acute presentations,

4

and they offered no improvement on model

performance, models without comorbidities were preferred.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ITU admission: UHB model and predictive performance
Area under the ROC curve values for each of the models performed are presented in
Supplementary Table 4.

The final model selected was a logistic regression using stepwise selection of variables with
categorisation of continuous variables (with imputed missing values). The final 16
categorical predictors included in the model were: age, gender, fever, new onset diarrhoea
or vomiting, heart rate, respiratory rate, FiO2, temperature, albumin, C-reactive protein,
eGFR, pH, monocytes, WBC, frailty score, and Glasgow Coma Scale score. AUROC was 0.892
(95% CI 0.865-0.920) (Table 2). At a 20% predicted probability of ITU admission, sensitivity
was 78% (95% CI 73-83), specificity was 83% (95% CI 82-85), positive predictive value was
50% (95% CI 46-54), and negative predictive was 95% (95% CI 93-96) (Table 3b). Calibration
was good; a calibration plot is shown in Figure 1B, calibration slope was 0.89 (95% CI 0.771.02) (Supplementary Table 2). Model coefficients are shown in Supplementary Table 5.

Again, use of a missing category rather than imputed missing values improved model
performance but was not selected as the final model due to potential problems with
generalisability (AUROC 0.955, 95% CI 0.933-0.978). Models using continuous rather than
categorical predictors (with splines where relevant; Supplementary Figure 2) gave a small
improvement in AUROC (0.908, 95% CI 0.883-0.934), but were deemed less practical.
Addition of comorbidities to the predictors included in the model did not improve
performance.

Reduced UHB model and external validation in the CovidCollab dataset
A total of 6099 patients admitted with COVID-19 were included in the CovidCollab external
validation dataset; 1668 (27%) died and 722 (12%) were admitted to ITU. Not all variables
included in the UHB model derived above were available in the CovidCollab dataset.
Therefore, revised and reduced models were developed in UHB data using the subset of
candidate predictors common to both the UHB and CovidCollab datasets (reduced UHB
dataset, UHB-R), using logistic regression with stepwise selection, and these were then
externally validated in the CovidCollab dataset. The reduced set of 27 candidate predictors
included: demographic characteristics: age, gender; symptoms: cough, fever, delirium;
physiological measures and vital signs: BMI, systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood
pressure, heart rate, temperature, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation, FiO2, chest X-ray;
frailty score; Glasgow Coma Scale score; laboratory test results: eGFR, pH, base excess,
lymphocytes, neutrophil:lymphocyte ratio, haemoglobin, bicarbonate, C-reactive protein,
alanine aminotransferase, urea, and lactate.

For the 28-day mortality outcome, following stepwise selection, the final 10 categorical
predictors (common to both datasets) included in the logistic regression model were: age,
oxygen saturation, FiO2, respiratory rate, temperature, systolic blood pressure, C-reactive
protein, pH, urea, and frailty score. These predictors were a subset of those in the original
UHB model derivation, but gave similar model performance. AUROC in the UHB-R dataset
was 0.791 (95% CI 0.761-0.822), and in the CovidCollab dataset was 0.767 (95% CI 0.7540.780) (Table 2). At a 20% predicted probability of mortality, in the UHB-R dataset sensitivity
was 86% (95% CI 85-88), specificity was 54% (95% CI 51-57), PPV was 42% (95% CI 40-43)
and NPV was 91% (95% CI 90-92); in the CovidCollab dataset sensitivity was 88% (95% CI 87-

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

89), specificity was 46% (95% CI 45-47), PPV was 38% (95% CI 0.37-0.38), and NPV was 91%
(95% CI 91-92) (Table 4a). Calibration was good for both derivation and external validation
datasets; calibration plots are shown in Figures 1C-D, calibration slopes were 0.86 (95% CI
0.82-0.90) and 0.88 (95% CI 0.80-0.96) for the UHB-R and CovidCollab datasets, respectively
(Supplementary Table 2). Model coefficients are shown in Supplementary Table 6.

For the ITU admission outcome, the final 11 categorical predictors (common to both
datasets) included in the model were: age, gender, fever, respiratory rate, FiO2, C-reactive
protein, eGFR, pH, neutrophil:lymphocyte ratio, frailty score, and Glasgow Coma Scale
score. AUROC in the UHB-R dataset was 0.906 (95% CI 0.883-0.929), and in the CovidCollab
dataset was 0.811 (95% CI 0.795-0.828) (Table 2). At a 20% predicted probability of ITU
admission, in the UHB-R dataset sensitivity was 83% (95% CI 81-85), specificity was 83%
(95% CI 82-84), PPV was 51% (95% CI 49-52) and NPV was 96% (95% CI 95-96); in the
CovidCollab dataset sensitivity was 64% (95% CI 62-67), specificity was 80% (95% CI 79-82),
PPV was 30% (95% CI29-32 ), and NPV was 94% (95% CI 94-95) (Table 4b). Calibration was
good for both derivation and external validation datasets; calibration plots are shown in
Figures 1E-F, calibration slopes were 0.94 (95% CI 0.84-1.03) and 0.93 (95% CI 0.84-1.02) for
the UHB-R and CovidCollab datasets, respectively (Supplementary Table 2). Model
coefficients are shown in Supplementary Table 7.

External validation of the ISARIC models in the UHB dataset
The recently published ISARIC model (XGBoost) was recalibrated to the UHB data and
performance in the UHB data assessed for predicting mortality; AUROC was 0.757 (95% CI
0.721-0.792) (Table 2). For the simplified 4C score (logistic regression), the AUROC was
marginally lower at 0.754 (95% CI 0.721-0.786).

It was not possible to externally validate the ISARIC model and 4C score in the CovidCollab
dataset, as information on many of the comorbidities required to calculate the ISARIC
comorbidity score was not available in the dataset.

Sensitivity analyses
Sensitivity analyses were carried out using the logistic regression models initially derived in
the UHB dataset (18 predictors for mortality outcome and 16 predictors for ITU admission).

Complete case analysis
Few patients in the dataset had complete data (n = 224/1040, 22%); model performance in
this patient subset was slightly poorer for mortality outcome: AUROC 0.690 (95% CI 0.5880.791) for mortality and 0.887 (95% CI 0.825-0.949) for ITU admission. Including patients
with missing variables, with missing values imputed, improved model performance; allowing
even a single missing/imputed variable improved AUROC for mortality to 0.767 (95% CI
0.715-0.819) (Supplementary Table 8).

Stratification by gender
When patients were stratified by gender, the model predicting mortality performed slightly
worse in males (AUROC 0.766, 95% CI 0.700-0.831) than females (0.788, 95% CI 0.7290.847). The model predicting ITU admission performed similarly in males and females: 0.893
(95% CI 0.823-0.963) in males and 0.893 (95% CI 0.851-0.935) in females (Supplementary

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 8). Training models in gender-specific datasets offered no improvement on model
performance (Supplementary Table 9).

Time series analysis
Supplementary Figure 3 shows variation in logistic regression coefficients for the candidate
predictors from day of admission and up to 7 days later. The majority of coefficients
remained relatively constant over time.

However, several (not necessarily statistically

significant) trends in the modification of effects over the week of admission on mortality
were visible, such as a decrease over the week of the effect of obesity on mortality,
elevated effect of eosinophils, and an increase over the week of the effect of elevated
haemoglobin, elevated potassium and elevated oxygen saturation. Some of these might be
depletion effects related to relatively high patient mortality in the first few days, for
example, the apparent protective effect of obesity and high eosinophils.

Discussion
Using routinely collected data for more than a thousand patients admitted with COVID-19 at
a large UK hospital trust, we have developed and externally validated prognostic models for
mortality and ITU admission. The models showed good discrimination and calibration. The
candidate predictors explored included a clinically informed, wider range of demographics,
clinical observations, symptoms, comorbidities, biomarkers and radiological investigations
than those included in the derivation of existing prognostic scores or models. If integrated
into hospital electronic medical records systems, the model algorithms will provide a
predicted probability of mortality or ITU admission within 28 days of hospital admission for
each patient based on their individual data at, or close to, the time of admission, which will
support clinicians’ decision making with regard to appropriate patient care pathways and
triage. This information might also assist clinicians in explaining complex prognostic
assessments and decisions to patients and their relatives, particularly at a time when
relatives are unable to see the patient and understand how unwell they are.

The models developed using all 63 available candidate predictors from UHB performed well
with an optimism-adjusted AUROC of 0.778 (95 % CI 0.741-0.815) for mortality within 28
days of admission and 0.892 (95% CI 0.865-0.920) for ITU admission. Models performed well
in male and female subgroups.

Not all variables included in the UHB dataset are routinely collected at admission in other
hospitals; therefore, reduced models using only variables common to both UHB and the
CovidCollab external validation dataset were explored. These were found to have slightly
better discrimination, with an AUROC of 0.791 (95% CI 0.761-0.822) for mortality and 0.906
(95% CI 0.883-0.929) for ITU admission in the UHB derivation dataset. These reduced
models also performed well in the CovidCollab external validation dataset, with AUROCs of
0.767 (95% CI 0.754-0.780) and 0.811 (95% CI 0.795-0.828) for mortality and ITU admission,
respectively. Calibration of all models showed good agreement between observed and
predicted probabilities, particularly at lower predicted probabilities in the range where the
models would be of most clinical utility.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Two systematic reviews summarised the existing secondary care COVID-19 prognostic
models or scores published until the 31

st

May 2020.

1,15

Many of the reported models

(largely derived from Chinese cohorts) demonstrated high discriminatory performance,
however all pre-existing models when assessed using the PROBAST score were at high risk
of bias. Additionally, few models were externally validated in suitable cohorts. By deriving
our model from routinely collected data, we were able to reduce the risk of bias in patient
selection as well as predictor and outcome measurements. Additionally, in this study we
were able to externally validate models in a large global heterogeneous cohort. Our study
builds on the existing literature as the CovidCollab dataset includes some patients from lowmiddle income countries where validation studies of prediction models are yet to be
published.

More recently, the most notable secondary care prediction model advised for uptake in UK
hospitals was derived from the ISARIC-WHO collaborating cohort.

3

Both the full and reduced

UHB-derived models for mortality had slightly better discrimination than the ISARIC model
and 4C score in the UHB data (AUROC 0.757 (95% CI 0.724-0.791) for recalibrated ISARIC
model and 0.754 (95% CI 0.721-0.786) for the simplified 4C score).This compares with
AUROCs of 0.779 (0.772 to 0.785) for the ISARIC model and 0.767 (0.760 to 0.773) for the 4C
score reported in the original ISARIC validation cohort.

3

Furthermore, the newly developed

UHB model offers an advantage over the ISARIC and 4C models in that it utilises only
routinely collected patient data recorded at admission, and does not require additional
assessment and recording of specific comorbidities.

In our time series analysis we did not find strong evidence for trends in predictor
coefficients over the first 8 days of admission, particularly for variables included in the final
models, suggesting that time-dependent effects due to effect modification or selection bias
in the first week are small. If models were implemented to treat time after admission in a
fine-grained way, only a limited subset of biomarkers might be of interest. Another recent
model derived from patients with COVID-19 in a Hong Kong hospital adopted the use of
time-dependent routinely collected predictors; the model in the Hong Kong study
demonstrated high discrimination, with an AUROC of 0.91 when predicting severe COVID-19

16

outcomes.

However, this model is yet to be externally validated.

Strengths and limitations
The UHB dataset represents one of the largest and most ethnically diverse patient cohorts
within the UK. Additionally, as part of the early UHB response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
the hospital trust ensured that, upon admission, all patients underwent a wide range of
investigations to support international research efforts examining prognostic markers. This
allowed us to examine a wide range of possible predictors (63 candidate predictors after
exclusions). Lastly, a strength of this study was the good performance, in terms of both
discrimination and calibration, of the simplified, reduced model in an externally validated
cohort (CovidCollab), indicating its suitability for wider use, including potentially in LMICs.

Despite the strengths, the findings must be considered in light of the study’s limitations.
Although we were able to use a derivation dataset from UHB with low levels of missing data,
the overall sample size was relatively small compared to that of the ISARIC study and was
limited to one UK geographical location. However, we were able to externally validate the

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

model in a larger external cohort. A second limitation was that in the external validation
cohort we were unable to examine all of the predictors included in the original full UHB
model due to only a reduced set of candidate predictors being available in CovidCollab.
Nevertheless, the model performed well and the results suggest it may be applicable in a
wide range of datasets where only a reduced set of predictor variables is available. It was
not possible to carry out stratified analysis by ethnicity as, in the UHB dataset, too few
patients were included in most of the strata; ethnicity data was not available in the
CovidCollab dataset.

Conclusion
In this paper we have described the development and external validation of novel
prognostic models which predict mortality and ITU admission within 28 days of admission
for patients admitted to hospital with COVID-19, using routinely collected data gathered at
admission. The simple, reduced models showed good discrimination and calibration,
outperformed the existing ISARIC model and 4C score, and performed well in a validation
cohort. The models can be integrated into existing electronic medical records systems to
calculate each individual patient’s probability of death or ITU admission at the time of
hospital admission. The models should be further validated to determine their applicability
in other populations. In addition, implementation of the models and clinical utility should be
evaluated.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure legend
Figure 1. Calibration plots (observed probability (y-axis) against predicted probability (xaxis)): A. University Hospitals Birmingham (UHB) derivation dataset for mortality outcome;
B. UHB derivation dataset for intensive therapy unit (ITU) admission outcome; C. UHB-R
derivation/train dataset reduced model for mortality outcome; D. UHB-R derivation/train
dataset reduced model for ITU admission outcome; E. CovidCollab external validation
dataset reduced model for mortality outcome; F. CovidCollab external validation dataset
reduced model for ITU admission outcome.

Ethical approval
Ethical approval was provided by the East Midlands – Derby REC (reference: 20/EM/0158)
for the PIONEER Research Database (data from University Hospitals Birmingham).

For CovidCollab data, local, regional, and national approvals were obtained from all
participating sites. In the UK, this study was registered as clinical audit or service evaluation,
with approval granted in line with local information governance policies, in line with
assessment and guidance by the Health Research Authority. At the lead site (University
Hospitals Birmingham NHS Trust) this study was registered as clinical audit (CARMS-15986).
In other countries, local principal investigators were responsible for obtaining approvals in
line with their local, regional, and national guidelines and recommendations. Only routinely
collected data was collected and patient care was not altered by this study. Anonymised
data was securely transferred to the Birmingham Centre for Prospective and Observational
Studies (BiCOPS), University of Birmingham via REDCap. All sites were required to confirm
that approvals were in place prior to being provided with logins; written data sharing
agreements were arranged where requested by individual sites.

Contributorship statement
The study was designed by NA, KN, ES, MP, YT, CS and TT. Data was collected by KG, ES, CS
and SG. TT, NA and DG analysed the data. The first draft was written by NA and TT. All
authors critically reviewed and revised the manuscript.

Funding
This work was funded by the Medical Research Council UK Research and Innovation (MRC
UKRI) (reference COV0306). The funder had no role in developing the research question or
the study protocol.

Competing interests
NJA, ES, KN, MP, AD, CS, TT and YT report a grant from UKRI MRC during the conduct of the
study. ES reports grants from National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), Wellcome Trust,
MRC, Health Data Research UK (HDR-UK), British Lung Foundation, and Alpha 1 Foundation
outside the submitted work. KN reports grants from MRC and HDR-UK outside the
submitted work. DP reports grants from NIHR, MRC, and Chernakovsky Foundation outside
the submitted work. All other authors have nothing to declare.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Transparency declaration
The lead author (the manuscript’s guarantor) affirms that this manuscript is an honest,
accurate, and transparent account of the study being reported; that no important aspects of
the study have been omitted; and that any discrepancies from the study as planned (and, if
relevant, registered) have been explained.

Exclusive licence
The Corresponding Author has the right to grant on behalf of all authors and does grant on
behalf of all authors, a worldwide licence
(http://www.bmj.com/sites/default/files/BMJ%20Author%20Licence%20March%202013.do
c) to the Publishers and its licensees in perpetuity, in all forms, formats and media (whether
known now or created in the future), to i) publish, reproduce, distribute, display and store
the Contribution, ii) translate the Contribution into other languages, create adaptations,
reprints, include within collections and create summaries, extracts and/or, abstracts of the
Contribution and convert or allow conversion into any format including without limitation
audio, iii) create any other derivative work(s) based in whole or part on the on the
Contribution, iv) to exploit all subsidiary rights to exploit all subsidiary rights that currently
exist or as may exist in the future in the Contribution, v) the inclusion of electronic links
from the Contribution to third party material where-ever it may be located; and, vi) licence
any third party to do any or all of the above.

Data sharing
No additional data available.

Dissemination declaration
Dissemination to participants is not possible as this is a review of existing evidence. Patients
and the public will not be involved in dissemination of the findings.

Acknowledgements
MP and YT are supported by the NIHR Birmingham Biomedical Research Centre. The views
expressed are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NHS, NIHR or the
Department of Health and Social Care.

We would also like to acknowledge the collaborators for the CovidCollab study: Sarah
Richardson, Miles Witham, AGE Research Group, NIHR Newcastle Biomedical Research
Centre, University of Newcastle and Newcastle-upon-Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
UK; Omar A Abdelwahab, Elsayed M Awad, Ahmed Y Azzam, Ahmed Cordie, Ahmed O
Elmehrath, Mostafa El-Shazly, Almontacer EB Masood, Alazher University Hospital, Egypt;
Osama MAS Abdulhadi, Hazem Ahmed, Muhammed Elhadi, Ahmed KM Hadreiez, Ahmed A
Momen, Mosab AA Shaban, Alkhadra Hospital, Libya; Giuseppe Cecere, Aldo Rocca, Antonio
Cardarelli Hospital, Italy; Hossam Aldein S Abd Elazeem, Mohammed H Abdelhafez, Islam A
Ahmed, Shrouk M Elghazaly, Helal F Hetta, Mohamed Eltaher AA Ibrahim, Soha M
Mohamed, Aliae AR Mohamed Hussein, Mohamed M Moustafa, Mariam Albatoul Nageh,
Mahmoud M Saad, Alshaimaa M Saad, Omar Zein Elabedeen, Assiut University Hospital,
Egypt; Victoria Cox, Danielle Hunsley, Rebecca Ryall, Kathleen T Shakespeare, Thyn Thyn,
Rachael Webb, Barnsley Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Deepthy Hari Madhavan, Nik

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sanyal, Birmingham Heartlands Hospital, UK; Bryony Brown, Matthew Hale, Bradford
Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Marie Goujon, Cambridge University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, UK; Benjamin Jelley, Cardiff University, UK; Laxmi Babar,
Tina Doll, Agnieszka Felska, Daniel N Guerero, Sandeep Karthikeyan, Anne Karunatilleke,
Helena Lee, Emma Livesey, Amelia Roberts, Charlotte Roberts-Rhodes, City Hospital,
Birmingham, UK; Teresa Perra, Alberto Porcu, Cliniche San Pietro, A.O.U. Sassari, Italy;
Antonio Buondonno, Giuseppe Cecere, Aldo Rocca, Department of Medicine and Health
Science "V. Tiberio", University of Molise, Italy; Vesna Hogan, Iain Wilkinson, East Surrey
Hospital, UK; Ioannis Baloyiannis, Jiannis Hajiioannou, Konstantinos Perivoliotis, George
Tzovaras, General University Hospital of Larissa, Greece; Anna Fleck, Aine McGovern,
Glasgow Royal Infirmary, UK; Victoria Gaunt, Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation
Trust, UK; Laura Babb, Emily Bailey, Jay Darley, Ioan M Draghita, Alexander Hickman, Jason
Kalloo, Akhil Kanzaria, Katy Madden, Wasim Nawaz, Ambreen Sadiq, Good Hope Hospital,
UK; Rifa Cardoso, Margherita Faulkner, William Hurst, Ellen James, Aimee Leadbetter,
Jordan Mayer, Tanya Robinson, Emma Stratton, Miriam Thake, Hannah Thould, Hannah
Watson, Great Western Hospital, UK; Ravindra Belgamwar, Corrina Bentley, Harplands
Hospital, UK; Sarah Freshwater, Health Education West Midlands, UK; Sergio DV Ruiz, Nuria
M Sanz, Milagros Carrasco Prats, Pedro VF Fernández, Clara G Francés, Esther M Manuel,
Miguel R Marin, Pedro L Morales, Patricia P Pérez, María V Soriano , Ismael Mora-Guzmán,
Hospital General Reina Sofía, Spain; Ismael Mora-Guzmán, Hospital Santa Bárbara, Spain;
Melanie Dani, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, UK; Fabio Barra, Antonella Ferraiolo,
Simone Ferrero, Claudio Gustavino, Chiara Kratochwila, IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San
Martino, Italy; Eric W Etchill, Alodia Gabre-Kidan, Joshua H Gray, Elliott R Haut, Harsha
Malapati, Sarah F Rapaport, Kent A Stevens, Dominique Vervoort, Johns Hopkins Hospital,
USA; Mohammed A Azab, King Abdullah Medical City Specialist Hospital, Saudi Arabia;
Catherine Bryant, Hannah Cheney-Lowe, Catrin Cox, Andrew Crowe, Gordon Dick, Sarah
Evans, Patrick CP Hogan, Kar Yee Law, Alexandra Richardson, Fabio Speranza, Kathryn
Toppley, Julie Whitney, Eirene Yeung, King's College Hospital, UK; Mary Ni Lochlainn, Claire
Steves, King's College London, UK; Alexandros Charalabopoulos, Spyridon Davakis, Amalia
Karapanou, Theodore Liakakos, Eustratia Mpaili, Maria Mpoura, Michail A Sampanis,
Nikolaos V Sipsas, Laiko University Hospital, Greece; Lucy Beishon, Elinor Burn, Parveen
Doddamani, Victoria Haunton, Shahriar Kabir, Hannah Shaw, Chloe Warner, Leicester Royal
Infirmary, UK; Chee Soo, Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells NHS Trust, UK; Yasmin K NasrEldin,
Minia University Hospital, Egypt; Nourhan AA Ghannam, Minya General Hospital, Egypt;
Isobel Sleeman, NHS Grampian, UK; Ravindra Belgamwar, Corrina Bentley, North
Staffordshire Combined Healthcare NHS Trust, UK; Ali Ali, Sylvia Amini, James Belcher, Marie
Giles, Hayley Jarvis, Nathan Jenko, Suvira Madan, Alexander Noar, Favour Nwolu, Jessica
Parkin, Lauren C Passby, Jarita Sivam, Michael Surtees, Joanne Wagland, Ruth West, David
Williams, Northern General Hospital, UK; Avinash Aujayeb, Lindsey Dew, Catherine Dotchin,
James M Dundas, Elinor Edwards, Georgia F Gilbert, Karl Jackson, Sarah H Manning, Dominic
Maxfield, Nicholas Moss, Declan C Murphy, Ellen Tullo, Sarah H Welsh, Northumbria NHS
Hospital Trust, UK; Tahir Masud, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, UK; Mustafa
Alsahab, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, UK; Antonio Buondonno, Enrico Pinotti,
Policlinico San Pietro, Italy; Francesco Alessandri, Gioia Brachini, Giancarlo Ceccarelli, Flavia
Ciccarone, Pierfranco M Cicerchia, Bruno Cirillo, Giorgio De Toma, Giulia Duranti, Enrico
Fiori, Giovanni B Fonsi, Pierfrancesco Lapolla, Simona Meneghini, Andrea Mingoli, Francesco
Pugliese, Paolo Sapienza, Luigi Simonelli, Martina Zambon, Policlinico Umberto I, Sapienza

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

University of Rome, Italy; Caterina Cattel, Laurenny Guzman, Princess Royal Hospital, King's
College Hospital Trust, Surrey, UK; Hannah Dowell, Aina Ibukunoluwakitan, Fawsiya
Mohamed, Claire Spice, Amanda Stafford, Queen Alexandra Hospital, Portsmouth, UK;
Jolene Atia, Catherine Atkin, Hannah Currie, Felicity Evison, Heena Khiroya, Zeinab Majid,
Maria Qurashi, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, UK; Siobhan Coulter, Claire
McDonald, Georgina Muir, Catherine O'Mahony, Caroline Tait, Queen Elizabeth Hospital
Gateshead, UK; Rowan Davies, Katie Honney, Laura Winter, Queen Elizabeth Hospital King's
Lynn, UK; Olubayode Adewole, Queen's Hospital Romford, UK; Amir Abdelmalak,
Mohammed Ahmad, Muhammed H Ansari, Kingsley Appiah, Rajesh Dwivedi, Hope Elrick,
Hedra Ghobrial, Rosie Jackson, Sophie Jeffs, Sasha Jeyakumar, Eleanor Lunt, Bushra
Muzammil, Sylvia Pytraczyk, Jonathan Sheldrake, Jennifer Smith, Hannah Tobiss, Mark
Vettasseri, Ruth H Willott, Hein Zaw, Queens Medical Centre, Nottingham, UK; Katherine
Patterson, Queen's University Belfast, UK; Moulinath Bannerjee, Jean Cummings, Barbara
Hart, Tom Maughan, Royal Bolton Hospital, UK; Clare Baguneid, Gabrielle Budd, Lizzie
Moriarty, Omoteniola Odutola, Hannah Street, Royal Derby Hospital, UK; Alexis Carr, Royal
Devon and Exeter Hospital, UK; Jennifer Pigott, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust,
UK; Sarah Baldwin, Hannah Bashir, Jake Gibbon, Amy Gray, Grace Lewis, Christina Page,
Rosanna Varden, Royal Victoria Infirmary, UK; Anthony Grubb, Elizabeth Holmes, Harjinder
Kainth, Natalie McNeela, Lara Reilly, Abigail Reynolds, Mark Whitsey, Royal Wolverhampton
NHS Trust, UK; Mertcan Akcay, Yeşim Akdeniz, Emrah Akın, Fatih Altintoprak, Zülfü Bayhan,
Recayi Capoglu, Hakan Demir, Necattin Firat, Emre Gonullu, Tarık Harmantepe, Baris
Mantoglu, Ali Muhtaroglu, Merve Yigit, Yasin A Yildiz, Sakarya Faculty of Medicine, Turkey;
Lobna Al-Sodani, Nicole Burden, Evelyn Charsley, Thomas Kneen, Angeline Price, Emma
Swinnerton, Salford Royal Hospital, UK; Yen Nee J Bo, Hayley R Boden, Reem Bulla, Alison
Eastaugh, Helena Lee, Asma Khan, Mohammed Mubin, Amelia Roberts, Anthony Umeadi,
Stephanie Wallis, Megan Williamson, Yu Lelt Win, Sandwell General Hospital, UK; Eltayeb A
Ahmed, Abdulmoiz Aljafari, Abdulmalek Aljafari, Abdulkader Mohammad, Sharq Alneel
Hospital, Sudan; Manpreet Badh, Amy Birchenough, Nick Coulthard, Alice Devaney, Ratnam
Gandhi, Katharine Hood, Samuel North, Martha Pinkney, Ellie Shaw, Elisha Whelan, Solihull
Hospital, UK; Adam Seed, Southport and Ormskirk Hospital NHS Trust, UK; Gurinder Dogra,
Claire Morris, Rebecca Wright, South Tyneside District Hospital, UK; Stephen Lim, Lia
Orlando, Harnish Patel, Prabhleen Puri, Sing Yang Sim, Southampton General Hospital, UK;
Carolyn Akladious, Gitanjali Amaratungaz, Taha Amir, Cheran Anandarajah, Rachael Anders,
Sally Aziz, Anna Barnard, Monica Bawor, Laura Bremner, Hannah Bridgwater, Hejab Butt,
Andra Caracostea, Theodore Chevallier, Victoria Comerford, Jack Cullen, Niamh
Cunningham, Daniel Curley, Madeleine Daly, Nikhita Dattani, Benyamin Deldar, Arjun Desai,
Nirali Desai, Jugdeep Dhesi, Maria Dias, Hannah C Dooley, Samiullah Dost, Hiren Dusara,
Alexander Emery, Cassandra Fairhead, Antia Fernandez, Gracie Fisk, Madeleine Garner,
Hannah Gerretsen, Andrew Ghobrial, Zaynub Ghufoor, Deirdre Green, Charlotte Greene,
Karla Griffith, Ayushi Gupta, Patrick Harrison, Aidan Haslam, Torben Heinsohn, Lindsay
Hennah, Abigail Hobill, Katherine Hopkinson, Lara Howells, Nicole Hrouda, Irem Ishlek, Rishi
Iyer, Nuha Kardaman, Mairead Kelly, Nicola I Kelly, Hesham Khalid, Muhammad S Khan,
Haris Khan, Matthew King, Li Kok, Aneliya Kuzeva, Rebecca Lau, Gabriel Lee, Gavriella
Levinson, Danielle Lis, Baguiasri Mandane, Jamie Mawhinney, Henry Maynard, Sophie
Mclachlan, Michelle Metcalf, John Millwood-Hargrave, Kelvin Miu, Aaliya Mohammed,
Hamilton Morrin, Stephanie Mulhern, Daniel Muller, Varun Nadkarni, Hanna Nguyen, Alice
O'Docherty, Sinead O'Dwyer, Marc Osterdahl, Ismini Panayotidis, Shefali Patel, Rose

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Penfold, Rupini Perinpanathan, Dina Radenkovic, Thurkka Rajeswaran, Tahmina Razzak,
Emily Ross-Skinner, Hazel Sanghvi, Ross Sayers, Luca Scott, Sri Sivarajan, Katharine
Stambollouian, Jack Stewart, Amybel Taylor, Hrisheekesh Vaidya, Vittoria Vergani, Madiha
Virk, Vaishali Vyas, Eleanor Watkins, Catherine Wilcock, Mettha Wimalasundera, Stephanie
Worrall, Natalie Yeo, Humza Yusuf, St Thomas' Hospital, UK; Adam H Dyer, Cliona Ni
Cheallaigh, Liam Townsend, St. James's Hospital, Ireland; Jocelyn Amer, Emily Lyon, Michael
Sen, Sunderland Royal Hospital, UK; Mohammed Al-Sadawi, Adam Budzikoski, Ishmam
Ibtida, Yusra Qaiser, SUNY Downstate Brooklyn, USA; Mohammad T Azam, Asad J Choudhry,
William Marx, SUNY Upstate University Hospital, USA; Ahmad Bouhuwaish, Ahmed SA
Taher, Tobruk Medical Center, Libya; Nikolaos Georgiou, Jade Man, Paul Reynolds,
Benjaman To, Tunbridge Wells Hospital, UK; Fatma D Collins, Sharon Budd, Ellanna Griffin,
Yue Guan, Deevia Hanji, Lily Lowes, Awolkhier Mohammedseid-Nurhussien, Farhana
Moomo, Olebu Ogochukwu, Katie Thin, University Hospitals Coventry and Warwickshire
NHS Trust, UK; Elinor Burn, University Hospitals of Leicester NHS Trust; Terry Hughes,
Thomas A Jackson, Laura Magill, Lauren McCluskey, Hannah Moorey, Kelvin Okoth, Rita
Perry, Michala Petitt, Thomas Pinkney, Daisy Wilson, University of Birmingham; Grace ME
Pearson, University of Bristol, UK; Christopher N Osuafor, Kelli Torsney, University of
Cambridge, UK; David Strain, Jane Masoli, University of Exeter, UK; Jenni Burton, Terence
Quinn, University of Glasgow, UK; Lucy Beishon, University of Leicester, UK; Joanne Taylor,
University of Manchester, UK; Adam Gordon, University of Nottingham, UK; Gilda De Paola,
Gaetano Gallo, Giuseppe Sammarco, Giuseppina Vescio, University 'Magna Graecia' of
Catanzaro, Italy; Shivam Pancholi, University of Nicosia, Cyprus; Natalie Cox, University of
Southampton, UK; Rajni Lal, Western Sydney Local Health District, Australia; Rand A
Hussein, Zafaraniyah General Hospital, Iraq.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Baseline characteristics of participants admitted with COVID-19 in the derivation
(University Hospitals Birmingham) and validation (CovidCollab) datasets

a. Demographic characteristics, comorbidities and symptoms

Development cohort (UHB)
Total
Alive
Died
N

1040

External validation cohort (CovidCollab)
Total
Alive
Died

752

288

6099

4431

1668

Age category (years), n (%)
<30

35 (3.4)

35 (4.7)

0 (0.0)

125 (2.0)

122 (2.8)

3 (0.2)

30-39

42 (4.0)

39 (5.2)

3 (1.0)

270 (4.4)

257 (5.8)

13 (0.8)
38 (2.3)

40-49

91 (8.8)

87 (11.6)

4 (1.4)

497 (8.1)

459 (10.4)

50-59

146 (14.0)

123 (16.4)

23 (8.0)

793 (13.0)

707 (16.0)

86 (5.2)

60-69

181 (17.4)

143 (19.0)

38 (13.2)

944 (15.5)

736 (16.6)

208 (12.5)

70-79

220 (21.2)

147 (19.5)

73 (25.3)

1325 (21.7)

891 (20.1)

434 (26.0)

80-89

214 (20.6)

124 (16.5)

90 (31.2)

1571 (25.8)

936 (21.1)

635 (38.1)

≥90

111 (10.7)

54 (7.2)

57 (19.8)

574 (9.4)

323 (7.3)

251 (15.0)

589 (56.6)

423 (56.2)

166 (57.6)

3361 (55.1)

2342 (52.9)

1019 (61.1)

White

590 (56.7)

406 (54.0)

184 (63.9)

South Asian

127 (12.2)

95 (12.6)

32 (11.1)

68 (6.5)

46 (6.1)

22 (7.6)

255 (24.5)

205 (27.3)

50 (17.4)

Gender (male), n (%)
Ethnicity, n (%)

Black
Other

Not available

Comorbidities, n (%)
Dementia

373 (35.9)

249 (33.1)

124 (43.1)

934 (15.3)

539 (12.2)

395 (23.7)

Cancer

135 (13.0)

90 (12.0)

45 (15.6)

649 (10.6)

409 (9.2)

240 (14.4)

Asthma

165 (15.9)

135 (18.0)

30 (10.4)

Not available

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease

283 (27.2)

211 (28.1)

72 (25.0)

Not available

49 (4.7)

36 (4.8)

13 (4.5)

1579 (25.9)

1125 (25.4)

454 (27.2)

567 (54.5)

366 (48.7)

201 (69.8)

3033 (49.7)

1977 (44.6)

1056 (63.3)

Not available
1229 (27.7)

565 (33.9)

Sleep apnoea
Cardiovascular disease
Hypertension

661 (63.6)

449 (59.7)

212 (73.6)

Diabetes without complications

258 (24.8)

181 (24.1)

77 (26.7)

1794 (29.4)

Diabetes with complications

112 (10.8)

76 (10.1)

36 (12.5)

Not available

Peptic ulcer

29 (2.8)

25 (3.3)

4 (1.4)

Not available

Liver disease

71 (6.8)

53 (7.0)

18 (6.2)

Not available

Rheumatic/inflammatory disease

51 (4.9)

36 (4.8)

15 (5.2)

Not available

107 (10.3)

75 (10.0)

32 (11.1)

Thyroid disorder
ISARIC comorbidity score

Not available
Not applicable

0

111 (10.7)

94 (12.5)

17 (5.9)

1

234 (22.5)

175 (23.3)

59 (20.5)

≥2

695 (66.8)

483 (64.2)

212 (73.6)

559 (59.2)

392 (56.6)

167 (66.3)

Not available

39 (4.1)

33 (4.8)

6 (2.4)

Not available

Cough

538 (57.0)

398 (57.5)

140 (55.6)

4259 (69.8)

3110 (70.2)

1149 (68.9)

Fever

465 (49.3)

339 (49.0)

126 (50.0)

3212 (52.7)

2394 (54.0)

818 (49.0)

42 (4.4)

37 (5.3)

5 (2.0)

Not available

699 (16.7)

461 (28.8)

Symptoms, n (%)
Breathlessness
Chest pain

Headache
Malaise

186 (19.7)

147 (21.2)

39 (15.5)

Not available

New onset diarrhoea or vomiting

56 (5.9)

49 (7.1)

7 (2.8)

Not available

Sputum

84 (8.9)

53 (7.7)

31 (12.3)

Not available

Delirium

80 (8.5)

41 (5.9)

39 (15.5)

1160 (20.1)

Outcomes
Died within 28 days of admission

288 (27.7)

0 (0.0)

288 (100.0)

1668 (27.3)

0 (0.0)

1668 (100.0)

ITU admission within 28 days

183 (17.6)

132 (17.6)

51 (17.7)

722 (11.8)

477 (10.8)

245 (14.7)

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

b. Physiological measures and scores

BMI category, kg/m

2

Underweight (<18.5)

Development cohort (UHB)
External validation cohort (CovidCollab)
Total
Alive
Died
Total
Alive
Died
27 (2.6)

16 (2.1)

11 (3.8)

155 (2.5)

112 (2.5)

43 (2.6)

273 (26.2)

179 (23.8)

94 (32.6)

1284 (21.1)

940 (21.2)

344 (20.6)

Overweight (25-29.9)

341 (32.8)

252 (33.5)

89 (30.9)

1247 (20.4)

999 (22.5)

248 (14.9)

Obese (>30)

366 (35.2)

280 (37.2)

86 (29.9)

1180 (19.3)

940 (21.2)

240 (14.4)

33 (3.2)

25 (3.3)

8 (2.8)

2233 (36.6)

1440 (32.5)

793 (47.5)

<140

688 (66.2)

503 (66.9)

185 (64.2)

4051 (66.4)

2936 (66.3)

1115 (66.8)

≥140

340 (32.7)

249 (33.1)

91 (31.6)

1926 (31.6)

1414 (31.9)

512 (30.7)

12 (1.2)

0 (0.0)

12 (4.2)

122 (2.0)

81 (1.8)

41 (2.5)

<90

870 (83.7)

636 (84.6)

234 (81.2)

5075 (83.2)

3654 (82.5)

1421 (85.2)

≥90

158 (15.2)

116 (15.4)

42 (14.6)

910 (14.9)

701 (15.8)

209 (12.5)

12 (1.2)

0 (0.0)

12 (4.2)

114 (1.9)

76 (1.7)

38 (2.3)

<37.8

851 (81.8)

619 (82.3)

232 (80.6)

4164 (68.3)

3025 (68.3)

1139 (68.3)

≥37.8

187 (18.0)

133 (17.7)

54 (18.8)

1805 (29.6)

1316 (29.7)

489 (29.3)

2 (0.2)

0 (0.0)

2 (0.7)

130 (2.1)

90 (2.0)

40 (2.4)

<80

288 (27.7)

211 (28.1)

77 (26.7)

1654 (27.1)

1190 (26.9)

464 (27.8)

80-99

441 (42.4)

326 (43.4)

115 (39.9)

2400 (39.4)

1794 (40.5)

606 (36.3)

≥100

309 (29.7)

215 (28.6)

94 (32.6)

1935 (31.7)

1370 (30.9)

565 (33.9)

2 (0.2)

0 (0.0)

2 (0.7)

110 (1.8)

77 (1.7)

33 (2.0)

<20

450 (43.3)

363 (48.3)

87 (30.2)

2249 (36.9)

1769 (39.9)

480 (28.8)

≥20

573 (55.1)

389 (51.7)

184 (63.9)

3659 (60.0)

2522 (56.9)

1137 (68.2)

17 (1.6)

0 (0.0)

17 (5.9)

191 (3.1)

140 (3.2)

51 (3.1)

Normal weight (18.5-24.9)

Missing
Systolic blood pressure (mm Hg), n (%)

Missing
Diastolic blood pressure (mm Hg), n (%)

Missing
Temperature (Celsius), n (%)

Missing
Heart rate category (beats per minute), n (%)

Missing
Respirations (per minute), n (%)

Missing
Oxygen saturation (%), n (%)
<80

9 (0.9)

4 (0.5)

5 (1.7)

158 (2.6)

71 (1.6)

87 (5.2)

80-88

47 (4.5)

17 (2.3)

30 (10.4)

443 (7.3)

230 (5.2)

213 (12.8)

89-93

173 (16.6)

110 (14.6)

63 (21.9)

1108 (18.2)

775 (17.5)

333 (20.0)

≥94

809 (77.8)

621 (82.6)

188 (65.3)

4281 (70.2)

3284 (74.1)

997 (59.8)

2 (0.2)

0 (0.0)

2 (0.7)

109 (1.8)

71 (1.6)

38 (2.3)

<4.67

184 (17.7)

125 (16.6)

59 (20.5)

947 (15.5)

627 (14.2)

320 (19.2)

4.67-6.3

380 (36.5)

278 (37.0)

102 (35.4)

650 (10.7)

467 (10.5)

183 (11.0)

≥6.4

176 (16.9)

124 (16.5)

52 (18.1)

214 (3.5)

128 (2.9)

86 (5.2)

Missing

300 (28.8)

225 (29.9)

75 (26.0)

4288 (70.3)

3209 (72.4)

1079 (64.7)

Missing
Partial pressure of CO2 (kPa), n (%)

Portable oxygen concentrator fraction of
inspired oxygen (%), n (%)
≤0.28

629 (60.5)

458 (60.9)

171 (59.4)

3518 (57.7)

2730 (61.6)

788 (47.2)

0.28-0.49

56 (5.4)

35 (4.7)

21 (7.3)

1132 (18.6)

794 (17.9)

338 (20.3)

≥0.5

80 (7.7)

51 (6.8)

29 (10.1)

1003 (16.4)

541 (12.2)

462 (27.7)

275 (26.4)

208 (27.7)

67 (23.3)

446 (7.3)

366 (8.3)

80 (4.8)

Clear/unchanged

210 (20.2)

161 (21.4)

49 (17.0)

1604 (26.3)

1225 (27.6)

379 (22.7)

Local consolidation

235 (22.6)

169 (22.5)

66 (22.9)

3226 (52.9)

2313 (52.2)

913 (54.7)

Ground glass opacity/bilateral infiltrates

393 (37.8)

273 (36.3)

120 (41.7)

637 (10.4)

402 (9.1)

235 (14.1)

99 (9.5)

65 (8.6)

34 (11.8)

-

-

-

103 (9.9)

84 (11.2)

19 (6.6)

632 (10.4)

491 (11.1)

141 (8.5)

376 (36.2)

321 (42.7)

55 (19.1)

1451 (23.8)

1326 (29.9)

125 (7.5)

Missing
Chest X-ray

Other/no firm diagnosis
None performed/missing
Frailty score, n (%)
1-3

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4-6

277 (26.6)

179 (23.8)

98 (34.0)

2079 (34.1)

1539 (34.7)

540 (32.4)

7-9

119 (11.4)

55 (7.3)

64 (22.2)

1911 (31.3)

1146 (25.9)

765 (45.9)

Missing

268 (25.8)

197 (26.2)

71 (24.7)

658 (10.8)

420 (9.5)

238 (14.3)

<15

274 (26.3)

178 (23.7)

96 (33.3)

1314 (21.5)

744 (16.8)

570 (34.2)

15

222 (21.3)

186 (24.7)

36 (12.5)

4250 (69.7)

3366 (76.0)

884 (53.0)

Missing

544 (52.3)

388 (51.6)

156 (54.2)

535 (8.8)

321 (7.2)

214 (12.8)

Glasgow Coma Scale score, n (%)

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

c. Laboratory test results

Development cohort (UHB)
External validation cohort (CovidCollab)
Total
Alive
Died
Total
Alive
Died
eGFR (ml/min), n (%)
<30 (Stage 4 or above)

200 (19.2)

119 (15.8)

81 (28.1)

693 (11.4)

364 (8.2)

329 (19.7)

30-59 (Stage 3)

216 (20.8)

141 (18.8)

75 (26.0)

1362 (22.3)

846 (19.1)

516 (30.9)

60-89 (Stage 2)

317 (30.5)

246 (32.7)

71 (24.7)

1825 (29.9)

1393 (31.4)

432 (25.9)

>90 (Normal or high)

259 (24.9)

215 (28.6)

44 (15.3)

1818 (29.8)

1531 (34.6)

287 (17.2)

48 (4.6)

31 (4.1)

17 (5.9)

401 (6.6)

297 (6.7)

104 (6.2)

<7.30

64 (6.2)

39 (5.2)

25 (8.7)

416 (6.8)

234 (5.3)

182 (10.9)

7.30-7.34

88 (8.5)

64 (8.5)

24 (8.3)

530 (8.7)

351 (7.9)

179 (10.7)

7.35-7.44

429 (41.2)

313 (41.6)

116 (40.3)

2300 (37.7)

1643 (37.1)

657 (39.4)

≥7.45

152 (14.6)

107 (14.2)

45 (15.6)

960 (15.7)

725 (16.4)

235 (14.1)

Missing

307 (29.5)

229 (30.5)

78 (27.1)

1893 (31.0)

1478 (33.4)

415 (24.9)

<-2

202 (19.4)

125 (16.6)

77 (26.7)

981 (16.1)

560 (12.6)

421 (25.2)

-2-2

349 (33.6)

262 (34.8)

87 (30.2)

1996 (32.7)

1491 (33.6)

505 (30.3)

>2

182 (17.5)

136 (18.1)

46 (16.0)

1077 (17.7)

801 (18.1)

276 (16.5)

Missing

307 (29.5)

229 (30.5)

78 (27.1)

2045 (33.5)

1579 (35.6)

466 (27.9)

Missing
pH, n (%)

Base excess (mmol/l), n (%)

Anion gap (mmol/l), n (%)

Not available

6-15
≥16
Missing

9

89 (8.6)

62 (8.2)

27 (9.4)

579 (55.7)

409 (54.4)

170 (59.0)

372 (35.8)

281 (37.4)

91 (31.6)

79 (7.6)

69 (9.2)

10 (3.5)

White blood cell count (10 /l), n (%)
<3.9

Not available

3.9-10.8

696 (66.9)

518 (68.9)

178 (61.8)

≥10.9

215 (20.7)

135 (18.0)

80 (27.8)

50 (4.8)

30 (4.0)

20 (6.9)

<150

179 (17.2)

121 (16.1)

58 (20.1)

150-399

Missing

9

Platelets (10 /l), n (%)

Not available

728 (70.0)

538 (71.5)

190 (66.0)

≥400

80 (7.7)

62 (8.2)

18 (6.2)

Missing

53 (5.1)

31 (4.1)

22 (7.6)

9

Lymphocytes (10 /l), n (%)
<1.5

801 (77.0)

572 (76.1)

229 (79.5)

4684 (76.8)

3349 (75.6)

1335 (80.0)

≥1.5

195 (18.8)

154 (20.5)

41 (14.2)

1183 (19.4)

929 (21.0)

254 (15.2)

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

232 (3.8)

153 (3.5)

79 (4.7)

Missing
Neutrophil:lymphocyte ratio, n (%)

94 (9.0)

82 (10.9)

12 (4.2)

600 (9.8)

509 (11.5)

91 (5.5)

2.21-4.82

282 (27.1)

223 (29.7)

59 (20.5)

1635 (26.8)

1341 (30.3)

294 (17.6)

>4.82

620 (59.6)

421 (56.0)

199 (69.1)

3387 (55.5)

2265 (51.1)

1122 (67.3)

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

477 (7.8)

316 (7.1)

161 (9.7)

<2.21

Missing
Mean corpuscular volume (fl), n (%)

Not available
91 (8.8)

69 (9.2)

22 (7.6)

80-95

782 (75.2)

578 (76.9)

204 (70.8)

≥96

123 (11.8)

79 (10.5)

44 (15.3)

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

13 (1.2)

11 (1.5)

2 (0.7)

<80

Missing
Red cell distribution width (%), n (%)
<11.5

Not available

11.5-15.4

742 (71.3)

555 (73.8)

187 (64.9)

≥15.5

240 (23.1)

160 (21.3)

80 (27.8)

45 (4.3)

26 (3.5)

19 (6.6)

71 (6.8)

51 (6.8)

20 (6.9)

Missing

9

Monocytes (10 /l), n (%)
<0.2

Not available

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.2-0.8

731 (70.3)

539 (71.7)

192 (66.7)

>0.8

194 (18.7)

136 (18.1)

58 (20.1)

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

≤0.4

979 (94.1)

710 (94.4)

269 (93.4)

>0.4

17 (1.6)

16 (2.1)

1 (0.3)

Missing

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

<115

310 (29.8)

215 (28.6)

95 (33.0)

1454 (23.8)

975 (22.0)

479 (28.7)

115-153

582 (56.0)

434 (57.7)

148 (51.4)

3718 (61.0)

2783 (62.8)

935 (56.1)

≥154

98 (9.4)

73 (9.7)

25 (8.7)

557 (9.1)

413 (9.3)

144 (8.6)

Missing

50 (4.8)

30 (4.0)

20 (6.9)

370 (6.1)

260 (5.9)

110 (6.6)

Missing

9

Eosinophils (10 /l), n (%)

Not available

Haemoglobin (g/l), n (%)

Glucose (mmol/l), n (%)

Not available
585 (56.2)

441 (58.6)

76 (7.3)

47 (6.2)

29 (10.1)

295 (28.4)

201 (26.7)

94 (32.6)

84 (8.1)

63 (8.4)

21 (7.3)

<22

184 (17.7)

118 (15.7)

66 (22.9)

996 (16.3)

608 (13.7)

388 (23.3)

22-28

451 (43.4)

339 (45.1)

112 (38.9)

2704 (44.3)

1981 (44.7)

723 (43.3)

98 (9.4)

66 (8.8)

32 (11.1)

437 (7.2)

320 (7.2)

117 (7.0)

307 (29.5)

229 (30.5)

78 (27.1)

1962 (32.2)

1522 (34.3)

440 (26.4)

<7.8
7.8-8.4
≥8.5
Missing

144 (50.0)

Bicarbonate (mmol/l), n (%)

≥29
Missing
C-reactive protein (mg/l), n (%)
<10

84 (8.1)

76 (10.1)

8 (2.8)

690 (11.3)

616 (13.9)

74 (4.4)

10-99

406 (39.0)

321 (42.7)

85 (29.5)

2735 (44.8)

2101 (47.4)

634 (38.0)

≥100

483 (46.4)

314 (41.8)

169 (58.7)

2213 (36.3)

1381 (31.2)

832 (49.9)

67 (6.4)

41 (5.5)

26 (9.0)

461 (7.6)

333 (7.5)

128 (7.7)

Missing
Albumin (g/l), n (%)

Not available

<25

189 (18.2)

123 (16.4)

66 (22.9)

25-34

569 (54.7)

408 (54.3)

161 (55.9)

≥35

214 (20.6)

176 (23.4)

38 (13.2)

68 (6.5)

45 (6.0)

23 (8.0)

Missing
Bilirubin (μmol/l), n (%)
<21

822 (79.0)

604 (80.3)

218 (75.7)

≥21

151 (14.5)

104 (13.8)

47 (16.3)

67 (6.4)

44 (5.9)

23 (8.0)

Missing

Not available

Alanine aminotransferase (U/l), n (%)
<55

837 (80.5)

601 (79.9)

236 (81.9)

4126 (67.7)

2986 (67.4)

1140 (68.3)

≥55

134 (12.9)

106 (14.1)

28 (9.7)

777 (12.7)

559 (12.6)

218 (13.1)

69 (6.6)

45 (6.0)

24 (8.3)

1196 (19.6)

886 (20.0)

310 (18.6)

Missing
Alkaline phosphatase (U/l), n (%)

Not available

<130

814 (78.3)

605 (80.5)

209 (72.6)

≥130

159 (15.3)

103 (13.7)

56 (19.4)

67 (6.4)

44 (5.9)

23 (8.0)

<7.8

567 (54.5)

466 (62.0)

101 (35.1)

2585 (42.4)

2122 (47.9)

463 (27.8)

≥7.8

429 (41.2)

259 (34.4)

170 (59.0)

2409 (39.5)

1399 (31.6)

1010 (60.6)

44 (4.2)

27 (3.6)

17 (5.9)

1105 (18.1)

910 (20.5)

195 (11.7)

Missing
Urea (mmol/l), n (%)

Missing
Potassium (mmol/l), n (%)
2.5-5.2

Not available
868 (83.5)

644 (85.6)

49 (4.7)

29 (3.9)

20 (6.9)

123 (11.8)

79 (10.5)

44 (15.3)

<133

146 (14.0)

105 (14.0)

41 (14.2)

133-144

746 (71.7)

567 (75.4)

179 (62.2)

≥145

104 (10.0)

53 (7.0)

51 (17.7)

44 (4.2)

27 (3.6)

17 (5.9)

≥5.3
Missing

224 (77.8)

Sodium (mmol/l), n (%)

Missing

Not available

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Corrected calcium (mmol/l), n (%)

Not available

<2.2

142 (13.7)

99 (13.2)

43 (14.9)

2.2-2.5

190 (66.0)

767 (73.8)

577 (76.7)

≥2.6

38 (3.7)

17 (2.3)

21 (7.3)

Missing

93 (8.9)

59 (7.8)

34 (11.8)

Lactate (U/l), n (%)
≤2.2

490 (47.1)

362 (48.1)

128 (44.4)

3091 (50.7)

2327 (52.5)

764 (45.8)

>2.2

192 (18.5)

121 (16.1)

71 (24.7)

996 (16.3)

558 (12.6)

438 (26.3)

Missing

358 (34.4)

269 (35.8)

89 (30.9)

2012 (33.0)

1546 (34.9)

466 (27.9)

Haematocrit (l/l), n (%)

Not available

<0.5

963 (92.6)

707 (94.0)

256 (88.9)

≥0.5

33 (3.2)

19 (2.5)

14 (4.9)

Missing

44 (4.2)

26 (3.5)

18 (6.2)

Table 2. Area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) for models
developed in University Hospitals Birmingham (UHB) data and externally validated in
CovidCollab data, and for external validation of the ISARIC model and 4C score

Dataset
Model development*

Outcome

AUROC (95% CI)

UHB
UHB
UHB-R†
UHB-R†

Mortality
ITU admission
Mortality
ITU admission

0.778 (0.741-0.815)
0.892 (0.865-0.920)
0.791 (0.761-0.822)
0.906 (0.883-0.929)

CovidCollab
CovidCollab

Mortality
ITU admission

0.767 (0.754-0.780)
0.811 (0.795-0.828)

UHB – ISARIC model (XGBoost)
UHB – 4C score

Mortality
Mortality

0.757 (0.721-0.792)
0.754 (0.721-0.786)

External validation of new model*

External validation of ISARIC and 4C models in UHB data

*Models derived using logistic regression with stepwise selection of candidate predictors
and categorisation of continuous variables into clinically meaningful categories (after
imputing missing data).
†Not all variables included in the full University Hospital Birmingham (UHB) model were
available in the CovidCollab dataset. Therefore, revised (reduced) models were developed in
UHB data using a subset of the candidate predictors common to both the UHB and
CovidCollab datasets (UHB-R), and these were then externally validated in the CovidCollab
dataset.

26

Predicted
probability
TP TN
FP FN Sensitivity (95% CI) Specificity (95% CI)
10%
271 277 475
17 0.941 (0.915-0.967) 0.369 (0.355-0.382)
20%
236 441 311
52 0.821 (0.792-0.850) 0.587 (0.563-0.611)
30%
194 544 208
94 0.673 (0.636-0.710) 0.723 (0.703-0.743)
40%
152 626 126 136 0.527 (0.492-0.562) 0.833 (0.815-0.850)
50%
118 680
72 170 0.410 (0.378-0.443) 0.904 (0.888-0.919)
60%
82 713
39 206 0.284 (0.231-0.337) 0.948 (0.944-0.952)
70%
50 728
24 238 0.174 (0.151-0.197) 0.968 (0.967-0.969)
80%
24 741
11 264 0.082 (0.062-0.102) 0.985 (0.978-0.993)
90%
8 750
2 280 0.027 (0.015-0.039)
0.998 (0.995-1)
TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives.

PPV (95% CI)
0.363 (0.354-0.373)
0.432 (0.412-0.452)
0.482 (0.452-0.512)
0.547 (0.505-0.589)
0.620 (0.568-0.672)
0.675 (0.631-0.719)
0.673 (0.644-0.703)
0.685 (0.568-0.801)
0.808 (0.573-1)

NPV (95% CI)
0.942 (0.917-0.968)
0.895 (0.878-0.912)
0.852 (0.836-0.869)
0.821 (0.807-0.835)
0.800 (0.789-0.811)
0.776 (0.763-0.788)
0.754 (0.748-0.759)
0.737 (0.733-0.741)
0.728 (0.725-0.731)

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3a. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for mortality at 28 days after admission
(University Hospitals Birmingham derivation dataset)

Predicted
probability
TP TN FP FN Sensitivity (95% CI) Specificity (95% CI)
10%
160 618 239
23 0.877 (0.839-0.914) 0.721 (0.694-0.748)
20%
143 714 143
40 0.779 (0.726-0.833) 0.834 (0.816-0.851)
30%
127 769 88
56 0.695 (0.655-0.735) 0.898 (0.888-0.908)
40%
113 798 59
70 0.620 (0.577-0.663) 0.931 (0.922-0.940)
50%
94 817 40
89 0.513 (0.472-0.553) 0.953 (0.944-0.963)
60%
79 832 25 104 0.430 (0.378-0.481) 0.970 (0.966-0.975)
70%
67 840 17 116 0.366 (0.327-0.405) 0.981 (0.972-0.989)
80%
53 848
9 130 0.292 (0.255-0.329) 0.990 (0.987-0.992)
90%
34 854
3 149 0.188 (0.146-0.230) 0.997 (0.995-0.999)
TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives.

PPV (95% CI)
0.402 (0.377-0.426)
0.500 (0.457-0.543)
0.592 (0.557-0.627)
0.659 (0.616-0.701)
0.701 (0.648-0.754)
0.755 (0.716-0.795)
0.802 (0.742-0.863)
0.859 (0.839-0.879)
0.924 (0.875-0.974)

NPV (95% CI)
0.965 (0.954-0.975)
0.946 (0.933-0.960)
0.932 (0.924-0.941)
0.920 (0.911-0.929)
0.902 (0.894-0.909)
0.888 (0.879-0.898)
0.879 (0.872-0.885)
0.867 (0.862-0.873)
0.852 (0.845-0.858)

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 3b. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for intensive therapy unit admission
within 28 days after admission (University Hospitals Birmingham derivation dataset)

Predicted
probability
TP
TN
FP
FN Sensitivity (95% CI) Specificity (95% CI)
UHB-R derivation dataset (reduced model)
10%
278
249 503
10 0.964 (0.955-0.972) 0.332 (0.315-0.348)
20%
248
406 346
40 0.862 (0.847-0.878) 0.539 (0.510-0.569)
30%
202
536 216
86 0.703 (0.671-0.734) 0.713 (0.698-0.727)
40%
153
635 117 135 0.532 (0.511-0.553) 0.844 (0.831-0.858)
50%
104
686
66 184 0.360 (0.335-0.384) 0.913 (0.905-0.920)
60%
66
723
29 222 0.228 (0.211-0.246) 0.962 (0.953-0.970)
70%
35
744
8 253 0.122 (0.101-0.144) 0.990 (0.985-0.994)
80%
14
750
2 274 0.050 (0.036-0.064) 0.997 (0.996-0.998)
90%
3
752
0 285
0.010 (0-0.022)
0.999 (0.998-1)
CovidCollab external validation dataset
10%
1614 1218 3213
54 0.967 (0.962-0.973) 0.275 (0.260-0.290)
20%
1471 2028 2403 197 0.882 (0.874-0.889) 0.458 (0.445-0.471)
30%
1289 2721 1710 379 0.773 (0.763-0.782) 0.614 (0.602-0.626)
40%
1059 3264 1167 609 0.635 (0.605-0.665) 0.737 (0.717-0.756)
50%
850 3698 733 818 0.510 (0.470-0.549) 0.835 (0.817-0.852)
60%
599 4025 406 1069 0.359 (0.305-0.414) 0.908 (0.890-0.927)
70%
380 4222 209 1288 0.228 (0.186-0.270) 0.953 (0.940-0.965)
80%
174 4355
76 1494 0.104 (0.077-0.132) 0.983 (0.978-0.987)
90%
37 4414
17 1631 0.022 (0.006-0.039) 0.996 (0.995-0.998)
TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives.

PPV (95% CI)

NPV (95% CI)

0.356 (0.351-0.360)
0.418 (0.403-0.433)
0.484 (0.464-0.504)
0.567 (0.547-0.587)
0.612 (0.593-0.632)
0.696 (0.663-0.729)
0.819 (0.753-0.884)
0.868 (0.835-0.900)
0.900 (0.573-1)

0.960 (0.952-0.968)
0.911 (0.902-0.920)
0.862 (0.849-0.876)
0.825 (0.819-0.831)
0.788 (0.782-0.794)
0.765 (0.762-0.768)
0.746 (0.742-0.751)
0.733 (0.730-0.735)
0.725 (0.723-0.727)

0.334 (0.330-0.338)
0.380 (0.375-0.384)
0.430 (0.425-0.435)
0.476 (0.469-0.483)
0.537 (0.523-0.551)
0.596 (0.578-0.615)
0.646 (0.626-0.666)
0.697 (0.671-0.722)
0.676 (0.572-0.780)

0.957 (0.951-0.963)
0.911 (0.907-0.916)
0.878 (0.874-0.881)
0.843 (0.835-0.851)
0.819 (0.810-0.828)
0.790 (0.779-0.801)
0.766 (0.759-0.774)
0.745 (0.740-0.750)
0.730 (0.727-0.733)

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 4a. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for mortality at 28 days after admission
(University Hospitals Birmingham derivation dataset and CovidCollab external validation dataset, using predictors common to both
datasets)

Predicted
probability
TP
TN
FP FN
Sensitivity (95% CI) Specificity (95% CI)
UHB-R derivation dataset (reduced model)
10%
165 590 267 18
0.904 (0.877-0.931) 0.689 (0.671-0.707)
20%
152 709 148 31
0.831 (0.812-0.849) 0.827 (0.816-0.839)
30%
132 765
92 51
0.723 (0.698-0.749) 0.893 (0.882-0.904)
40%
112 803
54 71
0.613 (0.573-0.653) 0.937 (0.928-0.946)
50%
92 829
28 91
0.505 (0.483-0.526) 0.967 (0.956-0.979)
60%
77 841
16 106
0.419 (0.403-0.435) 0.981 (0.974-0.988)
70%
67 847
10 116
0.365 (0.344-0.386) 0.988 (0.983-0.994)
80%
46 851
6 137
0.251 (0.189-0.313) 0.993 (0.989-0.997)
90%
20 855
2 163
0.108 (0.067-0.149) 0.997 (0.996-0.999)
CovidCollab external validation dataset
10%
574 3623 1754 148
0.794 (0.764-0.825) 0.674 (0.651-0.697)
20%
465 4312 1065 257
0.644 (0.621-0.667) 0.802 (0.785-0.819)
30%
377 4655 722 345
0.523 (0.497-0.549) 0.866 (0.847-0.885)
40%
315 4881 496 407
0.437 (0.381-0.492) 0.908 (0.887-0.928)
50%
250 5045 332 472
0.346 (0.258-0.434) 0.938 (0.920-0.956)
60%
178 5168 209 544
0.247 (0.175-0.318) 0.961 (0.945-0.977)
70%
113 5256 121 609
0.157 (0.105-0.208) 0.978 (0.967-0.988)
80%
57 5319
58 665
0.079 (0.044-0.114) 0.989 (0.984-0.995)
90%
18 5357
20 704
0.025 (0.006-0.044)
0.996 (0.993-1)
TP = true positives, TN = true negatives, FP = false positives, FN = false negatives.

PPV (95% CI)

NPV (95% CI)

0.383 (0.368-0.398)
0.507 (0.494-0.519)
0.591 (0.567-0.615)
0.675 (0.649-0.702)
0.768 (0.708-0.829)
0.828 (0.779-0.877)
0.870 (0.816-0.924)
0.889 (0.840-0.938)
0.898 (0.838-0.957)

0.971 (0.963-0.979)
0.958 (0.954-0.962)
0.938 (0.933-0.943)
0.919 (0.912-0.926)
0.901 (0.898-0.905)
0.888 (0.886-0.890)
0.879 (0.876-0.883)
0.861 (0.852-0.871)
0.840 (0.833-0.846)

0.247 (0.238-0.255)
0.304 (0.288-0.321)
0.344 (0.320-0.367)
0.389 (0.361-0.417)
0.430 (0.413-0.447)
0.462 (0.420-0.503)
0.486 (0.439-0.534)
0.500 (0.410-0.590)
0.485 (0.367-0.603)

0.961 (0.956-0.965)
0.944 (0.941-0.947)
0.931 (0.929-0.933)
0.923 (0.918-0.929)
0.914 (0.905-0.923)
0.905 (0.898-0.912)
0.896 (0.891-0.901)
0.889 (0.886-0.892)
0.884 (0.882-0.886)

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 4b. Sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) for intensive therapy unit admission
within 28 days after admission (University Hospitals Birmingham derivation dataset and CovidCollab external validation dataset, using
predictors common to both datasets)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.01.25.21249942; this version posted January 30, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1

Wynants L, Van Calster B, Bonten MMJ, et al. Prediction models for diagnosis and prognosis of covid-19

infection: systematic review and critical appraisal. BMJ 2020;369:m1328. doi:10.1136 bmj.m1328

2

Liang W, et al. Development and Validation of a Clinical Risk Score to Predict the Occurrence of Critical Illness

in Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19. JAMA Intern Med 2020. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.2033

3

Knight SR, Ho A, Pius R et al. Risk stratification of patients admitted to hospital with covid-19 using the ISARIC

WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: development and validation of the 4C Mortality Score. BMJ
2020;370:m3339 doi:10.1136/bmj.m3339

4

Hua-Gen Li M, Hutchinson A, Tacey M, Duke G. Reliability of comorbidity scores derived from administrative

data in the tertiary hospital intensive care setting: a cross-sectional study BMJ Health & Care Informatics
2019;26:e000016. doi:10.1136/bmjhci-2019-000016

5

Reynolds A, Seed A, Khan A, et al. on behalf of NIHR Clinical Research Network West Midlands, Birmingham

Surgical Trials Consortium, and Geriatric Medicine Research Collaborative. CovidCollab. A panspecialty
international project to determine point of care predictors from routinely collected data. Protocol v 1.4. 2020.
Available at: https://www.bgs.org.uk/sites/default/files/content/attachment/2020-0403/CovidCollab%20Main%20Study%20Protocol%20v2.pdf [accessed 26

6

th

Oct 2020].

Geriatric Medicine Research Collaborative, Covid Collaborative, Carly Welch. Age and Frailty Are

Independently Associated with Increased Mortality in COVID-19: Results of an International Multi-Centre
Study. Preprint available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3709847, doi:10.2139/ssrn.3709847 [accessed 9

th

December 2020]

7

Zhang Z. Variable selection with stepwise and best subset approaches. Ann Transl Med 2016;4(7):136.

doi:10.21037/atm.2016.03.35

8

Freund Y, Schapire RE. A decision-theoretic generalization of on-line learning and an application to boosting.

Journal of Computer and System Sciences 1997;55(1):119-139.

9

Mandrekar JN. Receiver operating characteristic curve in diagnostic test assessment. J Thorac Oncol

2010;5:1315-6. doi:10.1097/JTO.0b013e3181ec173d

10
11

Rubin DB (ed.). Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys. 1987. doi:10.1002/9780470316696
White IR, Royston P, Wood AM. Multiple imputation using chained equations: Issues and guidance for

practice. Statistics in Medicine 2011;30:377-399.

12

Rockwood K, Song X, MacKnight C, Bergman H, Hogan DB, McDowell I, Mitnitski A. A global clinical measure

of fitness and frailty in elderly people. CMAJ. 2005;173(5):489-95. doi:10.1503/cmaj.050051

13

Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment and prognosis of coma after head injury. Acta Neurochirurgica

1976;34:45-55. doi:10.1007/BF01405862

14

Institute of Neurological Sciences NHS Greater Glasgow and Clyde. Glasgow Coma Scale: Do it this way.

2015. Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow: Glasgow. Available at:

th

https://glasgowcomascale.org/downloads/GCS-Assessment-Aid-English.pdf?v=3 [accessed 9

December

2020].

15

Katzenschlager S, Zimmer AJ, Gottschalk C, et al. Can we predict the severe course of COVID-19 – a

systematic review and meta-analysis of indicators of clinical outcome? medRxiv preprint 2020.
doi:10.1101/2020.11.09.20228858

16

Zhou J, Lee S, Wang X, et al. Development of a predictive risk model for severe COVID-19 disease using

population-based administrative data. medRxiv preprint 2020. doi:10.1101/2020.10.21.20217380

31

