medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Modeling COVID-19 Nonpharmaceutical Interventions:
Exploring periodic NPI strategies
Raffaele Vardavas*, Pedro Nascimento de Lima, and Lawrence Baker
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA 90401, USA

Abstract
We developed a COVID-19 transmission model used as part of RAND’s web-based COVID-19
decision support tool that compares the effects of nonpharmaceutical public health interventions
(NPIs) on health and economic outcomes. An interdisciplinary approach informed the selection
and use of multiple NPIs, combining quantitative modeling of the health/economic impacts of
interventions with qualitative assessments of other important considerations (e.g., cost, ease of
implementation, equity). This paper provides further details of our model, describes extensions,
presents sensitivity analyses, and analyzes strategies that periodically switch between a base NPI
level and a higher NPI level. We find that a periodic strategy, if implemented with perfect compliance, could have produced similar health outcomes as static strategies but might have produced
better outcomes when considering other measures of social welfare. Our findings suggest that
there are opportunities to shape the tradeoffs between economic and health outcomes by carefully evaluating a more comprehensive range of reopening policies.

* All three authors contributed equally to the research work presented in this report.

Correspondence may be addressed

to Raffaele Vardavas (rvardava@rand.org).

1

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1 Introduction
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is unprecedented in terms of scale and speed, affecting millions
worldwide. Until recently, vaccines and effective treatments for COVID-19 were unavailable. National
leaders have had to take extraordinary measures to mitigate the virus’s spread and prevent health
care systems from being overwhelmed. Policymakers have implemented a range of nonpharmaceutical public health interventions (NPIs). These interventions include partial closings (e.g., schools and
non-essential businesses, prohibiting large gatherings, quarantining the most vulnerable) and complete lockdown (e.g., placing all residents under stay-at-home orders). The goal of NPIs is to delay
and reduce the peak number of cases per day, reduce pressure on health services, and allow time for
vaccines to be distributions [1]. If NPIs are relaxed too soon a new wave of infections may occcur.
However, NPIs have wide-ranging effects on the health, economy, and social well-being of populations, which has led to growing pandemic fatigue and a decline in adherence to NPIs since they were
first initiated [2, 3]. Decision-makers are faced with tough decisions, such as how to sequence, relax,
and possibly reinstate mitigation measures. Exacerbating these decisions are significant uncertainties, including new variants and behavioral responses to extended interventions.
Mathematical and simulation models of COVID-19 transmission dynamics are invaluable tools to
help decision-makers forecast and compare intervention outcomes, predict the timing of peaks in
cases and deaths, medical supply needs, and if and when we should expect additional waves. They
enable projection and comparison of population-level outcomes over hypothetical scenarios. Model
outcomes include the incidence and prevalence of the infection over time and for different population
groups. The hypothetical scenarios can consist of the impact of varying pharmaceutical and nonpharmaceutical public health interventions, distributing vaccines, and the emergence of new strains.
We developed a COVID-19 transmission Population-Based Model (PBM) used as part of a webbased COVID-19 decision support tool that compares the effects of different nonpharmaceutical public health interventions (NPIs) on health and economic outcomes. An interdisciplinary approach informed the selection NPI portfolios, combining quantitative modeling of the health/economic impacts with qualitative assessments of cost, ease of implementation and equity. An in-depth description of our approach was previously published as a RAND report describing how the PBM, the economic model, and a systematic assessment of NPIs informed the web-tool [4].
We expanded our original model [4] to account additional uncertainties and consider an expanded
set of NPI strategies. In this paper, we consider periodic NPI strategies. Recent research has demonstrated that high-frequency periodic NPIs [5] have the potential to mitigate COVID-19 resurgences
while providing more predictability and alleviating the damaging effects on economic activity and
social well-being. We use our updated model to explore if a periodic strategy could have provided
benefits compared to fixed strategies that would keep R t close to one. We find that a periodic strategy
can dominated fixed strategies, improving both health and days spent under restrictions.
The paper is structured as follows. First, we provide an overview of our model structure. Then, we
briefly analyze a set of illustrative scenarios, including periodic and fixed strategies, identifying if the
periodic strategies used by other modelers modelers [5] produce similar results in our model. Finally,
we provide detailed information on our mathematical model and present sensitivity analyses.
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2 Model Overview
Theory-based epidemiological models use a theoretical understanding of biological and social processes to represent a disease’s clinical and epidemiological course. The most typical model considers
the population in four different disease states: susceptible, exposed, infected, and Removed (SEIR).
Our PBM incorporates several extensions to the SEIR model of disease transmission. It is formulated
deterministically by coupled ODEs and integrated numerically by solvers for stiff problems [6–9]. We
extend the SEIR framework to better describe COVID-19 transmission by adding additional disease
states and considering population strata based on age and chronic conditions. The PBM models the
effects of different NPIs on health outcomes, from partial closings to complete lockdown. Unlike
many other COVID-19 models, we simulate the impact of NPIs on different mixing modes (such as
home, school, and work) separately, allowing us to model various interventions flexibly. Our PBM also
includes population strata and specify mixing pattern heterogeneities across the population strata
and for each mode. These heterogeneities included in our model allow us to set the NPI more specifically, with mixing rates reduced deferentially by mixing mode. Our model is designed to help policymakers understand the effects of NPIs, weigh tradeoffs among them, make decisions about which
NPIs to implement, and estimate how long-term interventions should be enforced to control the virus.
Figure 1 shows a simplified illustration
of the disease states included in the first basic version of our PBM. The model includes
a pre-symptomatic highly infectious state,
which leads to either an asymptomatic
state or a state with mild symptoms, a fraction of which continue to severe disease.
Most of those who develop severe symptoms are hospitalized. Non-hospitalized
Figure 1: COVID-19 PBM disease states
severely-symptomatic either recover or die.
The hospitalized state includes compartments for both the main hospital and the ICU, where individuals are admitted if they develop critical symptoms. Capacities can be set for the hospital and ICU
beyond which no additional patients can be added. At each of the infectious states, individuals can be
tested for COVID-19. Each compartment is composed of ten population strata, five age groups, and
two health states (those with and without at least one chronic condition). These strata allow the model
to simulate how the disease impacts different population groups, including differences in population
size, mixing mortality rate, and the proportion who are asymptomatic. Disease progression rates are
based on figures given in the literature and are sampled from distributions if uncertain. The force of
infection (the rate that susceptible individuals become exposed) is characterized by how many infectious people are in each state, the transmissibility of each state, and levels of mixing. We estimate
transmissibilities for each state based on biological and social factors. For instance, viral loads are
highest early in the disease [10], so these states have higher biological transmissibility. We assume
that those who receive positive tests or exhibit symptoms have lower social transmissibility because
they take measures to limit the exposure of others. The total transmissibility of a state is the product
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

of the biological and social transmissibilities, and the population-weighted sum of transmission is
proportional to the number of new infections.
NPI Level

Description

Level 1: No Intervention
Level 2: Close schools
Level 3: Close schools, bars, and restaurants; and ban large events

No Intervention
All schools are closed.
In addition to school closures, all bars’ and
restaurants’ dine-in services are closed,
only allowing for take-out options. Also,
large gatherings are banned.
In addition to school, bar, and restaurant
closures, all nonessential businesses are
closed.
In addition to the closure of all nonessential businesses, a shelter in place recommended for the vulnerable population, including the elderly, children, and other atrisk populations.
In addition to the interventions above,
shelter in place order is issued for the everyone but essential workers.

Level 4: Close schools, bars, and restaurants; ban large events; and close
nonessential businesses
Level 5: Close schools, bars, and restaurants; ban large events; close nonessential businesses; and shelter in place for the
most vulnerable
Level 6: Close schools, bars, and restaurants; ban large events; close nonessential
businesses; and shelter in place for everyone but essential workers

Table 1: Nonpharmaceutical intervention levels.
In our model, NPIs are portfolios of restrictions mandated at the state level, as described in table 1.
The set of NPIs levels used by each state is characterized by a discrete set of intervention levels ranging
from 1 (no intervention) to 6 (close schools, bars, restaurants, and nonessential businesses; and issue
a shelter-in-place order for everyone but essential workers). Each intervention level is associated with
mixing matrices that describe how strata interact with each other in six different settings: household,
work, school, commercial, recreation, and other. Interventions are modeled as changing the level of
mixing which occurs in each of these settings. For instance, closing schools reduces school and work
mixing but increases home mixing. Given the specified model structure, the NPI time-series, and the
mixing matrices, we calibrate our model for each state using deaths time series. Appendix A provides
a detailed description of the mathematical formulation of our model.

3 Exploring Periodic NPI Strategies
In this section, we present an illustrative retrospective analysis of policies that can be tested with the
model, using the state of California as an example. These analyses and findings do not constitute predictions. Yet, they illustrate that alternative plausible NPI strategies could have produced improved
outcomes during 2020, in the absence of vaccines. The purpose of this analysis is two-fold. First,
it demonstrates how our model can be used to trace many-objective trade-off curves to support the
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

analysis of reopening strategies. Second, this analysis demonstrates that a periodic switching of NPIs
might have placed society in a better position in these trade-off curves - that is, it could have represented a pareto-improvement.
This section explores two types of strategies that could have been followed to manage NPIs in
the year 2020. The first set of strategies are “fixed" NPI levels. This type of strategy holds the NPI
level constant over time. Although this strategy has not been followed in California explicitly, the NPI
mandates imposed in California are best approximated in our model by setting the NPI level to three.
This NPI level was stable between July of 2020 through the end of the year, and this represents our
baseline scenario and is the scenario used to calibrate our model.
Fixed NPIs are not, however, the only way to control the pandemic. Alternatively, one could use
periodic strategies to curb transmission [5]. A periodic NPI can represent a strategy wherein society
goes into more severe periods of NPIs then relaxes to lower levels of stringency. This strategy’s rationale is that those newly infected during the relaxed periods would take a few days before becoming
infectious themselves. The enforcement of stringent NPIs would then limit the time and possibilities
for the virus to spread further from these infectious individuals during the time before they either recover or are hospitalized. This periodical switching would systematically reduce transmissions and
force the dynamics of the epidemics to be controlled by the strategy’s frequency.
In essence, a periodic strategy uses the natural timescales of disease progression and infectivity
to induce a synchronization phase that helps align the times when people are more likely to be infected together, allowing for the social distancing NPIs to be more effective. An example of a similar
strategy includes schools adopting a hybrid learning model wherein students go to school every other
week. Similarly, restaurants could open for indoor dining periodically. In absence of vaccines, such
policies may be desirable as they would provide stability, regularity, and increased predictability for
businesses to plan against. The policies could, in principle, help suppress the transmission of the
virus and simultaneously reduce uncertainties in economic activity.
Figure 2 illustrates the dynamics of periodic and fixed NPI strategies. The fixed NPI strategies represented in the figure suggest that under the NPI level three, R t closely followed one and increased
towards the end of December, driven by our model’s seasonal effect. Because R t was close to one in
the model, a departure from the current NPI level would be expected to produce a significant departure from the R t = 1. Therefore, a policy that reopens the state (F-1) would be expected to produce a
spike in prevalence and subsequently in the number of deaths, and a more stringent, constant policy
(F-5) would be expected to reduce the number of deaths.
As figure 2 shows, the periodic strategy P-5-14 switches between NPI levels 1 and 5 every two
weeks. This switching causes R t to oscillate such that prevalence does not increase unchecked. As
a consequence, the number of deaths is controlled. The choice of two weeks is based on the typical timescale describing the disease progression for the majority of infected people. However, other
choices for the periodicity could be explored.
When judging alternative strategies, policymakers often have to weigh multiple criteria to make
decisions, so one needs to translate model outcomes to meaningful criteria. One criterion could be
the number of days of school closures, which has been an important concern during the COVID-19
pandemic. However, the number of days of school closures does not distinguish scenarios in which
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Deat
hs /
100K

Pr
eval
ence

Rt

Seasonal Di
scr
et
eNPI
f
act
or
l
evel

NPIst
r
at
egyt
ype
Fi
xed
6

Per
i
odi
c

Lockdown

4
2 NoI
nt
er
vent
i
on
1.
05
1.
00
0.
95
0.
90
1.
5
1.
0
0.
5
0.
0
1.
5%
1.
0%
0.
5%
0.
0%
150
100
50
Jul
1,20 Sep1,20

Nov1,20

Jan1,21

Jul
1,20 Sep1,20

Dat
e
St
r
at
egy
F1

F3

F5

Nov1,20

Jan1,21

Dat
e
P314

P514

Figure 2: Model Dynamics with Fixed and Periodic NPIs. Fixed NPI strategies are coded with an
“F" followed by the intervention level included in the NPI. Periodic NPI strategies are coded with a
“P" followed by the maximum NPI level in the periodic strategy and the period in days. In that case,
P-3-14 means that the state will switch between the NPI level 3 and 1 every 14 days.
non-essential businesses are closed for long periods, so other proxies for welfare loss are needed. One
approach could be to use weights for each NPI level, such that those weights are proportional to the
marginal daily welfare loss induced by each NPI level. If one defines those weights such that one day
under lockdown is equivalent to one, and one day under no restrictions is set to zero, one can compute
a proxy to social welfare that can be used to judge alternative strategies. Our weighted lockdown days
metric corresponds to this criterion.
There are other plausible ways to compute NPI costs. NPIs arguably induce income loss. Our third
metric uses the income loss under each NPI level estimated by a general equilibrium model [11] to
account for the economic consequences of NPI restrictions. Although all these proxies are imperfect

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

P314
140

P37
F2 F2
P47

Deat
hs/100K

120
P47

100

F3

P414
80
60

F2

P521

P514
P57
P621

40
20

F3
P414

P521

P514 P57
P621
P614

P47

F3
P414

P521

P514
P57
P621

P614
P67

NPIst
r
at
egyt
ype
Fi
xed
Per
i
odi
c

P614

P67

P67
F4

F4

F5F6

F5

0
120 140 160 180 200 220 50
Daysofschool
cl
osur
es

100

150

200

Wei
ght
edl
ockdowndays

5.
0%

10.
0%

15.
0%

I
ncomel
oss

Figure 3: Tradeoff surface implied by alternative policies. The vertical axis presents the number
of Deaths / 100k at the end of the simulation run (Feb. 2021) in California, and the horizontal axis
contains several proxies that represent alternative criteria to evaluate the costs of NPIs. Across all
these criteria, we find that periodic NPIs tend to dominate fixed NPIs. The plot demonstrates that
strategies with fixed NPIs generally are dominated by periodic NPI strategies.
measures of social welfare loss induced by NPIs, our conclusions do not rely on their precision, but
on the assumption that NPI costs are increasing in the level of restriction. This structural assumption
allows us to illuminate trade-offs and reveal pareto-dominated strategies that rely on the structure of
the epidemiological model1 .
Figure 3 demonstrates that using a small set of alternative measures can support those decisions
and reveal pareto-dominated strategies. Strategy F-3, our baseline strategy, is pareto-dominated by a
wide range of strategies that oscillate between the NPI level of 5 and 1, using many periods, which is
in line with prior research [5].
1

One might estimate the costs of NPIs using a willingness to pay or similar approach. As long as those weights are
monotonically increasing (e.g. people are not deriving utility from NPI restrictions), our substantive findings would hold.
While estimating more precise welfare costs of NPIs and using those costs as weights might be valuable to compare benefits from NPIs to costs, we doubt that these weights would be stable over time. Still, as long as these weights are monotonically increasing functions of the NPI level at any point in time our substantive results would hold. Because these weights
are highly uncertain and potentially not constant, we refrain from trying to aggregate all outcomes under a single social
welfare metric in our analyses as a traditional Cost-Benefit analysis would do. Instead, we assess pareto-efficiency and
seek to find strategies that dominate other strategies across a set of outcomes.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

However, there are limitations to our analysis. First, we do not consider practicality: these periodic strategies might be regarded as unfeasible, impractical, or undesirable by policymakers and the
public. This consideration is particularly important because the strength of the periodic NPIs relies
on the ability to abruptly reduced mixing, which can only be achieved with a high level of compliance. Further, people are may to shift their mixing to the open periods reducing or even canceling the
mitigation effects on transmission intended by the periodic NPI policy. Nevertheless, we use them in
this paper as an example to illustrate that alternative NPIs strategies, if implemented with high levels
of compliance, might pareto-dominate fixed strategies and might shift the trade-off surface among
health and economic/social outcomes.

4 Conclusion
The scenarios presented in this paper serve the purpose to illustrate that alternative policies using
periodic NPIs to manage the COVID-19 pandemic might have produced the same health outcomes
while allowing essential activities, such as in-person education, to have happened in a controlled
manner. While we do not advocate for any particular strategy, this brief analysis demonstrated that
alternative NPI strategies have the potential to shift the trade-off curves among the relevant outcomes.
Including social welfare loss measures induced by NPIs in analyses seeking to inform COVID-19
reopening decisions is essential. Only including health outcomes in those analyses leaves the task of
weighing other concerns to the policymaker, who may or may not be able to do so consistently. Metrics of welfare loss induced by NPIs can be either derived directly from the model outcomes (e.g., days
of school closures), or use a weighted sum based on the NPIs stringency level, potentially using economic models in our prior work[4]. Even if the analysis estimates are not precise or could become less
precise with time, they can still be useful. As figure 3 demonstrated, if one ignores all the horizontal
axes under the argument that those estimates might be imprecise, policymakers might not be properly informed that alternative policies dominate some policies. This statement and the pattern seen
in the trade-off curves do not rely on the precision of economic estimates but on the theory-based
epidemiological model structure.
The trade-off curves we present also should not be seen as static. Many other factors that have
been held constant in our analysis might also shift this curve. Widespread adoption of high-quality
masks, for example, would shift every point inwards, making society systematically better off. The
emergence of new, more transmissible variant strains can shift the curve outwards. A more stringent
strategy to eliminate community spread and prevent re-seeding (such as New Zealand’s strategy) can
remove the health-economic trade-offs curve completely if successfully implemented. Adaptation
measures to prevent transmission within schools would also shift this curve, strengthening periodic
strategies even more attractive to allow in-person education. Moreover, the introduction of vaccines
also shapes this trade-off curve over time. As vaccination roll-out advances, the marginal benefit of an
additional day under stringent NPIs will decrease. Accounting for the uncertainties mentioned before
and the vaccination dynamics will be essential to guide society to a new normal through a robust
reopening plan.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Contributions
Raffaele Vardavas (Ph.D.) led the effort in conceptualizing and formulating the model structure and
led the overall modeling effort. Pedro Nascimento de Lima (MSc) led the model implementation and
model analysis effort. Lawrence Baker (MSc) led the effort in informing the model with data and
parameter values found in the literature. All authors contributed equally to this research work and to
this article.
Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Drs. Jeanne Ringel, Jennifer Bouey, Courtney Gidengil and Carter Price at the RAND
Corporation for their support in advising the authors in the model development and in finding parameter value estimates. We thank Drs. Robert Lempert, Carolyn Rutter at the RAND Corporation and Dr.
Jonathan Ozik at the Argonne National Laboratory for their support in advising the authors in model
calibration and policy exploration methods. We thank Dr. Chris Bauch, a professor in applied mathematics at the University of Waterloo for his constructive comments that significantly improved our
model. This project was internally funded by RAND. We thank Drs. Michael Rich, Anita Chandra and
Peter Hussey for supporting our work and securing funding. We also thank the National Cancer Institute (R21CA157571), and the National Institute of Allergies and Infectious Diseases (R01AI118705) for
providing support in projects that led to preliminary work and ideas that motivated this project.
Disclaimer
This report provides additional technical details of a peer-reviewed RAND report describing RAND’s
COVID-19 Decision Support Tool for State and Local Policymakers. This report uses the simulation
model to explore the dynamics of a retrospective counterfactual COVID-19 transmission mitigation
policy for 2020 based on intermittent applications of NPIs. The results and conclusions drawn on how
effective this policy design could have been if implemented based on our simulation model have not
been peer-reviewed. Conclusions drawn from this working paper do not necessarily represent the
opinions of the RAND Corporation.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A The Mathematical Formulation of the Model
A.1 Model disease states and progression
Individuals in our population are divided into fourteen key compartments listed in Table 2. We assume that individuals in the P and I A compartments are fully asymptomatic and thus are unaware of
being infectious. In our model, individuals in I Sm have mild symptoms, including a dry cough and
a fever, while those in I Ss are assumed to have severe symptoms that include shortness of breath in
addition to a dry cough and a fever.
The sum of the population in all of the states gives the total
Disease State X

Description

Infectious X I

Diagnosed

S

Noninfected and susceptible.

No

No

E

Exposed and infected but not yet
infectious.

No

No

P

Presymptomatic infectious.

Yes

No

I Sm

Nondiagnosed Infected with mild
symptoms.

Yes

No

I Ss

Nondiagnosed infected with severe
symptoms.

Yes

No

YSm

Diagnosed infected with mild
symptoms.

Yes

Yes

YSs

Diagnosed infected with severe
symptoms.

Yes

Yes

H

Hospitalized not in the intensive-care
unit.

Yes

Yes

H ICU

Hospitalized in the intensive-care
unit.

Yes

Yes

IA

Nondiagnosed infected
asymptomatic.

Yes

No

YA

Diagnosed infected asymptomatic.

Yes

Yes

RS

Recovered who were symptomatic.

No

Yes & No

RA

Recovered who were asymptomatic.

No

Yes & No

D

Those who have died.

No

Yes & No

Table 2: Disease states included in the model. The dependence on time t is implicitly assumed.
population N . In our model we assume that each state variable gives the proportion of the population belonging to that state. Therefore, instead of tracking the dynamics of each compartment’s
P
population sizes, we track the population densities. We express this as X X (t ) = N = 1, where X ∈
{S, E , X I , R A , R S , D} labels the population compartments and X I ∈ {P, I Sm , I A , I Ss , YSm , Y A , YSs , H , H ICU }
labels the subset of compartments that are infectious.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

In the PBM, the susceptible that get infected enter state E at a rate known as the force of infection
λ described in the section A.5. As for all the transition rates in our PBM, λ is specified as a per-person
transition probability per unit time. Figure 4 illustrates disease progression in the early stages of
ISm
COVID-19 infection. They progress to the presympγ
λ
ν
tomatic infectious state P at a rate ν. As an individualS
E
P
γ
level interpretation of this transition, the mean duraIA
tion, also known as the mean dwelling or sojourn time
that newly infected individuals stay in disease state E
Figure 4: Initial disease progression stages
is given by ν−1 . Those in the presymptomatic infectious state P either remain asymptomatic and transition to state I A at a rate γ A , or develop mild
symptoms and transition to state I Sm at a rate γS . At the individual level, the mean duration that
infected individuals stay in disease state P is given by [γS + γ A ]−1 , and the probability of developing
mild symptoms is given by γS · [γS + γ A ]−1 . We assume that testing the presymptomatic for COVID-19
results in a false negative outcome. Consequently, all those who are presymptomatic are unaware of
their infected and infectious state. The formulation of the first three ODEs describing our PBM are
S

A

Ṡ = −λS,

(1)

Ė

= λS − νE ,

(2)

Ṗ

= νE − (γS + γ A )P.

(3)

The asymptomatic and unaware of having been infected, I A progress to the recovered state R at
rate ξ A . The asymptomatic are assumed to stay infectious until they recover. Figure 5 illustrates the
disease progression of the asymptomatic. A proportion ζ A (t ) · [ζ A (t ) + ξ A ]−1 of the asymptomatic are
diagnosed with having COVID-19.
This proportion of individuals transition to state Y A .
As described in section A.3, the testing rate ζ A (t ) is not constant
but implicitly depends on time, due to dynamic testing policies.
ξA
RA
These individuals most likely get tested because they suspect or
IA
ξ* A
ζ A (t)
are informed by health-care workers engaged in contact-tracing
YA
to have recently been in contact with someone diagnosed with
COVID-19. Those who enter disease stage Y A progress to the reFigure 5:
covered state R at rate ξ∗A . The transition rate ξ∗A is faster than
ξ A and accounts for the elapsed duration of mild symptoms prior to being diagnosed. These diagnosed asymptomatic are aware of having been infected and of being infectious. Therefore, they are
assumed to engage in increased social distancing behavior described in the section A.3 on the disease
transmission model. The ODEs describing the asymptomatic disease progression are
I˙A = γ A P − [ξ A + ζ A (t )]I A ,
Ẏ A =

ζ A (t )I A − ξ∗A Y A .

(4)
(5)

Figure 6 illustrates the disease progression of the symptomatic. The non-diagnosed mildly symptomatic, I Sm either progress to the recovered state R at a rate ξm or develop severe symptoms and
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

progress to state I Ss at a rate υ. Some are tested at a rate ζS (t ) and diagnosed with having COVID19. These transition to state YSm and become aware of their infection state. As before, ζS (t ) is not a
constant but is assumed to implicitly depends on time. Our model assumes that those mildly symp(a)

(b)
ξm

ISs
μ

S

μ

S

ξs

I Sm

υ

YSs
I Ss

ζ S(t)

hA

ξH

H

(1-A H )ζ S(t)

υ*

μ

ξ ICU
h*A

Y Sm

RS

+(1-AICU)χ

H

D

A ICU χ

H
H

H

H ICU

μ

ICU

Y Ss
ξ* s

HICU
ξ* m

Figure 6: Model flow of disease progression of the infected symptomatic with transitions that lead to the recovered state R and the died state D shown respectively in panels a and b.
tomatic that get diagnosed will also progress to the recovered state R at a rate ξ∗m or develop severe
symptoms and transition to state YSs at rates υ∗ . These rates are respectively faster than ξ and υ to
account for the elapsed duration of mild symptoms prior to being diagnosed. The ODEs describing
the non-hospitalized with mild symptoms are
I˙Sm = γS P − [υ + ξm + ζS (t )]I Sm ,

(6)

ẎSm = ζS (t )I Sm − [υ∗ + ξ∗m ]YSm .

(7)

Most of the non-diagnosed severely symptomatic I Ss are hospitalized at a rate h A H . When they enter the hospital they are diagnosed with COVID-19. The percentage of severe cases hospitalized remains constant as long as the hospital has not reached its capacity in terms of available beds. The
dichotomous variable A H indicates whether the hospital is accessible to COVID-19 patients (A H = 1)
or whether it has reached its bed capacity and no longer accepts new COVID-19 patients (A H = 0). If
the hospital is at capacity, the severely symptomatic patients that would have otherwise been hospitalized are tested at a rate (1 − A H )ζS (t ). Once the hospital is no longer at capacity, these diagnosed
patients are hospitalized at a rate h ∗ A which is faster than rate h as these diagnosed patients are likely
to have waited longer to be hospitalized than the non-diagnosed. A minority of the severely symptomatic never access the hospital. Some of these patients recover but most die at home. We assume
that the transition rates to the recovered state R is ξs and to death D is µs . These rates also apply to
those diagnosed and severely symptomatic as the majority of those in state YSs are diagnosed while
having mild symptoms. The ODEs describing the non-hospitalized with severe symptoms are
I˙Ss = υI Sm − [ξs + µs + h A H + (1 − A H )ζS (t )]I Ss ,
ẎSs = (1 − A H )ζS (t )I Ss + υ

∗

12

YSm − [ξ∗s + µs + h ∗ A H ]YSs .

(8)
(9)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Patients that are hospitalized may develop critical symptoms. Like for the hospital, the ICU can also
reach capacity, at which point it takes no more patients until it has free beds. Provided there are
available ICU beds, these hospitalized critical patients transition into the ICU at a rate χA ICU . As with
hospital accessibility, we use the dichotomous variable A ICU to indicate whether the ICU is accessible
(A ICU = 1) to COVID-19 critical patients or whether it has reached capacity (A ICU = 0). Hospitalized
patients that do not require the ICU either transition to the recovered state R at a rate ξH , or transition
to death D at a rate µH . The transition rate µH is assumed to be small because very few patients die
in the hospital without having accessed the ICU first, provided that the ICU is not at capacity. We
assume that patients who recover in the ICU move immediately to the recovered compartment rather
than back to the hospital. This ensures that individuals do not make multiple trips to the ICU. The
transition rate to the recovered state R is ξICU . Therefore, the time spent in the H ICU compartment
represents both the ICU and the time spent recovering after intensive care in the hospital. The actual
transition rates from the hospitalized to the recovered state R and death D depend on whether the
ICU is accessible. When the ICU is closed, we assume that all those who required ICU access will die
until the ICU is reopened. Hence, the general transition rate from H ICU to death D is µH +χ(1− A ICU ).
The ODEs describing the hospitalized are
Ḣ
Ḣ ICU

= A[hI Ss + h ∗ YSs ] − [µH + χ + ξH ]H ,

(10)

= A ICU χH − [µICU + ξICU ]H ICU .

(11)

When the hospital is at capacity (A H = 0), patients that develop critical symptoms are more likely to
die at home. This requires modifying the rate µs based on the hospital accessibility indicator variable
A H . The implementation of our PBM can take this into account where the death rate µs in state I Ss
is increased to µs + hχ/(χ + ξH ). A similar increase in the death rate applies in state YSs . However,
unlike for the ICU, the duration of having no accessibility to the hospital is likely to be short because
hospitals can adapt spaces and create new bed accommodations in a way that is not possible for the
ICU. Hence, the ODEs we present and describe here do not consider this increased mortality rate.
Therefore, the ODEs describing the recovered and those that die are
R˙A = ξ A I A + ξ∗A Y A ,
R˙S = ξm I Sm + ξ∗m YSm + ξs I Ss + ξ∗s YSs + ξH H + ξICU H ICU ,

(13)

Ḋ = µS (I Ss + YSs ) + [µH + (1 − A ICU )χ]H + µICU H ICU .

(14)

(12)

We assume that the expected time for the diagnosed and asymptomatic Y A to transition to the
recovered state R is shorter than the expected time for the same transition to the recovered state of
the undiagnosed asymptomatic I A . Similarly, the expected time for YSm to transition to either state
YSs or the recovered state R is shorter than the expected time for those in I Sm to transition to either
state I Ss or the R is. We model this by setting ξ∗A = κξ ξ A , ξ∗m = κξ ξm and υ∗ = κξ υ where the value of κξ
is sampled in a range of values greater than one. As for interpretation, when (κξ −1)/κξ is multiplied by
the expected duration before the next clinical disease progression, it gives the expected time duration
when an infected person is likely to be diagnosed with COVID-19.
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

It is important to note that we have used a single compartment to represent each disease state.
Since our model tracks populations’ flow between compartments rather than individuals, implicitly,
the sojourn or dwelling time distribution for each compartment is exponential. Hence, it is a Markov
process with the following individual-level interpretation. The sojourn times and the transition rate
for the next disease progression do not depend on the history or path taken in how an individual
reached a specific disease state, nor does it depend on the elapsed time they have spent in each disease state. This property can have profound consequences in the disease progression dynamics, ultimately affecting transmission. The boxcar method can alleviate the strong assumption of exponential dwelling time distributions substituting the exponential distribution with an Erlang distribution,
which is more pathologically realistic [12]. This method requires breaking each disease state into a
series of concatenated compartments of the same disease state and shorter internals. By making the
shorter intervals equal in duration we obtain an Erlang dwelling time distribution. Conversely, the
shorter internals could have different duration to approximate other types of dwelling time distributions. For example, a Weibull distribution can be approximated by a series of concatenated compartments with decreasing sojourn times [13]. A model that uses the box-car method retains its Markov
property and has more realism in terms of progression rates. However, using this method the model
becomes computationally expensive and has diminishing benefits for disease models like our PBM,
which has many disease compartments, each with relatively short dwelling times.

A.2 Loss of immunity
The description of our model so far follows the general framework of an SEIR model. However, research indicates that immunity to COVID-19 is not permanent nor enduring and can last less than a
year. To simulate this, we adopt an SEIRS model, whereby those who recover can become susceptible
again. Since the rate of loss of immunity is slow with a time scale of months or years compared to the
disease progression rates with time scales of days, having those who have recovered transition directly
to the susceptible state is too rudimentary. This is because, as mentioned in the previous section, progression rates from one compartment to the next assume an exponential dwelling time distribution,
and this assumption for the dwelling time of being recovered and immune is highly inaccurate. Hence
we adopt a simple first-order boxcar correction whereby we include an intermediate or buffer recovered compartment R B , which recovered people transition into before losing immunity and returning
the susceptible population pool S. Hence, equation 1, 12 and 13 are modified, and we have an ODE
describing the dynamics of the R B compartment
Ṡ = 2ρ N R B − λS,

(15)

Ṙ A = ξ A I A + ξ∗A Y A − 2ρ N R A ,

(16)

Ṙ S = ξm I Sm + ξ∗m YSm + ξs I Ss + ξ∗s YSs + ξH H + ξICU H ICU − 2ρ N R S ,

(17)

Ṙ B

(18)

= 2ρ N (R A + R S − R B ),

where ρ N is the rate of loss of naturally acquired immunity. Extending the first order boxcar method
to higher orders can accomplish more realistic distributions of natural immunity duration. It would
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

require increasing the number of intermediate buffers R B and correspondingly decrease the transition
multiplicative factor from 2 to n + 1 where here n represents the number of intermediate buffers.
In our model, those who lose immunity return to the susceptible state and are treated as any other
susceptible. This means that our model does not consider a better prognosis due to residual immunity from the previous infection for people infected a second time. Hence, this effect leads to more
pessimistic long-term and multiple-year model dynamics.

A.3 Testing
Our model assumes a daily per-person rate ζ(t ) of being tested for COVID-19 on the population. People in different disease states have different demands for getting tested. For example, we assume that
people that are aware of having had COVID-19 and have recovered do not seek a test. We assume that
people tested in the exposed and presymptomatic infectious state are not diagnosed with COVID19 as their test results in a false negative outcome. The specific rates ζS (t ) and ζ A (t ) respectively
represent the daily per-person detection and diagnosis rates for the symptomatic and asymptomatic
populations. Those with mild and severe symptoms are more likely to get tested than those who are
asymptomatic. Hence ζS (t ) > ζ A (t ). The rate ζS (t ) only applies to those not yet hospitalized who
have either mild or severe symptoms. We assume that those who are hospitalized get tested if they
did not previously test positive. The rate at which the asymptomatic population seeks a test can be
considered the same for the susceptible population. However, due to testing-and-tracing efforts, it is
instead likely to be marginally larger, and hence ζ A (t ) > ζ(t ). Under the assumption of unconstrained
testing rates, these parameters are treated as constant and depend on the base-case demand for testing. This means that anyone who seeks a test is tested. Therefore, we assume testing capacity can
accommodate the growth of the epidemic, including the exponential phase.
Our PBM can model both the initial and later stages of the pandemic. The assumption of unconstrained testing rates is best suited to model the later stages of the epidemic. The results presented in
this paper consider unconstrained testing rates. However, for completeness, we proceed to describe
the capability of our PBM in modeling the early phase of the pandemic where the number of available testing kits was limited. The implementation of our PBM can consider settings with constraints
in the daily number of available testing kits. This number is assumed to start low and grow linearly
to a predefined maximum daily testing rate capacity. Thus, under these settings, the actual rates describing the testing and diagnosis rates from each disease state are reduced based on the capacity
constraint. We assume that people who have been hospitalized take priority and are tested first. The
remaining number of testing kits is then used to test those with severe symptoms. After that, the
remaining number of testing kits is used to test those with mild symptoms, followed by the asymptomatic. This approach requires specifying a constant proportion of testing kits used to successfully
identify COVID-19–positive compared with those that are COVID-19–negative.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A.4 Additional Outputs
Our PBM extracts and combines incidence rates that flow into different compartments to track output
cumulative quantities by population strata that do not affect the dynamics. These outputs include
1. True cumulative case counts:
Ċ T = λS.

(19)

Ċ R = ζS [I Sm + (1 − A H )I Ss ] + h A H I Ss + ζ A I A .

(20)

2. Reported cumulative case counts:

3. Cumulative number of people tested:
Ṫ = Ċ R + ζ(S + E + P ).

(21)

Ṙ R = ξ∗A Y A + ξ∗m YSm + ξ∗s YSs + ξH H + +ξICU H ICU .

(22)

4. Reported recovered:

We assume that all diagnosed COVID-19 cases that do not result in death are reported as recovered cases.
5. Reported deaths:
Ḋ R = Ḋ − µS I Ss .

(23)

We assume that all diagnosed COVID-19 cases that result in death are reported. All suspect
deaths due to COVID-19 of those with severe symptoms that did not get diagnosed and did not
progress to the hospital are assumed to be unreported.
6. Reported Case Fatality Rate (CFR):
CFRR (t ) = D R (t )/C R (t ).

(24)

IFR(t ) = D(t )/[D + R S + R A + R B ].

(25)

7. The Infection Fatality Rate:

A.5 Modeling SARS-CoV-2 transmission
Following the approach taken in standard compartmental models of infectious diseases, the force
of infection λ describes SARS-CoV-2 transmission. The force of infection is characterized by how
infectious people in each disease state infect others. In our formulation, the force of infection is the
product of two parameters. The first parameter is the contact mixing rate, representing the number
of daily contacts people make with others. The second parameter is biological transmissibility, which
defines the probability of transmission between an infectious and a susceptible person when they
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

come in contact. Each disease state would have a different content mixing rate and transmissibility.
We express the force of infection as
λ(t ) =

X

c X I β X I X I (t ) = c e f f βe f f

XI

X

m X I X I (t ),

(26)

XI

where the coefficient c X I represents the social mixing contact rate and β X I represents the transmissibility of infectious people in disease state X I .
The expression for the force of infection simplifies by assuming an effective contact rate c e f f and
an effective βe f f transmissibility. The product of these two c e f f βe f f is assumed to characterize the
rate of infections caused by an undiagnosed asymptomatic infected person in either state P or I A .
Rates of infections in the other disease states are characterized using m X I coefficients that give the
multiplicative effect on infectivity with respect to the primary infectious state or an asymptomatic
state. For example, m Ss gives the overall average multiplicative infectivity of a symptomatic severe
individual relative to an asymptomatic individual. This multiplicative factor combines the effect
of decreased social mixing with increased biological transmissibility. We choose the asymptomatic
untested individual as our reference because they are unaware of their positive status and thus do
not change their social mixing behavior acting as though they are not infected. Hence m P = m I A = 1.
We estimate the values of the multiplicative factor of the other disease stages by considering how the
transmissibility and the social mixing contact rate change relative to the presymptomatic case.
Changes in viral load are used to estimate the transmissibility of each of the disease states. Studies
have shown that viral loads peak in the primary infectious stage and decrease monotonically after
the onset of symptoms. Hence, we assume the inequalities βP ∼ βI A > βI S m ∼ βI Ss ∼ βH = βICU . In
terms of mixing rates we assume that c P = c I A > c I Sm > c Y A ∼ c I Ss > c Y Sm > c Y Ss . See section B.2.3 for
more details on relative infectivity. Those who are in the presymptomatic or asymptomatic state are
unaware of their positive status and thus act as though they are not infected. However, those who have
symptoms will reduce their contacts as their conditions become more severe or receive a positive test
result. Likewise, tested asymptomatic people also will begin to practice increased social distancing to
protect their social contacts.
Under ideal conditions, the physical contact rate that leads to disease transmission between health
care workers and COVID-19 patients c H and c ICU would be close to zero. However, given the shortage
of personal protective equipment during the early stages of the epidemic, contact safety precautions
in health care settings may not have always been perfectly adhered to. We consider a range of assumptions for c H and c ICU .
The value of the effective infectivity c e f f βe f f and its range is estimated from the basic reproductive number R 0 . This number is defined at the individual-level and represents the average number of
secondary infections caused by an infectious person during the disease invasion phase. This phase
represents the early stage of the epidemic when susceptible individuals surround each infectious person. At the population-level, R 0 represents a threshold parameter. Whether its value is larger or
smaller than one, this threshold parameter indicates whether an outbreak will invade the population
and become an epidemic or whether it is likely to extinguish before becoming a full-blown epidemic.
The distinction between the individual-level definition and the basic reproductive number’s thresh17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

old property does not always align and can be very consequential, leading to incorrect conclusions.
A large body of literature provides a detailed discussion on the basic reproductive number, its uses,
limitations, and misconceptions [14–18].
In simple mathematical models of infectious diseases, such as Susceptible-Infected-Removed (SIR)
or SEIR models, R 0 can be expressed as the product of three terms R 0 = cβτI where τI represents the
duration of the infectious phase. This expression assumes that the contact rate c and the transmissibility β takes the same value for all the infectious compartments. This is the case for the SIR and SEIR
models but it is not the case for our COVID-19 PBM. Our COVID-19 model considers more-infectious
compartments with different contact mixing and transmissibility values and compartments that branch
off from each other. We express R 0 in terms of c e f f βe f f as
R 0 = c e f f β e f f τe f f ,

(27)

where τe f f represents a typical time-scale that considers the diversity of both disease transmission
and progression across the different disease states. It can be interpreted as the effective infectious
period for an equivalent SEIR model with a single infectious compartment, with contact rate c e f f and
the transmissibility βe f f . Consequently, in our model τe f f is not equal to the duration of the infectious period τI because the former accounts for the changes in transmissibilities in each infectious
compartment, namely the m multiplicative factors. The expression for τe f f is given at disease invasion and hence considers the case where testing rates ζ A (t ) and ζS (t ) are zero. The next section,
appendix A.6, describes the next-generation method and gives the mathematical expression for τe f f
at disease invasion in terms of the transmission and progression parameters. Hence, by knowing the
input transmission and progression parameter values, we can compute the duration τe f f . By knowing
the value of this duration and an estimated input value of R 0 we can compute the value of c e f f βe f f .
To extract an estimate for the value of R 0 , we use the number of reported cases during the epidemic’s early stages. In the disease invasion phase, the growth in cases is exponential. Hence, the
log of the case counts and the log of the death counts increase linearly with time. An estimate for the
growth rate r is obtained by linear regression of the log of these counts with time. Mathematically, R 0
is related to r by the following expression
R 0 = 1 + r (τE + τI ),

(28)

where τE + τI represents the typical duration for which a person is infected and is the sum of the
duration of the noninfectious incubation phase τE and the duration of the infectious phase τI [17].
The value of τI depends on the disease progression times and, more specifically, on the dwelling or
sojourn times of compartments representing infectious states.
As disease dynamics progress beyond the disease-invasion phase and natural immunity develops,
we use a time-dependent parameter known as the effective reproduction number R t . Tracking the
effective reproductive number dynamics is informative because it exhibits the same threshold properties as the basic reproductive number. Hence, if its value is above 1, the disease is spreading and
is not under control. At the individual-level R t , it represents the average number of new infections
caused by a single infected individual at time t in the partially susceptible population. Generally, it
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

is found by multiplying R 0 by the proportion of the population that is susceptible. For our model
this means substituting equation 30 for τe f f into equation 27 for R 0 and multiplying by S(t ). However, equation 30 provides an approximate value for τe f f which is only exact at disease invasion. This
is because R 0 is defined at disease invasion, and this allows us to remove unnecessary details from
the calculation, which do not matter at disease invasion. For example, we assume that no-one is being tested at disease invasion and that the hospital is at capacity. Hence, complexities in behavioral
changes due to testing and changes in the dynamics due to hospital capacity constraints can be neglected. However, when computing R t these details become important and dynamically change the
typical time-scale τe f f of the disease. We can obtain an equation for τe f f that replaces equation 30
which is more generally valid, and our model can rely on it. However, it is a very lengthy algebraic
expression. We discuss this further in appendix A.6.
The estimation of the value of the growth rate r and hence of R 0 using a linear regression approach
has limitations. During the disease invasion exponential growth phase, case reports are not very reliable because of backlogs and limited testing capacity. By the time testing rates and capacity have
stabilized, many jurisdictions were already in a stage where they had implemented social distancing.
A better choice is to use the death count data. However, when the linear regression approach is used
to find the R 0 for the different U.S. states we have found that some states produced an unacceptably
bad fit to the data. For these states, we assumed that the value of R 0 is between two and four based on
the population density of the state. For these cases, the value of R 0 is assumed to range from two for
the state with the lowest population density to four for the state with the highest population density.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A.6 The expression for τe f f
To find the expression for τe f f , we apply the next-generation method [19, 20] to the model described
by the set of coupled ODEs given in Eqs 1-14. We first rearrange the order of our ODEs and focus only
on the equations describing infection states. We then construct the matrices M and V respectively, describing the disease transmission and progression terms. The equations, together with the matrices,
are shown on the next page. A representation of the Jacobian matrix J∗ of our system of ODEs taken
at disease-free equilibrium point (i.e., S = 1) is given by
J∗ = M · [−V]−1 .

(29)

The expression for R 0 is found by finding the largest eigenvalue of J∗ . At the disease-free equilibrium point, and soon after, at disease-invasion, the hospital and ICU is not at capacity and there is no
testing for COVID-19. Hence the expression for R 0 is found by setting A H = A ICU = 1 and ζS = ζ A = 0).
Using this simplification we find that
£
¡
¢¤
a γ A bc + ξ A bc + m Sm γS c + υm Ss γS + ξ A A H hυm h γS
¡
¢
,
(30)
τe f f =
ξ A γ A + γS abc
where the coefficients a, b and c are given by
a =

¡
¢
µH + ξH ,

b = (ξm + υ),
¡
¢
c = A H h + µ H + ξS ,
and
R 0 = c e f f β e f f τe f f .
We can also find an expression for the effective reproductive number R t . Generally R t = R 0 S. However,
we cannot use equation 30 for τe f f and to get R t because it is only valid at disease invasion where we
assumed no testing and full accessibility to the hospital and ICU. We can derive a complete expression
for τe f f that considers testing rates and hospital accessibility using the next-generation method. Such
expression is algebraically long and complicated, and we choose not to include it here. A Mathematica
notebook providing the full expression is available upon request.

20

= νE − (γS + γ A )P,

Ṗ

21
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

m Sm
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0





V=







−ν
ν
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
−(γ A + γS )
γS
0
0
0
0
0
γA
0

0
0
−(υ + ξm + ζS )
υ
ζS
0
0
0
0
0

−[µS + ξS + A H + (1 − A H )ζS ]
0
(1 − A H )ζS
AH h
0
0
0

0
0
0

m Ss
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
−(υ∗ + ξ∗
m)
υ∗
0
0
0
0

and the matrix V describing the progression terms is given by

M = c e f f βe f f





·




0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

m tSm
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

m tSs
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
−(µS + ξ∗
+ A H h∗)
S
A H h∗
0
0
0

Using this order, the matrix describing the transmission terms M is given by


Ẏ A = ζ A (t )I A − ξ∗A Y A .

mh
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

= A H [hI Ss + h ∗ YSs ] − [µH + χ + ξH ]H ,

Ḣ ICU = A ICU χH − [µICU + ξICU ]H ICU ,
I˙A = γ A P − [ξ A + ζ A (t )]I A ,

Ḣ

1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

m tA
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0





,






0
0
0
0
0
0
−(µH + χ + ξH )
A ICU χ
0
0

mh
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

ẎSs = (1 − A H )ζS (t )I Ss + υ∗ YSm − [ξ∗s + µs + h ∗ A H ]YSs ,

ẎSm = ζS (t )I Sm − [υ∗ + ξ∗m ]YSm ,

I˙Sm = γS P − [υ + ξm + ζS (t )]I Sm ,
I˙Ss = υI Sm − [ξs + µs + h A H + (1 − A)ζS (t )]I Ss ,

= λS − νE ,

Ė

The ODEs of our model can be reordered as follows:

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−(µi cu + ξi cu )
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−(ζ A + ξ A )
ζA

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
−ξ∗A





.







medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

We note that although τe f f expresses a time scale, it includes the multiplicative coefficients m.
Thus, τe f f gives the time scale of the whole infectious state’s Q% when all multiplicative coefficients
m are set equal to one. Using a more direct approach instead of the next-generation matrix approach,
we verified that the expression for Q-.. does indeed give Q% when all multiplicative coefficients D are
set equal to one. Because
R0
.
(31)
c e f f βe f f =
τe f f

A.7 The Population Stratified Model
The population in our model can be partitioned into subpopulations. We consider multiple population groups or strata within each compartment. Each stratum specifies the population-based on
common characteristics, such as demographic, social, economic, and pathological states. The specific strata we consider are described in section B.1. The structure of the population stratified model
is expressed as an array of ODEs, where the disease progression dynamics for each stratum are expressed by equations 1-14. The reformulation to a strata-dependent PBM extends the model from the
more conventional version of a single-strata compartment model that assumes homogeneous mixing
and implicit interactions within the population.
The modeled population is described by the proportion of people in each stratum. These proportions are given by the one-dimensional array v where the element v i represents the proportion
of the population belonging to strata i . Since we are tracking population densities, the sum of all the
elements of the v is equal to one. We will refer to v and other strata-specific one-dimensional arrays
as vectors in the disease state space X . Therefore, each disease state is also expressed as a vector.
For example, the vector P (t ) represents the presymptomatic state, and the element P i represents the
proportion of the presymptomatic population belonging to strata i .
Some parameter values and settings that enter the model differ across the strata. The heterogeneity introduced by the strata-dependent parameters plays a crucial role in the disease progression and
transmission dynamics and is used to better characterize the epidemiology of COVID-19. Differences
across strata include parameter values describing pathological transition rates, including the proportion of the infectious in each stratum that stay asymptomatic (i.e., γ A and γS ), the proportion of the
symptomatic that develop severe symptoms and need hospitalization (i.e., υ), and the fatality rates
(i.e., the µ parameter values). The flexibility of our model allows users to easily specify other parameters that depend on the strata. For example, protective behaviors such as willingness to get tested can
be specified by stratum.
The strata-dependent parameters are also expressed as vectors and are used to specify the strataspecific transition rates between disease states. For example, the vector giving the strata-specific
transition rates from state P to state I A is expressed as γ A ¯ P , where ¯ denotes the element-wise
multiplication. Equivalently, this can be expressed by matrix multiplication as diag(γ A ) · P where the
operator diag represents vector diagonalization. By following this notation, the PBM’s ODEs can be
expressed in vector notation, remaining mathematically concise.
Heterogeneity in disease transmission is introduced by the strata-dependent mixing contact rates

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

describing the variations in how people belonging to the different population strata mix with each
other. This heterogeneity is described by a mixing matrix M . The matrix element M i j denotes the
proportion of contacts of individuals in population strata (or row) i with those in population strata
(or column) j . The sum across each row in the mixing matrix is a sum of proportions, and hence
P
equals one (i.e., j M i j = 1). In addition to the mixing matrix, we have a normalized contact vector
κ. The vector element κi denotes the proportion of all daily contacts (or duration of contacts) in the
population made by individuals in stratum i , and hence, the sum of the vector elements is one (i.e.,
P
i κi = 1). The matrix multiplication of the diagonalized vector κ with M gives the contact matrix K ,
expressed by
K = diag(κ) · M = κ ¯ M .
(32)
The contact matrix K is a symmetric matrix where the sum across the rows is equal to the vector κ.
For off-diagonal elements i and j , the sum K i j +K j i gives the proportion of all daily contacts between
strata i and j . For diagonal elements, the same proportion is given by K i i . Under the disease-free
status-quo conditions everyone is susceptible. Hence v = S , and the overall daily effective contact
rate is propositional to S T · K · S . During the disease transmission dynamics, we are instead interested
in the contacts between the susceptible population S and each of the infectious states XI . Hence
the daily effective contact rate between susceptible and infectious people is proportional to S T · K ·
P
X I X I . We denote the coefficient of proportionality by k λ . Taken together with transmissibility βe f f
and the transmissibility multiplier m X I , we can express the force of infection vector for our strata
dependent PBM as
X
λ(t ) = kλ c e f f βe f f K · m X I XI (t ).
(33)
XI

Equation 33 replaces equation 26 for our strata-specific PBM and the transition rate from S to E given
in equation 1 is re-expressed as
Ṡ (t ) = −λ(t ) ¯ S (t ).
(34)
The coefficient of proportionality k λ is related to the base-line total daily contact rates. We estimate
k λ at disease-invasion by calibration to the observed data and assume that it stays constant during the
dynamics. Instead, changes in mixing rates due to social-distancing NPI and behavioral responses are
accounted for by changes in the contact matrix K .

A.8 Mixing Modes
People mix in different settings, or mixing modes. Modes have different levels of social interaction and
different strata compositions. For instance, in schools mixing is primarily between children, whereas
in commercial settings mixing occurs between all ages. Our PBM considers six different modes of
social mixing: household, school, work, commerce, leisure, and other. Based on the data described
in Section B.1 we can create matrices describing the average daily contacts between each stratum in
each mixing mode. We decompose these matrices into a set of row normalized mixing matrices Mm ,
column normalized contact vectors κm , and scalar mode weight w m for each mixing mode labeled
by the index m. The total contact matrix, K is a weighted sum of the mode-specific contact matrices

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Km , and given by
K=

X

w m [κm ¯ Mm ] =

m

X

w m Km ,

(35)

m

The weights, w m give the proportion of contacts (or duration of contacts) of how people mix over
the different mixing modes. Under the disease-free status-quo conditions these weights sum to one,
P
hence m w m = 1.

A.9 Modeling Nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs)
When the initial outbreak becomes an epidemic, governments may choose to impose nonpharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) which limit how people can mix. The goal of NPIs is to delay and reduce
the peak number of cases and hospitalizations per day by shifting individuals to locations where there
are few unique contacts. Hence, we model the effects of NPIs by decreasing the weights associated
with various mixing modes. For example, an NPI policy that closed schools, restaurants, and bars is
modeled by reducing the weights associated with the school, commerce, and leisure mixing modes.
Mixing matrices measure the number of unique contacts, not time spent in a mixing mode, therefore
weights are not conserved. NPI interventions, such as confining people to their households, reduce
the total number of unique contacts such that the mixing mode weights sum to less than one. To
model the impact of reduced mixing from NPI level n on mode m, we define a diagonal matrix Φ{n}
m .
{n}
The diagonal elements of Φm specify the reduction in mixing for each stratum in mode m relative
to the disease-free state. For interventions that apply to all strata (i.e. where each stratum changes
their mixing by the same proportion), such as the closure of schools, all diagonal elements of Φ{n}
m
have the same value. In cases where interventions apply to some strata and not others: such as when
only front-line essential workers are expected to attend their workplaces, the diagonal elements of
Φ{n}
m take on different values, each specifying the strata-mode specific impact of the NPI. Hence the
expression for K {n} that accounts for the impact of NPIs is:
o
n
X
1
1
2 K (Φ{n} ) 2 .
K {n} = w m (Φ{n}
)
(36)
m
m
m
m

In the disease-free state, specified by NPI-level one (i.e., n = 1) the Φ{1}
m matrix is equal to the identity
matrix where all diagonal elements are equal to one.
The matrix Φ{n}
m is square-rooted and then multiplied on either side of the contact matrix Km so
that the contact matrix is symmetric. The matrix Φ{n}
m represents multiplicative factors that reduce the
strength of the interactions along the network edges. It is obtained by the individual-level reductions
specified on the network vertices. Two vertices bound each edge, and hence the overall edge-level
reduction of the interactions is given by multiplying the two vertex-level reductions. These reductions
1
are represented by the term (Φ{n}
m ) 2 in mixing on either side of the strength of the edge, and given by
the matrix Km .
We allow the effectiveness of NPIs to vary by state. The effectiveness of the NPIs, θ, is defined
through a calibration process. We narrow the ranges used as priors in the calibration process by exploring a wide range of parameter combinations using a Latin Hypercube Sample and by observing

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

that values outside those ranges consistently produced biased death results. The calibrated contact
matrix Kc{n} is:

K {1}

Kc{n} = ³

´
K {1}
θ K
−
1
+1
{n}

(37)

When θ = 1, Kc{n} = K {n} . For other values, θ approximately geometrically scales the distance
between K {n} and zero mixing, while leaving Kc{1} = K {1} for any θ. For instance, a value of θ = 2
yields a Kc{n} approximately half the size of K {n} for n 6= 1. This functional form allows us to account
for the physical and cultural differences between states which may yield different NPI effectiveness
and compliance levels.
After the initial wave of lockdowns in March and April 2020, many states slackened restrictions.
However many behaviors to reduce transmission, including mask-wearing, aversion to crowded spaces,
and other adaptation measures remained after the lockdowns were lifted. To account for this we compute the final contact matrix K {n}
as a weighted average of the contact matrix under the highest NPI
f

Kc{h} and the current NPI Kc{n} :
K {n}
= b h Kc{h} + (1 − b h )Kc{n} .
f

(38)

The relative weight b h of the highest NPI matrix is calibrated through the same process as the
NPI effectiveness parameter. Finally, to prevent NPIs from changing instantaneously in the model
and causing discontinuities inappropriate for an ODE, we make the NPI level n c a continuous stock
variable with rate n˙c = (n ∗ − n)/l , where n ∗ is a target NPI level and l determines how fast the NPI
level can be changed. Therefore, the mixing matrix we use is a weighted average between the ceiling
{dn e}
{bn c}
NPI level mixing matrix K f c and the floor NPI level K f c weighted by the distance between n c
and its ceiling.

A.10 Modeling NPI-induced changes in household mixing
The NPI-specific contact matrices K {n} specify average mixing levels across everyone in the population. For some modes this is a reasonable approximation - the sample of individuals in a grocery store
is approximately random and is likely different for each visit. However, this is not a good approximation of households, in which the same set of individuals mixes every day. Consider a stringent
intervention that confined everyone to their home: the mixing weights for each other mode would
drop to zero, but the mixing weights for the household would remain at one (because the number of
unique household contacts remains constant). This formulation would model the situation in which
all individuals are confined to a single (gigantic) household. To approximate the reality that people
are confined to different households, we assume that the number of infections transmitted within the
household is proportional to the amount of mixing outside the household. That is:
Φ{n}
=
household

X
m6=household

25

w m (Φ{n}
m )

(39)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A.11 Seasonality
The PBM considers seasonality in the transmissibility and social mixing. This is modeled by multiplying c e f f βe f f by a time-varying term denoted by ϑ(t ) that has an average value equal to one over a
year. We use a simple sinusoidal function to describe ϑ(t ) given by
2 + 2s[1 − sin2 (πt /365)]
ϑ(t ) =
,
2+s

(40)

where s is a tunable constant. For s = 0 we get no seasonal effects and the multiplicative parameter
ϑ = 1. As s → ∞, the multiplicative parameter ϑ(t ) will tend to vary between 0 in early July and 2 in
early January with an average value of 1. The sinusoidal function assumes that the seasonal decrease
in transmissibility after January mirrors its seasonal increase after July. In reality, changes in transmissibility over the year are not perfectly symmetric as given by a sinusoidal function. Future versions of
our model will relax this assumption.
In addition to the smooth change in seasonal transmissibility described by equation 40, our model
allows users to specify key date such as national holidays and sports events when people are likely to
relax social distancing measures, gather with family and friends, or in large groups, and generally be
less compliant to the NPIs.

A.12 Numerical Integration
The coupled ODEs defining our PBM are integrated numerically to track the dynamics of the population in each compartment as they change over time. Since the model includes many compartments
and a wide range of values defining the rates across the compartments, the numerical integration of
the ODEs is a stiff problem [8], whereby the numerical solution has its step size limited more severely
by the stability of the numerical technique than by the accuracy of the technique. We implemented in
R using the deSolve package [9]. DeSolve solves initial value problems for stiff ODEs using FORTRAN
solvers of the Livermore family. There are various types of solvers that can be used [6, 7]. We tested
the lsoda, vode, and the fourth-order Runge-Kutta method and found that the lsoda method was the
most reliable for our purpose.

B Informing the model
B.1 Mixing Matrices and Population Strata
We model mixing in the population using mixing matrices. A mixing matrix describes the amount
of contact that occurs between each of the population strata. We consider six different mixing locations: household, work, school, commercial, recreational, and other. We use two sources for mixing
matrices within the baseline scenario. The first source is a mixing matrix based on the locations of
a synthetic population in the city of Portland, Oregon provided by the Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory (NDSSL) at Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University [21]. The

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

second data source is based on self-reported survey data. Over the course of one day in eight European countries, 7,290 participants reported 97,074 unique contacts [22]. These results were then
extrapolated to create mixing matrices for 152 countries, including the United States [23]. We use the
US matrix as our second data source.
These sources represent two different methodologies for quantifying social mixing matrices, and
both have limitations. The NDSSL data define a contact as two simulated individuals inhabiting the
same sublocation at the same time. This method likely over-weights locations where there are many
individuals in low mixing environments, such as workplaces. Further, the data are synthetic and represent Portland on a weekday, so might not be representative of the entire United States. The Prem et
al. contacts are self-tracked, so they may over-weight contacts in close environments that are more
easily remembered, such as the home. Although they are ostensibly representative of the United
States, the original data were from European countries. Additionally, the Prem et al. matrices did
not differentiate between commercial, recreational, and other mixing. To mitigate these concerns we
averaged the mixing matrices from both sources.
States typically apply NPI and vaccination policies to specific groups. To ensure that we could represent state policies, we transformed these averaged matrices to represent the nine non-aggregated
strata shown in table 3. Creating different matrices for each state would be time-consuming and unnecessary for the analyses we aim to perform with the model. Instead, we created a single set of
matrices using the US populations, though the size of each stratum is allowed to vary by state. The
averaged matrices contain strata by age group and chronic condition. We aggregated these strata
into three age groups (age ≤ 17, 18 ≤ age ≤ 64, age ≥ 65). To create ‘employed’ and ‘not employed’
strata we split mixing in the ’working age 18 ≤ age ≤ 64 strata. In every mixing mode except work,
we split working-age mixing in proportion to the population who were employed or not employed.
This is equivalent to assuming that average levels of mixing in the household, school, commercial,
recreational, and other settings are the same for employed and unemployed individuals. Work mode
mixing was assigned entirely to the employed strata. Based on BLS data [24] approximately 10% of
workers are younger than 20 or older than 65, these workers and their work mixing was aggregated
into their respective age groups.
We further split the employed strata into Front-line essential workers (FLEW) and other workers.
All mixing was split in proportion to population, equivalent to assuming that FLEW and other workers
have similar mixing patterns. We assumed that FLEW would only mix with other FLEW at work and,
similarly, that non-FLEW workers would only mix with other non-FLEW workers. This was based on
the Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) guidance which indicates that most essential industries are composed entirely of essential workers [25]. We assumed that those workers with
chronic high-risk conditions have mixing behaviors identical to their colleagues without high-risk
conditions.
Some of these assumptions may not be robust. For instance, essential workers may have different distributions of mixing compared to other workers in settings outside work. They may mix with
other essential workers more in social settings because personal relationships are linked to work relationships and many social networks exhibit homophily [26]. Frontline essential workers may also
have different levels of mixing at work. Many essential jobs, such as grocery store workers or first27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Non-aggregated Strata

US Unique
Population
(millions)

Aggregated Strata

Young

73.4

Young

FLEW without high-risk conditions

36.0

FLEW

Employed, but not FLEW, without
high-risk conditions

60.0

Working age

Not employed without high-risk
conditions

33.2

Working age

Old without high-risk conditions

11.8

Old

FLEW with high-risk conditions

14.1

FLEW

Employed, but not FLEW, with
high-risk conditions

37.6

Working age with
high-risk conditions

Not employed with high-risk
conditions

20.8

Working age with
high-risk conditions

Old with high-risk conditions

37.6

Old

Table 3: Model strata and corresponding populations
responders involve high-levels of contact. However white-collar jobs are not defined by low mixing,
offices and group meetings are high-contact environments, but by the ease at which mixing can be reduced during a pandemic. In an analysis of O*NET data [27], RAND colleagues found that white-collar
jobs tended to have higher scores on questions that indicated higher work mixing than blue-collar or
service jobs. These mixing matrices represent baseline mixing, differences in adaptability are modeled through strata-specific effects of NPIs.
Detailed strata enable us to quickly adapt if states change their vaccination policies. However,
model calibration and run-times are significantly longer with more strata, especially if the strata are
small (due to absolute solver tolerances). To ensure that no stratum was less than 5% of the population, we aggregated the nine strata into five, as shown in Table 3. We aggregated strata that had the
same vaccination priority, for instance, FLEW are always vaccinated early irrespective of whether they
have a chronic condition. Where strata were aggregated, their mixing and disease severity are the
population-weighted average.

B.2 Model parameters
Parameters indicate how people move between states in the model. These include disease progression
rates, the proportion of individuals who enter more severe disease states, and the relative infectivity
of each stage.
Parameter estimates were selected from a review of the literature and with the input of RAND experts. To carry out sensitivity analyses of the parameters and to calibrate the model, we constructed a
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

large set of independent case runs, each with a different and unique combination of model parameter
values. Parameter values for the case runs are sampled using a Latin-Hypercube approach [28, 29].
We use either a uniform or a beta-PERT (Program Evaluation and Review Technique) distribution to
sample the model parameter value, as specified within a sensitivity analysis range [30]. In the latter
case, the reference value is used to specify the mode of the beta distribution used for our parameter value sampling. The model formulas shown are based on the parameters in Figures 4, 5, and 6.
Summaries of parameter estimates, sources, and sensitivity are shown in Tables 4, 5, 6 and 7
B.2.1 Duration parameters
Duration parameter estimates are shown in Table 4 and specify how fast individuals advance through
the disease phases. Estimates are for the mean duration of the phase length, rather than for any individual’s phase lengths. The incubation phase, or pre-symptomatic phase, is the time from exposure
to the virus to the appearance of the first symptoms. We assume that immediately after exposure
individuals are not infectious, but that they become infectious before exhibiting symptoms. Some
research suggests that the pre-symptomatic phase is the most infectious period [31], we explore this
more in Section B.2.3. We assume that the infectious periods are the same length for those with mild
disease or who are asymptomatic [31]. As shown in Figure 6 all individuals who develop severe disease
must first pass through the mild disease phase. The mean duration of mild disease is similar to the
mean delay between symptom onset and hospitalization [32–37], so we assume that individuals are
admitted almost immediately to the hospital after entering the severe compartment of the model.
We describe hospital and ICU stays through two parameters. The first includes the expected time
spent in the hospital at hospitalization, which includes some expectation of ICU admission. The second parameter is the expected time spent in the ICU at ICU admission as a fraction of the first parameter. For COVID-19 a significant proportion do not enter the ICU and ICU stays are long [37, 38], so
the second parameter is a large fraction of the first. The parameters are constructed in this manner so
that the length of ICU and hospital stays are not independently sampled.
B.2.2 Prognosis parameters
Prognosis parameter estimates are shown in Table 5 and specify what fraction of individuals enter
different phases, such as whether individuals with mild disease recover or develop severe disease.
We define severe disease as requiring hospitalization and critical disease as requiring ICU admission.
The proportion of asymptomatic individuals used in this model is substantially lower than early estimates. Recent systematic reviews have found that many early studies overestimated the fraction of
symptomatic individuals because they applied restrictive criteria for symptoms or did not observe
participants for long enough to determine if they were asymptomatic or presymptomatic [42–44].
The proportion of symptomatic infections which result in hospitalization has not been reliably estimated in the literature. Available estimates find high rates (19%) but are likely biased due to selection
effects which undersample mild cases [45]. Merely looking at the ratio of cumulative hospitalizations
to cumulative positive tests in US (among states who report both metrics) as of February 2020 [46]
shows a symptomatic hospitalization rate of around 6% (accounting for the proportion symptomatic
29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter

Mode

Sample
Range

Sample
Dist

Formula

Duration in days of
incubation phase

5

4-6

PERT

1
ν

Proportion of incubation
phase which is
non-infectious

60%

50 - 70%

PERT

γ A +γS
γ A +γS +ν

[32, 40]

Infectious duration in days
of asymptomatic and mild
disease

5

4-7

PERT

1
ξA

[32–36]

Expected days spent in
hospital (including ICU) at
hospitalization

8

6 - 10

PERT

1
×
³ξH +µH +A ICU χ ´
χ
1 + ξICU +µICU

[35, 37]

Expected days spent in the
ICU at ICU admission as a
proportion of expected days
spent in the hospital at
hospitalization

90%

80 - 100%

PERT

ξH +µH +A ICU χ
ξICU +µICU +χ

[35, 37]

Months before loss of
natural immunity

20

10 - 40%

PERT

ρ

[41]

1
+ γ A +γ
S

Sources
[32, 33,
35, 39]

Table 4: Disease duration parameter estimates
shown in Table 4). The real figure is likely significantly lower than this number because we observe a
higher fraction of hospitalizations due to COVID-19 than we do COVID-19 infections.
There is evidence that the fatality rate of those hospitalized has radically decreased since the beginning of the pandemic due to a combination of improved protocols and new treatment regimens.
Part of this effect is explained by a change in the age composition of the hospitalized, but accounting
for this some researchers estimate a 2 to 3-fold decrease in fatality rate among those admitted to the
hospital [47]. This finding suggests that treatment efficacy is an important time-varying confounder
in our model. Therefore, we allow a treatment efficacy stock variable T that is initiated at zero is modeled as d T /d t = (T ∗ −T )/t p where T is the treatment efficacy, T ∗ is the final treatment efficacy, and t p
controls how fast treatment improves. To model this, we assume that a high proportion of those admitted to the ICU die. This formulation allows treatment efficacy to become a time-varying variable,
as it has been observed empirically [47].
B.2.3 Relative Infectivity parameters
The relative infectivity, the daily expected infections of susceptible, varies by disease state. We conceptualize infectivity as having two components: contact mixing, how likely people are to mix with
others, and biological transmissibility, the probability of transmission between an infectious and a
susceptible person given a contact. The infectivity is the product of these components. We define
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter

Mode

Sample
Range

Sample
Dist

Formula

Sources

Proportion of infections which are
asymptomatic

25%

15 - 50%

PERT

γA
γ A +γS

[35, 42–44]

Proportion of symptomatic infections
which are severe (require
hospitalization)

5%

3 - 7%

Uniform

υ
υ+ξm +µS

Proportion of severe cases which are
critical (require ICU admission)

32%

26 - 38%

PERT

χ
χ+ξH +µH

[35, 38]

Initial proportion of critical cases
which result in death

75%

70 - 80%

PERT

µICU
ξICU +µICU

[38, 47, 48]

Reduction in ICU death proportion as
treatment improves

50%

40 - 60%

PERT

N/A

[47]

Time period over which treatment
improves (months)

6

4.8 - 7.2

PERT

N/A

[47]

See Section
B.2.2

Table 5: Disease prognosis parameter estimates
infectivities relative to the asymptomatic state.
To calculate biological transmissibility we rely on viral load data and estimates of the number of
infections in the presymptomatic period. We use viral load data from individuals who tested positive
[31], assuming that the average test occurs 3 days after initial exposure [35]. Based on relationships
between biological transmissibility observed in other infectious diseases, we assume that the functional form for the relative biological transmissibility, β1,2 between the viral load in two states, V L 1
and V L 2 is:
β1,2 = δ

Log 10

³

V L2
V L1

´

.

(41)

Where δ is a calibration parameter. Several studies have estimated that the fraction of infections
caused during the presymptomatic period is approximately 45% [10, 49]. We choose δ = 1.92 such
that 45% of infections are caused in the presymptomatic phase once contact mixing is accounted for.
We also assume that those who are asymptomatic have biological transmissibility only 75% of those
who have mild symptoms based on estimates by the CDC [36]
Contact mixing changes by disease phase because individuals may be incapacitated COVID-19 or
may voluntarily reduce their mixing to avoid infecting others. We assume that those who are presymptomatic or asymptomatic do not modify their mixing relative to those who have not yet been exposed
to the virus. Those with mild symptoms reduce mixing by 40%, those who are tested positive by 80%,
those who are severe (but not yet hospitalized) by 90%, and those who are hospitalized by 95%. The
reduction for those who are hospitalized is larger than for those who are waiting for hospitalization
because hospital staff is expected to have better protective equipment than home carers. The infectivities relative to the asymptomatic phase are shown in Table 6.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Infectivity of phase relative to
asymptomatic phase

Mode

Sample
Range

Sample Dist

Sources

Pre-symptomatic infectious

2.07

1.65 - 2.48

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Mild symptomatic

0.83

0.66 - 1.00

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Severe symptomatic

0.14

0.11 - 0.17

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Hospitalized

0.07

0.06 - 0.08

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Tested mild symptomatic

0.28

0.22 - 0.33

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Tested severe symptomatic

0.14

0.11 - 0.17

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Tested asymptomatic

0.20

0.16 - 0.24

PERT

[10, 31, 35, 50]

Table 6: Relative infectivity parameter estimates
B.2.4 Other parameters
We randomly sample several other parameters from distributions. These are shown in Table 7 and
pertain to testing rates, seasonality, and the effectiveness of NPIs within that state. See Sections A.3,
A.9, and A.11 for more details.
Testing and Detection Rates. In our most recent model runs, we do not assume constraints on
the availability tests. Hence we assume constant rates for ζ, ζS , and ζ A . During December 2020 and
January 2021, the total daily rate of tests in the US ranged between 1.5 and 2 million tests a day, and
the positive rate was 10%. We assume the infectious duration of the mild disease is between 4 and
7 days, and between 33% and 66% of the mildly symptomatic infected individuals seek to get tested
during this time. Using these numbers, we estimate that the per-person detection rate of the mildly
symptomatic ζS ranges between 0.06 to 0.13 per day. Using the 10% positive rate and the infectious
duration of asymptomatic disease ranging between 4 and 7 days, we estimate that the per-person detection rate of the asymptomatic ζ A ranges between 0.01 and 0.012 per day.
Seasonality. The range of values used for our seasonality parameter s was based on estimates
used for influenza [51]. However, depending on the climate zone, the range of s varied from 0.3 to 10.
A more recent study that looked at seasonality patterns for two human coronaviruses (CoVHKU1 and
CoVOC43) found a much lower and tighter range [52]. Based on this study, we assume that s varies
between 0.15 and 0.3.
Increased progression rate for tested individuals. We estimate that, on average, those who tested
with mild symptoms will have experienced symptoms for a few days before being diagnosed. Hence
they are more likely to progress to the next disease state than those that do not seek a test. We estimate
that the time they have already spent with mild-symptoms is between 25% and 75% of the expected
duration of experiencing mild symptoms. Inverting these proportions, we estimate that the range for
κξ is between 1.33 and 4 with a most likely value of 2. Similar reasoning and estimation apply to the
asymptomatic and how long they are infectious before seeking to be tested if they suspect to have had
32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

contact with a confirmed case.
Parameter

Mode

Sample
Range

Sample
Dist

Formula

Sources

Per person daily detection rate for
those not yet exposed

0.002

0.001 - 0.004

PERT

ζ

See Section A.3

Per person daily detection rate for
those who are asymptomatic

0.01

0.005 - 0.04

PERT

ζA

See Section A.3

Per person daily detection rate for
those who are symptomatic

0.2

0.1 - 0.8

PERT

ζS

See Section A.3

Impact of seasonality

0.2

0.15 - 0.3

PERT

s

See Section
A.11

Increased progression rate for tested
individuals

2

1.33 - 4

PERT

κξ

See Section A.1

Effectiveness of NPIs

2

0.5 - 3.5

PERT

θ

See Section A.9

Table 7: Other parameter estimates

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

C Sensitivity Analysis
This section presents a sensitivity analysis of the model runs generated by an experimental design
that considered 2,000 independent cases, each with a unique combination of input parameter values
generated by a Latin Hypercube Sampling (LHS) approach. Each case run considers the COVID-19
dynamics for California from March 1st, 2020, to December 31st, 2020. This is the period of interest
before the distribution of the vaccines. Because our period of interest has a duration of less than
a year, we fix some model parameter values to their mode value. We do not consider them in the
sensitivity analysis. Most notably, we fix the loss of immunity rate ρ.
We focus on the three model outputs produced. These are the cumulative deaths and the cumulative cases diagnosed by the end of 2020, and the hospitalized cases on that date. We use two approaches. The first is to compute the partial rank correlation coefficient (PRCC) [29] and the second
is based on Classification And Regression Tree (CART) analysis.
The partial correlation between model output and a model input measures the degree of association between the two while controlling for the variability and the effects of the other model inputs.
The partial correlation coefficient removes issues between confounding inputs. Therefore, it is generally a better measure than simple correlation and can reveal an association between an input and an
output that is the inverse of that suggested by a simple correlation.
Figure 7 shows the PRCC values associated with the input parameters. Parameters that have been
omitted from the plot have negligible values.
Our second method uses the importance scores of a CART algorithm. CART is a supervised machine learning algorithm that is commonly applied to analyze large data sets [53, 54]. For each model
output of interest, CART creates a binary decision tree. This process recursively splits the space of
input parameter values into regions that produce comparable output. As a first step, the algorithm
uses regressions to find which input parameter and its range in values best explain the model output
variance across all the model case runs. Using a cost function, it finds the input parameter’s threshold value that best splits the output data into two distinct groups. Using the CART terminology, this
creates the root-node and two first-generation leaf-nodes. If the input parameter for splitting is numerical and continuous, then the algorithm uses a regression-based method. If the input parameter
is categorical, then a different approach is used to use a Gini index function instead of a cost function. This index indicates how “pure" a leaf-node is in terms of what different categorical values of the
input it includes. During this process, all input parameters and all possible split point values are evaluated. For a given input parameter and split point, the algorithm first splits the data into two separate
training samples and runs a regression model for each sub-sample. For each of the two sub-samples,
it then uses the sum of the squared difference between the training sub-sample data and the regression’s prediction to generate the cost function. The algorithm then chooses the input parameter and
the split point that minimizes the cost function. Thus, the cost function is minimized when the input
space is split into two regions that produce distinct outputs.
The algorithm repeats this process for each of the two first-generation groups or leaf-nodes. Thus,
using the subset of model case runs belonging to each group, we repeat the process and find which
input parameters can best split the output data into additional second-generation leaf-nodes. This
34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter

Denoted

Proportion of incubation phase which is
non-infectious

Proportion Non- infectious
Incubation

Proportion of symptomatic infections which are
severe (require hospitalization)

Proportion Severe

Proportion of severe cases which are critical
(require ICU admission)

Proportion Critical

Proportion of infections which are asymptomatic

Proportion Asymptomatic

Initial proportion of critical cases which result in
death

Proportion die in the ICU

Duration of incubation phase

Incubation Days

Expected time spent in hospital (including ICU) at
hospitalization

Hospitalized Days

Infectious duration of asymptomatic and mild
disease

Symptomatic Mild Days

Per person daily detection rate for those who are
asymptomatic

zetaA

Per person daily detection rate for those who are
symptomatic

zetaS

Infectivity of phase of the mild symptomatic
relative to asymptomatic phase

m.Sm

Infectivity of phase of the severe symptomatic
relative to asymptomatic phase

m.Ss

Table 8: Shortened parameter labels of the most significant parameters found by the sensitivity analyses.
process continues until a stopping criterion is satisfied. The most common stopping procedure is to
specify a minimum number of model case runs that need to be assigned to each leaf node. When
the method splits the model cases runs belonging to a given node into two leaf-nodes, and either
leaf-node has fewer cases than some minimum threshold number, then the split is not accepted, and
the node is taken as a final leaf-node. Alternatively, stopping criteria can be specified based on when
the variance of the output across all model cases contained a given leaf-node goes below a specific
threshold value.
The CART plots shown in figures 8 - 10 show the decision tree for each of the three model outputs
and help provide a visual intuition of the importance of each input parameter in splitting the data.
An overall importance score can be associated with each node calculated over the CART procedures. The importance score is related to how often each input parameter is used to split the output
data most optimally over the decision tree’s nodes. It also considers how well the less optimal parameters split the data at each node without the more optimal parameters. Optimally at each node is
35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

output

Cumulative Deaths

Cumulative Diagnosed

Currently Hospitalized

Proportion Asymptomatic
Proportion die in the
ICU
Proportion Severe

zetaS
Symptomatic Mild
Days
Proportion Critical

Incubation Days

Hospitalized Days

m.Sm

zetaA
Proportion Non−
infectious Incubation
−0.4

−0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

Partial Rank Corelation Coefficent

Figure 7: Partial rank correlation coefficient values associate with each input parameter for our three
model outputs,
found by finding the improvement scores associated with each node and measuring the increase in
the split’s quality in the data. The parameter with the highest quality best breaks the data into two distinct output sets. The importance score takes into account which generation the node belongs to for
the split. Parameters that split the data at the root node or the first-generation node have more weight.
Parameters used in later generation data splits carry less weight towards calculating their importance
score even if they produce high-quality data splits.
Figure 11 shows a plot of the CART importance scores associated with each input parameter.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.0013
100%
yes

no

0.0011
49%

0.0014
51%

Proportion die in the
ICU < 0.77

Proportion die in the
ICU < 0.73

0.0011
32%
Proportion Asymptomatic >= 0.32

928e−6
8%

Proportion Severe < 0.06

0.0013
17%

0.0015
34%

Proportion Critical < 0.35

Proportion Critical < 0.32

0.0011
25%

0.0012
15%

0.0015
2%

0.0012
17%

0.0013
17%

Figure 8: Cumulative Deaths CART decision tree.

0.13
100%
yes

Proportion Asymptomatic >= 0.27 no
0.12
48%

0.14
52%

Symptomatic Mild
Days < 5.2

Symptomatic Mild
Days < 5.4

0.11
26%

0.14
33%

0.15
18%

Proportion Asymptomatic >= 0.37

zetaS < 0.083

zetaS < 0.12

0.1
5%

0.12
21%

0.13
22%

0.11
5%

0.14
29%

0.15
17%

Figure 9: Cumulative Diagnosed CART decision tree.

37

0.19
1%

0.0016
17%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

308e−6
100%
yes

Proportion die in the no
ICU < 0.76
364e−6
38%
Proportion Severe < 0.064
469e−6
12%
Proportion Critical < 0.35

274e−6
62%

316e−6
26%

431e−6
11%

890e−6
1%

Figure 10: Hospitalized CART decision tree.
output

Cumulative Deaths

Cumulative Diagnosed

Currently Hospitalized

Proportion Severe

Proportion die in the
ICU

Proportion Critical

Proportion Asymptomatic

Symptomatic Mild
Days

d.to.death.not.hosp

m.Sm

Hospitalized Days

zetaS
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

importance score

Figure 11: CART Importance scores for each model outputs and associated with each input parameter.
38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

D Limitations
Population-level models are best suited to comparing potential interventions, rather than to forecast outcomes. They make strong assumptions about functional forms, individual behavior, and how
parameters (such as treatment efficacy) change over time. These assumptions allow them to be informed with relatively little data but limit the extent to which they can reliably reproduce or predict
the outbreak [55]. In this section, we detail several other model limitations.
Unobservable True Cases Ideally, we would observe the true case count. However because cases
can only be verified through testing, the true case count is not observed, instead, we use proxies:
confirmed cases and deaths. Both these proxies have flaws. Observed cases are confounded by testing
rates, increases in test availability have caused surges in confirmed cases leading to the overestimation
of R 0 . Deaths are also an imperfect proxy due to the delay between infection and death. Deaths may
also be confounded by testing in states where regulations require a positive test to report deaths.
State Mixing The model assumes that no mixing occurs across state lines. This assumption is of
little importance while the virus remains widespread in almost every county in the United States.
However, as the virus becomes more controlled in some areas of the country, travel bans may become
an important tool to stop reseeding events.
Behavioral Feedback To make accurate predictions about the future or counterfactuals about the
past, one needs to understand how populations will react to different circumstances. Compliance is
crucial to the effectiveness of NPIs but is likely a function of perceived risk. As cases decrease, even
if mandated NPIs remain stringent, compliance may decrease to the point where we are unable to
contain the spread of the virus. Conversely, people may limit their mixing voluntarily if they perceive
significant personal risks. Our PBM does not contain an endogenous model of mixing behavior and
so has limited ability to model the second-order effects in counterfactual scenarios.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
[1] Julia E. Aledort, Nicole Lurie, Jeffrey Wasserman, and Samuel A. Bozzette. Non-pharmaceutical
public health interventions for pandemic influenza: An evaluation of the evidence base. BMC
public health, 7:208, August 2007. ISSN 1471-2458. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-7-208.
[2] Matthew A. Crane, Kenneth M. Shermock, Saad B. Omer, and John A. Romley. Change in Reported Adherence to Nonpharmaceutical Interventions During the COVID-19 Pandemic, AprilNovember 2020. JAMA, January 2021. ISSN 1538-3598. doi: 10.1001/jama.2021.0286.
[3] Bella Nichole Kantor and Jonathan Kantor. Non-pharmaceutical Interventions for Pandemic
COVID-19: A Cross-Sectional Investigation of US General Public Beliefs, Attitudes, and Actions.
Frontiers in Medicine, 7, July 2020. ISSN 2296-858X. doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.00384.
[4] Raffaele Vardavas, Aaron Strong, Jennifer Bouey, Jonathan William Welburn, Pedro Nascimento
de Lima, Lawrence Baker, Keren Zhu, Michelle Priest, Lynn Hu, and Jeanne S. Ringel. The Health
and Economic Impacts of Nonpharmaceutical Interventions to Address COVID-19: A Decision Support Tool for State and Local Policymakers. https://www.rand.org/pubs/tools/TLA1731.html, 2020.
[5] Michelangelo Bin, Peter Y. K. Cheung, Emanuele Crisostomi, Pietro Ferraro, Hugo Lhachemi,
Roderick Murray-Smith, Connor Myant, Thomas Parisini, Robert Shorten, Sebastian Stein, and
Lewi Stone. Post-lockdown abatement of COVID-19 by fast periodic switching. PLOS Computational Biology, 17(1):e1008604, January 2021. ISSN 1553-7358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.
1008604.
[6] Peter N. Brown, George D. Byrne, and Alan C. Hindmarsh. VODE: A Variable-Coefficient ODE
Solver. SIAM Journal on Scientific and Statistical Computing, 10(5):1038–1051, September 1989.
ISSN 0196-5204. doi: 10.1137/0910062.
[7] Alan C. Hindmarsh and Linda R. Petzold. Algorithms and software for ordinary differential equations and differential- algebraic equations, Part II: Higher-order methods and software packages.
Computers in Physics, 9(2):148–155, March 1995. ISSN 0894-1866. doi: 10.1063/1.168540.
[8] L. F. Shampine and C. W. Gear. A User’s View of Solving Stiff Ordinary Differential Equations.
SIAM Review, 21(1):1–17, January 1979. ISSN 0036-1445. doi: 10.1137/1021001.
[9] Karline Soetaert, Thomas Petzoldt, and R. Woodrow Setzer. Solving Differential Equations in R:
Package deSolve. Journal of Statistical Software, 33(1):1–25, February 2010. ISSN 1548-7660. doi:
10.18637/jss.v033.i09.
[10] Xi He, Eric H. Y. Lau, Peng Wu, Xilong Deng, Jian Wang, Xinxin Hao, Yiu Chung Lau, Jessica Y. Wong, Yujuan Guan, Xinghua Tan, Xiaoneng Mo, Yanqing Chen, Baolin Liao, Weilie Chen,
Fengyu Hu, Qing Zhang, Mingqiu Zhong, Yanrong Wu, Lingzhai Zhao, Fuchun Zhang, Benjamin J. Cowling, Fang Li, and Gabriel M. Leung. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and
40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

transmissibility of COVID-19. Nature Medicine, 26(5):672–675, May 2020. ISSN 1546-170X. doi:
10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5.
[11] Aaron Strong and Jonathan William Welburn. An Estimation of the Economic Costs of SocialDistancing Policies. May 2020.
[12] Scott Greenhalgh and Carly Rozins. Novel compartmental models of infectious disease transmission. bioRxiv, page 777250, September 2019. doi: 10.1101/777250.
[13] P. E. Oguntunde,
O. A. Odetunmibi,
and A. O. Adejumo.
On the
Sum of Exponentially Distributed Random Variables:
A Convolution Approach.
/paper/On-the-Sum-of-Exponentially-Distributed-Random-A-OguntundeOdetunmibi/25d5435884e2085a76a5d7514b83168f74180554, 2014.
[14] Romulus Breban, Raffaele Vardavas, and Sally Blower. Linking population-level models with
growing networks: A class of epidemic models. Physical Review E, 72(4):046110, October 2005.
doi: 10.1103/PhysRevE.72.046110.
[15] Romulus Breban, Raffaele Vardavas, and Sally Blower. Theory versus data: How to calculate R0?
PloS One, 2(3):e282, March 2007. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000282.
[16] O. Diekmann, J. A. P. Heesterbeek, and J. A. J. Metz. On the definition and the computation
of the basic reproduction ratio R0 in models for infectious diseases in heterogeneous populations. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 28(4):365–382, June 1990. ISSN 1432-1416. doi:
10.1007/BF00178324.
[17] J.m Heffernan, R.j Smith, and L.m Wahl. Perspectives on the basic reproductive ratio. Journal of
The Royal Society Interface, 2(4):281–293, September 2005. doi: 10.1098/rsif.2005.0042.
[18] Jing Li, Daniel Blakeley, and Robert J. Smith? The Failure of R 0. Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine, 2011, 2011. ISSN 1748-670X. doi: 10.1155/2011/527610.
[19] P. van den Driessche and James Watmough. Reproduction numbers and sub-threshold endemic
equilibria for compartmental models of disease transmission. Mathematical Biosciences, 180(1):
29–48, November 2002. ISSN 0025-5564. doi: 10.1016/S0025-5564(02)00108-6.
[20] An
introduction
to
compartmental
modeling
for
the
budding
infectious
disease
modeler:
Letters
in
Biomathematics:
Vol
5,
No
1.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/23737867.2018.1509026.
[21] M. V. Marathe. Synthetic Data Products for Societal Infrastructures and Proto-Populations: Data
Set 2.0. Technical Report NDSSL-TR-07-003, Network Dynamics and Simulation Science Laboratory, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, 1880 Pratt Dr, Building XV, Blacksburg,
VA, 24061, 2014.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[22] Joël Mossong, Niel Hens, Mark Jit, Philippe Beutels, Kari Auranen, Rafael Mikolajczyk, Marco
Massari, Stefania Salmaso, Gianpaolo Scalia Tomba, Jacco Wallinga, Janneke Heijne, Malgorzata
Sadkowska-Todys, Magdalena Rosinska, and W. John Edmunds. Social Contacts and Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread of Infectious Diseases. PLOS Medicine, 5(3):e74, March 2008. ISSN
1549-1676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074.
[23] Kiesha Prem, Alex R. Cook, and Mark Jit. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using
contact surveys and demographic data. PLOS Computational Biology, 13(9):e1005697, September 2017. ISSN 1553-7358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005697.
[24] BLS. Employed persons by detailed occupation and age. Technical report, Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2020.
[25] CISA.
Guidance
on
the
Essential
Critical
Infrastructure
Workforce.
https://www.cisa.gov/publication/guidance-essential-critical-infrastructure-workforce,
December 2020.
[26] M. E. J. Newman. Assortative Mixing in Networks. Physical Review Letters, 89(20):208701, October
2002. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.89.208701.
[27] Andrew Lauland, Benjamin Preston, Michelle Miro, Liam Regan, Scott Stephenson, Aaron
Strong, Jon Welburn, and Jeffrey Wenger. National Critical Functions COVID-19 Risk Assessment:
Lessons Learned. Technical Report DRR-A210-46, DHS, 2020.
[28] C. J. Sallaberry, J. C. Helton, and S. C. Hora. Extension of Latin hypercube samples with correlated
variables. Reliability Engineering & System Safety, 93(7):1047–1059, July 2008. ISSN 0951-8320.
doi: 10.1016/j.ress.2007.04.005.
[29] Alexander Hoare, David G. Regan, and David P. Wilson. Sampling and sensitivity analyses tools
(SaSAT) for computational modelling. Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling, 5(1):4, February 2008. ISSN 1742-4682. doi: 10.1186/1742-4682-5-4.
[30] W. Cottrell. Simplified Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT). Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 125(1):16–22, 1999. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9364(1999)125:
1(16).
[31] Ashish Goyal, E. Fabian Cardozo-Ojeda, and Joshua T. Schiffer. Potency and timing of antiviral therapy as determinants of duration of SARS CoV-2 shedding and intensity of inflammatory
response. medRxiv, page 2020.04.10.20061325, April 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.10.20061325.
[32] Chanu Rhee, Sanjat Kanjilal, Meghan Baker, and Michael Klompas. Duration of SARS-CoV-2
Infectivity: When is it Safe to Discontinue Isolation? Clinical Infectious Diseases: An Official
Publication of the Infectious Diseases Society of America, August 2020. ISSN 1058-4838. doi: 10.
1093/cid/ciaa1249.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[33] Andrew William Byrne, David McEvoy, Aine B Collins, Kevin Hunt, Miriam Casey, Ann Barber, Francis Butler, John Griffin, Elizabeth A Lane, Conor McAloon, Kirsty O’Brien, Patrick Wall,
Kieran A Walsh, and Simon J More. Inferred duration of infectious period of SARS-CoV-2: Rapid
scoping review and analysis of available evidence for asymptomatic and symptomatic COVID-19
cases. BMJ Open, 10(8), August 2020. ISSN 2044-6055. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2020-039856.
[34] Min-Chul Kim, Chunguang Cui, Kyeong-Ryeol Shin, Joon-Yong Bae, Oh-Joo Kweon, Mi-Kyung
Lee, Seong-Ho Choi, Sun-Young Jung, Man-Seong Park, and Jin-Won Chung. Duration of Culturable SARS-CoV-2 in Hospitalized Patients with Covid-19. New England Journal of Medicine, 0(0):
null, January 2021. ISSN 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2027040.
[35] CDC. COVID-19 Pandemic Planning Scenarios.
ncov/hcp/duration-isolation.html, February 2020.

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-

[36] CDC.
Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html, February 2020.

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-

[37] Christel Faes, Steven Abrams, Dominique Van Beckhoven, Geert Meyfroidt, Erika Vlieghe, and
Niel Hens. Time between Symptom Onset, Hospitalisation and Recovery or Death: Statistical
Analysis of Belgian COVID-19 Patients. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, 17(20), October 2020. ISSN 1661-7827. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17207560.
[38] Semagn Mekonnen Abate, Siraj Ahmed Ali, Bahiru Mantfardo, and Bivash Basu. Rate of Intensive
Care Unit admission and outcomes among patients with coronavirus: A systematic review and
Meta-analysis. PLOS ONE, 15(7):e0235653, July 2020. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0235653.
[39] Wei-jie Guan, Zheng-yi Ni, Yu Hu, Wen-hua Liang, Chun-quan Ou, Jian-xing He, Lei Liu, Hong
Shan, Chun-liang Lei, David S.C. Hui, Bin Du, Lan-juan Li, Guang Zeng, Kwok-Yung Yuen, Ruchong Chen, Chun-li Tang, Tao Wang, Ping-yan Chen, Jie Xiang, Shi-yue Li, Jin-lin Wang, Zi-jing
Liang, Yi-xiang Peng, Li Wei, Yong Liu, Ya-hua Hu, Peng Peng, Jian-ming Wang, Ji-yang Liu, Zhong
Chen, Gang Li, Zhi-jian Zheng, Shao-qin Qiu, Jie Luo, Chang-jiang Ye, Shao-yong Zhu, and Nanshan Zhong. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. New England Journal
of Medicine, 382(18):1708–1720, April 2020. ISSN 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa2002032.
[40] Lirong Zou, Feng Ruan, Mingxing Huang, Lijun Liang, Huitao Huang, Zhongsi Hong, Jianxiang
Yu, Min Kang, Yingchao Song, Jinyu Xia, Qianfang Guo, Tie Song, Jianfeng He, Hui-Ling Yen,
Malik Peiris, and Jie Wu. SARS-CoV-2 Viral Load in Upper Respiratory Specimens of Infected
Patients. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(12):1177–1179, March 2020. ISSN 0028-4793.
doi: 10.1056/NEJMc2001737.
[41] Jennie S. Lavine, Ottar N. Bjornstad, and Rustom Antia. Immunological characteristics govern
the transition of COVID-19 to endemicity. Science (New York, N.Y.), January 2021. ISSN 10959203. doi: 10.1126/science.abe6522.
43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[42] Eric A. Meyerowitz, Aaron Richterman, Isaac I. Bogoch, Nicola Low, and Muge Cevik. Towards
an accurate and systematic characterisation of persistently asymptomatic infection with SARSCoV-2. The Lancet Infectious Diseases, 0(0), December 2020. ISSN 1473-3099, 1474-4457. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30837-9.
[43] Oyungerel Byambasuren, Magnolia Cardona, Katy Bell, Justin Clark, Mary-Louise McLaws, and
Paul Glasziou. Estimating the extent of asymptomatic COVID-19 and its potential for community
transmission: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Official Journal of the Association of Medical
Microbiology and Infectious Disease Canada, 5(4):223–234, December 2020. ISSN 2371-0888. doi:
10.3138/jammi-2020-0030.
[44] Diana Buitrago-Garcia, Dianne Egli-Gany, Michel J. Counotte, Stefanie Hossmann, Hira Imeri,
Aziz Mert Ipekci, Georgia Salanti, and Nicola Low. Occurrence and transmission potential
of asymptomatic and presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections: A living systematic review and
meta-analysis. PLoS medicine, 17(9):e1003346, September 2020. ISSN 1549-1676. doi: 10.1371/
journal.pmed.1003346.
[45] Stephanie Bialek, Ellen Boundy, Virginia Bowen, Nancy Chow, Amanda Cohn, Nicole Dowling,
Sascha Ellington, Ryan Gierke, Aron Hall, Jessica MacNeil, Priti Patel, Georgina Peacock, Tamara
Pilishvili, Hilda Razzaghi, Nia Reed, Matthew Ritchey, and Erin Sauber-Schatz. Severe Outcomes
Among Patients with Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) — United States, February 12–March
16, 2020. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69(12):343–346, March 2020. ISSN 0149-2195.
doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6912e2.
[46] The COVID Tracking Project. https://covidtracking.com/, access date: 2020-07-01.
[47] Leora I. Horwitz, Simon A. Jones, Robert J. Cerfolio, Fritz Francois, Joseph Greco, Bret Rudy, and
Christopher M. Petrilli. Trends in COVID-19 Risk-Adjusted Mortality Rates. Journal of Hospital
Medicine, 16(2):90–92, February 2021. ISSN 1553-5606. doi: 10.12788/jhm.3552.
[48] R. A. Armstrong, A. D. Kane, and T. M. Cook. Outcomes from intensive care in patients with
COVID-19: A systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Anaesthesia, 75(10):
1340–1349, October 2020. ISSN 1365-2044. doi: 10.1111/anae.15201.
[49] Miriam Casey, John Griffin, Conor G. McAloon, Andrew W. Byrne, Jamie M. Madden, David Mc
Evoy, Áine B. Collins, Kevin Hunt, Ann Barber, Francis Butler, Elizabeth A. Lane, Kirsty O’Brien,
Patrick Wall, Kieran A. Walsh, and Simon J. More. Pre-symptomatic transmission of SARS-CoV-2
infection: A secondary analysis using published data. medRxiv, page 2020.05.08.20094870, June
2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.05.08.20094870.
[50] T. C. Quinn, M. J. Wawer, N. Sewankambo, D. Serwadda, C. Li, F. Wabwire-Mangen, M. O. Meehan,
T. Lutalo, and R. H. Gray. Viral load and heterosexual transmission of human immunodeficiency
virus type 1. Rakai Project Study Group. The New England Journal of Medicine, 342(13):921–929,
March 2000. ISSN 0028-4793. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200003303421303.
44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.02.28.21252642; this version posted March 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

[51] R.F. Grais, J.H. Ellis, A. Kress, and G.E. Glass. Modeling the Spread of Annual Influenza Epidemics
in the U.S.: The Potential Role of Air Travel. Health Care Management Science, 7(2):127–134, May
2004. ISSN 1572-9389. doi: 10.1023/B:HCMS.0000020652.38181.da.
[52] Stephen M. Kissler, Christine Tedijanto, Edward Goldstein, Yonatan H. Grad, and Marc Lipsitch.
Projecting the transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science,
368(6493):860–868, May 2020. ISSN 0036-8075, 1095-9203. doi: 10.1126/science.abb5793.
[53] Dan H. Moore. Classification and regression trees, by Leo Breiman, Jerome H. Friedman, Richard
A. Olshen, and Charles J. Stone. Brooks/Cole Publishing, Monterey, 1984,358 pages. Cytometry,
8(5):534–535, 1987. ISSN 1097-0320. doi: 10.1002/cyto.990080516.
[54] Leo Breiman. Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the
author). Statistical Science, 16(3):199–231, August 2001. ISSN 0883-4237, 2168-8745. doi: 10.
1214/ss/1009213726.
[55] David Manheim, Margaret Chamberlin, Osonde A. Osoba, Raffaele Vardavas, and Melinda
Moore. Improving Decision Support for Infectious Disease Prevention and Control: Aligning Models and Other Tools with Policymakers’ Needs. RAND Corporation, 2016. ISBN 978-0-8330-9550-3.

45

