medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“We also deserve help during the pandemic”: The effect of the COVID-19
pandemic on foreign domestic workers in Hong Kong
Ingrid D. Lui a, Nimisha Vandan a, Sara E. Davies b, Sophie Harman c, Rosemary
Morgan d, Julia Smith e, Clare Wenham f, Karen Ann Grépin a

a

School of Public Health, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong

Kong
b

School of Government and International Relations, Griffith University

c

Queen Mary University of London

d

Department of International Health, Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of

Public Health
e

Faculty of Health Sciences, Simon Fraser University

f

Department of Health Policy, London School of Economics and Political Science

Corresponding author:
Dr. Karen Ann Grépin
G/F, Patrick Manson Building (North Wing), 7 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
Email: kgrepin@hku.hk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic poses particular challenges for
migrant workers around the world. This study explores the unique experiences of
foreign domestic workers (FDWs) in Hong Kong, and how COVID-19 impacted their
health and economic wellbeing. Interviews with FDWs (n = 15) and key informants (n
= 3) were conducted between May and August 2020. FDWs reported a dual-country
experience of the pandemic, where they expressed concerns about local
transmission risks as well as worries about their family members in their home
country. Changes to their current work situation included how their employers treated
them, as well as their employment status. FDWs also cited blind spots in the Hong
Kong policy response that also affected their experience of the pandemic, including a
lack of support from the Hong Kong government. Additional support is needed to
mitigate the particularly negative effects of the pandemic on FDWs.

Keywords: COVID-19; Foreign domestic workers; Hong Kong; Pandemic; Migrant

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1. Introduction
Migrants are particularly vulnerable to the direct and indirect effects of the
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic. The International Organization for
Migration (IOM) has found that migrants were often excluded from host country
welfare systems, were greatly affected by border closures which limited their ability
to travel between their home and host countries, and that the pandemic was used as
an opportunity to foster xenophobic and discriminatory attitudes towards them [1].
Migrants also often face additional barriers in accessing healthcare or information
about COVID-19 in their host countries, increasing their risk of contracting the
disease [2]. The financial impact of the pandemic has been forecasted to result in a
$108.6 billion decline in global remittances, assuming recovery within a year, putting
remittance-dependent households at risk of falling into poverty [3].
Foreign domestic workers (FDWs) are migrants who engage in work
performed in or for a household within an employment relationship [4]. In 2015, it
was estimated that there were 11.5 million FDWs in the world, with 73.4% of them
being women [5]. By outsourcing domestic work, more married women have been
able to enter full-time paid work, creating dual-earner households with a higher
household income, benefitting the host country economy [6]. Women tend to migrate
to work in domestic and caretaking roles, whereas men typically take up jobs in
sectors like construction, which is significant as these different occupations are likely
to have their own health risks [7], affecting their susceptibility to COVID-19.
The lack of recognition and supportive policies for migrants can have many
physical, mental, social, and economic effects on FDWs. Live-in FDWs tend to work
long hours with an unspecified workload while living in the same place that they work

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

in, making it difficult to mentally separate work from private time [8]. They are also
vulnerable to abuse from their employers due to the unequal power relationship,
including verbal abuse and physical assault, and are often unable to negotiate for or
assert their rights [9]. FDWs often also struggle with the relationships with their
families back home. For example, FDWs may perceive that their relatives only value
the remittances they send, devaluing the work and sacrifices they are making
overseas [10]. As FDWs are often visible minorities within their host country, they
may also face discrimination as migrants, minorities, and women [7].
In Hong Kong, FDWs are essential to the functioning of many local families,
but they are also regarded as separate from the “real family” [6]. While they make
significant contributions to Hong Kong’s economy, they are still denied economic
rights [11]. In 2019, the Immigration Department reported that there were 399,320
FDWs in Hong Kong, with 98.5% of them being women, and most of them coming
from the Philippines (55%), Indonesia (43%), or Thailand (0.5%) [12]. Given the
enormous health, economic, and social effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, we
sought to explore the effects of the pandemic on FDWs in Hong Kong through indepth interviews with FDWs and key informants to better understand their
experiences. We focused on how this minority population, comprised mostly of
women, was disproportionately affected by the pandemic response in terms of their
health and economic wellbeing. A greater understanding of the experiences of this
vulnerable population can help to guide the policies aimed at mitigating the negative
effects of the pandemic on society in Hong Kong and in other areas where there are
significant FDW populations.
1.1 The status of FDWs in Hong Kong

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

According to Hong Kong laws, an FDW’s ability to stay in Hong Kong is bound
by a renewable two-year Standard Employment Contract [13], which states that they
can only provide full-time, live-in domestic services (including household chores,
cooking, baby-sitting, child-minding, and looking after aged persons) at a specific
employer’s residence. The Contract also outlines the obligations of the employer.
First, employers are required to pay the FDW no less than the Minimum Allowable
Wage, which, as of September 2019, was $4,630 HKD (~$600 USD) per month [14].
They are also required to provide FDWs with suitable accommodation within their
residence as well as free food or a food allowance of no less than $1,121 HKD ($145
USD) per month. FDWs are entitled to at least one rest day per week, usually on
Sundays, paid statutory holidays, and paid annual leave, as well as a vacation to
their home country at the end of each two-year contract period. Finally, either party
may terminate the contract with fair notice, barring extenuating circumstances, such
as if an employer believes the FDW has neglected their duties, or if an FDW is
subject to ill-treatment by the employer [15]. On top of the Contract, FDWs enjoy the
same legal protections under the Employment Ordinance as other employees in
Hong Kong, including a right to form labour unions. They are also supported by
numerous local NGOs that have worked to amplify their voices and advocate for their
rights [9]. FDWs who experience abuse or exploitation have several options for
recourse, including calling the police, contacting the Labour Department or their
government’s Consulate-General in Hong Kong, and submitting a complaint to the
Equal Opportunities Commission for discrimination-related cases.
Despite these protections, FDWs still face a number of disadvantages.
According to the Immigration Ordinance, a person who has resided in Hong Kong for
a continuous period of not less than seven years may apply for permanent

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

residency, but FDWs are explicitly exempted from this regardless of how long they
have remained in the city [16]. They have also been prohibited by law from living
outside of their employer’s residence since 2003, a ruling which was recently upheld
again in September 2020 [17]. However, the average size of a Hong Kong apartment
is relatively small, and there is no clear definition what constitutes a “suitable”
accommodation. One study from a local charity, Mission for Migrant Workers,
investigated the living accommodations of FDWs, and found that three out of five
FDWs they studied either did not have their own room to sleep in, or their room was
also utilized for other purposes, such as a storage area for the household. While
some of those who did not have their own room shared a bedroom with someone
else (e.g., children), others reported sleeping in the living room, the kitchen, or even
the bathroom [18].
Poor living conditions of this nature have been linked to poor mental health
outcomes: one study reported that FDWs who were less satisfied with their living
accommodations were also more likely to have higher levels of depression [19].
Studies have also shown that FDWs tend to have lower levels of self-reported
physical and mental health than the general adult population of Hong Kong, with
factors such as a larger household size and increased working hours contributing to
poorer physical health [20]. Factors such as withheld wages, the inability to regularly
send remittances back home, physical abuse and discrimination contributed to
poorer mental health, while daily contact with friends was associated with better
mental health [20].
Furthermore, when an FDW’s contract has been terminated, they are required
to leave Hong Kong within two weeks from the date of termination, unless they find a
new employer. If they overstay in Hong Kong, they could be prosecuted and

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

subjected to a fine of up to $50,000 HKD ($6,450 USD), and imprisonment for up to
two years. After serving their sentence, they will be deported from Hong Kong and
will not be permitted to work in Hong Kong as FDWs again [15]. This is significant
because it typically takes four to six weeks for a change of employment to be
processed, leading many FDWs to stay with abusive employers due to a fear of
losing their job [19]. Many instances of abuse against FDWs have been reported in
Hong Kong, with one study demonstrating that they are vulnerable to sexual abuse,
as well as psychological abuse [21]. Many survivors remained working for the
abusive employer, while a few chose to quit and many others had difficulty deciding
whether to stay or quit [21]. Abuse is used by employers to display power, reinforce
the employer-employee hierarchy and dehumanize FDWs [9].
Race and ethnicity also play a key role, intersecting with gender to further
marginalize FDWs in Hong Kong. There are specific stereotypes about different
ethnicities of FDWs: Filipinos are seen as more highly educated with better English
skills [22], whereas Indonesians are viewed as requiring more micro-management by
employers [23]. These stereotypes are further supported by the Hong Kong press,
which consistently portrays an “us-them” dichotomy between employers and FDWs,
reinforcing cultural perceptions of FDWs as “alien” or “other” and legitimising the
exploitation and abuse they face [24].
1.2 The COVID-19 pandemic in Hong Kong
The Hong Kong government began to respond to the pandemic in early
January 2020, days after a cluster of viral pneumonia with unknown aetiology was
first detected in Wuhan, China [25]. This included a series of travel restrictions
mainly aimed at travellers from mainland China, however, measures escalated into

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the lead up to the Chinese New Year holiday period in late January, which is a time
where many local families normally travel abroad and many FDWs take their annual
leave. On February 2, the Philippine President Duterte issued a temporary ban on
Filipinos from travelling to Hong Kong, mainland China and Macau [26], leaving
many FDWs who had gone home over the holidays stranded, and their employment
contracts with their employers uncertain [27]. FDWs were exempted from the
outbound travel ban two weeks later on February 18 [28], but restrictions on inbound
travellers were imposed by the Hong Kong government on March 18, including a
compulsory two-week quarantine for all inbound travellers [29]. In July, several highrisk countries were added to a list of specified places wherein travellers from these
places had to present a valid negative COVID-19 test result and quarantine in a hotel
upon arrival, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nepal, Pakistan, and the
Philippines [30]. By July, employers were required to bear the cost of the nucleic acid
test, as well as provide accommodation and food expenses for FDWs during their
compulsory quarantine [31].
However, despite the government regulations, many families were not keen to
have an FDW from abroad carry out their quarantine in the family home when such
measures had been permitted, nor pay for the additional expenses once additional
measures had been imposed. Some FDWs stayed in temporary boarding houses to
undertake their quarantines. Such houses were also being used by FDWs who were
between contracts and were trying to secure a new contract or had to return to their
home countries. These facilities are usually small, and during the pandemic up to 20
FDWs could be living in a 400 sq ft apartment at once [32]. Perhaps unsurprisingly,
two COVID-19 clusters have been linked to such facilities, first in August and then
December, 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

While initially the Hong Kong response was lauded for being both quick and
effective, this high level perspective overlooks the many challenges the government
faced in launching its response, including the fact that the region had just undergone
an extended period of civil unrest and prevailing high levels of mistrust in
government [33, 34]. Indeed, the actions of Hong Kong society in response to
COVID-19 stemmed from the memories of the SARS outbreak in 2003 and
dissatisfaction with the government, leading to faster adoption of personal hygiene
measures and networks of community-based assistance [35]. Their policies have
also largely lacked support and protection for vulnerable groups, including FDWs.

2. Material and methods
2.1 Participants
This study is based on data collected from interviews with 15 FDWs who
worked in Hong Kong during the COVID-19 pandemic. FDWs were recruited as part
of a larger project that aimed to understand and mitigate the real-time differential
gendered effects of the COVID-19 outbreak1. All participants were women: ten
participants were from the Philippines, one was from Indonesia, one was from
Thailand, and three were from Sri Lanka. Purposive convenience sampling was
employed to recruit FDWs through social media adverts. A small incentive gift worth
$50 HKD (~$6 USD) in the form of a gift certificate for a popular coffee shop was
provided to all of the FDW participants. This study also included three key informants
from organizations that work closely with FDWs in Hong Kong, who were recruited
purposefully in accordance with their professional roles in current decision-making

1

More details about this project can be found at http://www.genderandcovid-19.org

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

bodies related to outbreak response and gender equity initiatives. No individual
incentives were provided to the key informants. All participants have been assigned
numeric codes (e.g., FDW1 and KI1 for FDW participants and key informants,
respectively) to ensure the anonymity of our respondents.
2.2 Materials and procedure
A semi-structured interview guide was developed, which included a total of 6
questions for the FDWs and 8 questions for the key informants. This guide was
based on the domains of the COVID-19 Gender Matrix, which takes a
multidimensional perspective on the effects of COVID-19 [36]. Probing follow-up
questions were used to further understand participants’ experiences.
The interviews lasted an average of 31 minutes. All interviews were
conducted between May and August 2020 and were done over the phone or Zoom.
Each interview was audio-recorded with verbal consent from each participant, and
notes were taken during each interview. All interviews were carried out by one
researcher and were conducted in English. All recordings were then securely stored
on the online Simon Fraser University Vault. Interviews were transcribed verbatim
and checked against audio recordings for accuracy. Ethics approval was obtained
from the Human Research Ethics Committee of the University of Hong Kong.
2.3 Analysis
Interviews were analysed using the framework approach as outlined by Smith
and Firth [37]. Two researchers read through all transcripts and created an initial
coding guide based on recurring themes that arose from the data. The two sets of
codes were then compared and synthesised into one coding index. One researcher
subsequently coded all transcripts using the coding index, which was refined through

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

ongoing analysis, including the addition of new categories and the grouping of similar
categories into larger themes. The coding index was subjected to second-order
analysis to narrow down themes that were specific to FDWs. Second-order analysis
was undertaken to determine final themes which emerged most frequently across all
FDW participants and key informants.

3. Results
FDWs faced unique challenges that affected their experiences during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Below we present key themes from the pandemic in Hong
Kong that we identified as specific to FDWs.
3.1 Dual-country experience of the pandemic
FDWs were concerned both about the pandemic in Hong Kong as well as the
effect it was having directly and indirectly on their families and home countries. This
was demonstrated by quotes from FDW11, who was worried about the risk of
infection in Hong Kong with the effects it was likely to have on her family back home:
“If I get this virus, what will happen to me? What will happen to my family?” FDWs
were also very concerned about the state of the pandemic back in their home
countries and the lack of control of the outbreak relative to the experience in Hong
Kong, especially as the epidemiological conditions deteriorated in many of those
countries. As FDW11 explained: “we have a lot of protocols, laws [in her home
country], but the implementation is not that good.”
Additionally, many FDWs reflected on the pressure they faced to send money
back to their families. FDWs were often the primary breadwinners for their families
prior to COVID-19, and the increasing financial difficulties in their home countries

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

caused by the pandemic exacerbated the pressure they felt. As FDW9 said: “For us
the same salary … but our family … there’s no money and then we have to send
more money to support them.” Many FDWs became the sole earner of their family
and sent most, if not all, of their salary back home. This practice was commonly
framed as an obligation to their family, with FDW11 saying: “As a first child I need to
help my parents. I need to come here in Hong Kong to support my predecessors.”
KI1 also noticed that “there is more demand on the finances” from FDWs’ families.
Many FDW participants were greatly affected by the restrictions on international
travel. As FDW12 said: “I cannot go [to] my country, and I want [to] take care [of] my
mom.” Some had been unable to initially return to Hong Kong for work after Chinese
New Year and many had friends who had lost jobs, which led to increased stress
over their employment status. FDW1 recalled: “So many of my friends already [got]
terminated because they didn’t [come] back here in Hong Kong as schedule[d].”
Others were unable to return to their home countries to see their families for their
vacation, like FDW5 who said: “I always go back home every July to take my
vacation but unfortunately, I can’t do that this year because of the pandemic.”
3.2 Changes in Work Situation
Almost all participants reported changes to their current work situation,
including the actual work FDWs must perform for employers as well as their
employment status.
3.2.1 Employers’ treatment of FDWs
As the pandemic situation worsened in Hong Kong, many employers imposed
additional restrictions on FDWs’ movements to try to minimise exposure to the virus.
Based on a recommendation made by the government early into the pandemic,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

FDWs were encouraged to stay at home on their rest day. In many cases, however,
employers forbade their FDW from leaving the house on their rest day. KI1
observed: “The government has called for the domestic workers not to go out on
Sunday … many employers just take this recommendation by the government as an
instruction.” Some FDW participants also experienced double standards in mobility
restriction, where employers would do things that they forbade their FDWs from
doing: “[My employer is] always going out … they’re just afraid that I might bring
home [the] virus … but they don’t think about themselves bringing the virus.” (FDW7)
The nature of many FDWs’ work also changed during the pandemic, which
made their job harder and put more pressure on them. Two FDW participants even
described FDWs as “front liners of the employers” (FDW5 and FDW6), reflecting the
essential nature of their work in the prevention and control of the virus at home. This
caused many of them to feel stressed, tired, exhausted, and burned out. FDW9
stated: “I work more, I clean more than usual. Because [I] have to be careful,
everything must be cleaned.” Furthermore, FDWs’ own worries about the pandemic
situation in Hong Kong added pressure to keep the house clean. FDW10 said:
“Psychologically you really want to clean, clean, clean, clean. It’s very tiring but you
really want to make sure, even though you know that it’s clean, but you still have to
clean, clean, clean, because you’re afraid … Psychologically, it’s very draining.
Physically it’s very tiring.”
FDW participants also recalled instances where they or the people they knew
were subjected to riskier working conditions. Due to the pandemic, many employers
forced FDWs to clean with harsh chemicals, which caused adverse health effects.
This has been noted by FDW7 and KI1, respectively:

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

“Sometimes it will make my head dizzy because the smell is too powerful,
even [if] I use the mask, sometimes [it] make my chest hurt … sometimes I’m
afraid that I might get sick, not just because of the COVID-19, but because of
the chemical that I use in the everyday life.”
“Some employers want … more saturated bleach to clean, and this affect[s]
the workers’ [respiratory] health.”
Some employers also put FDWs at an increased risk of COVID-19 exposure.
For example, employers required to undergo quarantine at home did not provide
alternative accommodation for FDWs during the 14-day period. KI1 shared: “We
have cases that worker’s employers, family, returned home and they don’t wear a
mask [during quarantine].”
Finally, there were a few accounts of FDWs being abused by employers. KI1
stated: “[FDWs have] less bargaining power [which keeps them silent] against the
abuse and exploitation that they are facing.” Some FDWs also decided to tolerate
the abuse they faced in order to maintain their job security. As FDW11 put it:
“Sometimes [other FDWs] are too patient, because they don’t want to lose their job.”
3.2.2 Employment status of FDWs
Many FDWs expressed concerns about losing their jobs due to the pandemic.
Some had heard stories of friends who had been terminated for COVID-related
reasons, while others were worried about their employer’s ability to continue paying
them, either because their employers had lost jobs themselves, or were leaving
Hong Kong. FDW8 said: “Many of the employers lost their jobs. So once he lost the
job with his employers, that means migrant domestic workers will also be losing her
job.” A few FDW participants shared that they had recently renewed or planned to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

renew their contract with their current employer to ensure that they could keep
working, especially given the uncertain nature of the pandemic. As FDW8 explained:
“Once [FDWs] lose our job we are thinking of course of our family back home,
because that is the first or the very reason why we come here … not just for
ourselves but for our family.”
A few FDWs had also reported that they had actually lost their jobs due to the
pandemic. As such, these FDW participants were under pressure to find new
employment but expressed difficulties due to a lack of employment opportunities
during the pandemic. Furthermore, there were a few accounts of unfair termination of
FDWs. In some cases, employers would be worried about FDWs contracting COVID19, especially when they showed flu-like symptoms. KI1 stated: “You also should not
discriminate when the domestic workers just had the flu … you cannot dismiss the
workers.” In other cases, FDWs would be terminated if they did not conform with
employers’ restrictions. FDW5 shared an incident where an FDW she knew insisted
to go out on her rest day, and “when she come back her things were outside the
house.”
3.3 Hong Kong policies and blind spots
The FDW community was directly affected by the policies enacted by the
Hong Kong government to control the spread of COVID-19, yet many of these
policies and decisions were blind to the experiences of FDWs. Several FDWs felt
that there was a lack of consideration for FDWs by policymakers, and that their
needs were not being considered. Some expressed that they felt invisible in the eyes
of the government, including FDW7 who said: “We are just like nothing to them …
we really need to work hard to make them hear us.” This was also observed by KI1,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

who said that “the government is not listening enough” to FDWs. As FDW2
explained: “[The Hong Kong government] care for their own people, they must also
care for us … we also deserve help from them in times of this pandemic.”
Several FDW participants also reported experiencing prejudiced attitudes and
discrimination from the wider Hong Kong society. KI1 stated: “There has already
been discrimination faced by [FDWs], but this COVID-19 is revealing [a] more
extreme and worsening situation of the discrimination.” The most common
stereotype cited by FDW participants was the perception of FDWs as potential
carriers of COVID-19. FDW1 described this perception as: “The virus is only active
on Sundays [when it] will go out and then they will choose [foreign] domestic
workers.”
3.3.1 Protection and support during the pandemic
Many FDWs felt that they lacked adequate protection and support from the
Hong Kong government. Three key aspects of this were identified. First, there was a
lack of allocation of quarantine sites by the government for FDWs. As FDW5 stated:
“We don’t have any houses [to] stay for quarantine but then we need to find [one]
ourself.” Many FDW participants reported difficulties finding a suitable place to
complete their quarantine, and a few of those who did undergo quarantine did so
under unsafe conditions. For example, one FDW participant completed her
quarantine in her employer’s home while the family still lived there, while others did
so in boarding house rooms with at least one other person. FDW11 recommended:
“The government should build a facility for foreign domestic workers, especially to
support the accommodation.”

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Additionally, a lack of financial support from the government was reported. In
June, the government announced the “Cash Payout Scheme,” which disbursed
$10,000 HKD ($1,290 USD) to each eligible Hong Kong permanent resident aged 18
or above [38]. However, because FDWs are not entitled to become permanent
residents of Hong Kong, none of them were eligible to benefit from this scheme.
As FDW2 put it: “The local Hong Kongers get support from the government, but they
also must include the workers because we are also affected by this virus.”
FDW10 shared: “My employer knows. We even talk about this … she’s also
wondering why we are not given the subsidy.”
Finally, there was a feeling of a lack of food and personal protective
equipment (PPE) by the government. Many FDWs undergoing quarantine, or those
who were unemployed, were unable to pay for food or PPE, and wished the
government would provide them with these basic necessities. FDW6 said:
“Supposedly the government must provide us the mask, hand sanitizer or alcohol but
it’s already been too late when they had given us those masks.”
Perhaps due to the lack of support from the Hong Kong government, many
FDW participants reported receiving support from other members of the FDW
community and community organizations, most commonly in the form of financial
support, particularly for those who were unemployed. FDW participants also reported
sharing or receiving food and PPE, with food supplies being more likely to come from
individual community members, and PPE most likely to come from community
organizations such as labour unions. Furthermore, some participants also reported
giving financial and emotional support to fellow FDWs, as well as sharing information
about the virus. For example, FDW7 explained that she would “translate to the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

others the information that we get from the English resource,” and that other FDWs
who understood Cantonese would do the same for those who could not understand
either language.

4. Discussion
This study examined the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on FDWs in Hong
Kong. While several aspects of the FDW experience, such as job security,
discrimination, and abuse, predate the pandemic, our findings suggest that the
pandemic has further exposed many of these underlying conditions. It also highlights
the challenges that many migrants faced during the pandemic, namely physical and
emotional separation from family, discrimination by the host country, and the lack of
inclusion of this population in state sponsored policies [10]. The COVID-19 pandemic
has exacerbated inequalities and discrimination against FDWs, who are already
constrained by a series of power relationships at the intersection of their race,
gender, and socioeconomic status.
The finding that FDWs are experiencing the current pandemic across two
countries seems to be a novel one, as we have found no previous studies that
examined the effects of catastrophic events at home on overseas nationals. The
diasporic experience of FDWs is not new, however, as it has previously been found
that FDWs would continuously (re)negotiate their self-identity partly through
maintaining connections to their families in their home countries [39]. By expanding
on this finding, it is possible to consider how a global pandemic could affect their
self-identity. Since many of their family members had been negatively impacted by
the pandemic, their sense of identity in relation to their home countries seems to

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

have strengthened – there may be more importance placed on their role as the
breadwinner who can provide for their families’ increasing financial needs. However,
worries about their families and home countries, which came up frequently during
our interviews, may also be causing increased mental stress for FDWs. Additionally,
the implications of this mounting pressure to provide for their families is that FDWs
could be more willing to tolerate abusive employment relationships to continue
sending remittances back home, amplifying their already vulnerable status. Further
research is needed on the short- and long-term mental health effects of this dualcountry experience, and how the FDW experience interacts with the home country
experience of family members.
This study also found that the treatment of FDWs by employers has gotten
worse during the pandemic, and they have continued to be neglected by the Hong
Kong government, causing a disconnection between the FDWs’ experience of the
acute effects of COVID-19 and blind spots in the policy response. Their low-status
position indirectly comes with the expectation that they will be more flexible and
willing to cooperate with changes, even if these changes may result in increased
risks to their physical health. As front liners for their employers, FDWs are expected
to endure more pressure from employers to protect the family from the virus, yet they
are not given any support when doing so. Existing research shows that it is important
to improve FDWs’ ability to access health information and make informed decisions
about health-related issues, as they could be a key resource to break chains of
infection within the community [40]. Many of the FDW participants in this study
already reported seeking out health information on their own, so more efforts by
relevant government departments to provide accurate and comprehensive
information in ethnic minority languages is needed to support their search.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

However, rather than acknowledging the important role of these essential
workers in the city’s disease prevention activities and providing support for them, the
government has instead chosen to further limit their opportunities for rest and social
interaction with community members. In fact, the neglect of FDWs actually put the
overall community at higher risk of infection by forcing FDWs to quarantine or spend
more time in cramped and unsafe boarding houses, which were unsurprisingly linked
to two important clusters of COVID-19. FDWs have repeatedly been urged by the
government to comply with social distancing measures and stay home on their rest
days, with no less than 15 press releases issued over the course of 2020 concerning
the matter. This neglects the importance of FDWs’ rest days as an opportunity to
physically separate themselves from their workplace, maintain social connections
both in Hong Kong and in their home countries, or even engage in activism or
volunteer work. By continuing to draw attention to FDWs for their supposed lack of
compliance, this suggests that the public should be particularly concerned about
FDWs, and may have contributed to the discrimination, double standards and
employer-imposed restrictions mentioned by our participants.
Several key issues emerged that highlighted the need for changes in policies
related to FDWs in Hong Kong. Specific recommendations made by our FDW
participants included more financial support, better access to food and PPE, and
quarantine arrangements provided by the government. Like other members of Hong
Kong society [35], FDWs in our study reported turning to community support
networks for sharing PPE and other essentials during the pandemic. However, many
also felt that they did not have the power to speak up to the government and demand
change, illustrating their low status and lack of power in Hong Kong society.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

The situation of FDWs in Hong Kong at a policy level has seen some
improvement since the end of our data collection period. In light of the COVID-19
clusters linked to temporary boarding houses, the Hong Kong government offered
free, one-off COVID-19 tests for FDWs staying in such facilities in August [41]; this
was offered once again in December and extended to all FDWs in Hong Kong [42].
On November 3, the government reminded employers not to dismiss FDWs who had
contracted COVID-19, as it would be in violation of the Disability Discrimination
Ordinance [43]. In January 2021, the Ombudsman announced that it would launch
an investigation into boarding house conditions and the government’s role in the
regulation of such facilities [44]. However, there are still many problems that need to
be addressed. For example, it was announced on December 4 that fixed penalties
for those who violated anti-epidemic measures would increase from $2,000 HKD to
$5,000 HKD ($258 USD to $645 USD) [45], with a separate press release on the
same day reminding FDWs in particular of this change. However, given that this is
more than an FDW’s minimum salary, this could create a heavy financial burden on
those who get fined. FDWs continue to be reminded to comply with social distancing
measures, and are highlighted in the media when they do not do so. Although
progress is being made, there is clearly still much to be done to ensure FDWs are
considered and supported in Hong Kong’s COVID-19 response.
4.1 Limitations
This study has several important limitations. FDWs were recruited as part of a
larger project on gender and thus had not been the sole focus of the study, so our
interview guide was not tailored specific to the concerns of FDWs. The views
expressed by FDW participants in this study may not fully represent the experiences
of all FDWs working in Hong Kong or generalize to the pandemic experiences of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

FDWs in other countries. Participants were recruited through social media adverts,
so those who chose to respond many have had a vested interest in sharing their
experiences and opinions on this topic. As all interviews were conducted in English,
this may have limited the amount of information participants were able to share as
non-native speakers and excluded those who could not speak the language.
Future research is needed that is specifically catered to the experiences of
FDWs, including comparisons with FDWs in other countries. Given this, future
studies should also recruit larger and more robust sample sizes to increase
generalizability of study findings. Since there were many suggestions for change that
came up during our interviews, future research could consult with FDW collectives
who have perhaps attempted to gain recognition from the government to explore
how the COVID-19 pandemic may be used as a basis to claim greater recognition
and rights for FDWs. Given the ever-evolving nature of this pandemic, future studies
will be needed that can measure what has gotten worse or better since the start of
the pandemic. The use of a mixed methods design may enable future researchers to
increase the depth and breadth of study findings.

5. Conclusions
The current study demonstrates that the COVID-19 pandemic has
exacerbated the existing power dynamics that constrain FDWs in Hong Kong. Not
only is there a greater need to provide for family members back in FDWs’ home
countries, but there are also increased pressures from employers and a lack of
support from the Hong Kong government. Through this study’s findings of the current
situation and challenges faced by FDWs in Hong Kong during the COVID-19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

pandemic, it is clear that policy-level interventions are needed to mitigate the
particularly negative effects on FDWs. More supportive policies should be adopted
that not only consider the specific needs of FDWs but listens to them.

Acknowledgements
We thank the FDW participants for their trust in sharing their stories with us. We
thank Ka Chun Yung for his help in creating the initial coding guide.

Funding
This work was supported by the Canadian Institutes for Health Research [grant
number 170639].

Declarations of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Guadagno, L., MRS No. 60 – Migrants and the COVID-19 pandemic: An initial
analysis, in Migration Research Series. 2020. p. 28.
Kluge, H.H.P., et al., Refugee and migrant health in the COVID-19 response.
The Lancet, 2020. 395(10232): p. 1237-1239.
Takenaka, A.K., et al., COVID-19 Impact on International Migration,
Remittances, and Recipient Households in Developing Asia. 2020.
International Labour Organization, Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No.
189). 2011, International Labour Organization: Geneva.
Gallotti, M., Migrant Domestic Workers Across the World: global and regional
estimates. 2016, International Labour Organization.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.

Chan, A.H.-N., Live-in Foreign Domestic Workers and their Impact on Hong
Kong’s Middle Class Families. Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 2005.
26(4): p. 509-528.
Llácer, A., et al., The contribution of a gender perspective to the
understanding of migrants’ health. Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health, 2007. 61: p. ii4-ii10.
Fong, E. and B.S.A. Yeoh, Migrant Domestic Workers: Disadvantaged Work,
Social Support, and Collective Strategies in East Asia. American Behavioral
Scientist, 2020. 64(6): p. 703-708.
Cheng, S.-J.A., Migrant Women Domestic Helpers in Hong Kong, Singapore
and Taiwan: A Comparative Analysis. Asian and Pacific Migration Journal,
1996. 5(1): p. 139-152.
Hall, B.J., M.R. Garabiles, and C.A. Latkin, Work life, relationship, and policy
determinants of health and well-being among Filipino domestic Workers in
China: a qualitative study. BMC Public Health, 2019. 19(1).
Hung, J., Hong Kong Hurts Itself By Financially Excluding Foreign Domestic
Workers, in The Diplomat. 2020.
Immigration Department, Foreign domestic helpers by nationality and sex,
W.a.M.i.H.K.K. Statistics, Editor. 2020, Census and Statistics Department,
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region: Hong Kong.
Employment Contract for a Domestic Helper Recruited from Outside Hong
Kong - English version, Immigration Department, Editor. 2016: Hong Kong.
Minimum Allowable Wage and food allowance for foreign domestic helpers to
increase. 2019.
Guidebook for the Employment of Domestic Helpers from Abroad,
Immigration Department, Editor. 2018. p. 1-16.
Immigration Ordinance, Cap 115. 2018.
Helpers' live-in ruling welcomed. 2020.
Carnay, N.U., PICTURES FROM THE INSIDE: Investigating Living
Accommodation of Women Migrant Domestic Workers towards Advocacy and
Action. 2017, MWMF Limited. p. 48.
Cheung, J.T.K., et al., Abuse and depression among Filipino foreign domestic
helpers. A cross-sectional survey in Hong Kong. Public Health, 2019. 166: p.
121-127.
Chung, R.Y.-N. and J.K.-L. Mak, Physical and Mental Health of Live-In
Female Migrant Domestic Workers: A Randomly Sampled Survey in Hong
Kong. American Behavioral Scientist, 2020. 64(6): p. 802-822.
Ullah, A.A., Abuse and Violence Against Foreign Domestic Workers. A Case
from Hong Kong. International Journal of Area Studies, 2015. 10(2): p. 221238.
Yelland, N., et al., ‘We spend more time with the children than they do …’:
education, care and the work of foreign domestic workers in Hong Kong.
Globalisation, Societies and Education, 2013. 11(4): p. 443-458.
Palmer, W., International Migration and Stereotype Formation: Indonesian
Migrants in Hong Kong. Journal of International Migration and Integration,
2020. 21(3): p. 731-744.
Ladegaard, H.J., Demonising the cultural Other: Legitimising dehumanisation
of foreign domestic helpers in the Hong Kong press. Discourse, Context and
Media, 2013. 2(3): p. 131-140.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.04.21252889; this version posted March 8, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

Government launches Preparedness and Response Plan for Novel Infectious
Disease of Public Health Significance. 2020.
Jalea, G. and X. Gregorio, Duterte widens travel ban on mainland China,
Hong Kong, Macau, in CNN Philippines. 2020.
Creery, J., Coronavirus: Stranded by Manila’s travel ban, Hong Kong
domestic workers face financial havoc and an uncertain future, in Hong Kong
Free Press. 2020.
CNN Philippines Staff, OFWs exempted from travel ban to Hong Kong,
Macau, in CNN Philippines. 2020.
Compulsory Quarantine of Persons Arriving at Hong Kong from Foreign
Places Regulation gazetted. 2020.
Measures for travellers gazetted. 2020.
Labour Department reminds foreign domestic helpers and employers of
specifications relating to travelling to Hong Kong. 2020.
Siu, P., Are Hong Kong’s boarding houses hotbeds for Covid-19, and what is
being done to prevent outbreak among city’s domestic workers?, in South
China Morning Post. 2020.
Legido-Quigley, H., et al., Are high-performing health systems resilient against
the COVID-19 epidemic? The Lancet, 2020. 395(10227): p. 848-850.
Yuen, S., et al., A tale of two city-states : A comparison of the state-led vs civil
society-led responses to COVID-19 in Singapore and Hong Kong. Global
Public Health, 2021.
Wan, K.-M., et al., Fighting COVID-19 in Hong Kong: The effects of
community and social mobilization. World Development, 2020. 134: p.
105055.
Smith, J., et al., More than a public health crisis: a feminist political economic
analysis of COVID-19. Global Public Health (Submitted), 2020.
Smith, J. and J. Firth, Qualitative data analysis: the framework approach.
Nurse Researcher, 2011. 18(2): p. 52-62.
Cash handout agreements signed. 2020.
Yeoh, B.S.A. and S. Huang, “Home” and “away”: Foreign domestic workers
and negotiations of diasporic identity in Singapore. Women’s Studies
International Forum, 2000. 23(4): p. 413-429.
Ho, K.H.M. and G.D. Smith, A discursive paper on the importance of health
literacy among foreign domestic workers during outbreaks of communicable
diseases. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 2020. 29(23-24): p. 4827-4833.
Govt aids helpers facing health risks. 2020.
Free COVID-19 test for helpers. 2020.
Employers should not dismiss foreign domestic helpers who have contracted
COVID-19. 2020.
Ombudsman probes into Government's regulation of boarding facilities for
foreign domestic helpers. 2020.
Disease control penalties rise to $5k. 2020.

