medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Within-country age-based prioritisation, global allocation, and public health
impact of a vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a mathematical modelling analysis
Alexandra B Hogan^1, Peter Winskill^1, Oliver J Watson1, Patrick G T Walker1, Charles Whittaker1,
Marc Baguelin1,3, Nicholas F Brazeau1, Giovanni D Charles1, Katy A M Gaythorpe1, Arran Hamlet1,
Edward Knock1, Daniel J Laydon1, John A Lees1, Alessandra Løchen1, Robert Verity1, Lilith K Whittles1,
Farzana Muhib2, Katharina Hauck1, Neil M Ferguson1, Azra C Ghani1
^Contributed equally
1. MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, and the Abdul Latif Jameel Institute for
Disease and Emergency Analytics (J-IDEA), School of Public Health, Imperial College London,
St Mary’s Campus, Norfolk Place, London, W2 1PG, United Kingdom
2. PATH, 455 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20001, United States of
America
3. Department of Infectious Disease Epidemiology, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, Keppel St, Bloomsbury, London WC1E 7HT, United Kingdom
Corresponding author: Alexandra B Hogan, a.hogan@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
The worldwide endeavour to develop safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines has been extraordinary,
and vaccination is now underway in many countries. However, the doses available in 2021 are likely
to be limited. We extended a mathematical model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission across different
country settings to evaluate the public health impact of potential vaccines using WHO-developed
target product profiles. We identified optimal vaccine allocation strategies within- and betweencountries to maximise averted deaths under constraints on dose supply. We found that the health
impact of SARS-CoV-2 vaccination depends on the cumulative population-level infection incidence
when vaccination begins, the duration of natural immunity, the trajectory of the epidemic prior to
vaccination, and the level of healthcare available to effectively treat those with disease. Within a
country we find that for a limited supply (doses for <20% of the population) the optimal strategy is to
target the elderly. However, with a larger supply, if vaccination can occur while other interventions
are maintained, the optimal strategy switches to targeting key transmitters to indirectly protect the
vulnerable. As supply increases, vaccines that reduce or block infection have a greater impact than
those that prevent disease alone due to the indirect protection provided to high-risk groups. Given a
2 billion global dose supply in 2021, we find that a strategy in which doses are allocated to countries
proportional to population size is close to optimal in averting deaths and aligns with the ethical
principles agreed in pandemic preparedness planning.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

Keywords: SARS-CoV-2, mathematical model, COVID-19, vaccination model, optimisation
1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Highlights
•

The global dose supply of COVID-19 vaccines will be constrained in 2021

•

Within a country, prioritising doses to protect those at highest mortality risk is efficient

•

For a 2 billion dose supply in 2021, allocating to countries according to population size is
efficient and equitable

Introduction
COVID-19 has caused an unprecedented global public health and economic challenge which will
continue to disrupt lives and livelihoods until a preventative intervention, such as a vaccine, becomes
widely available. Demand for a vaccine is unparalleled and extraordinary public and private sector
efforts have been undertaken to identify vaccine candidates, to conduct clinical trials on compressed
timelines and to scale up manufacturing ahead of regulatory approval. To date, 13 vaccines have been
approved or authorised for use by individual or groups of countries, and many more vaccine
candidates are in development1–6.
Even as some countries begin to introduce approved vaccines, the demand for doses is likely to exceed
supply through 2021 due to constraints in manufacturing. Despite the development of international
initiatives such as COVAX to share the risks of the research and development process, and to ensure
equitable access7, political and economic incentives for countries to prioritise national interest remain
high – as has already been demonstrated by countries stockpiling treatment supplies and other
pharmaceuticals8,9 as well as countries signing advanced purchase agreements for individual vaccines.
Four allocation principles, reflected in the current World Health Organization (WHO) global allocation
framework10, have been identified by bioethicists to guide allocation of scarce resources: (A) that the
health benefits of the resource are maximised; (B) that priority is given to those who would be worstoff in the absence of the resource; (C) that individuals in equal circumstances should be treated
equally; and (D) that societal benefit is maximised11,12. A key component in achieving principles A and
B will be targeting the vaccine to those at highest risk of death. Given the strong age-gradient of risk
associated with COVID-19 infection13, allocation is likely to be age-targeted. However, to meet
principle B, vaccine dose allocation will need to be balanced against both life-expectancy (in order to
minimise life-years lost) and the additional variation in the risk of death resulting from, for example,
inequitable access to healthcare across the globe. In addition, aligned with principle D, it is likely that
any vaccine allocation would also prioritise essential workers such as those providing the frontline
health response14. Adhering to these principles to derive a fair and optimal allocation strategy, given
limited vaccine stocks is far from straightforward.
2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

We extend a model of SARS-CoV-2 transmission to explore the public health impact of different
vaccine characteristics, epidemic stages, and population-targeting strategies. We apply the model to
countries with different levels of income to understand the impact of demographics, societal mixing
and health system constraints in overall vaccine benefit. We explore the implications of these
characteristics for within-country allocation and global allocation and quantify the maximum public
health benefit of different allocation strategies under a range of likely supply constraints, over the
time periods 2021 only and 2021–2022.

Methods
Mathematical Model
We extended a previously developed age-structured deterministic SEIR-type compartmental model of
SARS-CoV-2 transmission15 to include vaccination. The model explicitly incorporates the clinical
pathway for those requiring hospitalisation, allowing estimates of the need for oxygen support and/or
intensive care unit (ICU) support. Transmission depends on age-based contact matrices and a constant
transmission rate per contact (in sensitivity analysis we explore reduced transmission from children).
Other risk groups or settings (such as healthcare workers or care homes) are not included. The model
was extended to capture loss of naturally acquired immunity by including an additional flow from the
recovered state to the susceptible state.
Once vaccination is introduced into a population, we assume that all eligible individuals (depending
on the targeting or prioritisation that is applied) are vaccinated at a constant rate, up to a maximum
level of coverage. Vaccination prioritisation strategies are modelled by specifying an age
disaggregated matrix of coverage targets where rows are ordered prioritisation steps (see
Supplementary Information, Section 1.2). Individuals who are susceptible, in the latent period, or
recovered (immune) can be vaccinated. The model structure assumes that people who are currently
infected do not receive the vaccine, and while this simplification may miss asymptomatic individuals,
such people represent a small fraction of the total population at any given time. Vaccinated individuals
initially enter a temporary state to capture the delay between receiving the vaccine and being
protected before moving into a vaccine-protected state. We assume that protection is partial, with
efficacy parameters detailed in Table 1. Given that the duration of protection for the approved and
candidate vaccines is not yet known, we assume that vaccine-induced immunity can either be longterm, one year, or six months, and we model decay in vaccine-induced immunity by moving individuals
from the vaccinated and protected state to a further state in which they are again susceptible to
infection (unless they acquire immunity through natural infection). Protection against infection only

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

is modelled by reducing the risk of acquiring infection in those who are vaccinated by a constant factor,
capturing the fact that vaccines will not give complete protection against infection. Protection against
severe disease only is captured by reducing the proportion of cases that are hospitalised. Combined
protection (the default setting) assumes protection against infection, with an additional reduction in
the risk of severe disease in vaccinated individuals who experience a breakthrough infection.
Additional details of the model are given in the Supplementary Information (Figure S1; Tables S1 and
S2).
The open-source model code is available as an R package at https://github.com/mrc-ide/nimue. To
aid utility of the modelling framework by policymakers, government agencies and other stakeholders,
we additionally developed a user-friendly interface (Box 1). In the interface the model is fitted to
country epidemics (see Section 1.4 in Supplementary Information) with these fits updated weekly to
reflect rapidly changing epidemic situations. Updates to this interface will incorporate new
information that emerges as the pandemic unfolds.

Parameterisation
We stratify the global population into four groups, based on the current World Bank16 classification of
high-income countries (HIC), upper-middle-income countries (UMIC), lower-middle-income countries
(LMIC) and low-income countries (LIC). Countries are assumed to remain in their current group over
the projection horizon. For each income setting, the age distribution of the population and age-based
contact patterns are modified to capture epidemiological characteristics of countries in the different
income strata. We use the current age distribution for the country with the median GDP in each of the
four groups (HIC: Malta; UMIC: Grenada; LMIC: Nicaragua; and LIC: Madagascar)17, and age-based
contact patterns representative of these settings based on the availability of contact data studies15.
Natural history parameters for SARS-CoV-2 infection are based on a review of published estimates and
large clinical studies18,19 with age-stratified probabilities of requiring hospitalisation and intensive care
obtained from a national study of French hospital admissions20 and the age-stratified infection fatality
ratio (IFR) obtained from a recent meta-analysis21 (Table S2). The model has been previously validated
by using Bayesian methods to fit to country-specific data on COVID-19 deaths (Figure S2)22,23. Modelled
levels of transmission are determined by the time-varying reproduction number, Rt. Transmission
scenarios are detailed below.
Phase III clinical trials have generally reported endpoints of symptomatic or severe COVID-19 illness.
Interim efficacy estimates against symptomatic COVID-19 have been published for several candidate
vaccines, including Pfizer/BioNTech (95% efficacy), Moderna (94.1%), Oxford/AstraZeneca (63.1% for
two standard doses), and the Gamaleya Center (Sputnik V, 91.6%)3–6. Trial results to date indicate
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

higher protection against severe COVID-19 disease, and this is supported by evidence being generated
by vaccine implementation in the UK and Israel3,5,24–27. The extent to which these candidate vaccines
will prevent infection is not fully known, however the phase III Oxford/AstraZeneca study reported
efficacy against asymptomatic COVID-19 of 27.3% (95% CI −17.2–54.9) in a preliminary analysis2, and
evidence from the UK indicates a four-fold reduction in asymptomatic COVID-19 in vaccinated versus
unvaccinated healthcare workers, following a single dose of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine28. Given
these results, for our baseline simulations we assume vaccine efficacy against infection of 90%, with
an additional 60% efficacy against severe disease for vaccinated individuals who experience
breakthrough infection24. We further consider 70% efficacy against infection as a sensitivity analysis,
which also aligns with the preferred efficacy level in the WHO Target Product Profiles29. We also
consider scenarios for a vaccine that reduces risk of infection only, with no additional protection
against severe disease, and a vaccine that reduces the risk of severe disease only, without reducing
the risk of infection. In simulations exploring the potential for lower vaccine efficacy in older age
groups, we also consider a scenario where vaccine efficacy in those aged 65 years and older is 50% of
that in younger individuals, based on observations from influenza vaccination30,31. We assume an
average period between vaccination and protection of 7 days, consistent with observations of
increasing antibody and T-cell responses in the phase II data32–36. We assume no partial protection in
the period between vaccination and protection. Antibody reversion from natural infection37 and reinfection38 has now been reported, and a UK-based study of hospital staff found that prior infection
was associated with an 83% lower risk of infection, with a median duration of follow-up of five
months39. Our baseline runs therefore assume that natural immunity following infection persists for
an average of one year, and we additionally explore both six-month and long-term durations in
sensitivity analyses, consistent with values identified in the WHO Target Product Profiles29. Key
parameters are summarised in Table 1, Table S1, and Table S3.

Scenarios and Counterfactual
To evaluate the public health impact of any vaccine, we must consider the epidemic trajectory in the
absence of vaccination. However, because of the vastly different experiences between countries in
their exposure and response to SARS-CoV-2, considering such counterfactuals is challenging,
particularly since testing rates differ markedly and so it can be difficult to accurately assess the current
epidemic stages of different countries. Furthermore, whilst vaccination has commenced in some
countries, scale-up will occur over a longer period. In the interim, countries will likely continue to
implement some level of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs). We do not explicitly model
individual NPIs, but instead incorporate the assumed impact of combined NPIs in the estimate of the
reproduction number Rt.
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

To understand the public health value of the vaccine and consider allocation strategies that do not
penalise countries for lacking the capacity to implement NPIs, in our baseline scenario we make the
simplifying assumption that the vaccine is introduced while NPIs are in place. This avoids the situation
in which our modelled results suggest the vaccine has no impact because the vaccine introduction
“misses” the counterfactual epidemic in the year being analysed. NPIs are then lifted (i.e. Rt increases)
after the target vaccine coverage is achieved, allowing vaccine impact in a fully vaccinated population
to be compared to the counterfactual scenarios. Under this simplification, we consider a scenario
where the first dose of a vaccine is introduced from the beginning of 2021 over 30 days, and that a
second vaccine dose occurs 21 days after the first, allowing target coverage to be achieved by the end
of February 2021 and with no further vaccination taking place subsequently (although in practice if
vaccine-induced immunity wanes, then repeat vaccination is likely to occur). We then compare
scenarios from March 2021 onwards and quantify vaccine impact over the time horizons of 2021 only
and 2021–2022. In sensitivity analyses we also consider a more realistic coverage scale-up throughout
the year.
Our baseline scenarios assume that an initial peak in transmission occurred in the first half of 2020,
which is reduced by NPIs, resulting in lower levels of transmission through the remainder of the year
(Figure S3). Assuming a mean duration of immunity of one year and for levels of transmission where
R0 = 2.5 and Rt1 = 1.1, the simulation results in 11% of the population becoming immune by the end of
2020 in a HIC setting (plausible given seroprevalence surveys to date23,24), and results in 11%, 12%,
and 16% immune in UMIC, LMIC and LIC settings respectively (Figure 1; Figure S5). We explore
additional scenarios with long-term natural immunity, which results in a higher proportion immune at
vaccine introduction (Figure S5), and also explore different plausible values of R0 and Rt1, which result
in the proportion of the population immune at vaccine introduction varying between 4% and 24%
(Figure S6).
For each income setting, we consider two possibilities for health system capacity. The first is that all
health systems are unconstrained – and hence that a constant (age-dependent) proportion of
infections are hospitalised and receive appropriate care, regardless of the size of the epidemic. This
results in population-level IFRs that are highest in HIC settings and lowest in LIC settings given the
different demographics of these populations15. Second, we more realistically assume that health
systems will be constrained to varying degrees. Here we follow the assumptions and parameters in
Walker et al.15 in which LIC and LMIC settings have limited hospital capacity (estimated using World
Bank data) and that once exceeded, those requiring hospitalisation but who do not receive it
experience worse outcomes. In contrast, in UMIC and HIC settings, while existing hospital capacity
may also be exceeded, we assume that surge capacity is implemented to fill this gap. In LIC settings
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

we additionally assume that outcomes for hospitalised cases are worse than in other settings. This
results in slightly higher population-level IFRs in LIC and LMIC compared to UMIC and HIC settings15.
Our default assumption is that health system constraints are in place.
It is unlikely that relaxing NPIs would result in a return to the high level of transmission (R0 between
values of 2 and 4) seen before controls were introduced, due to ongoing interventions (e.g. the use of
facemasks, working from home and test/trace/isolate)40. We therefore explore three scenarios for Rt2
from March 2021 onwards: Rt2=1.5, 2, or 2.5. These values were chosen to represent a range of
epidemic trajectories in the absence of vaccination, with the higher Rt2 resulting in a rapid epidemic
and the lower Rt2 values resulting in flatter but longer epidemics. We calculate the deaths averted and
life-years gained as the differences in deaths and life-years lost between the vaccinated and
counterfactual scenarios. The life-years lost is estimated by summing the remaining life expectancy
for each death in each age group, where the reference life expectancy is fixed at 86.6 years41,
consistent with the approach advocated for ethical vaccine allocation42.

Vaccine Allocation
We first consider optimal vaccine allocation within a country under different supply constraints. To do
this, we divide the population into 5-year age groups and generate all possible age group
combinations, where the selected age groups would then be allocated the vaccine. Since it is unlikely
that multiple non-sequential 5-year age groups would be selected in any vaccine programme (for
example, vaccinating only the 20–24-, 40–44- and 60–64-year-olds is not programmatically likely), we
retain the age group combinations in which up to two contiguous “bands” of age groups could be
selected. This would allow, for example, the elderly and children to be selected. The full set of age
group combinations is described in the Supplementary Information (Section 1.6; Figure S3). For each
combination we calculate the deaths averted over the time horizon, assuming 80% coverage (or
uptake) of the vaccine within each 5-year age group and assuming default vaccine efficacy, duration,
and coverage parameters, and with a 2020 epidemic that results in 11% of the HIC population being
immune when the vaccine is introduced (Table 1). The vaccine supply is calculated as the percentage
of the total population who is vaccinated. We then select the most efficient allocation frontier from
this set of simulations (see Supplementary Information, Figure S11). We compare this optimal strategy
to two age-targeted approaches. In the first approach we sequentially allocate from the oldest age
group downwards (80+ years, 75+, 70+ etc.), for both uniform vaccine efficacy across age groups and
where efficacy in the 65+ group is reduced by 50%. In the second approach we target the working-age
population, beginning with the highest risk group (60–64 years) and working downwards by age, and

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

then sequentially add in the younger and older age groups either side of the working age population
until the entire population is covered. We repeat this analysis for each income setting.
Second, we explore the impact of different global vaccine dose allocation strategies, assuming that
the dose supply is constrained in 2021, with the dose constraint guided by the two billion doses that
will be made available by the end of 2021 through the COVAX facility43. We use the same simulations
as above to calculate the deaths averted in 2021 assuming default vaccine efficacy, duration, and
coverage across the four income settings and for the set of 5-year age group combinations
(Supplementary Information Section 1.6). We then calculate the total population-level impact in terms
of deaths averted in the year 2021 for that income setting and age group, and use these results to
quantify the total global impact and number of vaccine doses required for every combination of agetargeting strategies across the four income settings.
We then identify six plausible global vaccine allocation strategies, and simulate the health impact for
each strategy, assuming a two-dose schedule, a 2 billion dose constraint, and 15% buffer stock and
wastage (Table 1):
•

Strategy A: Countries are allocated doses relative to population size.

•

Strategy B: Countries are allocated doses relative to population size, with individuals 65 years
and older targeted first.

•

Strategy C: Countries are allocated doses relative to size of population 65 years and older,
with that age group targeted first.

•

Strategy D: High-income countries can access doses first.

•

Strategy E: Low- and lower-middle-income countries can access doses first.

•

Strategy F: Countries are allocated the first 2 billion doses relative to population size, with
additional doses available to high- and middle-income (UMIC and LMIC) countries (1.15 billion
and 1.10 billion respectively, again distributed according to population).

For these six strategies, we do not stratify the population within an income setting into individual
countries, therefore by extension we assume that doses can be distributed across any number of
countries within an income setting, even if the dose supply means that coverage within an individual
country is low.
We additionally use the ompr package in R44, which formulates and solves mixed linear integer
optimisation problems, to identify the optimal global vaccine allocation strategy. To do this, we stratify
the global population into the population sizes of the 85 largest countries (comprising 95% of the
global population), assigning each country the characteristic age distribution, contact matrix, and

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

health system capacity for its income setting to reduce computational requirements. Under this
optimisation algorithm, the available doses can be allocated both between and within countries,
thereby allowing different combinations of 5-year age groups to be selected within each country.
For both the fixed and optimal global vaccine allocation strategies, we calculate the total deaths
averted per million population, and the deaths averted per 100 fully vaccinated persons, in order to
compare the efficiency of the identified strategies.

Sensitivity Analysis
We identify the optimal within-country and global between-country vaccine allocations, and calculate
the impact of the six fixed global strategies (A–F), while varying our default parameter assumptions:
vaccine efficacy reduced from 90% to 70%; efficacy in the 65 years and older population reduced by
50%; mode of vaccine action as disease-reducing only; greater NPIs following the introduction of a
vaccine (implemented as Rt2 reduced from 2.0 to 1.5); reduced level of NPIs following the introduction
of a vaccine (or higher transmission, implemented as Rt2 increased from 2.0 to 2.5); health system
constraints assumed to be absent; infectiousness in children younger than 10 years reduced by 50%;
and life-years gained rather than deaths averted used as the global optimisation outcome measure.

Results
Vaccines that are efficacious against infection can have health impact in two ways: by reducing the
burden of disease through direct protection of those vaccinated, and by reducing infection, and
therefore onward transmission, thus providing indirect protection to the entire population. For our
assumed R0 of 2.5, the theoretical coverage required to achieve herd immunity for a 100% efficacious
vaccine is 60%, in a population that mixes randomly. For a more transmissible strain (such as the
recently identified new UK variant45,46) with an R0 of 4 the coverage required for herd immunity
increases to 75%. Coverage must be higher if vaccine efficacy is below 100% (Figure 2A). For example,
for a vaccine with 90% efficacy the coverage would need to be 67% for R0=2.5 and 83% for R0=4.
However, as demonstrated in our simulations, temporary herd immunity can be reached at lower
coverage levels since ongoing NPIs generate a lower effective reproduction number (illustrated here
with R0=2). With wider vaccine availability from 2022 onwards it is likely that NPIs would gradually be
lifted and hence higher coverage would be required to sustain herd immunity.
A vaccine that prevents infection has a greater impact than one of equivalent efficacy that prevents
severe disease only due to the indirect effect of the former on transmission (Figure 2B). With an
infection-reducing vaccine the projected deaths averted increases sharply with coverage until herd

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

immunity is approached, at which point the curve plateaus. In contrast, a vaccine that only provides
direct protection against disease has a linear relationship between coverage and health impact
(deaths averted per thousand population). For example, for R0=2.5, Rt1=1.1, Rt2=2.0, vaccine efficacy
of 90% and coverage of 67%, only approximately 60% of the deaths averted by an infection-reducing
vaccine would be averted by a disease-reducing vaccine; this finding is consistent across income
settings (Figure S7). The additional value of indirect protection remains important for all potential
vaccine efficacies and levels of coverage, as seen in the different slopes of the solid and dashed lines
in Figure 2B. Similarly, the duration of protection will affect overall impact (Figure S8) although this
could be overcome through repeat vaccination.
The timing of vaccine introduction relative to the epidemic stage in each country will determine the
additional health benefit that the vaccine generates. The health impact of the vaccine depends on the
proportion of the population that have naturally acquired immunity at the time of vaccine
introduction and the duration of that immunity. There is a clear decrease in public health impact with
the extent of pre-existing immunity in the population, under the assumption that ongoing NPIs in 2021
do not differ based on this pre-existing immunity (Figure 3A–B). For example, we predict 6.0 deaths
averted per 1,000 population up to the end of 2022 if only 4% of the population have pre-existing
immunity compared to 3.9 if 14% of the population have pre-existing immunity. In addition, if
vaccination is timely, its impact is greater in countries where other NPIs are not feasible, i.e. where Rt2
is higher (Figure 3C–D). While our main analysis assumed that the target population is vaccinated
before NPIs are lifted, if NPIs are lifted at vaccine introduction and that vaccination takes place over a
longer period (one year), vaccine impact will be lower (Figures 3E–F and S9). Furthermore, a greater
public health impact will be obtained by targeting the older ages first rather than the working age
population because the overall vaccine coverage during the period in which the epidemic occurs is
lower compared to if NPIs are lifted after the target population is vaccinated.
The public health value of vaccination will also depend on the risk profile of the population and
whether other therapeutic means are available to reduce morbidity and mortality. In the absence of
any health system constraints, the public health value of a vaccine is predicted to be greatest in HIC
since these countries have the largest elderly populations (Figure 3G–H). For example, we predict 3.2
deaths averted per 1,000 population in a HIC compared to 1.1 in a LIC in 2021. However, once health
system constraints are incorporated into the model in lower-income settings, the public health value
of the vaccine becomes more similar across settings. Furthermore, if the metric for assessing public
health value accounts for the age at death (i.e. life-years gained) we predict a further shift towards
benefiting the lowest income settings (Figure 3H), – with 81 life-years gained per 1,000 population in
a LIC compared to 50 in a HIC in 2021.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Even accounting for differences in demography, contact patterns and health system capacity,
vaccination targeting those at highest risk of death is beneficial across all income settings. Given the
strong age-gradient in the estimated IFR for SARS-CoV-2, here we illustrate the value of targeting by
age (noting that similar principles will apply to other identified risk factors or vulnerable groups).
Under a strategy in which the most vulnerable age groups are targeted first, the required number of
vaccine doses differs between income settings. This reflects the different age distributions, with
relatively fewer doses required to fully cover the elderly populations in lower-income settings (Figure
S10). The predicted public health impact of such a strategy is also highest in HIC, LMIC, and LIC settings,
reflecting the overall higher IFR experienced in HIC countries and the presence of health system
constraints in the LMIC and LIC settings. However, the impact of age prioritisation is substantially
lower if the vaccine is less efficacious in the elderly population (Figure 4B, 4D, 4F, 4H, Figure S13, Table
S5).
Figure 4A–H shows the most efficient allocation of the vaccine for each of the four country income
settings. In all settings, if doses are limited, the most efficient approach is to vaccinate the most
vulnerable elderly population, starting at the oldest age group and working downwards. In LIC settings,
this approach broadly remains optimal throughout. However, in HIC, UMIC and LMIC settings we find
that above a given threshold for dose availability and for a vaccine that reduces the risk of infection,
the optimal allocation strategy switches from “direct protection of the vulnerable” to one of “herd
impact”, whereby the vaccine is allocated to younger populations (including children and adults).
Under such a scenario, transmission is reduced in the wider community and this indirectly reduces the
risk to the vulnerable elderly population to a greater extent than through direct protection. Assuming
that targeted age groups are vaccinated at 80% coverage, this switch occurs when there are sufficient
doses to cover between 20% and 40% of the total population, although the precise value depends on
both the relative size of the elderly population and on mixing patterns between the older population
and the general population. Furthermore, in UMIC and LMIC settings we obtain a “mixed” approach
at these intermediate dose availability levels, with both the highest risk elderly and younger
populations included. This is due to greater mixing between the older and general populations in these
settings, as well as the size of the high-risk older populations, which are generally smaller than in HIC
settings. In all settings our optimisation includes the vaccination of children when this switch occurs.
Our model does not explicitly capture a lower transmission risk of children; if this is included, we find
that they are de-prioritised (Figure S18). The most efficient strategy is also sensitive to vaccine efficacy
(where for a lower efficacy, the level of vaccine supply at which a herd impact strategy becomes
optimal is higher, Figure S12). For a vaccine that reduces the risk of severe disease only, the optimal
strategy is to directly protect the most vulnerable (Figure S14). If NPIs are maintained at a greater level
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

following vaccine introduction (explored by reducing Rt2 from 2.0 to 1.5), then we find that younger
populations are targeted at a lower dose supply threshold (around 10%, Figure S15). Conversely, if
transmission is higher (Rt2 increased from 2.0 to 2.5), it is efficient to continue to target older age
groups even at a higher level of dose availability (Figure S16).
At a global level and assuming an initial vaccine dose supply of 2 billion, allocating doses equitably
across all income settings relative to population size (Strategy B), or relative to population size in the
65+ age group (Strategy C), are the most efficient of the fixed approaches considered, assuming that
within a country the vaccine is targeted to the at-risk population (Table 2). This finding is consistent
across all sensitivity analyses considered (Table S6). If high-income countries can preferentially obtain
a large proportion of the available vaccine doses at the expense of lower income countries (and
assuming health systems are constrained in LIC and LMIC settings), then we would expect an
additional 900 deaths per million from this less efficient global allocation, assuming that all countries
have similar levels of pre-existing natural immunity (Table 2, Strategy D). Consistent with our earlier
results, the projected impact is greater if, within each country, the highest risk older age groups are
vaccinated at a high level of coverage, averting 1,400 deaths per million (Strategy C), compared to
averting 650 deaths per million if all ages are vaccinated at a lower coverage level (Strategy A). Under
a fully-optimised global allocation – in which allocation both within- and between- countries is
optimised – we estimate the most efficient strategy can avert 1.43 deaths per 100 fully vaccinated
persons, marginally higher than the equitable allocation with prioritisation to older age groups
scenario (1.25 deaths averted per 100 fully vaccinated persons, Strategy C).
A fully optimised global allocation could prevent 1,700 deaths per million people in 2021. Under this
strategy, a higher proportion of doses are allocated to HICs (33% of global doses) with sufficient
coverage (27%) in most HICs to pursue a herd impact strategy, assuming vaccination is efficacious
against infection and can be implemented while transmission remains suppressed (Table 3), relative
to 28%, 33% and 6% of global doses in UMIC, LMIC and LIC settings, respectively. This is due primarily
to the older populations in HIC but is also dependent on absolute population sizes in each income
band. Under the optimal allocation scenario, in LIC, LMIC and UMIC settings the proportional coverage
is lower (between 8–10% coverage) and hence doses are targeted to the elderly population. Overall,
assuming a vaccine reduces the risk of infection rather than only severe disease, the optimal allocation
of 2 billion doses balances herd impact strategies in some countries with direct protection of the
vulnerable in others.
The global optimised strategy is sensitive to assumptions about the vaccine mode of action, with a
more equitable allocation found to be optimal for a vaccine that is efficacious against disease only

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

(Table 3). For a scenario with higher transmission following vaccine introduction relative to the default
assumption, additional doses are allocated to HIC countries, however, for a scenario where NPIs are
maintained to a greater extent following vaccination, a more equitable global allocation is optimal as
the difference in averted deaths between income settings is less marked (Table 3, Figure S20). We also
find that if life years gained, rather than deaths averted, is used as the outcome measure, doses are
diverted away from UMICs and allocated to LMIC and LIC settings, whereas removing assumptions
about health system constraints causes doses to be allocated preferentially to HIC and UMIC countries
(Table 3, Figures S17 and S19).

Discussion
An effective vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 will have enormous global public health and economic value.
As the leading candidate vaccines progress further through late-stage clinical trials and receive
approval from government regulatory authorities, preparation is underway to scale up manufacturing
capacity, supply chains, and delivery systems. This preparation should enable the first vaccines to be
rapidly distributed in the coming year, however, it is unlikely that any candidate vaccine could be
manufactured and distributed in sufficient quantity in 2021 to enable all countries to vaccinate their
populations to achieve herd immunity. Furthermore, evidence on the extent to which the current
vaccines are efficacious against infection (and therefore have potential to generate indirect
protection) is still emerging from implementation studies, as phase III trials are generally not designed
to measure this property. Current COVAX plans favour a global allocation strategy that prioritises the
highest risk groups – including the elderly – and suggest an “equitable” vaccine allocation strategy in
which each country receives doses in proportion to their population size and their epidemic status7,47.
Our results support such a strategy being close to optimal in terms of reducing the potential global
mortality from SARS-CoV-2. Once all countries have been allocated doses to vaccinate 20% of the
population, COVAX currently proposes that allocation of further doses should occur based on the
epidemiological situation and local vulnerabilities. While we did not specifically explore this, our
modelling framework can help support future prioritisation in the coming months.
For most infectious disease vaccines, one of the underlying goals is to vaccinate a sufficiently high
proportion of the population to achieve herd immunity. Our results demonstrate that such indirect
protection remains important for SARS-CoV-2 despite the strong risk-profile with increasing age.
Indirect protection has a particularly important benefit for vulnerable groups – such as the
immunocompromised – who cannot be directly protected through vaccination. However, at a
population level, the reduction in transmission that occurs also benefits those that receive the vaccine
but who for whatever reason do not achieve sterile protection. The coverage required to achieve herd
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

immunity will depend on both the underlying transmissibility of the virus (R0) and vaccine efficacy (the
effective coverage) and requires a vaccine that is efficacious against infection rather than only disease.
For our assumed R0 of 2.5, the theoretical coverage required is 60% for a 100% efficacious vaccine.
Thus, for a vaccine efficacy of 90%, population coverage of nearly 70% would be required. It is possible
that heterogeneity in contact rates could reduce this theoretical coverage if vaccination is targeted to
those with the highest contact rates48,49. Furthermore, in the presence of ongoing NPIs, the effective
coverage required to interrupt transmission (i.e. to reduce Rt to less than 1) will be lower.
Nevertheless, aiming for high coverage will clearly be important given the uncertainty in the precise
value of this threshold.
One of the challenges with quantifying the public health value of a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine is determining
the appropriate “counterfactual” scenario against which its value can be assessed. Here we chose to
generate some simplified scenarios that illustrate three factors determined by the epidemic to date:
the proportion of the population with naturally acquired immunity, the likely forward trajectory of the
epidemic in the absence of a vaccine, and the duration of both naturally acquired and vaccine-induced
immunity. The interaction between these factors is predicted to generate complex immune
landscapes50. The duration of vaccine-induced immunity is perhaps best addressed through repeat
vaccination; however, it is important to note that such data will only become available after several
months, and possibly years, of follow-up of trial participants. Similarly, pre-existing naturally acquired
immunity is unlikely to be a barrier to immunisation, provided there are no vaccine-associated risks
from antibody-dependent enhancement51. Thus, the value of vaccination should be quantified by the
degree to which it enables NPIs to be lifted. Given the broader economic and societal costs of NPIs,
combined epidemiological-economic models are required to address this.
We focused on two metrics to capture the public health value of the vaccine: deaths averted, and lifeyears gained. These metrics were chosen because the IFR is the best characterised endpoint and is
easily translatable between settings. However, the impact of SARS-CoV-2 in terms of longer-term
morbidity – so-called “Long COVID”52 – could also be considerable. In health economics longer-term
morbidity would normally be captured via Quality-Adjusted Life Years (QALYS). If morbidity is
significant then it could favour the prioritisation of vaccination towards younger age-groups. However,
at the current time, the extent and longer-term consequences of COVID-19 remain relatively poorly
understood, with no other comparable respiratory infections available with which to quantify QALYs.
This will be a research priority in the coming months and years.
Several risk groups for more severe outcomes following SARS-CoV-2 infection have been identified,
including individuals in some minority ethnic groups (although such studies are currently biased

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

towards countries with a majority White population)53; those with obesity, who have a higher risk of
a COVID-19 positive test, hospitalisation, and death54; and those with other underlying health
conditions55. However, age remains one of the strongest determinants of increased risk of mortality56.
Our results demonstrate that targeting a limited vaccine supply to older age groups is likely to be an
efficient way from a public health perspective to reduce mortality if the number of available doses is
insufficient to adopt a herd impact approach. However, even if sufficient doses of a vaccine that is
efficacious against infection become available in 2021 to target vaccination to the working-age
population to reduce transmission, if the early supply in the first quarter is constrained then targeting
the most vulnerable will likely remain optimal. This result is consistent with other modelling studies
that have considered either a full optimisation57,58 (in which a similar trade-off between direct
protection and herd impact is observed) or sequential efficiency59,60 (in which the most vulnerable are
initially prioritised). Such an approach also has the advantage that delivery systems are in place in
many (though not all) settings that can access such groups. It is possible that for some vaccines the
immune response in older individuals could be weaker; more data are required to characterise this
effect for some products2. However, both the Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna phase III trials
demonstrated high efficacy in older age groups, providing further impetus for vaccinating older
groups4,5.
One of the most difficult challenges facing decision-makers in 2021 will be the allocation of a limited
dose supply. At the global level, under our baseline assumptions, the strategy that maximises the total
deaths averted is one in which the available vaccine doses are allocated preferentially to higherincome countries who have the largest at-risk elderly populations but also have the strongest health
systems. However, the optimality of this allocation is sensitive to many assumptions and will depend
on both the vaccine characteristics and on the stage of the epidemic in each country throughout
vaccine introduction. Considering the optimisation framework applied, it is possible that there are
other dose allocation strategies that would be close to the optimal solution, but that distribute doses
between countries in the same income setting differently. Given this uncertainty, allocating vaccine
doses according to population size appears to be the next most efficient approach.
Within a country, the most efficient strategy for individual countries will generally be to prioritise
vaccination of the elderly and other high-risk groups, particularly if doses are only available for less
than approximately 20% of the population. If sufficient doses are available and if vaccination reduces
the risk of infection, targeting the working age population, or a combination of older and working age
groups, could be more efficient in reducing mortality, compared to sequentially vaccinating the oldest
to youngest age groups. This finding is consistent with other modelling studies of vaccine allocation
within a single country57,61–63. However, while such a strategy would favour economic and social
15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

recovery, it would rely on all vaccine doses being immediately available and able to be administered
while NPIs are maintained, therefore the optimality of targeting younger groups may not hold if
vaccines are delivered in a gradual phased approach. Also, this approach requires a higher dose supply
if transmission is higher, indicating that in the presence of new variant strains, prioritising vaccination
of the most vulnerable groups will likely remain the most appropriate strategy.
In our study we assessed the impact of vaccination for broad income strata, rather than individual
countries. Decision-making at the individual country level will need to account for local epidemic
history, levels of transmission, other control measures and how long they can be sustained, and the
sizes of the populations at highest risk within those settings55. Some countries have identified
prioritisation frameworks for allocating vaccines, with general agreement that frontline health care
workers and high-risk populations should be allocated the first available doses, and our user-friendly
COVID-19 vaccine simulation interface could help in supporting such decisions about country-level
introductions (Box 1). However, there are many other setting-specific factors that will also be
important for governments to consider, including supply chains, logistics, access to populations, costs
and budgets, and competing health, economic, and social priorities14.
As with any modelling study, there are several limitations to our approach. First, while phase III trial
efficacy results have been announced for several vaccine candidates, durability data are not yet
available, and data on the extent to which the current vaccine products can prevent infection are still
emerging2,3,28; our model assumptions may therefore need to be updated as trials and effectiveness
studies progress. Second, the number of doses and the timing of their availability are also uncertain;
for this reason, we have illustrated simplified scenarios in which vaccination occurs over a one-month
period for a range of epidemic stages. In practice, each country will have experienced a different
epidemic when the first vaccine is introduced and will scale up coverage over a period of months.
Third, the model used here is relatively simple in structure and can only simulate the impact of a single
vaccine product, with one value for average vaccine efficacy, meaning we could not include
complexities such as multiple vaccine products, nor the potential partial efficacy following the first
dose in a multi-dose vaccine schedule. These considerations will be important for future studies.
Fourth, our study focuses only on the health benefits of vaccination. It will also be important to
consider other therapeutic interventions, as well as the capacity of countries to suppress transmission
using NPIs, and to better capture specific risk groups as appropriate to individual countries.
Furthermore, the direct health outcome is only one dimension; it will be important in the near-term
to capture the impact of vaccination on non-COVID-19 health, as well as to integrate epidemiological
and economic models to evaluate the impact of different vaccine allocation strategies on the
economic outputs of countries and the livelihoods of their citizens.
16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Research and development of a SARS-CoV-2 vaccine has taken place at unprecedented speed, with
efficacy and safety results now available for several vaccine candidates within one year of the
pandemic being declared. Our results demonstrate that the global public health value of the vaccine
can be maximised by ensuring equitable access. Acting collectively in this way during the early stages
of vaccine deployment remains the ethical approach to take, even if this is not the most beneficial
short-term strategy from a national perspective.
Funding: PW and ABH acknowledge fellowship funding from Imperial College London. PGTW, OJW,
ACG and NMF acknowledge grant funding from The Wellcome Trust and the UK Foreign,
Commonwealth & Development Office (FCDO). CW acknowledges support through a Medical
Research Council (MRC) Doctoral Training Programme studentship. NB, GC and ACG acknowledge
support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. All authors acknowledge funding support for the
MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis (reference MR/R015600/1), jointly funded by the
UK MRC and the UK FCDO, under the MRC/FCDO Concordat agreement, also part of the EDCTP2
programme supported by the European Union. NMF and KH acknowledge funding by Community
Jameel. NMF acknowledges support from the NIHR HPRU in Modelling and Health Economics, a
partnership between PHE, Imperial College London and LSHTM (grant code NIHR200908). ACG, ABH,
MB, and PW received personal fees from the World Health Organization in relation to developing the
online interface (approximately £1,000 per individual), and the WHO provided input into the design
of and data underpinning the online interface. The funders had no other role in study design, conduct,
or interpretation of results. Disclaimer: The views expressed are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the United Kingdom (UK) Department of Health and Social Care, the National
Health Service, the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR), or Public Health England (PHE).
Author contributions: ABH, PW and ACG designed the study with input from FM, KAMG, KH, MB, and
NMF. ABH, PW, GC and OJW coded the model, ran the simulations and undertook the analysis with
support from CW, NB, PGTW, and RV. AH, EK, JAL, and LW provided additional technical assistance
with the model development and parameterisation. ABH, PW and ACG produced the first draft of the
manuscript with additional input from AL, CW, DJL, KAMG, FM, KH, MB, NMF, OJW, and PGTW. All
authors approved the final draft.
Competing interests: The authors declare grants from The Wellcome Trust (NMF, ACG), UK Medical
Research Council (NMF, ACG, KH), National Institute for Health Research (NMF, KH), Community
Jameel (NMF, KH), the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (OJW) and the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation (NMF), during the conduct of the study; grants from the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation (ACG), National Institute for Health (ACG), GlaxoSmithKline (AL), and Gavi, the

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Vaccine Alliance (ACG, KAMG) outside the submitted work; personal fees from the World Health
Organization (ACG, ABH, MB, PW) during the conduct of the study, in relation to developing the online
interface (approximately £1,000 per individual); and personal fees from The Global Fund (ACG, PW)
outside the submitted work. ABH was previously engaged by Pfizer Inc to advise on modelling RSV
vaccination strategies for which she received no financial compensation. There are no other
relationships or activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work.
Data availability: The open-source model code is available as an R package at https://github.com/mrcide/nimue, and the code to perform the analysis and generate the tables and figures, is available to
download at https://github.com/mrc-ide/covid_vaccine_allocation.

References
1

Craven J. COVID-19 vaccine tracker. Regul. Aff. Prof. Soc. 2021. https://www.raps.org/newsand-articles/news-articles/2020/3/covid-19-vaccine-tracker (accessed Jan 26, 2021).

2

Voysey M, Clemens SAC, Madhi SA, et al. Safety and efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine
(AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an interim analysis of four randomised controlled trials in
Brazil, South Africa, and the UK. Lancet 2020; 397: 99–111.

3

Voysey M, Costa Clemens SA, Madhi SA, et al. Single-dose administration and the influence of
the timing of the booster dose on immunogenicity and efficacy of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
(AZD1222) vaccine: a pooled analysis of four randomised trials. Lancet 2021; 19: 881–91.

4

Baden LR, El Sahly HM, Essink B, et al. Efficacy and Safety of the mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2
Vaccine. N Engl J Med 2020; 384: 403–16.

5

Polack FP, Thomas SJ, Kitchin N, et al. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19
Vaccine. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 2603–15.

6

Logunov DY, Dolzhikova I V, Shcheblyakov D V, et al. Safety and efficacy of an rAd26 and rAd5
vector-based heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccine: an interim analysis of a
randomised controlled phase 3 trial in Russia. Lancet 2021; 397: 671–81.

7

GAVI. COVAX: Ensuring global equitable access to COVID-19 vaccines.
https://www.gavi.org/covid19/covax-facility (accessed Aug 4, 2020).

8

BBC. Coronavirus: US buys nearly all of Gilead’s Covid-19 drug remedesivir. 2020.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-53254487 (accessed Aug 5, 2020).

9

Stone J. Government says medicines must be stock-piled for no-deal Brexit on top of Covid-19
pressures. Indep. 2020. https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/coronavirus-nodeal-brexit-government-medicine-stockpiling-a9651991.html (accessed Sept 17, 2020).

10

World Health Organization. Ethics and COVID-19: resource allocation and priority-setting.
2020; : 1–5.

11

Persad G, Wertheimer A, Emanuel E. Principles for allocation of scarce medical interventions.
Lancet 2009; 737: 423–31.

12

Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Upshur R, et al. Fair allocation of scarce medical resources in the time
18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

of covid-19. N Engl J Med 2020; 382: 2049–55.
13

Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, et al. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a
model-based analysis. Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20: 669–77.

14

Russell FM, Greenwood B. Who should be prioritised for COVID-19 vaccination? Hum
Vaccines Immunother 2020; 00: 1–5.

15

Walker PGT, Whittaker C, Watson OJ, et al. The impact of COVID-19 and strategies for
mitigation and suppression in low- and middle-income countries. Science (80- ) 2020; 422:
eabc0035.

16

The World Bank. DataBank World Development Indicators. 2020.
https://databank.worldbank.org/ (accessed Sept 1, 2020).

17

United Nations. United Nations World Population Prospects. 2020.
https://population.un.org/wpp/ (accessed July 1, 2020).

18

Pritchard M, Dankwa EA, Hall M, et al. ISARIC Clinical Data Report 4 October 2020. medRxiv
2020. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.07.17.20155218.

19

(ICNARC) ICNA& RC. ICNARC report on COVID-19 in critical care 16 October 2020. 2020.
https://www.icnarc.org/Our-Audit/Audits/Cmp/Reports.

20

Salje H, Kiem CT, Lefrancq N, et al. Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France. Science
(80- ) 2020; 369: 208–11.

21

Brazeau NF, Verity R, Jenks S, et al. Report 34 - COVID-19 Infection Fatality Ratio estimates
from seroprevalence. 2020. DOI:https://doi.org/10.25561/83545.

22

Dong E, Du H, Gardner L. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time.
Lancet Infect Dis 2020; 20: 533–4.

23

Worldometer. Coronavirus updates. https://www.worldometers.info/ (accessed Jan 26,
2021).

24

Public Health England. PHE monitoring of the early impact and effectiveness of COVID-19
vaccination in England, 22 February 2021. 2021; : 1–17.

25

Bernal JL, Andrews N, Gower C, et al. Early effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccination with
BNT162b2 mRNA vaccine and ChAdOx1 adenovirus vector vaccine on symptomatic disease ,
hospitalisations and mortality in older adults in England. medRxiv 2021.

26

Amit S, Regev-Yochay G, Afek A, Kreiss Y, Leshem E. Early rate reductions of SARS-CoV-2
infection and COVID-19 in BNT162b2 vaccine recipients. Lancet 2021; 397: 875–7.

27

Hall V, Foulkes S, Saei A, et al. Effectiveness of BNT162b2 mRNA Vaccine Against Infection
and COVID-19 Vaccine Coverage in Healthcare Workers in England, Multicentre Prospective
Cohort Study (the SIREN Study). SSRN Prepr 2021.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3790399.

28

Weekes M, Jones NK, Rivett L, et al. Single-dose BNT162b2 vaccine protects against
asymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infection. Authorea 2021.
DOI:10.22541/au.161420511.12987747/v1.

29

World Health Organization. WHO Target Product Profiles for COVID-19 Vaccines. Version 3.
Geneva, 2020 https://www.who.int/publications/m/item/who-target-product-profiles-forcovid-19-vaccines.
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

30

Haq K, McElhaney JE. Immunosenescence: Influenza vaccination and the elderly. Curr Opin
Immunol 2014; 29: 38–42.

31

Arinaminpathy N, Kim IK, Gargiullo P, et al. Estimating Direct and Indirect Protective Effect of
Influenza Vaccination in the United States. Am J Epidemiol 2017; 186: 92–100.

32

L.A. Jackson, E.J. Anderson, N.G. Rouphael, P.C. Roberts, M. Makhene, R.N. Coler, M.P.
McCullough, J.D. Chappell, M.R. Denison, L.J. Stevens, A.J. Pruijssers, A. McDermott, B. Flach,
N.A. Doria-Rose KSC, K.M. Morabito, S. O’Dell, S.D. Schmidt, P.A. Swanson II, M. Padilla, J.R.
Mascola, K.M. Neuzil, H. Bennett, W. Sun, E. Peters, M. Makowski, J. Albert KC, W. Buchanan,
R. Pikaart-Tautges, J.E. Ledgerwood, B.S. Graham, and J.H. Beigel for the mRNA-1273 SG. An
mRNA Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 — Preliminary Report. N Engl J Med 2020; 383: 1920–31.

33

Folegatti PM, Ewer KJ, Aley PK, et al. Articles Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1
nCoV-19 vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 : a preliminary report of a phase 1 / 2 , single-blind ,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet 2020; 396: 467–78.

34

Zhu FC, Li YH, Guan XH, et al. Safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of a recombinant
adenovirus type-5 vectored COVID-19 vaccine: a dose-escalation, open-label, nonrandomised, first-in-human trial. Lancet 2020; 395: 1845–54.

35

Mulligan MJ, Lyke KE, Kitchin N, et al. Phase I/II study of COVID-19 RNA vaccine BNT162b1 in
adults. Nature 2020; 586: 589–93.

36

Sahin U, Muik A, Derhovanessian E, et al. COVID-19 vaccine BNT162b1 elicits human antibody
and TH1 T cell responses. Nature 2020; 586: 594–9.

37

Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovaciaon Gobierno de Espana, Ministerio de Sanidad Gobierno de
Espana, Consejo Interterritorial, Instituto de Salud Carlos III. Estudio Nacional de SeroEpidemiolgia de la Infeccion por SARS-CoV-2 en Espana: Informe Final. 2020
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/ciudadanos/ene-covid/.

38

To KKW, Hung IF, Ip JD, et al. COVID-19 re-infection by a phylogenetically distinct SARScoronavirus-2 strain confirmed by whole genome sequencing. Clin Infect Dis 2020; : ciaa1275.

39

Hall V, Foulkes S, Charlett A, et al. Do antibody positive healthcare workers have lower SARSCoV-2 infection rates than antibody negative healthcare workers? Large multi-centre
prospective cohort study (the SIREN study), England: June to November 2020. medRxiv 2021;
: 2021.01.13.21249642.

40

MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis Imperial College London. Future scenarios
of the healthcare burden of COVID-19 in Low- or Middle-income countries. 2021. https://mrcide.github.io/global-lmic-reports/ (accessed Jan 26, 2021).

41

Naghavi M, Abajobir AA, Abbafati C, et al. Global, regional, and national age-sex specifc
mortality for 264 causes of death, 1980-2016: A systematic analysis for the Global Burden of
Disease Study 2016. Lancet 2017; 390: 1151–210.

42

Emanuel EJ, Persad G, Kern A, et al. An ethical framework for global vaccine allocation.
Science (80- ) 2020; 369: 1309–12.

43

World Health Organization. 172 countries and multiple candidate vaccines engaged in COVID19 vaccine Global Access Facility. 2020. https://www.who.int/news/item/24-08-2020-172countries-and-multiple-candidate-vaccines-engaged-in-covid-19-vaccine-global-access-facility
(accessed Jan 27, 2021).

44

Schumacher D. ompr: Model and Solve Mixed Integer Linear Programs. R package version
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

0.8.0. 2020. https://cran.r-project.org/package=ompr.
45

Davies NG, Barnard RC, Jarvis CI, et al. Estimated transmissibility and severity of novel SARSCoV-2 Variant of Concern 202012/01 in England. medRxiv 2020; : 2020.12.24.20248822.

46

Volz E, Mishra S, Chand M, et al. Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 Lineage B.1.1.7 in England:
Insights from linking epidemiological and genetic data. medRxiv 2021; :
2020.12.30.20249034.

47

Gavi. 92 low- and middle-income economies eligible to get access to COVID-19 vaccines
through Gavi COVAX AMC. 2020. https://www.gavi.org/news/media-room/92-low-middleincome-economies-eligible-access-covid-19-vaccines-gavi-covax-amc (accessed Sept 17,
2020).

48

Britton T, Ball F, Trapman P. A mathematical model reveals the influence of population
heterogeneity on herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2. Science (80- ) 2020; 369: 846–9.

49

Fontanet A, Cauchemez S. COVID-19 herd immunity: where are we? Nat Rev Immunol 2020.
DOI:10.1038/s41577-020-00451-5.

50

Saad-Roy CM, Wagner CE, Baker RE, et al. Immune life history, vaccination, and the dynamics
of SARS-CoV-2 over the next 5 years. Science (80- ) 2020. DOI:10.1126/science.abd7343.

51

Jeyanathan M, Afkhami S, Smaill F, Miller MS, Lichty BD, Xing Z. Immunological considerations
for COVID-19 vaccine strategies. Nat Rev Immunol 2020. DOI:10.1038/s41577-020-00434-6.

52

Mahase E. Covid-19: What do we know about ‘long covid’? BMJ 2020; 370: m2815.

53

Sze S, Pan D, Nevill CR, et al. Ethnicity and clinical outcomes in COVID-19: A systematic review
and meta-analysis. EClinicalMedicine 2020; 29–30: 100630.

54

Popkin BM, Du S, Green WD, et al. Individuals with obesity and COVID-19: A global
perspective on the epidemiology and biological relationships. Obes Rev 2020; 21: 1–17.

55

Clark A, Jit M, Warren-Gash C, et al. Global, regional, and national estimates of the
population at increased risk of severe COVID-19 due to underlying health conditions in 2020:
a modelling study. Lancet Glob Heal 2020; 8: e1003–17.

56

Docherty AB, Harrison EM, Green CA, et al. Features of 20 133 UK patients in hospital with
covid-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol: Prospective observational
cohort study. BMJ 2020; 369: 1–12.

57

Matrajt L, Eaton J, Leung T, Brown ER. Vaccine optimization for COVID-19, who to vaccinate
first? medRxiv 2020. DOI:10.1101/2020.08.14.20175257.

58

Jentsch P, Anand M, Bauch CT. Prioritising COVID-19 vaccination in changing social and
epidemiological landscapes. medRxiv 2020; : 1–13.

59

Makhoul M, Ayoub HH, Chemaitelly H, et al. Epidemiological Impact of SARS-CoV-2
Vaccination: Mathematical Modeling Analyses. Vaccines 2020; 8.
DOI:10.3390/vaccines8040668.

60

Moore S, Hill EM, Dyson L, Tildesley MJ, Keeling MJ. Modelling optimal vaccination strategy
for SARS-CoV-2 in the UK. medRxiv 2020. DOI:10.1101/2020.09.22.20194183.

61

Babus A, Das S, Lee S. The Optimal Allocation of Covid-19 Vaccines. medRxiv 2020; :
2020.07.22.20160143.

62

Chen X, Li M, Simchi-Levi D, Zhao T. Allocation of COVID-19 Vaccines Under Limited Supply.
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

medRxiv 2020; : 2020.08.23.20179820.
63

Bubar KM, Reinholt K, Kissler SM, et al. Model-informed COVID-19 vaccine prioritization
strategies by age and serostatus. Science (80- ) 2021; : eabe6959.

64

Institute of Global Health Innovation, YouGov. Covid-19: Global attitudes towards a COVID-19
vaccine. 2020. https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/institute-of-global-healthinnovation/GlobalVaccineInsights_ICL-YouGov-Covid-19-BehaviourTracker_20201202_v6.pdf[15].pdf (accessed Jan 26, 2021).

65

Hansen CH, Michlmayr D, Gubbels SM, Mølbak K, Ethelberg S. Articles Assessment of
protection against reinfection with SARS-CoV-2 among 4 million PCR-tested individuals in
Denmark in 2020 : a population-level observational study. Lancet 2021; 6736: 1–9.

66

Dan JM, Mateus J, Kato Y, et al. Immunological memory to SARS-CoV-2 assessed for up to 8
months after infection. Science (80- ) 2021; 371. DOI:10.1126/science.abf4063.

67

World Health Organization. Revising global indicative wastage rates: a WHO initiative for
better planning and forecasting of vaccine supply needs. Concept Note, 8 April 2019. 2019; :
1–6.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Tables
Table 1: Summary of Scenarios Explored. The values in bold represent the default parameters, unless
otherwise stated.
Parameter

Values

References / Notes

Income setting

High-income
(HIC);
Upper-middle
income
(UMIC); Lower-middle income (LMIC); Low-income
(LIC)

16

Transmission from March 2020 - April 2020 (R0) 2.5; 1.5–4.0
Transmission from May 2020 - January 2021 1.1; 0.9; 1.3
(Rt1)

Assumed values to mimic
patterns of epidemics
observed globally

Transmission from February 2021 onwards (Rt2) 2.0; 1.5; 2.5
Vaccine mode of action

Combined; Infection; Disease

2–6,28

Vaccine efficacy against infection

90%; 50-90%; 0% (disease-only efficacy)

3–6

Vaccine efficacy against disease

Additional 60% for breakthrough infections; 50-90%
(disease-only efficacy); 0% (infection-only efficacy)

3,5,24–27

Reduction in efficacy against infection in 0%; 50%
individuals 65 years and older due to
immunosenescence

30,31

Vaccine coverage

80%; 0%–100%

64

Vaccine duration of protection

Long-term; 1 year; 6 months

29

Duration of naturally acquired immunity

1 year; lifelong; 6 months

37–39,65,66

Age targeting

All ages targeted; Older; Younger; combinations of 5- Chosen to reflect different
year groups
patterns being adopted by
countries

Duration between vaccination and vaccine 7 days
protection following second dose

32–36

Health system constraints

Present; Absent

15

Health system constraint assumptions

Health system constraints present
(LIC: Capacity limited + negative health outcomes due
to poorer standard of care
LMIC: Capacity limited
UMIC & HIC: Capacity unlimited as surge capacity is
put in place);
Health system constraints absent (Capacity unlimited
in all settings)

15

Vaccine dose supply constraint

2 billion doses in 2021 (COVAX); 2 billion doses in
2021 + direct country procurement (1.15 billion
doses by HICs, 1.10 billion doses by MICs)

7

Dose schedule

2 doses; 1 dose

2,4–6

Vaccine buffer stock and wastage allowance

15%

67

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Global Allocation of Vaccine Doses for both Non-Optimised and Optimised Scenarios. The
global vaccine supply was assumed to be constrained to 2 billion doses, with a two-dose schedule and
15% buffer and wastage (resulting in 0.85 billion vaccine courses available). Table S4 shows impact for
the same non-optimised allocation strategies, but with the assumption that limited countries within
each income setting are allocated doses at high (80%) coverage. Table S6 shows the sensitivity analysis
for each of the non-optimised scenarios. FVP: fully vaccinated persons.

Allocation strategy

A: Countries receive doses
in proportion to population

Allocated
to all
countries
at varying
coverage

B: Countries receive doses
in proportion to population,
with 65+ group prioritised
and remaining doses
allocated to 15-64 age
groups
C: Countries receive doses
in proportion to 65+
population, with 65+ group
prioritised and remaining
doses allocated to 15-64
age groups
D: Allocated first to highincome countries

E: Allocated first to lowincome and lower-middleincome countries

F: Countries receive doses
in proportion to population,
plus 1.15 b doses to HIC
and 1.1 b doses to MIC

Optimised
allocation

Allocation algorithm selects
countries and age groups
within targets to maximise
deaths averted

all

Deaths
averted
per
million
831

Deaths
averted
per 100
FVP
0.76

UMIC

all

531

0.48

LMIC

all

730

0.66

LIC

482

0.44

HIC

all
15+

1389

1.26

UMIC

15+

1270

1.14

LMIC

15+

1374

1.25

LIC
HIC

15+
15+

1221

1.11

2238

0.9

UMIC

15+

1285

1.09

LMIC

15+

1237

1.91

LIC

15+

918

2.56

HIC

all

3234

0.46

UMIC

all

0

0

LMIC

all

0

0

LIC

all

0

0

HIC

all

0

0

UMIC

all

0

0

LMIC

all

1323

0.55

LIC

all

1074

0.45

HIC

all

3231

0.63

UMIC

all

898

0.47

LMIC

all

1099

0.58

LIC

all

482

0.44

HIC

optimised

3135

1.16

UMIC

optimised

1241

1.44

LMIC

optimised

1581

1.62

LIC

optimised

1533

1.81

Income
setting

Target
age
group

HIC

24

Total deaths
averted per
million global
population

Total deaths
averted per 100
FVP

650

0.59

1324

1.20

1386

1.25

513

0.46

597

0.53

1308

0.56

1672

1.43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 3: Identified Optimal Global Allocation by Income Setting. The optimal allocated coverage is
the fully vaccinated persons per population, and the value in parentheses represents the proportion
of total global doses allocated to that income setting. The Default scenario represents the default
vaccine assumptions in Table 1. We also present the sensitivity of the allocation to changes in the
assumptions about vaccine efficacy, vaccine efficacy in the 65+ years age group, mode of action of the
vaccine, NPIs at vaccine introduction, health system constraints, reduced infectiousness in children
younger than 10 years, and life-years gained (LYG) as an optimisation measure. The within-setting
results are shown in Figures S12–S19, and the public health impact for each scenario is in Table S5.
The estimated proportion of the global population in each income setting is included for reference.
Income setting
HIC

UMIC

LMIC

LIC

15.9%

37.3%

38.1%

8.7%

Default

27.1% (33.2%)

8.6% (27.9%)

9.8% (32.6%)

8.5% (6.2%)

Lower vaccine
efficacy (70%)

32.7% (40.2%)

7.8% (25.3%)

8.5% (28.3%)

8.5% (6.2%)

Reduced vaccine
efficacy (scaled by
50%) in 65+ years
population

27.1% (33.2%)

11.5% (37.3%)

6.9% (23.2%)

8.5% (6.2%)

Vaccine efficacious
against disease
only

18.3% (22.5%)

7.8% (25.3%)

13.1% (43.7%)

11.6% (8.5%)

NPIs maintained at
higher level
following vaccine
introduction (such
that Rt2=1.5)

11.3% (13.9%)

11.5% (37.1%)

11.2% (37.5%)

15.6% (11.5%)

NPIs maintained at
lower level
following vaccine
introduction (such
that Rt2=2.5)

29.2% (35.8%)

7.8% (25.3%)

9.8% (32.6%)

8.5% (6.2%)

Health system
constraints absent

27.1% (33.2%)

15% (48.7%)

4.5% (15.2%)

4% (3%)

Reduced
infectiousness in
children younger
than 10 years

29.3% (35.9%)

7.8% (25.3%)

9.7% (32.5%)

8.5% (6.2%)

LYG as optimisation
outcome measure

27.1% (33.2%)

1.7% (5.5%)

10.7% (35.8%)

34.7% (25.6%)

Proportion of global population

Allocated
coverage of the
population
(proportion of
global doses
allocated to
income setting)

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure Captions

Figure 1: Scenarios for the Course of the Epidemic from 2020–2022, for a High-Income Country
Setting, in the Absence of a Vaccine (counterfactual scenarios). We assume that R0=2.5 up to time t1
(May 2020) and that Rt1 drops to 1.1 between time t1 and t2 (February 2021). Assuming an average
duration of naturally acquired immunity of one year, this results in 11% in the recovered (immune)
state at vaccine introduction. From time t2 onwards, we consider three counterfactual scenarios,
Rt2=1.5, 2 and 2.5 shown in light green, purple, and turquoise, respectively. Vaccine impact is
compared to these counterfactual scenarios.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Vaccine Efficacy and Herd Immunity. (A) The relationship between efficacy of a vaccine that
reduces the risk of infection, and the theoretical coverage required for herd immunity, for a range of
levels of transmission shown as the level of the reproduction number Rt. The theoretical coverage
assumes random mixing of the population. (B) Projected total deaths averted per thousand population
in 2021 under the default assumptions shown in Table 1 (with R0 = 2.5, Rt1 = 1.1, and Rt2 = 2.0). The
colours show different magnitudes of vaccine efficacy . Solid lines represent impact for a vaccine that
is efficacious against infection, with additional efficacy against severe disease. Dashed lines represent
a vaccine that is efficacious against infection only, and dotted lines represent a vaccine that only
prevents severe disease (and hence death) but does not reduce infection or onwards transmission
(Table S3). Impact is shown for a HIC setting and all age groups are vaccinated uniformly; additional
plots for other income settings and health system constraint assumptions are in Figure S7.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Epidemic Characteristics at Vaccine Introduction. (A) Three scenarios for the stage of the
epidemic at vaccine introduction. The dark blue line shows a scenario where transmission has
previously been suppressed and therefore the proportion immune at vaccine introduction is low (4%).
The purple line shows the default scenario in which the proportion immune at vaccine introduction is
11%. The light blue line shows a scenario in which more widespread transmission occurred during
2020 and the proportion immune at vaccine introduction is higher (14%). (B) The projected impact of
vaccination in terms of total deaths averted per thousand individuals over 2021–2022, for the
scenarios in A. All other vaccine characteristics are set to the default assumptions. (C) Three scenarios
for the course of the epidemic from February 2021 onwards assuming the default scenario up until
this time of vaccine introduction. The light green line shows the scenario for Rt2=1.5, purple Rt2=2, and
turquoise Rt2=2.5. (D) Deaths averted per thousand individuals over 2021–2022, for the scenarios in
C. All other vaccine characteristics are set to the default assumptions. (E) Three scenarios for the
course of the epidemic from February 2021 onwards where NPIs are assumed to be lifted when the
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

vaccine is introduced, and the target population is vaccinated at a constant rate over 2021, for three
vaccine targeting strategies (coloured lines). The black long-dashed line shows the counterfactual
scenario. (F) Deaths averted per thousand individuals over 2021–2022, for the scenarios in E. “All”: all
age groups vaccinated simultaneously. “Target older”: the 80+ group is vaccinated first, then
additional groups (75–79, 70–74 and so on) are consecutively vaccinated. “Target working-age”: the
15–64-year-old group is vaccinated first, and then the older group, and then children. (G, H) Deaths
averted (G) and life-years gained (H) per thousand population in 2021 for each income setting, where
health systems are either unconstrained (dark grey) or constrained (light grey). Default vaccine
parameters are in Table 1.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: Age-targeting of Vaccine Introduction. These panels illustrate the most efficient allocation
under different supply constraints, where the supply is defined as the proportion of the total
population able to access two doses. Panels A, C, E and G show the age groups allocated the vaccine
under the optimal strategy for different levels of vaccine supply, where the purple shaded regions
indicate the age groups prioritised. Panels B, D, F and H show the total health impact expressed as
deaths averted per thousand population as a function vaccine supply. The optimal strategies from the
left-hand panels are shown in purple on the right-hand panels. The dark blue points show the strategy
that prioritises the older at-risk age: 80+ for the lowest coverage level, and sequentially including
30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253960; this version posted March 20, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

additional age groups (75–79, 70–74 and so on) as additional doses are available. The turquoise points
show the same strategy, but where vaccine efficacy in the 65+ population is 35%
(immunosenescence). The green points show the strategy that prioritises the working age population
first (beginning with the 60–64 age group and sequentially adding younger groups), then vaccinates
the elderly and children as doses become available. Health system constraints in LICs and LMICs are
assumed to be present These allocations are generated using the default vaccine characteristics in
Table 1, with 80% coverage in the target age group vaccinated; additional scenarios are shown in
Figures S12–S19.

31

