medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

System-wide hematopoietic and immune signaling aberrations in COVID-19
revealed by deep proteome and phosphoproteome analysis
Tomonori Kaneko1,7, Sally Esmail1,7, Courtney Voss1, Claudio M. Martin2,3, Marat Slessarev2,3,
Owen Hovey1, Xuguang Liu1, Mingliang Ye4, Sung Kim5, Douglas Fraser2,3,6, and Shawn SC Li1,*
1

Departments of Biochemistry, 2Medicine, 5Microbiology and Immunology, and 6Pediatrics,

Schulich School of Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario N6G 2V4,
Canada.
3

Lawson Health Research Institute, 750 Base Line Rd E, London, ON N6C 2R5, Canada.

4

CAS Key Laboratory of Separation Sciences for Analytical Chemistry, National

Chromatographic R&A Center, Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences (CAS), Dalian 116023, China.
7

These authors contributed equally to this work

*Corresponding author: sli@uwo.ca

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUMMARY
The COVID-19 pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus, has become a global crisis. To gain
systems-level insights into its pathogenesis, we compared the blood proteome and
phosphoproteome of ICU patients with or without SARS-CoV-2 infection, and healthy control
subjects by quantitative mass spectrometry. We find that COVID-19 is marked with hyperactive
T cell and B cell signaling, compromised innate immune response, and dysregulated inflammation,
coagulation, metabolism, RNA splicing, transcription and translation pathways. SARS-CoV-2
infection causes global reprogramming of the kinome and kinase-substrate network, resulting in
defective antiviral defense via the CK2-OPN-IL-12/IFN-a/b axis, lymphocyte cell death via
aberrant JAK/STAT signaling, and inactivation of innate immune cells via inhibitory SIRPA,
SIGLEC and SLAM family receptor signaling. Our work identifies CK2, SYK, JAK3, TYK2 and
IL-12 as potential targets for immunomodulatory treatment of severe COVID-19 and provides a
valuable approach and resource for deciphering the mechanism of pathogen-host interactions.

KEYWORDS
COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, proteome, phosphoproteome, immune regulation, signal transduction,
kinase, cytokine, CK2, SYK, IL-12, JAK-STAT, T cell, B cell, phagocytes, immunoreceptor Tyrbased motifs, inhibitory receptor.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 or SARS-CoV-2, first identified in humans
in December 20191, has infected tens of millions of people and claimed nearly 2 million lives
worldwide to date. While the majority of individuals infected by the new coronavirus have mild
symptoms or are asymptomatic, approximately 10-15% of patients develop severe diseases that
require hospitalization. Patients with severe symptoms usually develop acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) 2, a major cause of morbidity and mortality. The coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) pandemic has sparked an unprecedented effort from the scientific community to
understand the disease mechanism and develop therapeutic and immunization strategies to combat
the pandemic, cumulating in the recent approval of two vaccines for emergency use by the US
Federal Drug Administration.
Despite these encouraging developments, the biological and biochemical underpinnings of
ARDS and other symptoms of severe COVID-19 are not fully understood, which has hampered
the development of effective treatment. Studies to date have shown that the SARS-CoV-2 infection
elicits a wide array of biochemical and cellular abnormalities that are rooted in an unbalanced
immune response to the virus. For example, while cytokines play an important role in antiviral
immunity, rapid production of a large amount of proinflammatory cytokines, referred to as the
cytokine release syndrome (CRS), is associated with severe COVID-19 cases3. Furthermore,
severe diseases are characterized frequently with lymphopenia, manifesting in reduced circulating
T cells, B cells or/and natural killer (NK) cells 4. However, immune profiling has revealed
activation of subsets of T cells, extrafollicular B cells and production of neutralizing antibodies in
severe COVID-19, suggesting robust cellular and humoral immune responses in these patients 5,6.
Nevertheless, a large proportion of patients with a strong, early antibody response do poorly in
controlling the infection and ultimately succumb to the disease6. These dichotomies highlight voids
in our knowledge on the fundamental immunological processes perturbed by the SARS-CoV-2
virus.
To decipher the molecular, cellular and immunological basis of COVID-19 in a systematic
and unbiased manner, we employed mass spectrometry (MS) and complementary biochemical
assays to characterize the peripheral blood – the barometer of the immune system. By comparing
the blood proteome and phosphoproteome of the patients under intensive care who tested positive

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or negative for the SARS-CoV-2 virus with age- and sex-matched healthy controls, we identified
the protein/phosphoprotein signatures and the regulatory/signaling pathways associated with
severe COVID-19. We show that the SARS-CoV-2+ ICU patients are marked with aberrant
changes in a wide range of hematopoietic and immunological processes and pathways. Combined
with comprehensive cytokine/chemokine and antibody profiling, our MS analysis not only
captured the major defects identified to date for COVID-19, but also generated novel insights into
the signaling and regulatory mechanisms underlying the aberrant immune responses mediated by
T cells, B cells, NK cells and myeloid cells. Importantly, our work has identified numerous
potential therapeutic targets, including the casein kinase 2 (CK2), the spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK),
the Janus kinases JAK3 and TYK2, and interleukin-12 (IL-12), for the development of targeted
immunomodulatory therapies for the treatment of patients with severe COVID-19 diseases.
RESULTS
Quantitative MS analysis of the blood reveals distinctive features of the COVID-19 proteome
We employed mass spectrometry (MS) to identify proteins and phosphoproteins in the blood of
critically ill COVID-19 patients in comparison to age- and sex-matched critically ill SARS-CoV2 negative and healthy control subjects. Specifically, the peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMCs) were isolated, respectively, from the blood of 5 ICU patients who tested positive for the
SARS-CoV-2 RNA (the COV group; median years of age= 61.0; IQR = 54.8–67.0), 5 SARS-CoV2-negative ICU patients (the ICU group; median years of age = 58.0; IQR = 52.5–63.0), and 5
healthy individuals (the HC group; median years of age = 57.5; IQR = 52.8–62.8) (Table S1). To
gauge the proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics accompanying disease progression, we
included in the MS analysis serial blood samples from the COV group drawn on days 1, 7 and 10
(or D1, D7, and D10) of ICU admission. Peptides from the 25 PBMC were isobarically labeled
with tandem mass tags (TMT) in three batches (Table S2) and subjected to liquid chromatography
(LC)-MS/MS analysis (Fig. S1, Table S3). The phosphoproteome identification was facilitated by
SH2 superbinder enrichment for the pTyr-containing peptides 7 and by IMAC (immobilized metal
affinity chromatography) enrichment for the pSer/pThr-containing peptides (Fig. S1). The MS
analysis identified 3,236 non-redundant proteins containing 2,317 Ser/Thr and 394 Tyr unique
phosphorylation sites (Tables S4-6).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Clustering of the 894 proteins that differed significantly in abundance correctly identified
the COV, ICU and HC cohorts, suggesting distinctive protein expression patterns in the different
PBMCs (Fig. 1A). In general, proteins over-expressed in the patients were found under-expressed
in the healthy controls and vice versa (i.e., Clusters 1 and 5, Fig. 1A). In contrast, fewer than 130
proteins (belonging to the clusters 2, 3 and 4, Fig. 1A) were significantly different in expression
between COV and ICU, suggesting that the proteomes of the two patient groups are similar. Gene
ontology (GO) analysis revealed a number of significantly enriched processes that included
exocytosis, innate and adaptive immune responses, interleukin signaling, platelet activation, redox
response, and glycolysis (Fig. 1B). Intriguingly, interleukin-12 (IL-12) signaling emerged as a
significant feature. As described later, IL-12 expression was drastically reduced in the COV
PBMCs. Because functionally related proteins tend to interact with one another, we employed the
protein-protein interaction (PPI) clustering feature of Metascape to identify the enriched PPI
networks for the 521 differentially expressed proteins between COV and HC (Fig. S2). This led to
the identification of four PPI networks enriched in the COVID-19 samples with functions in cell
cycle phase transition8, RNA processing, catabolism 9 and exocytosis and stress responses (Fig.
S3). The PPI network for RNA processing comprises a spliceosome and a translation regulation
subnetwork (Fig. 1C), reinforcing the previous finding that SARS-CoV-2 suppresses global
mRNA splicing and translation10.
Systematic changes in the immune response, coagulation, platelet activation and metabolic
pathways in COVID-19
To gain further insights into the cellular and biochemical defects caused by SARS-CoV-2, we next
focused on the differentially expressed proteins in specific pathways, taking advantage of the
quantitative proteome data. In keeping with an essential role for regulated exocytosis (Fig. 1B) in
the degranulation and activation of myeloid cells, we found that the neutrophil activation and
monocyte/macrophage differentiation pathways11 were significantly upregulated in the COV
group (D1, D7 and D10) compared to HC or ICU. Phagocytosis/endocytosis, which plays an
important part in the elimination of virus-infected cells, was also significantly elevated in COV.
Specifically, the Fc receptor-dependent phagocytosis pathway was progressively upregulated from
D1 to D7 and D10 for the COV group, coinciding with increased antibody response to SARSCoV-2 (vide infra). In agreement with the GO enrichment analysis (Fig. S4), the complement and

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

coagulation pathway, which plays key roles in innate immunity and hemostasis in an interactive
manner, was significantly elevated in COV in a progressive manner from D1 to D10, but not in
ICU. The same was observed for platelet activation. Indeed, we found that the fibrinogens FGA,
FGB and FGG, which when cleaved by thrombin, form fibrin-based blood clots, were significantly
upregulated. Similarly, expression of the complement regulators such as C1QA, C3, C5, C7, CFB,
CFD, CFH, and CFHR5 was significantly increased in COV (Table S4). These findings are
consistent with the results from published data showing that significant upregulation of cellular
proteins related to neutrophil activation and blood coagulation12,13 and the activation of the
complement and platelet pathways 9,14,15 in COVID-19.
Overproduction of proinflammatory cytokines is a hallmark of severe SARS-COV-2
infection. Indeed, we found that the cytokine/chemokine signaling pathway significantly
upregulated in the COV, but not the ICU group. Because antigen processing and presentation is a
significantly enriched process in the GO analysis (Fig. S4B), we analyzed the MHC-I and MHCII mediated antigen presentation pathways and found that the former significantly up-regulated
and the latter down-regulated in COV (Fig. 2), suggesting defects in antigen presentation by
professional antigen presenting cells11. Massive metabolic change in the host cell is another
hallmark of SARS-CoV-2 infection9,16. We found, indeed, that the TCA cycle was significantly
downregulated while glycolysis significantly upregulated in COV, and the trend became more
pronounced with disease progression. This suggests the SARS-CoV-2 infection reprogrammed
energy production from aerobic metabolism inside the mitochondria to anaerobic metabolism
outside mitochondria. In agreement with a wholesale change in metabolism, both the nucleic acid
metabolism (not shown) and fatty acid synthesis and metabolism pathways (Fig. 2) were found
significantly increased in COV.
Kinome reprogramming by SARS-CoV-2
Phosphorylation plays a pivotal role in cellular signal transduction and communication of the cell
with its environment. The widespread changes in the cellular and immunological pathways implies
that differential protein phosphorylation may play a role. Indeed, of the ~3,000 Ser/Thr and Tyr
phosphosites identified, 25% (670 pS/pT and 94 pY sites) differed significantly between COV,
ICU and HC (Tables S5 and S6). The proteins with differentially Ser/Thr phosphorylation were
found enriched in various metabolic processes, RNA processing or transcription, virus-host or cell-

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cell interaction, and protein folding (Fig. S5). An increase in misfolded protein response suggests
virus infection-induced ER stress is an important feature of COVID-19 17. In contrast, the proteins
with differential Tyr phosphorylation were involved mainly in adaptive and immune responses
(Fig. S6). This is expected given the importance of Tyr phosphorylation in the proximal signaling
by immunoreceptors and their associated proteins.
To understand the role of protein kinases in the immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection,
we next focused on characterizing kinase phosphorylation and activation. The activity of a kinase
is often regulated/induced by the phosphorylation of specific residues, some of which are located
in the activation loop. Therefore, the phosphorylation status of the regulatory site(s) provides a
facile readout of the activity of the corresponding kinase7. Based on this rationale, seven of the
dozen detected tyrosine kinases (TKs), including LYN, SYK, BTK, HCK, FER, TEC and PTK2,
were more active in COV than HC (Fig. 3A). It is important to note that LYN, SYK and BTK,
which play pivotal roles in the signal transduction by the B cell receptor (BCR) and a variety of
other immunoreceptors, were more activated in COV than ICU. LYN was hyper-phosphorylated
on multiple Tyr or Ser sites, including Y473 within the kinase domain and Y397 in the activation
loop (which is identical in sequence to the HCK activation loop). In contrast, the phosphorylation
of the inhibitory Y194 residue 18 was significantly reduced (Fig. 3A). The phosphorylation profile
of LYN together with its increased expression (Fig. S7), suggests that SARS-CoV-2 caused a
significant increase in LYN activity. Similarly, both the activity (i.e, activation loop Tyr525
phosphorylation) and the expression of SYK were significantly increased in COV vs. ICU or HC
(Fig. 3A, Fig. S7B). BTK and TEC, both playing a critical role in PLCg1 activation and Ca2+
mobilization downstream of antigen receptors 19, were also highly activated in the COV group.
Together, these data suggest that B cell signaling is escalated significantly in the COVID-19
patients. In contrast to the B cell kinases, the status of the T cell receptor (TCR) proximal kinase
LCK was less clear. LCK expression was drastically reduced in the COV PBMCs (Fig. S7A),
consistent with pronounced T cell lymphopenia in severe COVID-19 cases. However,
phosphorylation of the inhibitory Y505 residue was significantly decreased in COV. Moreover,
CSK, the kinase that phosphorylates Y505, was reduced in both phosphorylation and expression
(Fig. 3A; Fig. S7). Therefore, it is likely that LCK was more active in the COVID-19 patients
despite reduced expression.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Numerous Ser/Thr kinases (STKs) showed significant changes in phosphorylation (Fig.
3B). The phosphorylation of 9 STKs, including on activation or inducible residues, was
significantly increased, suggesting potential activation of these kinase. Of note, SLK and
PRKCD/PKCd, which can mediate/promote apoptosis, were significantly over-phosphorylated
whereas AKT2, critical for cell survival, is under-phosphorylated at its activation site residue S478
20

, suggesting that these kinases may work in concert to promote PBMC apoptosis and thereby,

contributing to lymphopenia for the COVID-19 patients (Table S1). The b-adrenergic receptor
kinase ADRBK1/GRK2, a hallmark of cardiac stress and heart failure21, was highly and selectively
phosphorylated in the COV PBMCs, suggesting that GRK2 may contribute to cardiac dysfunction
associated with COVID-19 22. In support of this possibility, elevated myocardial and lymphocyte
GRK2 expression and activation has been associated with heart failure23.
In contrary to the activated kinases, WNK1 exhibited significantly reduced
phosphorylation on multiple sites, including the activation loop S382 residue, suggesting that
WNK1 activity is inhibited in the COVID-19 patients. As an important regulator of blood pressure
and electrolyte homeostasis24, WNK1 may play a role in regulating blood pressure in COVID-19
patients. The TRAF2- and NCK-interacting kinase (TNIK) is another kinase with reduced
phosphorylation on multiple sites. TNIK is an essential activator of the Wnt signaling pathway,
and the reduced TNIK activation together with increased activation of GSK3B/3A

25

, may

contribute collectively to reduced Wnt signaling. Because Wnt signaling is involved in dendritic
cell (DC) maturation and survival of regulatory T cells26, the aberrant inactivation of TNIK and
activation of GSK3B/3A may underly the reduced Treg cell population found in hospitalized
patients 27. Moreover, TNIK is required for canonical NF-kB signaling, and reduced TNIK activity
may contribute to reduced antiviral response28.
While the MS analysis yielded quantitative phosphorylation information for numerous
kinases (Table S7), not all expressed kinases were detected for phosphorylation due to the
stochastic nature of mass spectrometry and the unfavorable chromatographic behavior for some
phosphopeptides. However, the activity of the kinases missed in the phosphoproteomic analysis
may be inferred by Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA). Indeed, KSEA predicted 55
kinases with increased activity and 25 with decreased activity in COV compared to HC (Fig. 3C).
Moreover, the vast majority of kinases were predicted to be more active in COV than ICU,
suggesting that the SARS-CoV-2 infection reprogrammed the kinome, rendering it more active.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Consistent with enhanced cytokine signaling (Fig. 2), the most activated kinases based on KSEA
are the Janus kinases JAK3, JAK2, and TYK2. Because deficiency in either JAK3 or TYK2 causes
immunodeficiency, their over-activation may underly the autoimmune condition associated with
severe COVID-19 29. Intriguingly, PRKG1, a key regulator of nitric oxide (NO)/cGMP signaling,
and CK2, a promiscuous STK, were also highly active in COV compared to HC. CK2 was
identified in a recent study as the top kinase activated in the Vero E6 cells following SARS-CoV2 infection 8. Our data, therefore, further underscores a critical role for CK2 in COVID-19
pathogenesis. The placement of LCK as the 6th most active kinase based on KSEA reinforces the
notion that T cell receptor (TCR) signaling is activated in the COVID-19 patients. It is also worth
noting that PRKDC/DNA-PK was strongly activated in COV. Because DNA-PK deficiency has
been shown to potentiates cGAS-mediated antiviral innate immunity30, the increased DNA-PK
activity suggests inhibition of antiviral immune response.
Several kinases, including DYRK1A, CSNK1A1 (CK1a) and MARK3, were inactivated
in COV based on KSEA, suggesting defects in alternative RNA splicing, Wnt signaling, and
microtube dynamics. The oppositive activity patterns of CK2 and CK1 may be due to their
differential expression (Table S4). Collectively, these data suggests that the SARS-CoV-2
infection causes systematic reprogramming of the active kinome and the associated processes or
pathways. While the signaling pathways for BCR, TCR, cytokine and cardiac stress were
significantly activated in the COVID-19 PBMCs, others, including Wnt signaling, RNA splicing
and blood pressure regulation, were apparently suppressed.
Rewiring of the protein kinase-substrate network by SARS-CoV-2
The emergence of CK2 as a highly activated kinase based on substrate enrichment is intriguing.
Unlike many other kinases, the activity of CK2 is not regulated by the activation loop, but by the
tetramerization of catalytic (a or a’) and regulatory b subunits into the holoenzyme (a/a’)2b2.
However, the catalytic subunit may exhibit activity independently of the regulatory subunit

31

.

Although we were not able to detect CK2a phosphorylation, our phosphoproteome dataset
contained 44 CK2 substrates that were differentially phosphorylated between COV and HC (Table
S8), providing valuable information on the cellular processes/pathways regulated by CK2 in the
context of COVID-19. In agreement with the known functions of CK2, the CK2 substrate network
is enriched with proteins involved in DNA binding, RNA processing/transcription, protein

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

translation and folding. Of note, both the DNA replication licensing factor MCM2 (eg., pS27 and
pS139, activating) and the RNA polymerase-associated protein LEO1 were phosphorylated on
multiple sites. Similarly, the transcriptional activator PURB, translation initiation factor EIF3 and
several ribonuclear proteins were highly phosphorylated in the COV group. Related to this, we
found the heat shock protein HSP-90 phosphorylated at the activation residue S226, implicating
increased demand for protein folding and/or ER stress.
Besides proteins involved in the DNA-RNA-protein genetic information cascade, the most
highly phosphorylated (in both number of sites and degree of phosphorylation) CK2 substrate is
osteopontin (OPN or SPP1) (Fig. 4A; Fig. S8). Because phosphorylation, in general, inhibits
osteopontin function, it is likely that CK2 shut down the many osteopontin signaling pathways
through phosphorylation. OPN plays a critical role in the crosstalk between innate and adaptive
immunity by regulating the differentiation of Th1 and Th17 cells, the production of IL-12 by
macrophages and type I interferon response by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) 32,33. Thus, the
CK2-OPN-IL-12/IFN-a/b axis may underly a multitude of immunological defects associated with
severe SARS-CoV-2 infection, including under-representation of Th1 subset in virus reactive
CD4+ T cells27 and impaired type I interferon response34,35. The effect of IL-12 on the development
of Th1 may be aided by CD44, which plays an essential role in the survival and memory
development in Th1 cells36. We found significantly reduced in CD44-S706 phosphorylation in
COV, suggesting reduced activation and signaling through CD44. Moreover, intracellular OPN
enhances TLR7 and TLR9 (key antiviral innate immune receptor) and Tfh/Bcl6+ cells. SARSCoV-2 infection prevents Tfh (Bcl6+) cell generation and durable antibody production37.
Therefore, the CK2-OPN axis could cause defects in inducing strong anti-viral responses.
Because of the central role of Tyr phosphorylation in proximal signaling by immune
receptors and cytokines, we next focused our analysis on the TK-substrate network. Of the 394
quantifiable pTyr sites identified, 95 showed significant changes between COV and HC (Fig. S6A).
The majority of the significantly regulated Tyr phosphorylated proteins/pTyr sites belong to a large
TK-substrate signaling network (Fig. 4B). The tyrosine kinases LYN, SYK, LCK, SRC, FYN and
ABL1 form the major nodes whereas BTK and JAK2/3 form the minor nodes in the network to
connect the diverse array of phosphorylated substrates. Except for ABL1, all the TKs in the
network were significantly more active in the COV group based on the phosphoproteome datasets

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or KSEA prediction. This extensive TK-substrate network suggests that SARS-CoV-2 promotes
immune signaling.
Excessive JAK-STAT signaling associated with the cytokine storm
The cytokine release syndrome (CRS) or cytokine storm is a major cause of acute lung damage
associated with patient mortality38-43. Because the cytokine storm is also common in sepsis caused
by other pathogens 42,44, we determined the mRNA levels of key proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines in the PBMCs of the COV (D1) and ICU cohorts in comparison to the heathy controls.
Except for IL-12, IFN-a, IFN-b, and IL-4, all the cytokines/chemokines examined were
significantly overexpressed in COV (Fig. 5A). This is in contrast to the ICU cohort where only a
few were significantly upregulated and by a much smaller degree. SARS-CoV-2 thus elicited a
much stronger cytokine storm in the COVID-19+ than the COVID-19- ICU patients who had
pneumonia and suspected sepsis (Table S1). In agreement with published data

3,39,45,46

, the most

highly expressed cytokines included TNF-a, IL-6, IFN-g, IL-2 and IL-15. Curiously, we found
the IL-1b level fairly low in comparison, consistent with a previous report47. Besides cytokines,
the chemokines MCP-1/CCL2 (which recruits monocytes and/or macrophages) and IL-8/CXCL8
(a classic neutrophil chemoattractant), the macrophage inflammatory protein MIP-1b and the
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) were all significantly upregulated. These data
agree with the important role for neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages in the pathology of
COVID-1935,48. In support of this assertion, iNOS, which is frequently expressed by neutrophils,
macrophages and dendritic cells to produce NO, was significantly elevated. Inflammatory
cytokines, including TNF-a and IFN-g, may also induce NO production through the JAK-STAT1
axis39.
It is intriguing that IL-12, which was slightly upregulated in ICU, was significantly downregulated COV. In contrast, IL-10 expression, which may antagonize IL-12-mediated protection
against acute virus infection49, is significantly increased. IL-12, produced by dendritic cells,
macrophages, and lymphoblastoid cells, is required for the differentiation of Th1 cells and for the
activation of NK cells, both of which have been found defective in COVID-1946. In contrast, the
Th2 cytokines IL-4 and IL-10 were moderately increased, suggesting the CD4+ T cell lineage is
skewed towards Th2 in COVID-1946. Besides IL-12, we found the transcripts of the type I
interferons, IFN-a and INF-b, significantly reduced, suggesting impaired antiviral immunity. As
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

discussed earlier, the suppression of IL-12 and IFN-a/b expression may be mediated in part by
CK2-induced phosphorylation and inhibition of OPN/SPP1. Furthermore, the increased NO
production via iNOS may inhibit IL-12 production by macrophages and dendritic cells

50

.

Consistent with reduced IFN-a/b signaling, we found the expression of the downstream targets
ISG15 and EIF2A significantly reduced in the COV samples (Table S4).
Signal transduction by cytokines is dependent on the JAK-STAT pathway. As shown in
Fig. 3C, JAK2/3 and TYK2 were the most highly activated kinases in the COV PBMCs. Network
analysis indicates that the JAK2/3 activation is reinforced by decreased phosphorylation/activation
of SHP1 and STAM, which are negative regulators of cytokine signaling. Activation of the Janus
kinases led to significant activation of STAT1, STAT3 and STAT5A. It is interesting to note that
STAT1 was the most activated STAT despite numerous reports suggesting that the IL-6-STAT3
axis plays a pivotal role in the cytokine storm43,46. STAT1 activation may underlie the significant
changes in expression for proteins involved in regulating inflammation, complement, exocytosis,
metabolism, glycosylation, cardiac myocyte survival and T cell signaling (Fig. S9). Collectively,
the JAK-STAT pathway may signal to reduce the transcriptional activity of EP300 (i.e., increased
S1038 phosphorylation) and the expression of FHL1/SLIM, a protein implicated in protein
turnover and cardiomyopathy51,52. JAK2/3 may also regulate cell proliferation through the SHP2GRB2-SOS-RAS-RAF-MEK1/2 pathway and survival through the PI3K-AKT2 pathway. The
reduced phosphorylation/activation of AKT2 suggests reduced cell survival, which together with
reduced BCL2L1 expression, may contribute to increased apoptosis and lymphopenia in COVID1939,46.
Elevated TCR signaling in the COVID-19 PBMCs
Immune signaling is critically dependent on immunoreceptor Tyr-based regulatory motifs
(ITRMs)53. The phosphorylation profile of the ITRMs, therefore, provides a picture of the immune
signaling landscape. Our MS analysis yielded phosphorylation data for numerous ITRMs (Fig. 6A;
Table S9). Together with the quantitative expression data for many ITRM containing proteins (Fig.
6B), we are at a unique position to gauge the activity of different immune signaling pathways. Of
note, five of the six pairs of immunoreceptor Tyr-based activation motifs (ITAMs) on CD3z, CD3d,
CD3e and CD3g showed increased phosphorylation in COV (Fig. 6A, 6C). This observation is
consistent with the increased activation of LCK in the same samples (Fig. 3C). Given the pivotal
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

role of the CD3 molecules in TCR signaling, this data indicates that TCR signaling is elevated in
the COVID-19 patients. In accordance with this assertion, NFAM1, an activator of the
calcineurin/NFAT-signaling pathway, was phosphorylated more robustly in the patient PBMCs.
Collectively, these data indicate that the COVID-19 patients had highly active circulating T cells
despite having lymphopenia.
Compromised NK cell signaling
Contrary to elevated T cell signaling, we found that signaling by NK cells, which may kill virusinfected cells, were significantly compromised in COV. The activity of NK cells is regulated by
the SLAM family receptors that contain ITSM sequences54. We found that the Tyr phosphorylation
of several SLAM members, including SLAM6, CD84 and CD244 (2B4), significantly reduced.
Moreover, phosphorylation of the ITAM in TYROBP/DAP-12, an adaptor for the activating NK
cell receptor CD94/NKG2C, was down-regulated in both the COV and ICU cohorts. Moreover,
both CD300A/MAIR-1, an inhibitory receptor in NK cells, and CEACAM1, a coinhibitory
receptor in T cells, NK cells and neutrophils, were increased in expression (Fig. 6B). In contrast,
the expression of PVR, which mediates NK cell adhesion and triggers NK cell effector functions,
was significantly reduced (Fig. 6B). Collectively, these data suggest that NK cell receptormediated signaling and effector function were compromised by SARS-CoV-2. The defective NK
cell signaling is consistent with reduced IL-12 expression as IL-12 plays a critical role in NK cell
activation.
Antibody response and Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis
Phagocytosis is an important defense mechanism against pathogen infection. The elimination of
infected cells or pathogens can be facilitated by Fc receptor-dependent phagocytosis. Consistent
with up-regulation of the FcR pathway (Fig. 2), signaling through the Fce receptor FCER1G ITAM
was seen elevated in both patient groups whereas the Fcg receptor FCGR2A ITAM
phosphorylation was significantly upregulated in the COV but not the ICU group (Fig. 6A & 6C).
To find out if this was caused by virus specific IgG, we determined the antibody response to SARSCoV-2 using an antigen array containing recombinant viral proteins (Fig. S10). Probing the protein
antigen array by the COVID-19 patient plasma yielded the antibody response profiles (Fig. 6D).
Four of the five COVID-19 patients showed robust anti-Spike and anti-nucleocapsid antibodies in

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the plasma collected on day 7 and day 10 of ICU admission. No antibody was detected for the fifth
patient (COV+5) using the same array, but antibody response to the Spike ecto-domain was
detectable when the antigen concentration was increased by 10-fold (Fig. S11). Intriguingly, this
patient was the only one who recovered from the SARS-CoV-2 infection while the remaining four
succumbed to the disease. This suggests that robust antibody response is not an indicator of potent
immunity against the virus, as have been shown in previous studies55.
A possible reason behind this phenomenon is compromised phagocytosis due to coinhibitory signaling mediated by the immunoreceptor based inhibitory or switch motifs
(ITIMs/ITSMs). While FcR signaling positively regulates phagocytosis by phagocytes, it can be
countered by inhibitory receptors that bear the ITIM/ITSM motifs. A number of ITIM-containing
receptors were found indeed activated, presumably in neutrophils or macrophages. Of note,
phosphorylation of Y429 in the inhibitory receptor SIRPa, was significantly up-regulated (Fig. 6A
& 6C). Coincidently, the expression of SIRPa was significantly increased in COV, but not ICU
(Fig. 6B). PECAM1, another inhibitory receptor abundantly expressed on macrophages, was also
significantly activated (Fig. 6A). This suggests SIRPa and PECAM1 may work together to impede
phagocytosis by neutrophils and macrophages56. Intriguingly, we found that TREML1, a member
of the TREM (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells) family, was down-regulated in both
expression and ITIM phosphorylation. Furthermore, ITAM phosphorylation in TYROBP/DAP-12,
an adaptor in TREM1 and TREM2 signaling57, was significantly reduced. Collectively, these data
suggest that the Fc receptor-mediated phagocytosis via macrophages or neutrophils is
compromised by robust inhibitory signaling in the COV group.
SIGLECs are a family of receptors that play an important role in immune self-tolerance
and host defense58. Different SIGLECS are expressed in different myeloid and lymphatic cells and
plays a negative role in regulating the effector function of these cells. We found that ITIM/ITSM
phosphorylation in SIGLEC5, SIGLEC7, SIGLEC9 and SIGLEC10 all increased in the COV
cohort. Because the SIGLECs are found in neutrophils, monocytes, NK cells and B cells, this
suggests immune tolerance in the COVID-19 patients may be mediated by enhanced sialic acid
signaling in these cells. Furthermore, increased inhibitory signaling via the SIGLECs suggests
compromised myeloid cell function. Finally, it is worth noting that SYK may be a potential target
for intervention due to its ability to phosphorylate numerous substrates in immune cells59,

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

including the SIGLECs, PAG1- a negative regulator of T cell signaling, PTPN11/SHP-2-negative
regulator of immune signaling, and STAT3/STAT5, key players in cytokine signaling (Fig. 6E).
DICUSSION
Our deep and quantitative MS analysis uncovered the largest proteome and phosphoproteome for
the COVID-19 patient peripheral blood derived mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to date. This allowed
for comparison of SARS-CoV-2+ ICU patients with age- and sex-matched SARS-CoV-2- ICU
patients and heathy individuals at the proteome, phosphoproteome, network and pathway levels.
Besides significant differences in the phagocytosis, complement/coagulation, platelet activation,
metabolism, antigen presentation, and cytokine signaling pathways, the COVID-19 PMBCs are
characterized with a highly active kinome and extensive kinase-substrate networks. Our work
shows that severe COVID-19 is marked with a highly active adaptive immune response,
compromised innate immune response, and imbalance between antiviral and proinflammatory
responses 46.
T cell and B cell activation despite of lymphopenia
Despite a general reduction in lymphocyte count, robust T cell and B cell subsets have been
reported in a proportion of patients5,60,61. We showed that the critically ill COVID-19 patients had
highly activated T cell and B cell signaling that are regulated by the tyrosine kinases LCK, LYN
and SYK. The T cell activation was manifested in increased ITAM phosphorylation in the CD3
proteins. At the same time, negative regulators of TCR signaling, including DOK, PAG, and CSK
were inhibited in the COVID-19 PBMCs. It is likely that the TCR was activated be pMHC-I as
MHC-II mediated antigen presentation was deficient in COVID-19 (Fig. 2) 62. Because DCs are a
major source of IL-12 production, the reduced IL-12 expression observed in the COV cohort may
reflect reduced dendritic cell numbers in the critically ill COVID-19 patients. Similarly, the
activated TCR and BCR signaling is consistent with reports that the magnitude and functional
breadth of virus-specific CD4 T cell and antibody responses are consistently higher among
hospitalized patients63.
Enhanced inhibitory signaling and impaired innate immunity

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We have shown that the impairment in innate antiviral immunity involves at least three
mechanisms. First, SARS-CoV-2 compromises phagocytosis by promoting inhibitory signaling in
phagocytes. Activation of the ITIM/ITSM-containing inhibitory receptors SIRPa and PECAM1
may contribute to reduced phagocytosis whereas activation of the SIGLECs may block
phagocytosis by a wide range of professional phagocytic cells, including neutrophils, monocytes,
dendritic cells and macrophages. By countering FcR-mediated phagocytosis, the sialic acidSIGLEC axis may be exploited by SARS-CoV-2 to promote immune tolerance64 or even contribute
to antibody-dependent enhancement

65

. Potential sialic acid or galactose binding domains have

been described in the Spike protein by docking analysis66. The broad-scale impairment of
phagocytosis mediated by the ITIM/ITSM-containing inhibitory receptors likely explains why
patients who developed neutralizing antibodies earlier in infection had a higher rate of the disease
and worse outcome than those who did not

67,68

. Second, SARS-CoV-2 interferes with NK cell

signaling and effector function. A number of studies have reported the association of reduced NK
cell number and disease severity. Moreover, ex vivo NK cells from the peripheral blood of
COVID-19 patients show impaired cytotoxicity69. We have showed that signaling through the
SLAM family receptors, which are important regulators of NK cell activity, is significantly
inhibited. Besides reduced FYN activation (Fig. 3A), which is responsible for SLAM receptor
phosphorylation, IL-12 deficiency may contribute significantly to reduced NK cell activity. Third,
SARS-CoV-2 inhibits the production of the type I interferons IFN-a/b 70. Because plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) are the major source of IFN-a/b and IL-12, reduced expression of these
cytokines is consistent with previous reports showing reduced pDC function and defects in MHCII-dependent antigen presentation62.
Targets for potential immunomodulatory therapy
In addition to providing information on the regulatory mechanisms of adaptive and innate immune
response, our work has identified a number of therapeutic targets, including CK2, SYK, JAK3,
TYK2, DNA-PK and IL-2. CK2 is likely a master regulator of immune response in COVID-19.
CK2 may directly regulate viral RNA sensing and antiviral defense via the CK2-RIG1-TKB1IRF3-IFN-a/b pathway. CK2 knockdown or inhibition has been shown to activate RIG1, TKB1
and IFN-a/b response71,72. Our work suggests that CK2 may also regulate type I interferon
response via the CK2-OPN-IFNa/b axis and inactivate NK cell effector function via CK2-OPN16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

IL-12. Furthermore, CK2 activation may impact the JAK-STAT pathway by phosphorylating
JAK273. Therefore, by inhibiting CK2, it is possible to rejuvenate antiviral immunity and at the
same time, reduce the damaging effect of the cytokine storm. In that vein, it is worth noting the
CK2 inhibitor silmitasertib suppressed SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro in cell model 8.
SYK is another attractive target emerging from our work 74. SYK activation in COVID-19
may be a double-edged sword75. On the one hand, it is required for the B-cell receptor and FcRmediated signaling pathways, and on the other hand, it is involved in promoting inhibitory
pathways in innate immune cells59, thereby compromising FcR-mediated phagocytosis to
eliminate the virus or virus-infected cells. In the latter capacity, it is possible that SYK may even
contribute to ADE. Indeed, SYK has a crucial role in autoimmune diseases and haematological
malignancies76. SYK inhibitors may thus alleviate the autoimmune response associated with
COVID-1929.
Lastly, we propose that IL-12 supplementary therapy alone or in combination with
proinflammatory cytokine blockade may be effective strategies to treat critically ill patients. The
wide ranges of cytokines that are significantly overexpressed, which may signal to different STAT
proteins to affect a wide range of cellular functions, may not be overcome by targeting a single
cytokine-receptor pair. For example, there are at least 9 other cytokines of the IL-6 family that can
activate STAT3 besides IL-6 itself 41. This may explain why tocilizumab, an inhibitor of the IL-6
receptor, did not show significant benefits on disease progression or survival of hospitalized
patients with COVID-19 pneumonia in clinical trials77,78. Indeed, anticytokine therapies in severe
COVID-19 should be informed by detailed inflammatory profiling79 and be applied according to
the underlying molecular mechanisms. Our work suggests that IL-12 should be included in future
cytokine-based therapies. Furthermore, JAK3, JAK2 and TYK2, which are highly activated in
COVID-19, may be explored. Because these kinases transduce signals downstream of the
cytokines, the corresponding inhibitor may help alleviate ARDS associated with CRS.
The pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2-induced ARDS has similarities to that of severe
community-acquired pneumonia and sepsis caused by other viruses or bacteria 40, as is the case
between the COV and ICU cohorts employed in the current study. The rich proteomics and
phosphoproteomics datasets obtained herein may inform future investigations into the mechanisms
underpinning pneumonia and sepsis associated with virus or bacterium infection and aid in the
development of targeted immunomodulatory therapies for the treatment of these conditions39.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Furthermore, quantitative MS analysis of the peripheral blood, a readily available biospecimen,
may be used to evaluate individual responses to COVID-19 therapies or vaccines.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The proteins used in the proteome array were supplied by the Toronto Open Access COVID-19
Protein Manufacturing Center (comprising BioZone and the Structural Genomics Consortium
(SGC)) under an Open Science Trust Agreement (http://www.thesgc.org/click-trust). These
included the SARS-CoV-2 Spike-ectodomain, nucleocapsid-dimerization, nucleocapsid-RNA
binding domain, NSP3-unique, NSP3-ADRP, NSP3-NAB, NSP3-PLPro, NSP4-CTD, NSP5,
NSP7, NSP8, NSP9, NSP10, NSP16. The Center received funding from the Toronto COVID-19
Action Fund. We acknowledge funding from the Ontario Research Fund-COVID-19 Rapid
Research Fund, Western University (Research), the Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics at
Western University, the Lawson Health Research Institute (https://www.lawsonresearch.ca/), the
London Health Sciences Foundation (https://lhsf.ca/), and the AMOSO Innovation Fund. SE was
supported by a Post-Doctoral Fellowship from the National Science and Engineering Council of
Canada. SSCL holds a Canada Research Chair in Molecular and Epigenetic Basis of Cancer.
DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
MAIN FIGURE TITLES AND LEGENDS
Fig. 1. Proteome signatures of COVID-19.
(A) Heatmap representation of differentially expressed proteins between the proteome of the COV
(n=5, day 1 samples or COV-D1), ICU (n=5, day 1) and HC (n=5) PBMCs ordered by hierarchical
clustering of the normalized intensities (z-scores) of the 894 proteins that were significantly
distinguished by an ANOVA test between the groups. Over-expressed proteins (compared to the
mean for each protein) are shown in red, and under-expressed proteins are shown in cyan. (B)
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins based on analysis with

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Metascape. Significant features intersecting each GO category were compared to the background
dataset as an enrichment score and FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg) q-value from Fisher’s exact test.
(C) A PPI network for RNA splicing (left) and translation (right) identified from the significantly
regulated proteins (constructed using STRING). The node color gradient corresponds to the log2
COV-D1/HC ratio. The node border is colored with the five major functional annotation terms
enriched in the network.
Fig. 2. Pathways and processes perturbed in the PBMCs of critically ill COVID-19 patients.
Each spot corresponds to a protein within the specified pathway based on GO annotation. The yaxis shows the log2 value of the fold difference in protein expression for the group (relative to the
mean of the whole proteome). The p values were calculated based on ANOVA test, *p<0.05,
**p<0.002, NS, not significant.
Fig. 3. Kinase phosphorylation and activity status in the COV and ICU PBMCs.
The averaged log2 ratio of matched samples (e.g., the mean value of ICU1/HC1,
ICU2/HC2...ICU5/HC5) are displayed as a heatmap with clustering. (A) Detected tyrosine kinases
(TKs). (B) Ser/Thr kinases (STKs) showing significant changes in phosphorylation between
patients and the heathy controls. See Supplementary Table S3 for a complete list of all detected
kinase phosphorylation sites. “AL”: kinase activation loop, “inducible”: the phosphorylation
induces kinase activity, “inhibitory”: the phosphorylation inhibits kinase activity. The annotations
are based on PhosphositePlus, except for LCK-pY194 and AKT2 pSer478. (C) Kinase activity
predicted using Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA). The combined phosphoproteome
data (pTyr and IMAC datasets) were used to analyze which kinases may be activated or supressed
in the COVID-19 patients compared to healthy controls, based on enrichment of phosphorylated
substrates in the COV samples. The prediction used both the PhosphositePlus and NetworKIN
datasets. The list of kinases was filtered and the kinases detected in any of the mass spec injections
were retained in the figure.
Fig. 4. The protein kinase-substrate network underlying COVID-19.
The protein kinase-substrate network underlying COVID-19. (A) The CK2-substrate network.
Known or predicted CK2 substrate phosphosites were extracted from the significantly regulated

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

phosphosites (ANOVA FDR < 10% between COV-D1, ICU and HC). Phosphosites with a green
border are known CK2 substrates based on PhosphositePlus. The phosphorylation nodes are
colored based on the IMAC data, whereas the protein nodes are based on the proteome data. Protein
nodes without observation/quantification are colored grey. (B) A TK-substrate network for
COVID-19 based on quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome data. The kinase nodes were
coloured by the log2 COV-D1/HC fold change of the full proteome protein intensities. Kinase
proteins which were observed by mass spectrometry but without sufficient data were colored green
(proteins with n ≥ 3 from each sample group were considered sufficient for statistical analysis).
The thickness of the node border correspond to p-values (thicker for smaller p-values). The kinasesubstrate relationship data were retrieved from PhosphoSitePlus database (version November
2020).
Figure 5. The cytokine storm and elevated JAK-STAK signaling in critically ill COVID-19
patients. (A) Differential expression of cytokines and chemokines in the COV-D1, ICU and HC
PMBCs. Data shown were normalized to b-actin to calculate relative fold change in mRNA
transcript. Asterisks indicate significant difference between COV-D1 and ICU or HC unless
otherwise indicated. *, p<0.05, **, p<0.002, calculated based on One-Way ANOVA (n=5, 4
technical repeats). (B) The cytokine-JAK-STAT signaling network underlying COVID-19. The
proteins and phosphosites are colored according to the COV-D1/HC ratio (red: upregulation, blue:
downregulation). The nodes without sufficient data to calculate the ratio are colored grey.
Fig. 6. SARS-CoV-2 augments immune signaling through immunoreceptor Tyr-based
regulatory motifs. (A) A heatmap showing the differences in ITRM Tyr phosphorylation in
patient PBMCs compared to the heathy controls. (B) A heatmap of the ITRM-containing proteins
with significant changes in expression. (C) Representative examples showing the dynamic changes
in phosphorylation of the ITRMs. p-values calculated by One-way ANOVA (n=3-5), *, p<0.05,
**, p<0.002. (D) Antibody response determined by a SARS-CoV-2 antigen array. (E) SYK may
phosphorylates multiple proteins and nucleate an immune signaling hub. The SIGLEC pTyr sites
with dashed arrows are potential SYK substrates.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUPPLEMENTAL FIGURE TITLES AND LEGENDS
Fig. S1. An overview of sample processing for LC/MS-MS analysis.
PMBCs were isolated from patients or healthy control blood samples. Another PBMC sample was
treated with pervanadate to be used as pTyr booster in the 11-plex TMT experiments. Protein
materials were isolated and digested by LysC and trypsin. The samples were labelled with 3 sets
of 11-plex TMT labelling reagents. The 11 peptide samples for each isobaric set were combined
and incubated with SH2 superbinder beads. The bound peptides were enriched with tyrosinephosphorylated peptides. The flow-though materials were used for analysis of the full proteome
and the phosphoproteome (mainly for pSer and pThr peptides). The Ti4+-IMAC resin was used
for the phosphopeptide enrichment. Proteome peptides and enriched phosphopeptides were
fractionated using a high-pH fractionation kit prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.
Fig. S2. Proteins differentially expressed in COVID-19+ ICU patients compared to healthy
controls.
A Volcano plot comparing the identified PBMC proteome between the COVID-19 patients (day 1
samples) and healthy controls. 521 proteins (marked red) were found significantly different
between the two sample groups (FDR 5%).
Fig. S3. PPI network clustering by Metascape on the differentially expressed proteins in the
COVID-19 PBMCs.
(A) A summary of enriched networks and the associated top 3 functional annotation terms.
MCODE_1 to 4 correspond to the depicted PPI network 1-4 below. (B-E) PPI networks
significantly enriched in the COVID-19 PMBCs. A color gradient from cyan to orange was used
to indicate decreased to increased expression between the COV-D1 and HC groups with the dot
size indicating Log2 of the difference (from -2.7 to 2.5).
Fig. S4. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of proteins differentially expressed
between patients and healthy controls.
(A) Enriched processes or functions for the Cluster 1 proteins (in Fig. 1A). (B) Enriched processes
or functions for the Cluster 5 proteins (in Fig. 1A).

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S5. Distinguishing features of the COVID-19 PBMC phosphoproteome compared to that
of the heathy controls or ICU patients.
Biological processes significantly enriched between (A) COVID-Day1 and HC, and, (B) COVID
Day1 and ICU based on PHOTON analysis. The enrichment score and FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg)
q-value from Fisher’s exact test are shown on the y-axis.
Fig. S6. The Tyr phosphoproteome signature of COVID-19.
(A) Heatmap showing clustering of significantly regulated pTyr sites. The 94 significantly
regulated pTyr sites were identified based on the ANOVA test for the three sample groups with
10% FDR cut-off, and were grouped by hierarchical clustering. (B) Enriched GO categories for all
proteins displaying significant pTyr changes between groups.
Fig. S7. Kinase protein abundance in PBMC samples from patients relative to healthy
controls.
The scale is in log2 ratio between the sample groups. (A) All tyrosine kinases. (B) All kinases with
ANOVA FDR < 10% between the three groups (COV-D1, ICU, HC).
Fig. S8. OPN/SPP1 phosphorylation is significantly upregulated in the COVID-19 PBMCs.
(A) A volcano plot comparing the identified pSer/pThr sites between the COV-D1 and HC1
samples. The OPN/SPP1 phosphorylation sites are identified in red. (B) A heatmap showing the
intensities of all SPP1 phosphosites in the patient PBMCs relative to the healthy control. The
significant pSer sites are identified by asterisks.
Fig. S9. STAT1 regulated gene expression in the COV and ICU patients.
Log2 fold change in expression relative to the HC group is shown. The heatmap is generated color
gradient from blue to red, representing decreased to increased (Log2 fold change) expression.
Significantly regulated proteins are identified in asterisks with brief functional annotation on the
right.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S10. SDS PAGE images of the recombinant SARS-CoV-2 proteins used in the antigen
array.
Fig. S11. SARS-CoV-2 Proteome antigen array.
(A) Identity and position of proteins printed in the proteome array (see also Fig. 5). (B) The plasma
from the ICU (COVID-19 negative) and healthy control group showed no antibody response to
any virus antigen. (C) A proteome array printed with 10 x spike Ecto domain (5 μM) was screened
with the plasma samples from the COV+5 patient.
SUPPELMENTAL TABLE TITLES
Table S1. Subject demographics and clinical data
Table S2. The list of samples for TMT labelling and mass spectrometry analysis
Table S3. Mass spectrometer data collection parameters
Table S4. Identified proteins
Table S5. Identified phosphosites by IMAC enrichment
Table S6. Identified tyrosine phosphorylation sites by superbinder enrichment
Table S7. Identified phosphosites from protein kinases.
ANOVA test was conducted between the three groups of COV-D1, ICU, HC.
Table S8. Known or predicted CK2 substrates.
Only the significantly regulated phosphosites are included (ANOVA FDR < 10% based on
comparison between the three groups, COV-D1, ICU and HC).
Table S9. Phosphorylated immunoreceptor tyrosine-based regulatory motifs.
All pTyr sites of proteins that possess an ITRM motif are included here. The ANOVA test was
conducted between the three sample groups (COV-D1, ICU, HC).

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1

Zhu, N. et al. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in China, 2019. N
Engl J Med 382, 727-733, doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001017 (2020).

2

Vardhana, S. A. & Wolchok, J. D. The many faces of the anti-COVID immune response.
J Exp Med 217, doi:10.1084/jem.20200678 (2020).

3

Fraser, D. D. et al. Inflammation Profiling of Critically Ill Coronavirus Disease 2019
Patients. Crit Care Explor 2, e0144, doi:10.1097/CCE.0000000000000144 (2020).

4

Wang, F. et al. Characteristics of Peripheral Lymphocyte Subset Alteration in COVID-19
Pneumonia. J Infect Dis 221, 1762-1769, doi:10.1093/infdis/jiaa150 (2020).

5

Mathew, D. et al. Deep immune profiling of COVID-19 patients reveals distinct
immunotypes with therapeutic implications. Science 369, doi:10.1126/science.abc8511
(2020).

6

Woodruff, M. C. et al. Extrafollicular B cell responses correlate with neutralizing
antibodies and morbidity in COVID-19. Nat Immunol 21, 1506-1516,
doi:10.1038/s41590-020-00814-z (2020).

7

Bian, Y. et al. Ultra-deep tyrosine phosphoproteomics enabled by a phosphotyrosine
superbinder. Nat Chem Biol 12, 959-966, doi:10.1038/nchembio.2178 (2016).

8

Bouhaddou, M. et al. The Global Phosphorylation Landscape of SARS-CoV-2 Infection.
Cell 182, 685-712 e619, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.06.034 (2020).

9

Shen, B. et al. Proteomic and Metabolomic Characterization of COVID-19 Patient Sera.
Cell 182, 59-72 e15, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.05.032 (2020).

10

Banerjee, A. K. et al. SARS-CoV-2 Disrupts Splicing, Translation, and Protein
Trafficking to Suppress Host Defenses. Cell 183, 1325-1339 e1321,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.004 (2020).

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11

Giamarellos-Bourboulis, E. J. et al. Complex Immune Dysregulation in COVID-19
Patients with Severe Respiratory Failure. Cell Host Microbe 27, 992-1000 e1003,
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2020.04.009 (2020).

12

Al-Samkari, H. et al. COVID-19 and coagulation: bleeding and thrombotic
manifestations of SARS-CoV-2 infection. Blood 136, 489-500,
doi:10.1182/blood.2020006520 (2020).

13

Li, J. et al. Virus-Host Interactome and Proteomic Survey Reveal Potential Virulence
Factors Influencing SARS-CoV-2 Pathogenesis. Med (N Y),
doi:10.1016/j.medj.2020.07.002 (2020).

14

Ramlall, V. et al. Identification of Immune complement function as a determinant of
adverse SARS-CoV-2 infection outcome. medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.05.05.20092452
(2020).

15

Fraser, D. D. et al. Endothelial Injury and Glycocalyx Degradation in Critically Ill
Coronavirus Disease 2019 Patients: Implications for Microvascular Platelet Aggregation.
Crit Care Explor 2, e0194, doi:10.1097/CCE.0000000000000194 (2020).

16

Fraser, D. D. et al. Metabolomics Profiling of Critically Ill Coronavirus Disease 2019
Patients: Identification of Diagnostic and Prognostic Biomarkers. Crit Care Explor 2,
e0272, doi:10.1097/CCE.0000000000000272 (2020).

17

Aoe, T. Pathological Aspects of COVID-19 as a Conformational Disease and the Use of
Pharmacological Chaperones as a Potential Therapeutic Strategy. Front Pharmacol 11,
1095, doi:10.3389/fphar.2020.01095 (2020).

18

Jin, L. L. et al. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the Lyn Src homology 2 (SH2) domain
modulates its binding affinity and specificity. Mol Cell Proteomics 14, 695-706,
doi:10.1074/mcp.M114.044404 (2015).

19

Takesono, A., Finkelstein, L. D. & Schwartzberg, P. L. Beyond calcium: new signaling
pathways for Tec family kinases. J Cell Sci 115, 3039-3048 (2002).

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

20

Kearney, A. L. et al. Serine 474 phosphorylation is essential for maximal Akt2 kinase
activity in adipocytes. J Biol Chem 294, 16729-16739, doi:10.1074/jbc.RA119.010036
(2019).

21

Cannavo, A. et al. GRK2 as a therapeutic target for heart failure. Expert Opin Ther
Targets 22, 75-83, doi:10.1080/14728222.2018.1406925 (2018).

22

Topol, E. J. COVID-19 can affect the heart. Science 370, 408-409,
doi:10.1126/science.abe2813 (2020).

23

Iaccarino, G. et al. Elevated myocardial and lymphocyte GRK2 expression and activity in
human heart failure. Eur Heart J 26, 1752-1758, doi:10.1093/eurheartj/ehi429 (2005).

24

Richardson, C. & Alessi, D. R. The regulation of salt transport and blood pressure by the
WNK-SPAK/OSR1 signalling pathway. J Cell Sci 121, 3293-3304,
doi:10.1242/jcs.029223 (2008).

25

Rana, A. K., Rahmatkar, S. N., Kumar, A. & Singh, D. Glycogen synthase kinase-3: A
putative target to combat severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV2) pandemic. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev, doi:10.1016/j.cytogfr.2020.08.002 (2020).

26

Staal, F. J., Luis, T. C. & Tiemessen, M. M. WNT signalling in the immune system:
WNT is spreading its wings. Nat Rev Immunol 8, 581-593, doi:10.1038/nri2360 (2008).

27

Meckiff, B. J. et al. Imbalance of Regulatory and Cytotoxic SARS-CoV-2-Reactive
CD4(+) T Cells in COVID-19. Cell 183, 1340-1353 e1316,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.10.001 (2020).

28

Shkoda, A. et al. The germinal center kinase TNIK is required for canonical NF-kappaB
and JNK signaling in B-cells by the EBV oncoprotein LMP1 and the CD40 receptor.
PLoS Biol 10, e1001376, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001376 (2012).

29

Ehrenfeld, M. et al. Covid-19 and autoimmunity. Autoimmun Rev 19, 102597,
doi:10.1016/j.autrev.2020.102597 (2020).

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

30

Sun, X. et al. DNA-PK deficiency potentiates cGAS-mediated antiviral innate immunity.
Nat Commun 11, 6182, doi:10.1038/s41467-020-19941-0 (2020).

31

Nunez de Villavicencio-Diaz, T., Rabalski, A. J. & Litchfield, D. W. Protein Kinase
CK2: Intricate Relationships within Regulatory Cellular Networks. Pharmaceuticals
(Basel) 10, doi:10.3390/ph10010027 (2017).

32

Icer, M. A. & Gezmen-Karadag, M. The multiple functions and mechanisms of
osteopontin. Clin Biochem 59, 17-24, doi:10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2018.07.003 (2018).

33

Shinohara, M. L. et al. Osteopontin expression is essential for interferon-alpha
production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Nat Immunol 7, 498-506, doi:10.1038/ni1327
(2006).

34

Hadjadj, J. et al. Impaired type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe
COVID-19 patients. Science 369, 718-724, doi:10.1126/science.abc6027 (2020).

35

Blanco-Melo, D. et al. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development
of COVID-19. Cell 181, 1036-1045 e1039, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.04.026 (2020).

36

Baaten, B. J. et al. CD44 regulates survival and memory development in Th1 cells.
Immunity 32, 104-115, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2009.10.011 (2010).

37

Zhang, J. et al. Spike-specific circulating T follicular helper cell and cross-neutralizing
antibody responses in COVID-19-convalescent individuals. Nat Microbiol,
doi:10.1038/s41564-020-00824-5 (2020).

38

Nady, S., Ignatz-Hoover, J. & Shata, M. T. Interleukin-12 is the optimum cytokine to
expand human Th17 cells in vitro. Clin Vaccine Immunol 16, 798-805,
doi:10.1128/CVI.00022-09 (2009).

39

Karki, R. et al. Synergism of TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma Triggers Inflammatory Cell
Death, Tissue Damage, and Mortality in SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Cytokine Shock
Syndromes. Cell, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.11.025 (2020).

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

40

Jose, R. J. & Manuel, A. COVID-19 cytokine storm: the interplay between inflammation
and coagulation. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine 8, e46-e47, doi:10.1016/s22132600(20)30216-2 (2020).

41

Hirano, T. & Murakami, M. COVID-19: A New Virus, but a Familiar Receptor and
Cytokine Release Syndrome. Immunity 52, 731-733, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.04.003
(2020).

42

Moore, J. B. & June, C. H. Cytokine release syndrome in severe COVID-19. Science 368,
473-474, doi:10.1126/science.abb8925 (2020).

43

Pedersen, S. F. & Ho, Y. C. SARS-CoV-2: a storm is raging. J Clin Invest 130, 22022205, doi:10.1172/JCI137647 (2020).

44

Chousterman, B. G., Swirski, F. K. & Weber, G. F. Cytokine storm and sepsis disease
pathogenesis. Semin Immunopathol 39, 517-528, doi:10.1007/s00281-017-0639-8 (2017).

45

Noroozi, R. et al. Altered cytokine levels and immune responses in patients with SARSCoV-2 infection and related conditions. Cytokine 133, 155143,
doi:10.1016/j.cyto.2020.155143 (2020).

46

Vabret, N. et al. Immunology of COVID-19: Current State of the Science. Immunity 52,
910-941, doi:10.1016/j.immuni.2020.05.002 (2020).

47

Del Valle, D. M. et al. An inflammatory cytokine signature helps predict COVID-19
severity and death. medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.05.28.20115758 (2020).

48

Schulte-Schrepping, J. et al. Severe COVID-19 Is Marked by a Dysregulated Myeloid
Cell Compartment. Cell 182, 1419-1440 e1423, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.001 (2020).

49

van Den Broek, M. et al. IL-4 and IL-10 antagonize IL-12-mediated protection against
acute vaccinia virus infection with a limited role of IFN-gamma and nitric oxide
synthetase 2. J Immunol 164, 371-378, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.164.1.371 (2000).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

50

Xue, Q., Yan, Y., Zhang, R. & Xiong, H. Regulation of iNOS on Immune Cells and Its
Role in Diseases. Int J Mol Sci 19, doi:10.3390/ijms19123805 (2018).

51

Giuca, A. et al. Novel FHL1 mutation variant identified in a patient with nonobstructive
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and myopathy - a case report. BMC Med Genet 21, 188,
doi:10.1186/s12881-020-01131-w (2020).

52

Ding, J., Cong, Y. F., Liu, B., Miao, J. & Wang, L. Aberrant Protein Turn-Over
Associated With Myofibrillar Disorganization in FHL1 Knockout Mice. Front Genet 9,
273, doi:10.3389/fgene.2018.00273 (2018).

53

Liu, H. et al. A Comprehensive Immunoreceptor Phosphotyrosine-based Signaling
Network Revealed by Reciprocal Protein-Peptide Array Screening. Mol Cell Proteomics
14, 1846-1858, doi:10.1074/mcp.M115.047951 (2015).

54

Veillette, A. NK cell regulation by SLAM family receptors and SAP-related adapters.
Immunol Rev 214, 22-34, doi:10.1111/j.1600-065X.2006.00453.x (2006).

55

Garcia-Beltran, W. F. et al. COVID-19 neutralizing antibodies predict disease severity
and survival. Cell, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.12.015 (2020).

56

van Rees, D. J., Szilagyi, K., Kuijpers, T. W., Matlung, H. L. & van den Berg, T. K.
Immunoreceptors on neutrophils. Semin Immunol 28, 94-108,
doi:10.1016/j.smim.2016.02.004 (2016).

57

Colonna, M. TREMs in the immune system and beyond. Nat Rev Immunol 3, 445-453,
doi:10.1038/nri1106 (2003).

58

Macauley, M. S., Crocker, P. R. & Paulson, J. C. Siglec-mediated regulation of immune
cell function in disease. Nat Rev Immunol 14, 653-666, doi:10.1038/nri3737 (2014).

59

Lowell, C. A. Src-family and Syk kinases in activating and inhibitory pathways in innate
immune cells: signaling cross talk. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 3,
doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a002352 (2011).

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

60

Sekine, T. et al. Robust T Cell Immunity in Convalescent Individuals with Asymptomatic
or Mild COVID-19. Cell 183, 158-168 e114, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.08.017 (2020).

61

Chen, Z. & John Wherry, E. T cell responses in patients with COVID-19. Nat Rev
Immunol 20, 529-536, doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0402-6 (2020).

62

Arunachalam, P. S. et al. Systems biological assessment of immunity to mild versus
severe COVID-19 infection in humans. Science 369, 1210-1220,
doi:10.1126/science.abc6261 (2020).

63

Yu, K. K. Q. et al. T cell and antibody functional correlates of severe COVID-19.
medRxiv, doi:10.1101/2020.11.25.20235150 (2020).

64

Lubbers, J., Rodriguez, E. & van Kooyk, Y. Modulation of Immune Tolerance via SiglecSialic Acid Interactions. Front Immunol 9, 2807, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.02807 (2018).

65

Liu, L. et al. Anti-spike IgG causes severe acute lung injury by skewing macrophage
responses during acute SARS-CoV infection. JCI Insight 4,
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.123158 (2019).

66

Chen, W. et al., doi:10.1101/2020.12.01.406025 (2020).

67

Tay, M. Z., Poh, C. M., Renia, L., MacAry, P. A. & Ng, L. F. P. The trinity of COVID19: immunity, inflammation and intervention. Nat Rev Immunol 20, 363-374,
doi:10.1038/s41577-020-0311-8 (2020).

68

Zhao, J. et al. Antibody Responses to SARS-CoV-2 in Patients With Novel Coronavirus
Disease 2019. Clin Infect Dis 71, 2027-2034, doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa344 (2020).

69

Osman, M. et al. Impaired natural killer cell counts and cytolytic activity in patients with
severe COVID-19. Blood Adv 4, 5035-5039, doi:10.1182/bloodadvances.2020002650
(2020).

70

Schreiber, G. The Role of Type I Interferons in the Pathogenesis and Treatment of
COVID-19. Front Immunol 11, 595739, doi:10.3389/fimmu.2020.595739 (2020).

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

71

Du, M. et al. Casein kinase II controls TBK1/IRF3 activation in IFN response against
viral infection. J Immunol 194, 4477-4488, doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1402777 (2015).

72

Sun, Z., Ren, H., Liu, Y., Teeling, J. L. & Gu, J. Phosphorylation of RIG-I by casein
kinase II inhibits its antiviral response. J Virol 85, 1036-1047, doi:10.1128/JVI.01734-10
(2011).

73

Zheng, Y. et al. A CK2-dependent mechanism for activation of the JAK-STAT signaling
pathway. Blood 118, 156-166, doi:10.1182/blood-2010-01-266320 (2011).

74

Liu, D. & Mamorska-Dyga, A. Syk inhibitors in clinical development for hematological
malignancies. J Hematol Oncol 10, 145, doi:10.1186/s13045-017-0512-1 (2017).

75

Geahlen, R. L. Getting Syk: spleen tyrosine kinase as a therapeutic target. Trends
Pharmacol Sci 35, 414-422, doi:10.1016/j.tips.2014.05.007 (2014).

76

Mocsai, A., Ruland, J. & Tybulewicz, V. L. The SYK tyrosine kinase: a crucial player in
diverse biological functions. Nat Rev Immunol 10, 387-402, doi:10.1038/nri2765 (2010).

77

Salvarani, C. et al. Effect of Tocilizumab vs Standard Care on Clinical Worsening in
Patients Hospitalized With COVID-19 Pneumonia: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA
Intern Med, doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.6615 (2020).

78

Huang, E. & Jordan, S. C. Tocilizumab for Covid-19 - The Ongoing Search for Effective
Therapies. N Engl J Med 383, 2387-2388, doi:10.1056/NEJMe2032071 (2020).

79

Slessarev, M. & Fraser, D. D. Anticytokine Therapies in Severe Coronavirus Disease
2019 Should Be Informed by Detailed Inflammatory Profiling and Specific Therapeutic
Targets. Crit Care Explor 2, e0246, doi:10.1097/CCE.0000000000000246 (2020).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A
Cluster-1

r- 2 r- 3 e r- 4
s te l u s te l u s t
u
l
C
C C

B
Cluster-5

Enrichment Score
0.0

0.5

1.0

Exocytosis
Leukocyte activation
Myeloid cell activation
Vesicle-mediated transport
Interleukin Signaling
Actin cytoskeleton organization
Membrane Trafficking
Golgi vesicle transport
Vesicle-mediated transport
Cofactor metabolic process
Innate immune response
Platelet activation
Interleukin-12 signaling
Oxygen radical
Canonical glycolysis
NADH regeneration
Glycolysis, three-carbon

2.0

FDR
Enrichment Score

10-10

low

1.5

10-20

10-30

FDR

high

C

Node color (log2 COV-D1/HC ratio)

Annotation terms and node border colors
Metabolism of RNA
Translation
Spliceosome
Ribosomal scanning and start codon recognition
RNA recognition motif

Fig. 1. Proteome signatures of COVID-19. (A) Heatmap representation of differentially expressed proteins between the
proteome of the COV (n=5, day 1 samples or COV-D1), ICU (n=5, day 1) and HC (n=5) PBMCs ordered by hierarchical
clustering of the normalized intensities (z-scores) of the 894 proteins that were significantly distinguished by an ANOVA test
between the groups. Over-expressed proteins (compared to the mean for each protein) are shown in red, and underexpressed proteins are shown in cyan. (B) Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins based on
analysis with Metascape. Significant features intersecting each GO category were compared to the background dataset as an
enrichment score and FDR (Benjamini-Hochberg) q-value from Fisher’s exact test. (C) A PPI network for RNA splicing (left)
and translation (right) identified from the significantly regulated proteins (constructed using STRING). The node color
gradient corresponds to the log2 COV-D1/HC ratio. The node border is colored with the five major functional annotation terms
enriched in the network.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0
-1

C
O

V

-D
C
1
O
V
C -D7
O
V
-D
10

U

C

IC

V
-D
C
1
O
V
C -D7
O
V
-D
10

U

C
O

IC

C
H

C
H

IC
C U
O
V
-D
C
1
O
V
D
C
O 7
V
-D
10

-4

*

6
4
2
0

VD
C
1
O
VD
C
7
O
VD
10

C

-2

H

V
-D
C
1
O
V
C -D7
O
V
-D
10

C

U

C
O

IC

H

10

7

-D

-D
V

C
O

V

1
V

-D

C
O

U
IC

C
O

-2

8

Fatty Acid Synthesis
and metabolism

2

-2

-6

0

C
O

*

4

0

-4

**

2

V
-D
C
1
O
V
D
C
O 7
V
-D
10

IC

U

C

-4

4

U

-2

H

Glycolysis

-2

C

-1

MHCII antigen presentation

0

V

0

H

NS

0

V
-D
C
1
O
V
C D7
O
V
-D
10

2

6

*

2

TCA Cycle

1

C
O
4

-D
C
1
O
V
C -D7
O
V
-D
10

U

**

6

C
O

IC

IC

H

MHC-1 antigen presentation

-2

H

U

C

V
-D
C
1
O
V
C -D7
O
V
-D
10

0

C

Chemokine&
Cytokine Signaling

NS

4

2

-2

-2

*

2

Phagocytosis &
Endocytosis pathways

1

C
O

IC

H

U

C

-2

NS

2

**

3

IC

-1

3

4

C
O

0

**

Platelets Activation

NS

1

-2

C
O

Complement and
Coagulation Cascades

4

2

0
-1

H

-D
C
1
O
V
D
C
7
O
V
-D
10

U

C
O

Fc Receptor
mediated Phagocytosis

**

3

1

-3

-2

V

IC

H

C

-3

-1

U

-2

0

NS

-D
C
1
O
V
D
C
O 7
V
-D
10

-1

*

1

*

2

V

0

2

C

NS

1

IC

2

3

**

3

H

Neutrophil Activation

Monocyte and
Macrophage differentiation

*

3

Fig. 2. Pathways and processes perturbed in the PBMCs of critically ill COVID-19 patients. Each spot
corresponds to a protein within the specified pathway based on GO annotation. The y-axis shows the log2 value of the
fold change in protein expression for the group (relative to the mean of the whole proteome). The p values were
calculated based on ANOVA test, *p<0.05, **p<0.002, NS, not significant.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

C

KSEA prediction score

Fig. 3. Kinase phosphorylation and activity status in the COV and ICU PBMCs.
The averaged log2 ratio of matched samples (e.g., the mean value of ICU1/HC1, ICU2/HC2...ICU5/HC5) are
displayed as a heatmap with clustering. (A) Detected tyrosine kinases (TKs). (B) Ser/Thr kinases (STKs) showing
significant changes in phosphorylation between patients and the heathy controls. See Supplementary Table S3
for a complete list of all detected kinase phosphorylation sites. “AL”: kinase activation loop, “inducible”: the
phosphorylation induces kinase activity, “inhibitory”: the phosphorylation inhibits kinase activity. The annotations
are based on PhosphositePlus, except for LCK-pY194 and AKT2 pSer478. (C) Kinase activity predicted using
Kinase-Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA). The combined phosphoproteome data (pTyr and IMAC datasets)
were used to analyze which kinases may be activated or supressed in the COVID-19 patients compared to
healthy controls, based on enrichment of phosphorylated substrates in the COV samples. The prediction used
both the PhosphositePlus and NetworKIN datasets. The list of kinases was filtered and the kinases detected in
any of the mass spec injections were retained in the figure.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

RNA processing/transcription

translation

DNA binding

other proteins

protein folding

CK2

protein degradation

immune regulation

node color: log2 COV-D1/HC ratio

B

Fig. 4. The protein kinase-substrate network underlying COVID-19. (A) The CK2-substrate network. Known or predicted
CK2 substrate phosphosites were extracted from the significantly regulated phosphosites (ANOVA FDR < 10% between COVD1, ICU and HC). Phosphosites with a green border are known CK2 substrates based on PhosphositePlus. The
phosphorylation nodes are colored based on the IMAC data, whereas the protein nodes are based on the proteome data.
Protein nodes without observation/quantification are colored grey. (B) A TK-substrate network for COVID-19 based on
quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome data. The kinase nodes were coloured by the log2 COV-D1/HC fold change of the
full proteome protein intensities. Kinase proteins which were observed by mass spectrometry but without sufficient data were
colored green (proteins with n ≥ 3 from each sample group were considered sufficient for statistical analysis). The thickness of
the node border correspond to p-values (thicker for smaller p-values). The kinase-substrate relationship data were retrieved
from PhosphoSitePlus database (version November 2020).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A
mRNA(Flold Change)

35

COV-D1
ICU
HC

**
25
15

**

**
**

*

*

*

5

**

*

**

**

-5

TNF-α

IL-6

IL-2

IL-1α

IFN-γ M-CSF

IL-1β

IL-8

MIP-1b MCP-1

iNOS

mRNA (Fold Change)

20
15

**

10

*

*

*

5

**

*

*

*

0

*

*

-5

-10

IL-15

IL-10

IL-12

IL-4

IFN-β

pY536

Receptors

B

IFN-α

IL-13

IL-33

IL-17

TGF-β

GB

STAT

SHP1

pY701

IFNGR1

pY564

pT295

STAT1

pS727

pS601

Cytokines

CSF2RB

JAK2
JAK3
TYK2

DNA

STAT3

* STAT1 reduces BCL-2 expression

IL-12
pS659

pY705

IFN-a/b

EP300

anti-apoptosis

STAT5A

IL6ST

BCL2L1

FHL1/SLIM

pS1038

?
pY694

proteasome

STAM
STAT5B

STAM

pS156

pY62

STAM2

GRB2

SHP2

pY371

pY542

SOS

RAS
MAP2K1

pY580

MAPK1

RAF1
MAP2K2

PI3K

AKT

pS621

T394

log2 COV-D1/HC

PIK3CB
-2.6

PIP3

AKT2

Cell survival

2.6

pS478

Figure 5. The cytokine storm and elevated JAK-STAK signaling in COVID-19. (A) Differential expression of cytokines
and chemokines in the COV-D1, ICU and HC PMBCs. Data shown were normalized to b-actin. Asterisks indicate a significant
difference between COV-D1 and ICU or HC unless otherwise indicated. *, p<0.05, **, p<0.002, calculated based on One-Way
ANOVA (n=5, 4 technical repeats). (B) The cytokine-JAK-STAT signaling network underlying COVID-19. The proteins and
phosphosites are colored according to the COV-D1/HC ratio (red: upregulation, blue: downregulation). The nodes without
sufficient data to calculate the ratio are colored grey.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.19.21253675; this version posted March 25, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

E

log2 difference

Day 1

0

Day 7

Day 10
-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

NS
0

**

2

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

**

CD3z-pY123

CD3D-pY160

D

4
2

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

C

COV+1

-2

-2

VD
7
C
O
VD
10

VD7
CO
VD1
0

CO

VD1

IC
U

CO

HC

VD7
CO
VD1
0

CO

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o
-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o
-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

-N

VD1

COV+5
-N

CO

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o
-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

-2

-N

IC
U

HC

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

O
C

O

VD
1

U

C

C

C

IC

C
H

VD
7
O
VD
10

VD
1

U

O

IC

C
H

C

O

0

-N

SIGLEC10-pY691

COV+4

-4

-4

-N

-2

**

2

-N

NS

4

-N

0

- Ig
G
-S
-R
- S BD
-E
ct
o

COV+3
-N

2

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

-2

-N

*

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

-Ig
G
-S
-R
-S BD
-E
ct
o

0

-4

4

- Ig
G
-S
-R
- S BD
-E
ct
o

VD
7
O
VD
10

O
C

C

U

VD
1
O

C

SLAMF6-pY309

-2
-4

SIRPA-pY429

IC

C
H

VD
7
O
VD
10
C

C

O

VD
1

U
C

O

IC

C
H
0

2

-N

NS

-N

2

COV+2

*

-N

FCGR2A-pY281

4

**

-N

4

-N

-N

-4

Fig. 6. SARS-CoV-2 augments immune signaling through immunoreceptor Tyr-based regulatory motifs. (A) A
heatmap showing the differences in ITRM Tyr phosphorylation in patient PBMCs compared to the heathy controls. (B) A
heatmap of the ITRM-containing proteins with significant changes in expression. (C) Representative examples showing the
dynamic changes in phosphorylation of the ITRMs. p-values calculated by One-way ANOVA (n=3-5), *, p<0.05, **, p<0.002.
(D) Antibody response determined by a SARS-CoV-2 antigen array. (E) SYK may phosphorylates multiple proteins and
nucleate an immune signaling hub. The SIGLEC pTyr sites with dashed arrows are potential SYK substrates.

