medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

1

Characteristics of Long Covid: findings from a social media survey
Short title: Characteristics of Long Covid
Nida Ziauddeen1, Deepti Gurdasani2, Margaret E O’Hara3, Claire Hastie3, Paul Roderick1, Guiqing
Yao4, Nisreen A Alwan1,5,6
School of Primary Care, Population Sciences and Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Southampton, Southampton, UK

1

2

William Harvey Research Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London

Patient contributor, Long Covid Support: www.longcovid.org

3
4

Department of Health Science, University of Leicester

5

NIHR Applied Research Collaboration Wessex, Southampton, UK

NIHR Southampton Biomedical Research Centre, University of Southampton and University Hospital
Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Southampton, UK

6

Corresponding authors:
Nida Ziauddeen and Nisreen A Alwan
School of Primary Care, Population Sciences and Medical Education, Faculty of Medicine, Mailpoint
805, Level C (AC22), South Academic Block, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road,
Southampton SO16 6YD, UK
Email: Nida.Ziauddeen@soton.ac.uk, N.A.Alwan@soton.ac.uk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2

Abstract
Many people are not recovering for months after being infected with SARS-CoV-2. Long Covid has
emerged as a major public health concern that needs defining, quantifying, and describing. We
aimed to explore the initial and ongoing symptoms of Long Covid following SARS-CoV-2 infection and
describe its impact on daily life in people who were not admitted to hospital during the first two
weeks of the illness. We co-produced a survey with people living with Long Covid. We collected the
data through an online survey using convenience non-probability sampling, with the survey posted
both specifically on Long Covid support groups and generally on social media. The criteria for
inclusion were adults with lab-confirmed (PCR or antibody) or suspected COVID-19 managed in the
community (non-hospitalised) in the first two weeks of illness. We used agglomerative hierarchical
clustering to identify specific symptom clusters, and their demographic and functional correlates.
We analysed data from 2550 participants with a median duration of illness of 7.7 months
(interquartile range (IQR) 7.4-8.0). The mean age was 46.5 years (standard deviation 11 years) with
82.8% females and 79.9% of participants based in the UK. 89.5% described their health as good, very
good or excellent before COVID-19. The most common initial symptoms that persisted were
exhaustion, chest pressure/tightness, shortness of breath and headache. Cough, fever, and chills
were common initial symptoms that became less prevalent later in the illness, whereas cognitive
dysfunction and palpitations became more prevalent later in the illness. 26.5% reported labconfirmation of infection. The biggest difference in ongoing symptoms between those who reported
testing positive and those who did not was loss of smell/taste. Ongoing symptoms affected at least 3
organ systems in 83.5% of participants.
Most participants described fluctuating (57.7%) or relapsing symptoms (17.6%). Physical activity,
stress and sleep disturbance commonly triggered symptoms. A third (32%) reported they were
unable to live alone without any assistance at six weeks from start of illness. 16.9% reported being
unable to work solely due to COVID-19 illness. 66.4% reported taking time off sick (median of 60
days, IQR 20, 129). 37.0% reported loss of income due to illness, and 64.4% said they were unable to
perform usual activities/duties.
Acute systems clustered broadly into two groups: a majority cluster (n=2235, 88%) with
cardiopulmonary predominant symptoms, and a minority cluster (n=305, 12%) with multisystem
symptoms. Similarly, ongoing symptoms broadly clustered in two groups; a majority cluster (n=2243,
88.8%) exhibiting mainly cardiopulmonary, cognitive symptoms and exhaustion, and a minority
cluster (n=283, 11.2%) exhibited more multisystem symptoms. Belonging to the more severe
multisystem cluster was associated with more severe functional impact, lower income, younger age,
being female, worse baseline health, and inadequate rest in the first two weeks of the illness, with
no major differences in the cluster patterns when restricting analysis to the lab-confirmed subgroup.
This is an exploratory survey of Long Covid characteristics. Whilst it is important to acknowledge that
it is a non-representative population sample, it highlights the heterogeneity of persistent symptoms,
and the significant functional impact of prolonged illness following confirmed or suspected SARSCoV-2 infection. To study prevalence, predictors and prognosis, research is needed in a
representative population sample using standardised case definitions (to include those not labconfirmed in the first pandemic wave).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

Introduction
The morbidity burden of the COVID-19 pandemic is becoming increasingly apparent and concerning.
Long Covid describes the condition of not recovering for many weeks or months following acute SARSCoV-2 infection1. It was first described and named as an umbrella term through a social media
movement in Spring 2020 when many people with suspected or confirmed COVID-19 infection were
not recovering weeks after onset of symptoms2,3. Long Covid can occur regardless of the severity of
the initial infection4,5. The mechanisms underlying it are still largely unknown6 and therefore it is
premature to label all of its manifestations as a post viral illness3. Evidence describing the condition is
scarce, but is starting to emerge on the long-term health impairment and organ damage following
COVID-197–11. Patients are struggling to access adequate recognition, support, medical assessment
and treatment for their condition, particularly those with no lab evidence of their infection during the
first wave of the pandemic when testing was not accessible to those not hospitalised in the initial
phase of their COVID-19 disease12,13.
The prevalence of Long Covid is still uncertain, but evidence is emerging that it is relatively common.
Data from the UK’s Office for National Statistics (ONS), based on a nationally representative noninstitutionalised sample of lab-confirmed COVID-19 cases including asymptomatic ones, estimate a
prevalence of 21% at 5 weeks, and 10% at 12 weeks from testing positive14. However, the detailed
range of symptoms, disability, progression from the acute illness, and impact on work and daily
activities are not well described in such non-hospitalised population-based surveys yet. For example,
the ONS study based their estimates on a list of 12 symptoms included in the ONS infection survey15,
with some of the common symptoms of Long Covid such as chest pain, palpitations and cognitive
problems missing from that list. Other studies, some with a wider symptom list, estimate the
prevalence of persisting symptoms to be higher at around one in three people for up to 18 weeks
post infection4,5,16.
There are more studies following-up hospitalised than non-hospitalised COVID-19 patients, with the
assumption that hospitalisation indicates severe disease in most settings17–19. The natural history and
pathology in those acutely severely ill with COVID-19 may be different to those developing Long
Covid, but certain inflammatory or immunological mechanisms may be shared20. The multisystem
nature of the illness is a common feature. A multi-country web-based survey of suspected and
confirmed COVID-19 cases found a range of 205 symptoms, with respondents who had a duration of
illness over 6 months experiencing an average of 14 symptoms10.
A rapid living systematic review concluded that there is currently insufficient evidence to provide a
precise definition of Long Covid symptoms and prevalence21. The National Institute of Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) has defined “post-COVID-19 syndrome” as signs or symptoms that develop
during or after acute COVID-19, continue for more than 12 weeks and are not explained by an
alternative diagnosis22. However, the ‘signs or symptoms’ that qualify for the definition are not
specified. This may result in variation in diagnosis and referral among different clinicians, leading to
inequalities in recognition and accessing services23. Many of those infected in spring 2020 did not
have access to testing and therefore have struggled to receive recognition, diagnosis and
support12,13. This study was conceived following conversations with people with Long Covid in the
community who perceived a lack on data of COVID-19 sequelae in non-hospitalised individuals and
felt a need for their experience to be explored and documented.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4

In adults who self-reported suspected or confirmed COVID-19 and were not hospitalised in the first
two weeks of their COVID-19 illness, we aimed to:
•

Characterise the initial and the ongoing symptoms of Long Covid in terms of their range,
nature, pattern, progression and what triggers and relieves them

•

Describe the impact of Long Covid on daily activities and work

Methods
This is a cross-sectional online survey using a convenience non-probability sampling method. The
survey was posted by the study authors on social media websites (Twitter and Facebook), including
on the Facebook Long Covid Support Group (membership at the time of posting was around 30,000,
the group was founded in the UK but has international membership too), and the smaller UK doctors
#longcovid Facebook Group. Subsequently, it was shared on the Survivor Corps Facebook Group
(USA), and the Body Politic Support Group on Slack (international) by members of these groups.
These social media groups were selected for posting the survey because we aimed to recruit people
who identify themselves as living with Long Covid as well those who believe they have recovered
from the illness. CH is the founder of the Facebook Long Covid Support Group, and MEO is on the
administrative team for that Group. They both have experience of Long Covid.
The survey was available online in Microsoft Forms format, and open to complete for a period of one
week, from November 7th to 14th 2020. The survey was only available in English, but responses were
invited internationally, and not restricted to the UK, from those able to access the survey through
social media and who fulfilled the inclusion criteria. The social media post contained brief
information about the study, eligibility criteria and a link to the questionnaire. On opening the link,
participants were taken to an in-depth participant information sheet. Participants gave their consent
by answering ‘yes’ to a consent question.
Participants had to consent to participating in the survey before they could access the questionnaire.
Survey responses were anonymous, but participants who were willing to be contacted in the future
for a follow-up survey were asked to consent to future contact and then provide contact details.
Ethical approval for the study was granted by the University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine
Ethics Committee (Reference 61434). The survey data is available on request provided ethics
committee approval for sharing the anonymised data is granted.
Eligibility criteria
The survey was restricted to adults aged 18 years or over who thought they had COVID-19
(confirmed or suspected) and who were not hospitalised for the treatment of COVID-19 in the first
two weeks of experiencing COVID-19 symptoms. The screening questions for the survey were the
following.
• Are you aged 18 years or over?
• Do you think you have had COVID-19?
• Were you admitted to hospital in the first two weeks of experiencing COVID-19 symptoms?

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

5

If the participant answered ‘no’ to the first two questions or ‘yes’ to the third question, they could
not progress further in the survey. Our survey provided an opportunity for people who were
infected with SARS-CoV-2 but had not been hospitalised to participate in research to characterise
their condition, since there were other studies following up hospitalised COVID-19 patients. In the
UK, community testing for COVID-19 stopped on the 12th of March 202024, and was not available
throughout Spring 2020. Most of those who experienced COVID-19 symptoms and did not require
hospital admission during that period did not have a positive test result. Therefore, the survey was
open to those who did not have lab confirmation of their infection, but they had suspected or
clinically diagnosed COVID-19. The survey was also open to people who had fully recovered from
confirmed or suspected acute COVID-19.
Questionnaire components
The questionnaire was co-produced working with public contributors experiencing Long Covid (CH
and MEO). NAA also experienced Long Covid symptoms. Public contributor members of the COVID19 Research Involvement Group (a Facebook group founded by MEO for the purpose of encouraging
patient involvement in COVID research) gave feedback on early versions of the questionnaire to
ensure that the questions were appropriate and relevant. The survey was amended according to
their feedback. The questionnaire included questions primarily about the individual respondents and
focused on minimising participant burden by collecting data deemed essential.
Questions included demographic information, baseline health, symptoms experienced at the start of
COVID-19 illness, the pattern of illness over the course, symptoms that remained/appeared over the
course of the illness, functional status, impact on health, activity, ability to work including current
employment status, and healthcare usage. We collected data on pre-existing health conditions as a
binary (yes/no) variable and used an open text response to collect details on these conditions. We
also asked if other members of the household had experienced symptoms of COVID-19 and the
duration of their illness. With the exception of questions on initial symptoms and functional status at
six weeks of illness, all questions captured responses at the time of survey completion.
The survey incorporated the Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) to assess fatigue25, and the Post-COVID-19
Functional Status (PCFS) Scale to assess functional status at six weeks from start of infection26. FSS
consists of nine items scored on a seven-point Likert-type scale ranging from strongly disagree (1) to
strongly agree (7). The nine items are combined into a total score calculated as the average of the
individual item responses. A higher score indicates greater fatigue severity. We considered a score of
4 or above to indicate beyond normal levels of fatigue27. A PCFS scale variable was constructed
consisting of grades 0-4 assigned based on yes/no responses to four component questions. Grade 0
reflects the absence of any functional limitation; grade 1 reflects the presence of symptoms, pain or
anxiety without effect on activities (negligible functional limitations); grade 2 reflects the presence
of symptoms, pain or anxiety requiring lower intensity of activities (slight functional limitations);
grade 3 reflects the inability to perform certain activities (moderate functional limitations); and
grade 4 reflects requiring assistance with activities of daily living (severe functional limitations).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

6

Statistical analysis
Data were downloaded from Microsoft Forms once the survey was taken offline. Statistical analysis
was undertaken using Stata 15.0 and R. R packages used included readstata13, mclust, stats, and
ggplot2. A minimum duration of illness of four weeks was defined as Long Covid for the purposes of
this analysis. Confirmed infection was defined as reported positive result of nucleic acid
amplification test (NAAT) such as PCR, and/or antibody test. Descriptive percentages and summary
statistics were generated for the full sample and stratified separately for those with lab-confirmed
and suspected infection. Univariate comparisons between those with and without confirmed COVID19 infection were carried out using t-test for continuous variables and Chi square test for categorical
variables. Complete case analysis was carried out as missing data was minimal.
Questions on initial and ongoing symptoms were used to categorise symptoms as not experienced,
initial only (experienced in the first two weeks of the illness), new symptom developed after the
acute phase, and initial symptom that remained as an ongoing symptom. Brain fog, poor
concentration, memory problems and confusion are presented as distinct symptoms but were also
used to derive a combined variable for “cognitive dysfunction”. Similarly, chest pressure and chest
tightness are distinct symptom questions used to derive a combined “chest pressure and/or
tightness” variable. These derived variables were defined as having one or more of the component
symptoms as initial and/or ongoing symptoms and categorised specifically for the derived variable.
The percentages do not directly reflect the individual percentages of the component symptoms due
to individuals having reported developing one (or more) component symptoms during different
phases of the illness changing the distribution of the combined variable compared to the individual
component symptoms. Ongoing symptoms were also categorised into the organ system affected
(gastrointestinal, cardiopulmonary, neurological, systemic, nose/throat, pain and skin)
(Supplementary Table 1).
Clustering
We examined symptom clusters based on acute symptoms reported to have been experienced in
the first two weeks of the illness, as well as with reported ongoing symptoms. We carried out
hierarchical agglomerative clustering using hclust implemented in the R package stats using the
complete method of clustering. We first generated a dissimilarity matrix based on categorical binary
data separately on symptoms during acute infection and with ongoing symptoms using Gowers
distance. We used the silhouette method to identify the optimal number of clusters, by assessing
both statistics for clusters 2 through 20. We examined the frequency of symptoms across different
clusters in order to determine the clinical syndromes represented by the cluster. We examined
patterns of transition of participants from acute clusters to ongoing clusters over time.
We also examined demographic, socioeconomic, and functional correlates of the ongoing symptom
clusters. Categorical variables were initially analysed using the Chi square test. Means for continuous
variables were compared by regressing the variable on cluster number, using the lm() function in R,
in univariate analysis. We then examined predictors of cluster membership by using multivariable
logistic regression with cluster number as the dependent variable, and age, gender, ethnicity,
income, education, alcohol consumption, smoking, baseline health, laboratory confirmation, acute
symptom cluster membership, numbers of organ systems with at least one associated symptom, rest

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

7

in the first two weeks of the illness, and pre-existing conditions as predictors. In order to account for
the impact of duration of illness, and time-specific effects, we also included the month of infection
as indicator variable to allow for heterogeneity of effect, and the reported duration of illness as
covariate. Age category was also included as an indicator variable rather than an ordinal variable to
allow for heterogeneity of effect.
As full analysis included those with and without lab-confirmed diagnosis of Long Covid, we examined
whether this was a significant predictor of cluster membership to assess whether clusters correlated
with having lab-confirmation of infection. We also carried out additional sensitivity analysis by
clustering only those with lab confirmation to see if clusters obtained were different from full
sample analysis.
Results
A total of 2644 participants completed the survey; 94 with reported length of illness of less than four
weeks (n=41) and those who had recovered from short acute COVID-19 (n=53) were excluded. The
numbers of individuals who had recovered from short acute or Long Covid were too small to enable
comparison. 2550 participants were included in this analysis, of which 675 participants (26.5%)
reported that they had SARS-CoV-2 infection confirmed through PCR and/or antibody tests. The
mean duration of illness was 7.2 months (standard deviation (SD) 1.8 months, median 7.7 months,
interquartile range 7.4-8.0), with a mean duration of 6.2 months (SD 2.4) in those lab-confirmed
compared to 7.6 months (SD 1.3) in those who were not.
The mean age of participants was 46.5 years (SD 11 years). 82.8% were female and 93.3% were of
White ethnicity. Responses were received from a range of places across the world, with the majority
from the UK (79.9%: England 66.0%, Scotland 8.5%, Wales 4.5%, Northern Ireland 0.9%), North
America (9.2%) and Europe (8.3%). In terms of educational attainment, 77.2% were qualified at
university degree level or above (Table 1). Nineteen percent of participants reported that at least
one other household member was also experiencing Long Covid (ill for 4 weeks or longer).
Previous health
A small proportion of participants reported poor (1.3%) or fair (9.2%) health prior to COVID-19
infection, with 89.6% reporting good, very good or excellent health before COVID-19. 47.3%
reported having pre-existing health conditions with asthma, hypertension, and hyperthyroidism
being the most common conditions reported (Supplementary Table 2). There were no significant
differences in these proportions between those whose infection was lab-confirmed and those who
were not (Table 1).
Course of illness
The most common initial symptoms (first two weeks of the illness) were exhaustion (75.9%),
headache (65.5%), chest pressure and/or tightness (64.5%), shortness of breath (61.7%), cough
(58.5%), muscle aches (55.2%), fever (51.1%) and chills (51.0%) (Table 2). In terms of ongoing
symptoms, the most common were exhaustion (72.6%), cognitive dysfunction (brain fog, poor
concentration, memory problems, confusion) (69.2%), chest pressure and/or tightness (52.6%),
shortness of breath (54.2%), headache (46.0%), muscle aches (44.6%) and palpitations (42.0%)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

8

(Table 3, Figure 1). Mean scores for each item on the Fatigue Severity Scale ranged between 5.2 and
6 (maximum (most severe) score is 7). Using a score of ≥4, the frequency of fatigue among survey
participants was 86% (Table 3).
Participants reported experiencing a mean of 12 (SD 6, median 11, IQR 7-16) initial symptoms and 10
(SD 6, median 9, IQR 5-14) ongoing symptoms. The most common initial symptoms that persisted
past the acute phase were exhaustion (59.1%), shortness of breath (41.3%), chest pressure and/or
tightness (40.5%), and headache (37.5%). At least one symptom of cognitive dysfunction was
present in the initial first two weeks and persisted throughout the illness in 36.9% of participants but
was also reported as new symptom(s) after the acute phase of the illness in 32.3% of participants,
including brain fog (36.1%), memory problems (30.7%), and poor concentration (27.4%)
(Supplementary Table 3).
Ongoing symptoms affected three or more organ systems (gastrointestinal, cardiopulmonary,
neurological, systemic, nose/throat, pain and skin) in 83.5% of participants, with 21.8% reporting
symptoms that affected five systems, 15.0% six systems, and 4.7% seven systems (Table 3). The
majority of participants reported a course of illness that was fluctuating (57.7%) or symptoms
‘coming and going’/relapsing (17.6%). 72.8% of participants experienced symptoms daily. Exhaustion
improved on resting in 35.3% of participants. The majority of participants (60.4%) said that exertion
(exercise/work) was not the only cause of exhaustion (Table 4).
Only 2.3% of participants reported that they felt they had recovered to baseline health before
COVID-19 with a further 20.1% reporting that they were not symptomatic at the time of completing
the survey but did not feel they had recovered to pre-infection health and/or activity levels. The
remaining 77.7% reported that they were experiencing symptoms at the time of completing the
survey (Table 4). Of those who reported completely recovering from Long Covid (n=58), the duration
of illness was 1-4 months for 65.5% and six months or longer for 13.8% (Supplementary Table 4).
Common triggers that exacerbated existing symptoms or caused symptoms to return included
physical activity (77.2%), stress (55.1%), disturbance in sleep patterns (46.9%), cognitive activity
(42.2%), and domestic chores (35.0%). 23.2% reported symptoms varying by time of day. 15.8% of
participants also reported not always being able to identify a trigger and sometimes symptoms
returned or worsened without a trigger. Just over half of participants (54.3%) reported sufficient rest
in the acute phase of the illness, with 26.0% reporting less rest than they would have liked due to
caring or other responsibilities (Table 4).
Functional ability
At the time of completing the survey, being ill still affected respondents’ ability to carry out domestic
chores (84.3%), leisure (84.8%) and social (77.1%) activities, work (74.9 %), self-care (50.0%),
childcare (35.8%), and caring for other adults (26.1%), as well as affecting their mental health
(63.7%). Using the PCFS Scale to describe how Long Covid affected daily activities at six weeks from
the start of symptoms, nearly a third (32.3%) reported that they were unable to live alone without
any assistance, and 34.5% reported moderate functional limitations (able to take care of self but not
perform usual duties/activities). 89.5% of participants said they avoided certain activities/duties at
six weeks from onset of illness. Only 10.3% reported no or negligible functional limitations (Table 5).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

9

Figure 1: Frequency of reported ongoing symptoms in survey participants (n=2526)

Work
At the time of responding to the survey, 9.7% reported working reduced hours, 19.1% reported
being unable to work (out of which 88.3% was reported to be solely due to COVID-19 illness), and
1.9% reported being made redundant or having taken early retirement (Table 6, Figure 2). The most
common reported reason for working reduced hours was COVID-19 illness (96.5%). 66.4% reported
taking time off sick and 5.1% reported not needing to take time off sick as they were furloughed. The
median time off sick was 60 (IQR 20 to 129) days. 37.6% reported a loss of income due to illness
(median reported number of days for which income is lost 120, IQR 50 to 172). This was significantly
higher for those with no lab confirmation (median 129, IQR 60 to 172) compared to those with lab
confirmation (median 84, IQR 30 to 151).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

10

Healthcare utilisation
Most participants reported at least one or more type of healthcare service usage (GP, 111 calls,
Accident and Emergency, hospital outpatient appointments) with 12% admitted to hospital after 2
weeks from onset of illness.

Figure 2: Reasons for change in work pattern in those reporting reduced work hours (n=243), being
unable to work (n = 478) or being made redundant/taking early retirement (n-47) (total n= 768)

Lab confirmation of infection
Out of the 2550 participants, 675 (26.5%) reported lab confirmation of infection by either PCR or
antibody test and 82 did not answer the question on testing for lab confirmation of infection (3.2%)
(27.4% lab-confirmed out of n=2468 who answered the testing questions). 1582 participants (62%)
reported having a PCR test with 426 testing positive (27% of those tested). The date of PCR test was
available for 1491 of these 1582 participants. Twenty percent (n=304) were first tested at 0-5 days of
onset of symptoms, with 72.7% of this group testing positive, while 80% (n=1187) were first tested
≥6 days of onset of symptoms, with 12.6% of this group testing positive.
The date of antibody testing was available for 1120 of 1172 participants who reported having an
antibody test, 26.3% (n=294) were first tested between 2 to 12 weeks of onset of symptoms and
42.1% of them tested positive, while 72.5% (n=812) were first tested ≥12 weeks from onset of
symptoms with 27.7% testing positive 1172 participants (46%) reported having an antibody test with
369 testing positive (31% of those tested). 820 participants (32%) reported having both a PCR and
antibody test of which 120 (15%) tested positive for both, 48 (6%) positive for PCR only and 122
(15%) positive for antibodies only. Overall, 5% (n=120) tested positive for both PCR and antibodies.
Out of the 168 participants who tested positive for PCR and had an antibody test, 29% tested

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

11

negative for antibodies. Out of the 652 participants who tested negative for PCR and had an
antibody test, 19% tested positive for antibodies (Supplementary Figure 1).
Those with lab confirmation of infection were more likely to be working full-time (45.3%) at the time
of responding to the survey than those who were not tested or tested negative (33.8%) (Table 6).
Those will lab confirmation had similar patterns of illness and ongoing symptom frequency to those
who tested negative or were not tested. The symptoms with the biggest difference between the two
groups were loss/altered smell or taste (Table 3). Participants with lab-confirmed infection were
more likely to report they had rested well in the first two weeks of the illness (60.4% vs 51.8%)
(Table 4), more likely to have had time off sick (71.7% vs 64.3%), less likely to experience loss of
income (33.3% vs 39.1%) (Table 6), and less likely to be unable to live alone at six weeks from onset
(28% vs 33.8%) (Table 5).
Clustering
Thirty-four symptoms were used in clustering for acute symptoms (Table 2) and 35 for ongoing
symptoms (Table 3). Clustering based on acute symptoms (initial symptoms experienced during the
first two weeks) identified two clusters as the optimal number of clusters (Supplementary Figure 2).
Acute symptom cluster (ASC) 1 consists of the majority of participants (88%, n= 2235) who exhibit
predominantly cardiopulmonary symptoms, while ASC2 consists of the remaining 12% (n= 305) who
exhibit multisystem symptoms (Supplementary Figure 3). On examining ongoing symptoms among
ASCs 1 and 2, we found that although the differences between the groups persisted, they became
less distinct primarily due to a large proportion of participants in ASC1 developing ongoing
symptoms of cognitive dysfunction in addition to the predominantly cardiopulmonary symptoms
over time.
On clustering participants based on ongoing symptoms, we once again identified two optimal
clusters (Figure 3), with ongoing symptom cluster (OSC) 1 predominantly including participants with
cardiopulmonary symptoms, neuro-cognitive symptoms, and exhaustion (n=2243, 88.8%); and OSC2,
a minority cluster, including multisystem ongoing symptoms (n=283, 11.2%). In univariate analysis,
membership of OCS2 was associated with worse fatigue (FSS) and PCFS scores; needing to take time
off sick; compromised ability to carry out self-care, domestic chores, care for other adults and
childcare, work, participate in leisure, or social activities; greater risk of losing employment or
needing to stop work (23% OSC2 vs 14% OSC1); and loss of income (52% OSC2 vs 36% OSC1).
Membership of OSC2 was also associated with having a pre-existing condition, poorer baseline
health, and greater healthcare usage with a higher number of GP consultations (6.1 OSC2 vs 4.7
OSC1) (Table 7).
Multivariate fully adjusted analysis showed that being female (OR=2.0, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.2, 3.4), poor baseline health (OR=3.4, 95% CI 1.2, 9.8), being a member of ACS2 (OR=2.5, 95% CI
1.7, 3.5), a higher number of acute symptoms related to different organ systems (OR=1.2, 95% CI
1.04, 1.31) were positively associated with membership of the more severe OCS2 cluster. Older age
(>60 years) (OR=0.35, 95% CI 0.19, 0.66), higher income (OR=0.85 per increase in income category,
95% CI 0.75, 0.95), and sufficient rest in the first two weeks of the illness (OR=0.68, 95% CI 0.46,
0.99) seemed to be protective against OCS2. OSC2 membership was not related to the duration since
onset of acute symptoms (Figure 4).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

12

In sensitivity analyses, we restricted to only participants who reported lab confirmation of infection.
On hierarchical clustering into two clusters, consistent with our clustering on the whole dataset, we
once again identified a majority cluster with cardiopulmonary, neurological symptoms, and
exhaustion dominating (n=576), and a minority multisystem cluster where symptoms related to all
systems were common (n=99) (Supplementary Figure 4). We found high correlation between
ongoing clusters identified with the whole dataset, and those identified when limiting data to only
those with lab confirmation (r=0.56, p<0.001).

Figure 3: Two clusters of ongoing symptoms and acute symptoms among these clusters

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

13

Figure 4: Adjusted associations with developing multisystem ongoing symptom cluster (OSC) 2

Transition between clusters
On examining the membership of acute symptom clusters by number of systems with at least one
symptom, we found that 98% of those in ASC2 had 5 or more systems involved compared with 56%
in ASC1. Even though acute symptom clustering strongly predicts ongoing symptom clusters, there is
movement between clusters. Of those in OSC2, 73% had 5 or more systems involved compared with
59% in the OSC1. Both clusters had more multisystem involvement during the acute infection phase
than the ongoing symptoms phase. Among 2223 participants clustering in ASC1, 9% (n=202) move
into OSC2 over time, suggesting increase in severity. Among 305 participants in ASC2, 27% (n=81)
remain in this cluster, with the remaining moving into OSC1, with cardiopulmonary, neurological,
and fatigue symptoms predominating. Movement from ASC1 into OSC2 appears to be dependent on
the number of organ system involvement, with those with more multisystem related symptoms
more likely to move into the more severe cluster (Supplementary Figure 5).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14

Multivariate analysis suggested that gender and age were both predictors of transition from ASC1 to
the more severe OSC2, with women being at higher risk (OR=1.8; 95% CI 1.1, 3.2), and participants
aged >60 years at lower risk (OR=0.30, 95% CI 0.14-0.65). Number of systems with at least one
associated symptom was also associated with higher likelihood of movement from ASC1 to OSC2
(OR=1.1, 95% CI 1.0, 1.3), while having a confirmed positive test (R=0.66, 95% CI 0.44, 0.99) and
having rested well during the first two weeks of the illness were associated with lower likelihood of
movement from ASC1 to OSC2 (OR=0.66, 95% CI 0.44, 0.99) (Supplementary Figure 6). Multivariate
analysis was adjusted for duration of illness which was not associated with transition from ASC1 to
OSC2. Month of infection was not included as a fixed effect in the analysis due to multi-collinearity
with duration of illness.

Discussion
Findings from this survey indicate that Long Covid is a debilitating multisystem illness for many of
those experiencing it. Despite 9 in 10 of participants reporting good, very good, or excellent health
before infection, a third said they were unable to live alone without assistance at six weeks from
onset. At an average of 7 months into Long Covid, 50% of participants said their illness affected selfcare, 64% said it affected their mental health, and 75% said it affected their work. The majority of
participants reported a fluctuating or relapsing/remitting pattern of illness. Two-thirds had to take
time off sick from work with over a third reporting loss of income due to their illness. The symptoms
of exhaustion, cognitive dysfunction, shortness of breath, headache, chest pressure/tightness, and
muscle aches predominated. 86% of participants had a score of 4 or above on the Fatigue Severity
Scale. For most participants, several of their initial symptoms became less prevalent with time, with
the stark exception of cognitive dysfunction and palpitations. However, for a minority of participants
who had extensive multisystem involvement from the start, many symptoms tended to become
more common with time.
Limitations
This is a non-representative survey which recruited through online support groups as well as
generally through social media. The survey sampling method was convenience non-probability
sampling. This means that the sample was not randomly drawn from the population of interest to
ensure representativeness, and therefore the findings cannot be generalised to the groups not
represented among participants, nor can they be used in any way to calculate the prevalence of
Long Covid. Respondents were predominantly White, female and of higher socioeconomic status.
People living with Long Covid who use social media (and therefore were able to access the survey)
could have different characteristics to those who do not use such platforms. Indeed, some of those
with Long Covid in the community who are suffering ill health may not realise it is due to Long Covid,
particularly if their infection was not lab-confirmed in the first place.
In relation to the finding that the majority of participants being women, there is some evidence that
Long Covid may be more common in women but not to the extent of the gender split seen in this
survey28. We tried to keep the survey as short as possible to be manageable, therefore some of the
details around baseline characteristics, such as body mass index which requires self-measurement,
were not collected. Although we asked about previous health status in general, we did not ascertain

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15

the prevalence/absence of each reported symptom before COVID-19. Given the variable severity
and disability levels among participants at the later stages of the illness, there is also the possibility
of recall bias in this survey, as the data about the acute stage was collected retrospectively. The
survey also aimed to collect data on those who have recovered from Long Covid and from short
acute COVID-19 to allow comparisons of the acute symptoms between the two groups. However,
the number of responses from these groups were too small to allow adequately powered
comparisons. This likely reflects the motivation of individuals with Long Covid to participate in
research which has Long Covid as its primary focus.
Just over a quarter of survey participants reported having evidence of lab confirmation of COVID-19.
However, the only pronounced differences in ongoing symptoms between those with lab
confirmation and those without were the symptoms of loss/alteration of smell/taste. This is
consistent with the other patient-led survey which included both confirmed and suspected cases of
COVID-1910. This difference can potentially be explained by people who have these symptoms being
more likely to seek testing due to being specific to COVID-19 and heavily advertised in public health
campaigns, as in the UK, unlike many of the other common symptoms. Before loss of small/taste
were added to the symptom lists, it could be that people experiencing them were more likely to seek
healthcare input and hence get a test early on in their illness. It is important to note that people who
reported testing negative were more likely to be tested much later in the illness than those who
tested positive, again a consistent finding with Davis et al10. Also, the limitations of test accuracy and
the importance of timing of testing (whether PCR or antibody) in relation to ascertaining SARS-CoV-2
infection are now well known29,30.
Patient involvement
A major strength of this survey is that it was co-produced with people with Long Covid (pwLC). The
idea for the survey came from pwLC and they were involved in the research from the initial
discussions to the writing of the manuscript. It was important for us to ask the questions that reflect
the main areas of concerns expressed by pwLC. NAA experienced Long Covid Symptoms and has
been a strong advocate of the recognition and measurement of the condition31 32,33. MEO and CH, as
well as experiencing Long Covid themselves, have a wide overview of the symptoms, disability,
disease course and concerns as expressed in the support groups and other national forums given
their extensive involvement in Long Covid advocacy. The survey questions also received wider input
from the members of the COVID-19 Facebook Research Involvement Group and went through
several rounds of reshaping based on all the feedback. We asked specific questions about the nature
of the illness including triggers of symptoms, effect on work and daily activities, and also attempted
to ascertain the acute symptoms pwLC experienced to explore how they are linked with ongoing
symptoms.
Although we list including suspected as well as lab-confirmed cases in the survey as a limitation, we
also consider this a strength of the survey. Community testing in the UK was stopped in early March
2020 but became available to essential workers in May 2020, and community testing was restarted
in late Spring/Summer 202024. It is vital that people who got infected in the first wave of the
pandemic and unable to access testing during the acute phase of their illness are included in
research. They represent a big proportion of people currently living with Long Covid, and have the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

16

longest duration of illness, making it essential for studies about disease progression and prognosis to
include them. We describe the differences and similarities between the groups (suspected and labconfirmed) in the results section and the tables, as well as conduct sensitivity analyses of symptom
clustering using the lab-confirmed subgroup only. However, we base our main findings on all survey
participants. We argue that those experiencing acute COVID-19 symptoms at a time of high national
prevalence of infection, and not recovered for months after their acute episode, are very likely to
have been infected with SARS-CoV-2 even if their access to lab testing was delayed or not possible at
the time.
Main findings and comparison to other data
Only 10% of survey participants reported less than good health prior to infection. The relapsing
(comes and goes) or fluctuating nature of the illness was a prominent feature in most participants,
but almost three quarters had daily symptoms. Many participants identified triggers for their
symptoms, including physical or cognitive activity, stress, sleep disturbance and domestic chores.
Avoiding the activities that trigger the symptoms mean adapting life routines accordingly. Some
people may have life circumstances and job types that allow them to do that while others may not,
leading to them feeling more unwell. This in turn has the potential to widen health and
socioeconomic inequalities.
Symptoms that were prevalent in the acute phase of the illness that were also common at the time
of survey completion included exhaustion, breathlessness, headache, and chest pressure and/or
tightness. We included separate questions about chest pain, chest pressure (heaviness) and chest
tightness. Chest pain was also common both as an initial and ongoing symptom. Anxiety was
reported by 28% and depression by 18% of participants. There are multiple reasons for anxiety in
Long Covid including the unknown nature and prognosis of the illness, not having a definitive
treatment, and the anxiety of not being believed by others including health professionals and
employers. Alteration or loss of taste and smell were not among the most common ongoing
symptoms in our survey, even in those with lab confirmation (21% and 24%), while sleep disturbance
was experienced by 38% of participants.
On clustering the ongoing symptoms, a minority cluster (OSC2: 11%) was detected with more
multisystem involvement than the majority of participants (OSC1). In adjusted analysis, reporting
sufficient rest during the first two weeks of the illness was associated with less likelihood of
belonging to this cluster. It was also associated with less likelihood of moving from ASC1 to OSC2.
Rest following acute infection is being recommended to prevent Long Covid34. However, taking
weeks to recuperate is not always a choice for people who have pressing work or caring
responsibilities, or those who are unable to take adequate sick leave because of limited employment
rights or financial difficulties.
We stratified all of our main finding by test positivity. Most characteristics were similar between
those who had lab confirmation and those who did not. A higher proportion of respondents who had
a positive test reported that they rested well in the first two weeks of infection (60% vs 52%). This
could be due to them recognising the seriousness of a COVID-19 illness having had a positive SARSCoV-2 test and dedicating more time and resources towards their recovery and recuperation. This
may in turn be linked to the finding that those who were lab-confirmed reported less functional

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

17

disability, and a lower proportion of them reported loss of income (33% vs 39%). However, a
considerable proportion of them were still severely functionally affected with 28% unable to live
alone without help, 59% unable to perform usual activities and duties, 87% avoiding certain activities
or duties at 6 weeks, and 28% with severe functional limitations. Additionally, the duration of loss of
income due to illness experienced was higher among those with no test confirmation. As the
majority of respondents reported still being ill at the time of completing the survey, this is likely to
increase. This may mean that those who had lab-confirmation had an advantage in terms of both
clinical recognition and for employment rights.
Descriptive findings from this survey on Long Covid are in line with findings from another online Long
Covid survey which included participants from 56 countries with a majority from the United States10 .
Both surveys found that Long Covid symptoms affect multiple organ systems, with fatigue and
cognitive dysfunction identified as the most common persistent symptoms. However, Davis et al
collected data on more symptoms and thus identified a higher number of organ system involvement.
Common triggers for return or exacerbation of symptoms were physical activity, cognitive activity,
and stress, though our survey also identified sleep disturbance as a common trigger.
A recent study in Denmark (preprint) following up 198 non-hospitalised PCR positive COVID-19
patients at 4 weeks and 129 at 12 weeks found similar findings to ours with fatigue and cognitive
symptoms being the most common. There were no major differences in the prevalence of symptoms
at these two time points other than loss of smell/taste being less common at 12 than 4 weeks from
onset. Women and people with higher body mass index were more likely to suffer from persistent
illness 16. Another US study (preprint) of mainly non-hospitalised PCR positive cases (n=357) found a
prevalence of symptoms of 36% after 30 days from onset and 15% at 90 days35. Although we asked
about previous health status in general, we did not ascertain the prevalence/absence of each
reported symptom before COVID-19 infection.
A study in the Faroe Islands of 180 mainly non-hospitalised PCR positive patients found that 20% had
three or more symptoms after an average follow up of around 4 months, with the most prevalent
symptoms being fatigue, loss of smell and taste and joint pains. In this study, they had a much higher
proportion of participants with ongoing symptoms compared to acute for most of the symptoms,
including fatigue5. We provide a detailed assessment of the variation of symptoms across the course
of the illness in Supplementary Table 3. Only 14% of our participants reported exhaustion as a new
symptom not observed in the first two weeks of the illness, while 36% reported brain fog, 31%
memory problems, and 27% poor concentration as symptoms they have not experienced in the first
two weeks of the illness. It is possible that these symptoms were experienced in the first two weeks
but because of the many other symptoms including fever, and people potentially being too ill to
conduct cognitive tasks that require concentration, these were not specifically identified or recalled.
A study which recruited confirmed and suspected COVID-19 cases from Facebook groups in the
Netherlands and Belgium found the average number of symptoms among non-hospitalised patients
was 14, compared to an average of 12 initial and 10 ongoing symptoms in our survey. The most
prevalent were similar to what we found including fatigue, shortness of breath, headache, and chest
tightness, however cognitive dysfunction symptoms were not ascertained as an item in their
questionnaire. These symptoms were included as open-text though not analysed36. In another paper

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18

from this study, it was reported that 52% of patients needed help with personal care more than two
months from onset of symptoms, compared to before infection (8%)37. In our survey, 32% reported
not being able to live alone without assistance at six weeks from onset of illness. At the time of
completing the survey, a similar proportion (50%) said being ill affected their ability to self-care.
Implications for research and practice
Many questions remain unanswered and require further research. Particular issues building on the
findings from this survey include further understanding disease progression and studying the
longitudinal clustering of symptoms and organ pathology. This is important to inform prognosis and
prediction of progression at an early stage of the illness, which will in turn inform intensity and
timing of appropriate interventions. The question of what pharmacological and non-pharmacological
treatments work to ‘cure’ Long Covid or to improve quality of life and prevent complications also
requires urgent research. The impact of Long Covid on disadvantaged socioeconomic and ethnic
minority groups needs to be quantified. Potential mechanisms explaining why certain age or
demographic groups may be more at risk need to be explored. Equitable, inclusive and effective
healthcare access is a fundamental right for all people living with Long Covid and must be
systematically modelled to ensure services do not contribute to widening health disparities.
Long Covid studies based on both surveys and clinical records are needed as they complement each
other. There is an assumption that Long Covid studies based on recruitment from primary care, Long
Covid clinics, or clinical records data are unbiased compared to community surveys. However,
although this assumption may be justified for other more established medical conditions, it does not
necessarily apply to Long Covid. Currently, healthcare access for Long Covid depends on many
factors that may render healthcare research selective and unrepresentative. These include whether
the person was tested or not, hospitalised or not, and their awareness that their own ill health may
be linked to SARS-CoV-2 infection. This in turn, among other sociodemographic factors, will influence
their health seeking behaviour. Also, clinicians’ own variation in diagnosis and cognitive biases in the
absence of objective guidelines on case definitions can play a part in who gets a diagnosis and gets
coded in the medical records as Long Covid. Therefore, future applied research needs to triangulate
the findings from representative community-based surveys, healthcare studies and qualitative
research of patients’ lived experiences.
The prevalence of Long Covid remains uncertain and dependent on the case definitions used and the
duration of follow up. However, we know at this stage that it is not uncommon, including those
whose infection was considered ‘mild’. The number of cases will continue to increase if the virus
continues to spread, therefore the issue of Long Covid and the impact it causes in terms of illness
and disability is vital to pandemic and public health policy. This research demonstrates the impact of
this prolonged illness on daily activities, work, physical, and mental health in a sample of
predominantly healthy working-age individuals prior to infection. We explore how the acute
symptoms are linked to the ongoing symptoms as a first step to help us characterise subgroups
within the Long Covid umbrella. Long Covid is clearly a multisystem disease, and individuals
experiencing it must be able to receive care from a co-ordinated multidisciplinary team. The current
model of Long Covid clinics in the UK will only be successful if there are clear, inclusive, and
equitable referral pathways and case definitions, and if effective and appropriately-resourced clinical
input, investigations, treatments, and evidence-based rehabilitation become available.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

19

Acknowledgements
We thank all participants for their time and commitment completing this survey. We also sincerely
thank members of the COVID-19 Research Involvement Group for providing feedback on earlier
versions of the questionnaire.
Author contributions
Co-production of survey questions (NAA, NZ, CH, MEO, GY), survey design and administration (NAA,
NZ), data management (NZ), statistical analysis (NZ, DG), manuscript first draft (NAA, NZ, DG),
interpretation of results, input on draft, and approval of final version (all).
Funding
The study received no specific funding.
References:
1.
Nabavi N. Long covid: How to define it and how to manage it. BMJ. 2020;370.
doi:10.1136/bmj.m3489
2.

Callard F, Perego E. How and why patients made Long Covid. Social Science & Medicine.
2021;268:113426. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.113426

3.

Perego E, Callard F, Stras L, Melville-Jóhannesson B, Pope R, Alwan NA. Why the Patient-Made
Term “Long Covid” is needed. Wellcome Open Res. 2020;5:224.
doi:10.12688/wellcomeopenres.16307.1

4.

Nehme M, Braillard O, Alcoba G, et al. COVID-19 Symptoms: Longitudinal Evolution and
Persistence in Outpatient Settings. Ann Intern Med. Published online December 8, 2020.
doi:10.7326/M20-5926

5.

Petersen MS, Kristiansen MF, Hanusson KD, et al. Long COVID in the Faroe Islands - a
longitudinal study among non-hospitalized patients. Clinical Infectious Diseases.
2020;(ciaa1792). doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1792

6.

Altmann D, Boyton R. Confronting the pathophysiology of long covid. The BMJ. Published
December 9, 2020. Accessed March 10, 2021.
https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/12/09/confronting-the-pathophysiology-of-long-covid/

7.

Puntmann VO, Carerj ML, Wieters I, et al. Outcomes of Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance
Imaging in Patients Recently Recovered From Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). JAMA
Cardiology. Published online July 27, 2020. doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2020.3557

8.

Long-term Health Consequences of COVID-19 | Cardiology | JAMA | JAMA Network. Accessed
October 22, 2020. https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2771581/

9.

Dennis A, Wamil M, Kapur S, et al. Multi-organ impairment in low-risk individuals with long
COVID. medRxiv. Published online October 16, 2020:2020.10.14.20212555.
doi:10.1101/2020.10.14.20212555

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

20

10.

Davis HE, Assaf GS, McCorkell L, et al. Characterizing Long COVID in an International Cohort: 7
Months of Symptoms and Their Impact. medRxiv. Published online December 27,
2020:2020.12.24.20248802. doi:10.1101/2020.12.24.20248802

11.

Huang Y, Pinto MD, Borelli JL, et al. COVID Symptoms, Symptom Clusters, and Predictors for
Becoming a Long-Hauler: Looking for Clarity in the Haze of the Pandemic. medRxiv. Published
online March 5, 2021:2021.03.03.21252086. doi:10.1101/2021.03.03.21252086

12.

Ladds E, Rushforth A, Wieringa S, et al. Persistent symptoms after Covid-19: qualitative study
of 114 “long Covid” patients and draft quality principles for services. BMC Health Services
Research. 2020;20(1):1144. doi:10.1186/s12913-020-06001-y

13.

Kingstone T, Taylor AK, O’Donnell CA, Atherton H, Blane DN, Chew-Graham CA. Finding the
“right” GP: a qualitative study of the experiences of people with long-COVID. BJGP Open.
Published online October 14, 2020. doi:10.3399/bjgpopen20X101143

14.

Prevalence of long COVID symptoms and COVID-19 complications - Office for National
Statistics. Accessed December 18, 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/healthandlifee
xpectancies/datasets/prevalenceoflongcovidsymptomsandcovid19complications

15.

Coronavirus (COVID-19) Infection Survey, UK Statistical bulletins - Office for National Statistics.
Accessed December 18, 2020.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/conditionsand
diseases/bulletins/coronaviruscovid19infectionsurveypilot/previousReleases

16.

Bliddal S, Banasik K, Pedersen OB, et al. Acute and persistent symptoms in non-hospitalized
PCR-confirmed COVID-19 patients. medRxiv. Published online January 25,
2021:2021.01.22.21249945. doi:10.1101/2021.01.22.21249945

17.

Carfì A, Bernabei R, Landi F. Persistent Symptoms in Patients After Acute COVID-19. JAMA.
2020;324(6):603-605. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.12603

18.

Lu Y, Li X, Geng D, et al. Cerebral Micro-Structural Changes in COVID-19 Patients – An MRIbased 3-month Follow-up Study. EClinicalMedicine. 2020;25.
doi:10.1016/j.eclinm.2020.100484

19.

Wong AW, Shah AS, Johnston JC, Carlsten C, Ryerson CJ. Patient-reported outcome measures
after COVID-19: a prospective cohort study. European Respiratory Journal. Published online
January 1, 2020. doi:10.1183/13993003.03276-2020

20.

Bergamaschi L, Mescia F, Turner L, et al. Early immune pathology and persistent dysregulation
characterise severe COVID-19. medRxiv. Published online January 15,
2021:2021.01.11.20248765. doi:10.1101/2021.01.11.20248765

21.

Michelen M, Manoharan L, Elkheir N, et al. Characterising long-term covid-19: a rapid living
systematic review. medRxiv. Published online December 9, 2020:2020.12.08.20246025.
doi:10.1101/2020.12.08.20246025

22.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. COVID-19 rapid guideline: managing the
long-term effects of COVID-19 | Guidance | NICE. Accessed December 18, 2020.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng188

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

21

23.

Alwan N, Johnson L. Long COVID: where do we start with the case definitions? Published online
December 21, 2020. doi:10.31219/osf.io/hndtm

24.

Iacobucci G. Covid-19: Lack of capacity led to halting of community testing in March, admits
deputy chief medical officer. BMJ. 2020;369:m1845. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1845

25.

Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir-Nash J, Steinberg AD. The Fatigue Severity Scale: Application to
Patients With Multiple Sclerosis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus. Archives of Neurology.
1989;46(10):1121-1123. doi:10.1001/archneur.1989.00520460115022

26.

Klok FA, Boon GJ a. M, Barco S, et al. The Post-COVID-19 Functional Status (PCFS) Scale: a tool
to measure functional status over time after COVID-19. European Respiratory Journal.
Published online January 1, 2020. doi:10.1183/13993003.01494-2020

27.

Valko PO, Bassetti CL, Bloch KE, Held U, Baumann CR. Validation of the Fatigue Severity Scale in
a Swiss Cohort. Sleep. 2008;31(11):1601-1607. doi:10.1093/sleep/31.11.1601

28.

Updated estimates of the prevalence of long COVID symptoms - Office for National Statistics.
Accessed February 16, 2021.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/healthandlifee
xpectancies/adhocs/12788updatedestimatesoftheprevalenceoflongcovidsymptoms

29.

Ward H, Cooke G, Atchison C, et al. Declining prevalence of antibody positivity to SARS-CoV-2:
a community study of 365,000 adults. medRxiv. Published online October 27,
2020:2020.10.26.20219725. doi:10.1101/2020.10.26.20219725

30.

Miller TE, Beltran WFG, Bard AZ, et al. Clinical sensitivity and interpretation of PCR and
serological COVID-19 diagnostics for patients presenting to the hospital. The FASEB Journal.
2020;34(10):13877-13884. doi:10.1096/fj.202001700RR

31.

Alwan NA. A negative COVID-19 test does not mean recovery. Nature. 2020;584(7820):170170. doi:10.1038/d41586-020-02335-z

32.

Alwan NA. Nisreen Alwan: We must pay more attention to covid-19 morbidity in the second
year of the pandemic. The BMJ. Published February 3, 2021. Accessed February 7, 2021.
https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2021/02/03/nisreen-alwan-we-must-pay-more-attention-to-covid19-morbidity-in-the-second-year-of-the-pandemic/

33.

Alwan NA. Nisreen A Alwan: What exactly is mild covid-19? BMJ Opinion. Published July 28,
2020. Accessed August 12, 2020. https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2020/07/28/nisreen-a-alwanwhat-exactly-is-mild-covid-19/

34.

Energy Envelope and prevention: Dr David Strain interview https://t.co/0Y9qn9NLeW.
@ABrokenBattery. Published February 25, 2021. Accessed March 20, 2021.
https://twitter.com/ABrokenBattery/status/1365066849692635138

35.

Cirulli E, Barrett KMS, Riffle S, et al. Long-term COVID-19 symptoms in a large unselected
population. medRxiv. Published online October 11, 2020:2020.10.07.20208702.
doi:10.1101/2020.10.07.20208702

36.

Goërtz YMJ, Herck MV, Delbressine JM, et al. Persistent symptoms 3 months after a SARS-CoV2 infection: the post-COVID-19 syndrome? ERJ Open Research. 2020;6(4).
doi:10.1183/23120541.00542-2020

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

22

37.

Vaes AW, Machado FVC, Meys R, et al. Care Dependency in Non-Hospitalized Patients with
COVID-19. Journal of Clinical Medicine. 2020;9(9):2946. doi:10.3390/jcm9092946

Figure legends:
Figure 1: Frequency of reported ongoing symptoms in survey participants (n=2526)
Figure 2: Reasons for change in work pattern in those reporting reduced work hours (n=243), being
unable to work (n = 478) or being made redundant/taking early retirement (n-47) (total n= 768)
Figure 3: Two clusters of ongoing symptoms and acute symptoms among these clusters
Figure 4: Adjusted associations with developing multisystem ongoing symptom cluster (OSC) 2
Supplementary Figure 1: Reported SARS-CoV-2 testing history in survey participants
Supplementary Figure 2: Silhouette coefficient for 2 to 10 clusters
Supplementary Figure 3: Two clusters of acute symptoms and ongoing symptoms among these
clusters
Supplementary Figure 4: Clustering of confirmed positive data only identifies similar clusters to
whole dataset
Supplementary Figure 5: Transition from acute symptom cluster to ongoing symptom clusters by
number of systems affected by symptoms
Supplementary Figure 6: Mutually adjusted predictors of transition from acute symptom cluster 1
(ASC1: cardiopulmonary predominant) to ongoing symptom cluster 2 (OSC2: multisystem)

Table legends
Table 1: Demographics and baseline health of survey participants
Table 2: Initial symptoms experienced at the start of COVID-19 illness (first two weeks)
Table 3: Ongoing symptoms, fatigue severity and organ systems affected
Table 4: Duration, pattern and triggers of illness
Table 5: Functional ability of study participants
Table 6: Employment status and impact of illness on work
Table 7: Correlates of Ongoing symptom clusters (n=2526)
Supplementary Table 1: Classification of ongoing symptoms by organ system
Supplementary Table 2: Pre-existing conditions in survey participants
Supplementary Table 3: Symptoms categorised by phase of illness
Supplementary Table 4: Duration and pattern of illness in those who reported full recovery from
Long Covid

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

23

Table 1: Demographics and baseline health of survey participants
Full sample

Total n
Age, years (mean ± SD) (n= 2543)
Age, categorised
18-30
31-45
46-60
≥60
Gender (n=2547)
Male
Female
Non-binary
Prefer not to say
Other
Country (n=2523)
UK - England
UK - Scotland
UK - Wales
UK - Northern Ireland
Outside the UK
Africa
Australia and New Zealand
Europe
South/Central America and
Caribbean
North America
Asia
Middle East
Ethnicity (n=2533)
White
Mixed/Multiple ethnic backgrounds
Asian
Black/African/Caribbean
Other
Prefer not to say
Educational attainment (n=2527)
No formal qualifications
O levels or equivalent
A levels or equivalent
University degree or above
Smoking status (n=2537)
Non-smoker
Ex-smoker
Current smoker
Alcohol intake in the 12 months before
COVID-19 (n=2539)
Do not drink
Did not drink in the past year
<Once a month
Once a month
Few times a month
1-3 times a week
4-6 times a week
Everyday
Baseline health before COVID-19 (n=2540)
Poor
Fair
Good
Very good
Excellent
Pre-existing health conditions (n=2541)
No
Yes

n
2550
46.5 ±
11.0

%

189
997
1051
306

Tested positive

Tested negative or
not tested
n
%
1793
46.6 ±
10.8

p-value*

n
675
45.3 ±
10.9

%

7.4
38.2
41.3
12.0

68
271
275
60

10.1
40.2
40.8
8.9

118
712
741
217

6.6
39.8
41.4
12.1

0.006

413
2108
21
3
2

16.2
82.8
0.8
0.1
0.1

101
572
1
1
-

15.0
84.7
0.2
0.2
-

290
1477
20
2
2

16.2
82.5
1.1
0.1
0.1

0.22

1665
215
114
22
507
18
15
210
10

66.0
8.5
4.5
0.9
20.1
0.7
0.6
8.3
0.4

410
34
23
6
194
16
7
60
5

61.5
5.1
3.4
0.9
29.1
2.4
1.0
9.0
0.7

1203
176
85
15
302
2
8
145
5

67.5
9.9
4.8
0.8
17.0
0.1
0.4
8.1
0.3

<0.001

232
15
7

9.2
0.6
0.3

93
7
6

13.9
1.0
0.9

133
8
1

7.5
0.4
0.1

2362
67
64
23
14
3

93.3
2.7
2.5
0.9
0.6
0.1

607
18
25
15
7
-

90.3
2.7
3.7
2.2
1.0
-

1688
47
36
8
7
3

94.4
2.6
2.0
0.5
0.4
0.2

<0.001

37
209
331
1950

1.5
8.3
13.1
77.2

11
57
79
520

1.7
8.6
11.8
78.0

24
145
236
1381

1.3
8.1
13.2
77.3

0.76

1577
692
268

62.2
27.3
10.6

424
184
66

62.9
27.3
9.8

1103
489
197

61.7
27.3
11.0

0.67

91
254
452
210
514
708
245
65

3.6
10.0
17.8
8.3
20.2
27.9
9.7
2.6

35
50
137
62
135
186
55
14

5.2
7.4
20.3
9.2
20.0
27.6
8.2
2.1

54
192
306
144
368
498
182
47

3.0
10.7
17.1
8.0
20.6
27.8
10.2
2.6

0.01

32
233
675
1050
550

1.3
9.2
26.6
41.3
21.7

3
53
199
277
142

0.5
7.9
29.5
41.1
21.1

27
172
462
749
382

1.5
9.6
25.8
41.8
21.3

0.07

1339
1202

52.7
47.3

337
338

49.9
50.1

965
828

53.8
46.2

0.08

0.01

*Comparisons between those with lab-confirmed COVID-19 and those who were not used t-test for continuous and chi square test for categorical variables.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

24

Table 2: Initial symptoms experienced at the start of COVID-19 illness (first two weeks)
Full sample

n
Fever
Cough
Altered or loss of sense of smell
Altered or loss of sense of taste
Abdominal pain
Diarrhoea
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Vomiting
Cognitive dysfunction
Brain fog
Confusion
Memory problems
Poor concentration
Depression
Chest pain
Chest pressure
Chest tightness
Palpitations
Shortness of breath
Chills
Dizziness
Exhaustion
Headache
Hoarse voice
Nasal symptoms
Sore throat
Sneezing
Tinnitus
Joint pain
Leg pain
Muscle aches
Pins and needles
Skin rash
Sleep disturbance
Number of initial symptoms, mean ± SD,
median (interquartile range)

n
2540
1298
1485
922
921
562
855
946
642
148
1168
797
539
475
730
187
991
1314
1379
754
1566
1296
1079
1928
1663
653
717
1161
242
339
890
573
1402
388
289
909

%
51.1
58.5
36.3
36.3
22.1
33.7
37.2
25.3
5.8
46.0
31.4
21.2
18.7
28.7
7.4
39.0
51.7
54.3
29.7
61.7
51.0
42.5
75.9
65.5
25.7
28.2
45.7
9.5
13.4
35.0
22.6
55.2
15.3
11.4
35.8

12 ± 6
11 (7 to 16)

Tested positive

n
675
362
399
410
388
150
235
293
176
47
315
226
137
152
198
57
239
323
338
215
405
359
304
514
480
156
231
291
85
104
290
179
425
109
81
243

%
53.6
59.1
60.7
57.5
22.2
34.8
43.4
26.1
7.0
46.7
33.5
20.3
22.5
29.3
8.4
35.4
47.9
50.1
31.9
60.0
53.2
45.0
76.2
71.1
23.1
34.2
43.1
12.6
15.4
43.0
26.5
63.0
16.2
12.0
36.0

13 ± 6
12 (8 to 17)

Tested negative or
not tested
n
%
1793
893
49.8
1037
57.8
487
27.2
510
28.4
402
22.4
601
33.5
624
34.8
451
25.2
99
5.5
822
45.8
550
30.7
385
21.5
311
17.4
516
28.8
126
7.0
728
40.6
967
53.9
1016
56.7
521
29.1
1121
62.5
910
50.8
738
41.2
1367
76.2
1138
63.5
482
26.9
466
26.0
837
46.7
148
8.3
217
12.1
584
32.6
370
20.6
936
52.2
263
14.7
198
11.0
638
35.6
12 ± 6
11 (7 to 15)

p-value*

0.09
0.57
<0.001
<0.001
0.92
0.54
<0.001
0.64
0.17
0.72
0.18
0.52
0.003
0.79
0.23
0.02
0.007
0.003
0.18
0.25
0.28
0.08
0.96
<0.001
0.06
<0.001
0.11
0.001
0.03
<0.001
0.002
<0.001
0.36
0.50
0.85
<0.001

*Comparisons between those with lab-confirmed COVID-19 and those who were not used t-test or Mann Whitney U for continuous and chi square test for
categorical variables.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25

Table 3: Ongoing symptoms, fatigue severity and organ systems affected
Full sample

n
Ongoing symptoms
Fever
Cough
Altered or loss of sense of smell
Altered or loss of sense of taste
Abdominal pain
Diarrhoea
Loss of appetite
Nausea
Vomiting
Anxiety
Cognitive dysfunction
Brain fog
Confusion
Memory problems
Poor concentration
Depression
Chest pain
Chest pressure
Chest tightness
Palpitations
Shortness of breath
Chills
Dizziness
Exhaustion
Headache
Hoarse voice
Nasal symptoms
Sore throat
Sneezing
Tinnitus
Joint pain
Leg pain
Muscle aches
Pins and needles
Skin rash
Sleep disturbance
Number of ongoing symptoms, mean ±
SD, median (interquartile range)
Fatigue Severity Scale score, mean ± SD
(n=2000)
Score ≥4 %
Number of organ systems affected
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Organ systems affected by symptoms
Gastrointestinal
Chest (cardiopulmonary)
Neurological
Systemic
Nose/Throat
Pain
Skin

Tested positive

n
2526

%

n
675

%

217
587
358
313
427
398
283
412
46
715
1747
1490
520
1094
1138
397
891
970
1023
1062
1370
373
980
1834
1161
453
471
591
188
662
950
668
1126
667
299
952

8.6
23.3
14.2
12.4
16.9
15.8
11.2
16.3
1.8
28.3
69.2
59.0
20.6
43.3
45.1
15.7
35.3
38.4
40.5
42.0
54.2
14.8
38.8
72.6
46.0
17.9
18.7
23.4
7.4
26.2
37.6
26.4
44.6
26.4
11.8
37.7

46
158
165
141
97
95
69
90
9
213
480
427
145
294
304
106
214
263
247
270
370
77
256
494
320
103
110
128
37
159
252
184
303
156
73
241

6.8
23.4
24.4
20.9
14.4
14.1
10.2
13.3
1.3
31.6
71.1
63.3
21.5
43.6
45.0
15.7
31.7
39.0
36.6
40.0
54.8
11.4
37.9
73.2
47.4
15.3
16.3
19.0
5.5
23.6
37.3
27.3
44.9
23.1
10.8
35.7

10 ± 6
9 (5 to 14)
5.5 ± 1.4

10 ± 6
9 (5 to 13)
5.5 ± 1.4

86

Tested negative or
not tested
n
%
1792
167
413
183
164
319
293
210
315
37
493
1232
1034
363
777
814
283
656
695
752
774
977
286
703
1298
827
342
353
454
146
477
681
472
795
501
217
691

9.3
23.1
10.2
9.2
17.8
16.4
11.7
17.6
2.1
27.5
68.8
57.7
20.3
43.4
45.4
15.8
36.6
38.8
42.0
43.2
54.5
16.0
39.2
72.4
46.2
19.1
19.7
25.3
8.2
26.6
38.0
26.3
44.4
28.0
12.1
38.6

10 ± 6
9 (5 to 14)
5.5 ± 1.4

84

p-value*

0.05
0.85
<0.001
<0.001
0.04
0.17
0.30
0.01
0.23
0.05
0.26
0.01
0.50
0.93
0.86
0.96
0.02
0.94
0.02
0.15
0.90
0.004
0.55
0.71
0.56
0.03
0.05
0.001
0.02
0.12
0.76
0.65
0.82
0.02
0.37
0.19
0.49
0.38

86

121
253
437
623
551
380
119

4.8
10.0
17.3
24.7
21.8
15.0
4.7

29
81
120
185
145
77
29

4.3
12.0
17.8
27.4
21.5
11.4
4.3

91
164
308
421
393
295
88

5.1
9.2
17.2
23.5
21.9
16.5
4.9

0.02

909
2070
2164
2035
1036
1785
299

36.0
82.0
85.7
80.6
41.0
70.7
11.8

220
552
582
541
232
481
73

32.6
81.8
86.2
80.2
34.4
71.3
10.8

666
1471
1530
1445
788
1261
217

37.2
82.1
85.4
80.6
44.0
70.4
12.1

0.04
0.86
0.60
0.79
<0.001
0.67
0.37

*Comparisons used t-test or Mann Whitney U for continuous variables and chi square test for categorical variables.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

26

Table 4: Duration, pattern and triggers of illness

Full sample

Total n
Well rested in first two weeks of illness
(n=2536)
No
Yes
Less than I would have liked
Not sure
Back to baseline health (n=2538)
No, still symptomatic
No, but not symptomatic
Yes
Duration of illness, weeks (mean ± SD)
(n=2518)
Duration of illness, months (mean ± SD)
Pattern of illness (n=2519)
Constant throughout
Gradually got worse
Gradually got better
Fluctuating
Comes and goes
Relapsing
Symptom frequency (n=2511)
Daily
>3 times a week
Once a week
Once a fortnight
Once a month
<Once a month
Daily and reduced over time
Episodic
Variable
Triggers for return or exacerbation of
symptoms (n=2474)
Physical Activity
Diet
Hormonal
Cognitive activity
Work
Social activity
Stress
Time of day
Sleep disturbance
Domestic chores
Caring responsibilities
Unknown
Other - Talking
Other - Posture
Exhaustion improves on rest (n=2332)
No
Yes
Sometimes
Exhaustion caused by exertion
(exercise/work) only (n=2343)
No
Yes
Sometimes
Do not know

Tested positive

Tested negative or
not tested
n
%
1793

p-value*

Overall n
2550

%

n
675

%

437
1376
658
65

17.2
54.3
26.0
2.6

98
407
154
15

14.5
60.4
22.9
2.2

326
928
489
49

18.2
51.8
27.3
2.7

0.002

1971
509
58
31.3 ±
7.9
7.2 ± 1.8

77.7
20.1
2.3

531
130
14
26.9 ±
10.6
6.2 ± 2.4

78.7
19.3
2.1

1383
369
41
33.0 ±
5.7
7.6 ± 1.3

77.1
20.6
2.3

0.72

146
273
201
1454
394
51

5.8
10.8
8.0
57.7
15.6
2.0

43
69
63
394
96
9

6.4
10.2
9.3
58.5
14.2
1.3

97
201
130
1033
284
41

5.4
11.3
7.3
57.8
15.9
2.3

0.26

1827
425
95
50
32
20
21
34
7

72.8
16.9
3.8
2.0
1.3
0.8
0.8
1.4
0.3

485
126
24
7
6
9
6
8
1

72.2
18.8
3.6
1.0
0.9
1.3
0.9
1.2
0.2

1290
295
70
43
26
11
15
26
6

72.4
16.6
3.9
2.4
1.5
0.6
0.8
1.5
0.3

0.19

1911
454
582
1045
705
713
1364
573
1161
866
411
404
30
18

77.2
18.4
23.5
42.2
28.5
28.8
55.1
23.2
46.9
35.0
16.6
15.8
1.2
0.7

500
90
138
281
206
180
332
143
287
213
91
123
5
2

75.8
13.6
20.9
42.6
31.2
27.3
50.3
21.7
43.5
32.3
13.8
18.2
0.8
0.3

1364
351
438
743
485
516
994
412
847
632
307
275
23
15

77.6
20.0
24.9
42.3
27.6
29.4
56.6
23.5
48.2
36.0
17.5
15.3
1.3
0.8

0.33
<0.001
0.04
0.90
0.08
0.31
0.006
0.35
0.04
0.09
0.03
0.08
0.26
0.15

317
823
1192

13.6
35.3
51.1

99
222
310

15.7
35.2
49.1

208
582
855

12.6
35.4
52.0

0.26

1415
241
506
181

60.4
10.3
21.6
7.7

384
62
135
51

60.8
9.8
21.4
8.1

1006
174
352
122

60.8
10.5
21.3
7.4

0.96

<0.001
<0.001

*Comparisons between those with lab-confirmed COVID-19 and those who were not used t-test for continuous and chi square test for categorical variables.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

27

Table 5: Functional ability of study participants

Full sample

Total n
Post-COVID-19 Functional Status Scale
components at 6 weeks from start of
symptoms
Unable to live alone (n=2499)
Unable to perform
activities/duties (n=2525)
Suffer from symptoms, depression,
pain or anxiety (n=2538)
Avoid activities/duties (n=2486)
Post-COVID-19 Functional Status Scale at
6 weeks from start of symptoms
(n=2498)
No functional limitations
Negligible functional limitations
Slight functional limitations
Moderate functional limitations
Severe functional limitations
At the time of survey completion, being
ill affected (n=2478):
Self-care
Childcare
Caring for other adults
Domestic chores
Work
Leisure activities
Social activities
Mental health

Tested positive

Tested negative or
not tested
n
%
1793

p-value*

n
2550

%

n
675

%

808
1627

32.3
64.4

187
397

28.0
58.8

599
1191

33.8
66.4

0.006
<0.001

2521

99.3

670

99.3

1782

99.4

0.73

2224

89.5

574

86.7

1602

90.4

0.008
0.01

17
242
588
871
808

0.7
9.6
23.3
34.5
32.0

5
79
178
226
187

0.7
11.7
26.4
33.5
27.7

11
158
403
622
599

0.6
8.8
22.5
34.7
33.4

1238
887
646
2088
1857
2101
1911
1579

50.0
35.8
26.1
84.3
74.9
84.8
77.1
63.7

282
221
166
531
517
537
491
433

42.3
33.2
24.9
79.7
77.6
80.6
73.7
65.0

928
650
461
1517
1324
1525
1383
1122

52.5
36.8
26.1
85.8
74.9
86.3
78.2
63.5

*Comparisons between those with lab-confirmed COVID-19 and those who were not used chi square test for categorical variables.

<0.001
0.10
0.56
<0.001
0.16
<0.001
0.02
0.48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

28

Table 6: Employment status and impact of illness on work
Full sample

Total n
Employment status at time of
survey completion (n=2507)
Working full-time
Working part-time
Furloughed
Working reduced hours
Unemployed/Looking for work
Unpaid (Volunteer, Carer)
Student
Homemaker
Unable to work
Made redundant/took early
retirement
Retired
Off sick
Lost job or had/chose to stop work
(n=2483)
No
No but was furloughed
Yes
Had time off sick (n=2484)
No
No but was furloughed
Yes
Time off sick, days (median, IQR)
(n=1564)
Loss of income due to COVID-19
illness (n=2479)
No
Yes
Days income lost/too ill to work
(median, IQR) (n= 622)

Tested positive

Tested negative/not
tested
n
%
1793

p-value*

n
2550

%

n
675

%

919
340
58
243
45
14
61
101
478
47

36.7
13.6
2.3
9.7
1.8
0.6
2.4
4.0
19.1
1.9

306
72
9
65
9
3
20
16
133
6

45.3
10.7
1.3
9.6
1.3
0.4
3.0
2.4
19.7
0.9

606
265
47
176
36
11
41
79
342
39

33.8
14.8
2.6
9.8
2.0
0.6
2.3
4.4
19.1
2.2

155
46

6.2
1.8

27
9

4.0
1.3

115
36

6.4
2.0

1947
165
371

78.4
6.7
14.9

562
25
83

83.9
3.7
12.4

1362
136
284

76.4
7.6
15.9

<0.001

709
126
1649
60
20 to 129

28.5
5.1
66.4

171
20
484
54
22 to 129

25.3
3.0
71.7

535
105
1153
60
20 to 129

29.8
5.9
64.3

<0.001

1548
931
120
50 to 172

62.4
37.6

450
225
84
30 to 151

66.7
33.3

1092
701
129
60 to 172

60.9
39.1

0.008

<0.001

0.56

<0.001

*Comparisons between those with lab-confirmed COVID-19 and those who were not used t-test or Mann Whitney U for continuous and chi square test for
categorical variables.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.21.21253968; this version posted March 27, 2021. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

29

Table 7: Correlates of Ongoing symptom clusters (n=2526)
Characteristic*
Age (mean)
Gender (Male)
Fatigue Severity Scale Score
Post COVID-19 Functional Scale Score (PCFS)
Duration of illness, days
Number of A&E visits
Number of GP consultations
Number of hospital out-patient appointments
Number of days off sick
Number of days of income lost
Pre-existing health conditions (Yes)
Alcohol consumption in 12 months before COVID-19 infection
Do not drink
Did not drink in the past year
<Once a month
Once a month
Few times a month
1-3 times a week
4-6 times a week
Everyday
Self-reported health before COVID-19 infection
Poor
Fair
Good
Very good
Excellent
Being ill affected
Self-care
Childcare
Caring for other adults
Domestic chores
Work
Leisure activities
Social activities
Mental health
Hospitalisation for treatment of Long Covid symptoms
No
Ward – day stay
Ward – overnight stay
High dependency unit
Intensive care unit
Ambulatory care
Lost job or had/chose to stop work
No
No but was furloughed
Yes
Had time off sick
No
No but was furloughed
Yes
Loss of income due to COVID-19 illness
No
Yes

Ongoing symptom
cluster (OSC) 1
46.60
17
5.36
2.82
219.73
0.74
4.71
1.74
74.84
109.97
46

Ongoing symptom
cluster (OSC) 2
44.87
7
6.30
3.29
221.29
0.90
6.10
2.08
88.77
136.88
60

3
10
17
8
20
29
10
3

5
11
26
9
22
20
7
1

1
9
26
42
23

4
15
33
35
14

47
34
24
83
74
84
75
62

75
43
42
97
84
94
91
79

88
5
7
0
0
0

83
9
5
2
0
0

80
6
14

69
8
23

30
5
65

18
5
77

64
36

48
52

p-value**
0.01
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.65
0.07
<0.001
0.03
0.004
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

<0.001

<0.001
0.002
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001

<0.001

<0.001

<0.001

*Summary statistics are expressed as means for continuous variables and percentages for categorical variables.
**Categorical variables were compared using the chi2 test and continuous variables were compared by regressing the variable on cluster number.

