Remote activation of biomolecules in deep
tissues using near-infrared-to-UV
upconversion nanotransducers
Muthu Kumara Gnanasammandhan Jayakumara, Niagara Muhammad Idrisa, and Yong Zhanga,b,1
a
Department of Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576; and bGraduate School for Integrative
Sciences and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117456

Edited by David A. Tirrell, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, and approved March 29, 2012 (received for review September 6, 2011)

siRNA ∣ mesoporous silica ∣ uncaging

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

P

hotocaging involves the caging of molecules of interest by a
light-sensitive molecule which can then be destroyed by light
irradiation to make it functional. Various molecules, like proteins, peptides, nucleic acids, amino acids, and drugs, have been
photocaged and delivered to the cells/animals, and photolysis
is done in the area of interest, enabling activation of these
molecules with very high spatial and temporal resolution (1–7).
Unfortunately, most of these current photoactivable systems are
only suitable for in vitro applications because UV light necessary
for the uncaging process is very harmful, besides having a poor
tissue penetration depth, which made it unacceptable for in vivo
and clinical use. Near-infrared (NIR) light has the deepest tissue
penetration compared to visible and UV light (8, 9). It is also safe
and is expected to cause minimal photodamage to the biological
specimen involved. However, to bridge this gap, a transducer
which is capable of converting NIR light to UV light is required.
Converting high-energy UV light to visible light and NIR light
is done by various materials; however, the opposite process where
low-energy NIR light is converted to visible or UV light is restricted to few rare earth materials which show a unique property
called upconversion. These upconversion nanoparticles are
usually made of host lattices of ceramic materials, such as LaF3 ,
YF3 , Y2 O3 , LaPO4 , NaYF4 embedded with trivalent lanthanide
ions like Yb 3þ , Er 3þ , and Tm 3þ and show a unique phenomenon
of absorbing NIR light and emitting UV, visible, and NIR light
(10). There are a few reports exploiting NIR-to-NIR and NIRto-visible upconversion nanoparticles (UCNs) (11–14); however,
the use of NIR-to-UV UCNs is minimally explored (15–17).
Here, we have successfully demonstrated the use of NIR-to-UV
upconversion nanoparticles as a transducer for activating caged
nucleic acids in solution and in cells, and deep-tissue activation of
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1114551109

the same was tested using different approaches like tissue phantoms and animal models, which altogether overcomes the current
limitations of photo-controllable gene expression in particular
and photo-controllable biomolecules in general. Nanocrystals
made of sodium yttrium fluoride (NaYF4 ) and codoped with
ytterbium (Yb 3þ ) and thulium (Tm 3þ ), which can emit in the
UV-visible region were used for this study. The nanocrystals are
then coated with thin layers of mesoporous silica as reported
previously by our group (11), and caged DNA/siRNA was loaded
into these mesopores, which enables delivery of higher payload
and protection of the nucleic acids from the harsh environment.
This method also increases the loading efficiency of nucleic acids
when compared to chemical crosslinking, which is hampered by
unstable attachment and low attachment efficiency. Upconverted
UV light emitted from the NIR irradiated UCNs will act as a
switch to uncage the caged molecules, thereby rendering it fully
functional for exerting its effect in the host cells. Apart from
acting as a transducer to activate photocaged nucleic acids, the
mesoporous silica coating on the surface of the UCNs help in the
delivery of nucleic acids into the cells, protecting them from
harmful enzymatic environment which might cause the degradation of nucleic acids. Lanthanide-based upconversion nanoparticles are also comparatively less toxic (18) and studies have proved
them to be safe for long-term usage in vivo (19), thus providing a
safe approach for use in biological applications. All the aforementioned properties make NIR-to-UV UCNs ideal candidates
for in-depth control of biomolecules in vitro and in vivo.
Results
The nanoparticle core of NaYF4 UCNs and their various coatings
is shown in Fig. 1. The nanoparticle core (Fig. 1B) is initially
coated with an amorphous layer of silica (Fig. 1C) and then a
mesoporous layer of silica (Fig. 1 D and E) is coated onto the
nanoparticles as shown by the transmission electron micrographs
with an overall size of approximately 80 nm. The emission spectrum of these nanoparticles can be easily tuned by varying the
concentrations of the lanthanides used (20, 21). Fig. 1 F–H show
the emission spectrum of NaYF4 nanocrystals doped with different concentrations of Yb, Er, and Tm and the emission varies
from UV, visible, and NIR light, and they have been used for various applications, depending on their emission. Monodisperse
NaYF4 ∶Yb, Tm NIR-to-UV UCNs were synthesized by a protocol as reported previously (11) and the fluorescence emission
spectrum of them is shown in Fig. 1H, and the Inset shows the
Author contributions: M.K.G.J. and Y.Z. designed research; M.K.G.J. and N.M.I. performed
research; M.K.G.J. and Y.Z. analyzed data; and M.K.G.J. and Y.Z. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: biezy@nus.edu.sg.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1114551109/-/DCSupplemental.

PNAS ∣

May 29, 2012 ∣

vol. 109 ∣

no. 22 ∣

8483–8488

APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES

Controlled activation or release of biomolecules is very crucial in
various biological applications. Controlling the activity of biomolecules have been attempted by various means and controlling the
activity by light has gained popularity in the past decade. The major hurdle in this process is that photoactivable compounds mostly
respond to UV radiation and not to visible or near-infrared (NIR)
light. The use of UV irradiation is limited by its toxicity and very
low tissue penetration power. In this study, we report the exploitation of the potential of NIR-to-UV upconversion nanoparticles
(UCNs), which act as nanotransducers to absorb NIR light having
high tissue penetration power and negligible phototoxicity and
emit UV light locally, for photoactivation of caged compounds and,
in particular, used for photo-controlled gene expression. Both activation and knockdown of GFP was performed in both solution
and cells, and patterned activation of GFP was achieved successfully by using upconverted UV light produced by NIR-to-UV UCNs.
In-depth photoactivation through tissue phantoms and in vivo activation of caged nucleic acids were also accomplished. The success
of this methodology has defined a unique level in the field of
photo-controlled activation and delivery of molecules.

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

Fig. 1. Characterization of UCNs. Schematic showing UCN
core and its silica coatings (A); transmission electron micrograph (TEM) images of monodisperse NaYF4 (Yb20%,
Er2%) UCNs (Scale bar, 100 nm) (B); with silica coating (Scale
bar, 100 nm) (C); and mesoporous silica coating (Scale bar D,
50 nm; Scale bar E, 25 nm) (D and E). Fluorescence emission
spectra of UCNs, NIR-to-VIS, NaYF4 ∶Yb 20%, Er 2% (F); NIRto-NIR, NaYF4 ∶Yb 0.2%, Tm 0.02% (G); and NIR-to-UV,
NaYF4 ∶Yb 25%, Tm 0.3% UCNs (H), under excitation by
an NIR laser at 980 nm, and Inset shows the total fluorescence of NIR-to-UV UCNs in a cuvette, excited by a
980 nm NIR laser.

total fluorescence of NIR-to-UV UCNs dispersed in water when
excited by a 980-nm continuous wave (CW) NIR laser.
UCNs were used to prove that caged siRNAs and caged plasmid DNA can be uncaged and activated using NIR-to-UV upconverted light. Various strategies have been undertaken for caging
nucleic acids with light-sensitive compounds (22) and caging with
4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitroacetophenone (DMNPE) was found to be
effective in caging plasmid DNA and siRNA (7, 23). The probable site of attachment of DMNPE to the phosphate backbone
of DNA was proposed by Haselton and coworkers (24) Detailed
schematic on caging of these nucleic acids with the chemical
DMNPE and their uncaging with upconverted UV light emitted
from the UCNs is as illustrated in Fig. 2A. Fig. 2 also illustrates
the transducing ability of UCNs to produce upconverted UV
light in deep tissues where direct UV irradiation cannot penetrate. The emission peak at 350 nm coincides well with the wavelength needed to uncage DMNPE from the nucleic acids which
makes them ideal transducers for activation. After the caging
of nucleic acids, they are loaded into the mesopores of the UCNs
by physical adsorption (Fig. 2B). The loading was checked by UV
absorbance spectrophotometry and was found to be more than
70% for both DNA and siRNA. DNA loading was also confirmed
by gel retardation assay as shown in Fig. S1. Typical release profile of DNA is given in Fig. S2 and the protection of DNA by the
mesopores of the UCNs against harsh biological conditions was
checked by the DNAse protection assay as shown in Fig. S3.
Admittedly though, UV light is known for its harmful effects
and may thus draw a parallel conjecture and possible concern on
the use of upconverted UV light emitted from excited NIR-toUV UCNs in living organisms. This issue was therefore addressed
here by assessing the viability of cells that were exposed to upconverted UV light. B16-F0 cells incubated overnight with
0.5 mg∕mL of NIR-to-UV UCNs and then irradiated with different light doses using a 980 nm CW NIR laser were examined for
signs of cytotoxicity 48 h post treatment using an MTS [3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium, inner salt] assay. Cells without the nanoparticles were also irradiated with the NIR laser and used as a control
to check the phototoxicity. As shown in Fig. 3A, no apparent reduction in cell viability was detected in any of the cell samples
with or without the nanoparticles. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
release and live/dead cell staining done on cells exposed to
NIR-to-UV UCNs and exposed to NIR laser also showed similar
8484 ∣

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1114551109

results (Fig. S4). The above studies show that both NIR-to-UV
UCN transfection and NIR laser exposure are safe for the cells
and the upconverted UV light does not lower the cell viability,
which might be attributed to the highly localized UV radiation
produced by the UCNs compared to conventional whole-cell
irradiation. Furthermore, the phototoxicity of NIR light was also
evaluated using single cell gel electrophoresis assay as shown in
Fig. 3B by assessing the extent of DNA damage after cells were
exposed to the NIR laser, UCNs, and UCNs þ NIR laser and was
found to be minimal. Hence, this result ascertained the safe use
of NIR irradiation and the upconverted UV light produced by
NIR-to-UV UCNs for photoactivation in living organisms.
Upon establishing the safe use of upconverted UV light, the
efficacy of UCNs in producing sufficient such UV light to uncage
nucleic acids in solution was next examined by absorbance spec-

Fig. 2. Schematic illustration. Plasmid DNA and siRNA are caged with
DMNPE and then uncaged by upconverted UV light from NIR-to-UV UCNs.
Inset shows the penetration depth of UV and NIR light in the skin (A). Loading
of caged plasmid DNA/siRNA into the mesopores of UCNs (B).

Jayakumar et al.

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

trophotometry (23). In Fig. 3C, DMNPE-caged siRNA revealed a
characteristic plateau at 355 nm, which confirms the attachment
of DMNPE caging groups to the siRNA molecules. Upon irradiation with direct UV light for 12 min though, a significant drop in
the 355 nm peak was observed, resembling the spectra of native
(uncaged) siRNA molecules. DMNPE-caged siRNA molecules,
which were premixed with NIR-to-UV UCNs and then irradiated
with a 980 nm NIR laser, also showed a similar shift in the trend
of the spectra that is reminiscent of the uncaging phenomenon,
thereby confirming the ability of NIR-to-UV UCNs to uncage
siRNA molecules. The ability of UCNs to activate photocaged
siRNA with and without loading into the mesopores was checked
by absorbance spectrophotometry (Fig. S5).
With the aim of assessing UCNs’ ability to photoactivate caged
nucleic acids in an in vitro platform, experiments were performed
to check if both gene expression and gene silencing can be reguJayakumar et al.

PNAS ∣

May 29, 2012 ∣

vol. 109 ∣

no. 22 ∣

8485

APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES

Fig. 3. Phototoxicity of NIR light and absorbance spectrophotometry of
DMNPE-caged siRNA. Viability of B16F0 cells without (black) and with (gray)
NIR-to-UV UCNs exposed to various doses of 980 nm CW NIR laser (A). Mean
percentage of tail DNA in cells treated with NIR, UCNs, and UCN þ NIR laser,
determined by single-cell gel electrophoresis assay (B). Absorbance spectrophotometry of native siRNA (black) DMNPE-caged siRNA before (green) and
after UV irradiation (violet) and DMNPE-caged siRNA mixed with NIR-to-UV
UCNs and activated with NIR irradiation (red) (C).

lated by this setup in cells. First, caged plasmid DNA encoding
GFP (test) and noncaged plasmid encoding enhanced green
fluorescent protein (pEGFP) (control) were separately loaded
into the mesoporous silica shell of NIR-to-UV UCNs and used
them as a vehicle to deliver these plasmids into B16-F0 cells.
UCNs endocytosed into the cells were then irradiated with a
980 nm CW NIR laser for various doses. Cellular uptake of UCNs
was checked by its blue emission as shown in Fig. S6. Absorption
of NIR light by the UCNs produced upconverted UV emission
which facilitates uncaging of the delivered caged plasmid DNA,
thereby rendering them functional. Indeed, at 32 h post-NIR
irradiation, successful expression of the encoded GFP was quantitated using a scanning fluorescence microplate reader, as shown
in Fig. 4B. Similar experiments were performed with NIR-to-UV
UCNs loaded with DMNPE-caged GFP siRNA and noncaged
GFP siRNA, which was used to transfect B16F0 cells pretransfected with EGFP plasmid. The cells were then exposed to
980 nm CW NIR laser and the gene knockdown was checked
after 32 h, as stated above, and shown in Fig. 4A.
To further show that this technique can activate genes with
very high spatial and temporal resolution, cells were transfected
with NIR-to-UV UCNs loaded with photocaged plasmids, as
mentioned previously. Instead of irradiating the whole well with
a NIR laser, the NIR laser was shined through a stencil with
the pattern NUS for 12 min (Fig. 4C). The expression of GFP
was checked after 32 h using a confocal fluorescence microscope,
and the pattern was visualized as shown in Fig. 4D. Live cell
DAPI staining was also done to show the presence of cells and
its confluence. Similar control experiments were performed,
using caged GFP plasmids without NIR irradiation and uncaged
GFP plasmids with NIR irradiation (Fig. S7 A and B).
The main advantage of this method to activate photocaged
nucleic acids in deep tissues was demonstrated in several ways.
Photoactivation was tested using a tissue phantom model with
similar optical properties to that of muscle tissues, by placing
the tissue phantom between the cells loaded with NIR-to-UV
UCNs/caged EGFP and the laser, as shown in Fig. 5A. The caged
plasmids are activated only if the NIR laser penetrates through
the tissue phantom and reaches the cell monolayer. For this purpose, agarose gel-based solid tissue phantoms were casted using
Intralipids as the scatterer and Indian ink as the absorber (25, 26).
The absorbance data of the tissue phantom and the mouse tissue
samples are shown in Fig. 5B. The GFP expression results from
the experiments with and without the tissue phantom were compared. The results showed that the UCNs inside the cells produced upconverted UV light upon excitation by the NIR light
penetrating into the tissue phantoms of different thickness, such
as 2 mm and 4 mm, and the caged plasmids were activated, as
shown in Fig. 5C. This study showed that UCNs had the ability
to activate photocaged nucleic acids at depths and further experiments were designed to show the same in vivo. NIR-to-UV UCNs
loaded with photocaged GFP plasmids were injected beneath the
skin in the flank of Balb/C mice and given an interval of 32 h, for
uptake and expression. Control mice received a saline injection.
The mice were then placed on a petri dish, and the injected site
was imaged using a confocal fluorescence microscope. Two-dimensional and three-dimensional Z-stack images were obtained
to show the GFP expression and its persistence across the optical
sections Fig. S8 A and B). The mice were then euthanized, and
the skin tissue with the injected UCNs was harvested and fixed.
Cryosectioning of the tissues was done and immunostained with
anti-GFP antibody labeled with TRITC. Counterstaining was
done with DAPI and imaged using a confocal fluorescence microscope as shown in Fig. S8C. In addition, cells transfected with
NIR-to-UV UCNs with photocaged GFP plasmids were loaded
into a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) device and transplanted
into the flank of Balb/C mice under the skin and sutured. NIR
irradiation was done to activate the cells in the device through

Fig. 4. Photoactivation and patterned activation of
caged nucleic acids in cells. Total GFP fluorescence
intensity of B16-F0 cells after cell lysis. Cells are transfected with NIR-to-UV UCNs/caged GFP siRNA complex (gray) and with NIR-to-UV UCNs/noncaged
GFP siRNA complex (black) and irradiated with different light doses using a 980 nm CW NIR laser which
corresponds to 0, 4, 8, 12 min (I-IV) of irradiation
to uncage GFP siRNA. GFP fluorescence is normalized
to control cells expressing GFP without any siRNA
treatment (A). Cells are transfected with NIR-to-UV
UCNs/caged pEGFP complex (gray) and with NIR-toUV UCNs/noncaged pEGFP complex (black) and irradiated with different light doses using a 980 nm CW
NIR laser, which corresponds to 0, 4, 8, 12 min (I-IV) of
irradiation to uncage pEGFP. GFP fluorescence is normalized to the fluorescence from normal cells without GFP transfection (B). *P < 0.05 versus 0 min NIR
laser exposure. Schematic of setup showing the stencil and the position of the laser for patterning of cells
transfected with caged pGFP. Inset shows the pattern
(NUS) on the stencil (C). Composite image showing
the GFP fluorescence from three different wells
(one letter in each well of a 96-well plate) (Scale
bar, 200 μm) and live-cell DAPI staining of the same
to show the cell confluence (D).

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

the skin (Fig. 5A). The device was then explanted after 48 h and
ex vivo imaging was performed, as shown in Fig. 5D. GFP expression was checked using a confocal fluorescence microscope and
quantitation was done using a microplate reader and the results
are given in Fig. 5E.
Discussion
In this study, a unique dimension to remote control of biomolecules by light using NIR-to-UV UCNs has been added. We provide proof-of-concept of our unique approach to activate photocaged siRNAs and photocaged plasmid DNA using indirect UV
light emitted from the NIR-to-UV UCNs. Indeed, these NIRto-UV UCNs are foreseen to overcome the drawback of current
systems in using low penetrating UV light for activating photocaged nucleic acids. The use of UCNs is therefore anticipated to
increase not only the depth of penetration but also its associated
therapeutic efficiency rather significantly. Initial reports on exploiting upconverted UV light for photoactivation shows preliminary studies on the activation of the caged compound (3′5′dicarboxymethoxy benzoin) attached to the surface of the UCNs
and release of carboxylic acids in solution. Here, we used mesoporous silica-coated NIR-to-UV UCNs encapsulating DNA/
siRNA molecules in the porous silica shell with an improved
biocompatibility and increased payload capacity, thus offering
a more efficient loading and delivery of the DNA/siRNA cargo
molecules. It is a unique report on such UCN-based delivery and
photoactivation of biomolecules (nucleic acids) in solution, cells,
and animal models. The DNA and siRNA photocaged with a
photolabile DMNPE group was found to have a caging efficiency
of 2–3%, similar to that reported previously (24). It was also demonstrated that these caged nucleic acids were efficiently loaded
into the mesopores of the porous silica shell by physical adsorption, which is in agreement with recent reports elucidating the
mechanism of DNA adsorption onto mesoporous silica that
shows more efficient adsorption of DNA in mesoporous silica,
as compared to solid silica (27). Additionally, incorporating them
within the mesoporous silica shell gives the benefit of being
protected from the surrounding harsh biological conditions, as
assessed by DNAse protection assay. Sustained release of the
loaded caged nucleic acids from the mesoporous silica-coated
UCNs for prolonged durations was also successfully demonstrated here. When used on cells, these UCNs were able to absorb
NIR light with good tissue penetration and extremely low photo8486 ∣

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1114551109

toxicity. No statistically significant difference in the percentage
viability of cells exposed to different concentrations of NIRto-UV UCNs was observed when compared to those that were
not exposed to the nanoparticles. Interestingly, though, in those
cells not treated with the nanoparticles, there was a mild but
statistically insignificant increase in their percentage cell viability
with increase in the duration of NIR irradiation, presumably due
to the photobiostimulation effects that NIR has on cells that is
known to increase their proliferation (28, 29). Besides the incident NIR light, the upconverted UV produced by the irradiated
nanoparticles was also found to be relatively safe for the cells,
within the nanoparticle dosage and duration of NIR laser irradiation range used in the present work, as proved by the results from
the MTS assay, LDH assay, live/dead cell staining and comet
assay. Although the comet assay showed some extent of DNA
damage in cells treated with the UCN-based system, the damage
is very minimal when compared to using direct UV light even at
very low doses (30). Moreover, the comet assay includes DNA
damage that is repairable by the cell machinery if given time,
hence the actual extent to which these cells are affected is very
low as ascertained by other cytotoxicity tests. Besides the upconverted UV light, the nanoparticles’ visible emission can also be
used for optional imaging capabilities with superior quality due
to UCNs’ inherent unique optical properties. The blue emission
at 450 nm was used to track the nanoparticle uptake by cells during their delivery and activation process with almost nil background autofluorescence and extremely high photostability.
Experiments were performed to confirm the ability of NIRto-UV UCNs in activating photocaged nucleic acids (DNA and
siRNA) in both solution cells. In fact, uncaging of DMNPEcaged siRNA in solution had demonstrated an efficiency that
was comparable to those activated by conventional direct UV
light (23, 24). Nonetheless, a direct comparison on factors, such
as specific dose, duration of irradiation, and percentage restoration of activity between the samples photoactivated using direct
UV light and that using NIR light, cannot be made here because
the intensity of upconverted UV is comparatively much lower
than that from direct UV irradiation, mainly attributed to the
significantly low quantum yield of the upconversion process
(0.005–0.3%) (31). Hence, even when the power of both the NIR
light and direct UV light are kept identical, the intensity of UV
light eventually received by the cells is very different.
Jayakumar et al.

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

Additional experiments conducted in this study also revealed
UCNs’ ability to efficiently photoactivate nucleic acids both when
they were still in the nanoparticles and when they have been released out of the particles’ porous shell. Indeed, this result suggests that UCNs can activate nucleic acids even after their release
into the cellular environment. Gene expression and knockdown
of GFP were accomplished in cells by using caged EGFP plasmids
and caged GFP siRNA and the amount of protein expressed was
controlled. Control experiments to check the influence of NIR
irradiation on the variation of gene expression was also done
in parallel by delivering noncaged DNA and siRNA. The NIR
Jayakumar et al.

laser power and the concentration of nanoparticles were kept
constant, but the light dosage was varied to bring about various
degrees of uncaging. Significant control was achieved in both expression and knockdown as shown by the reporter gene assay
after cell lysis and was again comparable to caging systems activated by direct UV light (4, 7). There was a statistically significant
increase in GFP fluorescence for caged pEGFP delivery from
672 J∕cm 2 of NIR laser exposure when compared to nonirradiated control, and there was a statistically significant decrease
in GFP fluorescence for caged GFP siRNA delivery from
1;344 J∕cm 2 of NIR laser exposure when compared to nonirraPNAS ∣

May 29, 2012 ∣

vol. 109 ∣

no. 22 ∣

8487

APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES

Fig. 5. Deep-tissue photoactivation. Experimental
setup showing the uncaging of photocaged genes
in cells through a tissue phantom and in a microfabricated device in an animal model (A). UV-visible-NIR
absorbance of hind limb muscle tissue from furless
black mouse of 3 mm thickness (⦁) and agarose gel
tissue phantoms of 2 mm (×) and 4 mm thickness
(▪) (B). GFP expression in cells transfected with
NIR-to-UV UCNs loaded with photocaged pEGFP
and activated by an NIR laser through tissue phantoms of different thickness. Bars show fluorescence
intensity of GFP in cells with (black) and without
(gray) NIR irradiation. *P < 0.05 versus cells irradiated with NIR laser without any tissue phantom
in between (C). Ex vivo imaging shows GFP expression in cells with and without NIR irradiation, respectively (Scale bar, 50 μm) (D), quantitative
measurement of GFP fluorescence (E). *P < 0.05 versus cells without NIR irradiation.

Downloaded by guest on July 13, 2021

diated control. In a similar experiment, patterned activation of
GFP was done to show the versatility of UCNs not only in activating the photocaged nucleic acids but also to show the activation with very high spatial and temporal resolution as shown by
the word NUS patterned by GFP expressing cells.
Finally, our main hypothesis, which highlights the necessity of
using UCNs for photo-controllable gene expression is that NIRto-UV UCNs can be used for activating photocaged nucleic acids
in deeper tissues compared to conventional systems. The first series of photoactivation studies were tested initially using agarosebased tissue phantoms with similar optical properties as muscle
tissue. The degree of activation reduces with increase in thickness
of the tissue but significant activation (more than 50%) was seen
even with a tissue phantom thickness of 0.4 cm. However, there
was a statistically significant difference in GFP fluorescence intensity of the sample with 0.4 cm tissue phantom when compared
to the sample without the tissue phantom. The system can be improved by further increasing the quantum yield of UCNs, and
there is a huge scope for improvement enabling activation in very
deep tissues. This technique was then used to activate photocaged
nucleic acids in animal models. Photocaged GFP-loaded UCNs
were injected under the skin of mice and activated using the NIR
laser. GFP fluorescence was checked by using a confocal fluorescence microscope and immunohistochemistry. Injection of nanoparticles under the skin and activation of the nucleic acids are
not routine procedures. To prove the versatility of UCNs in actual
applications, an experiment was devised to mimic the clinical setting as closely as possible. Cell therapy has gained popularity in the
past decade, and it usually involves cells encapsulated in a scaffold/
device and transplanted into the body, after which the activation is
done to produce the proteins of interest; this application requires
deep-tissue activation. So cells transfected with UCNs containing
photocaged GFP plasmid were loaded into a PDMS device and
transplanted into mice. The cells in the device were then activated
using NIR light through the skin and PDMS layer, and efficient
activation was observed even at that depth. All these results prove
that this technique has enormous potential in the fields such as
gene therapy for controlled and specific gene delivery/knockdown,
1. Banghart M, Borges K, Isacoff E, Trauner D, Kramer RH (2004) Light-activated ion
channels for remote control of neuronal firing. Nat Neurosci 7:1381–1386.
2. Scaiano JC, Blake JA, Griffith M (2010) Extreme Photonics and Applications, eds TJ Hall,
SV Gaponenko, and SA Paredes (Springer, The Netherlands), pp 95–105.
3. Goubko C, Majumdar S, Basak A, Cao X (2010) Hydrogel cell patterning incorporating
photocaged RGDS peptides. Biomed Microdevices 12:555–568.
4. Mikat V, Heckel A (2007) Light-dependent RNA interference with nucleobase-caged
siRNAs. RNA 13:2341–2347.
5. Tang X, Dmochowski IJ (2007) Regulating gene expression with light-activated oligonucleotides. Mol BioSyst 3:100–110.
6. Ando H, Furuta T, Tsien RY, Okamoto H (2001) Photomediated gene activation using
caged RNA/DNA in zebrafish embryos. Nat Genet 28:317–325.
7. Shah S, Jain PK, Kala A, Karunakaran D, Friedman SH (2009) Light-activated RNA
interference using double-stranded siRNA precursors modified using a remarkable
regiospecificity of diazo-based photolabile groups. Nucleic Acids Res 37:4508–4517.
8. Frangioni JV (2003) In vivo near-infrared fluorescence imaging. Curr Opin Chem Biol
7:626–634.
9. Guo H, Qian H, Idris NM, Zhang Y (2009) Singlet oxygen-induced apoptosis of cancer
cells using upconversion fluorescent nanoparticles as a carrier of photosensitizer.
Nanomedicine 6:486–495.
10. Auzel F (2004) Upconversion and anti-Stokes processes with f and d ions in solids.
Chem Rev 104:139–174.
11. Qian H, Guo H, Ho P, Mahendran R, Zhang Y (2009) Mesoporous-silica-coated upconversion fluorescent nanoparticles for photodynamic therapy. Small 5:2285–2290.
12. Nyk M, Kumar R, Ohulchanskyy TY, Bergey EJ, Prasad PN (2008) High contrast in vitro
and in vivo photoluminescence bioimaging using near infrared to near infrared upconversion in Tm 3þ and Yb 3þ doped fluoride nanophosphors. Nano Lett 8:3834–3838.
13. Chatterjee DK, Yong Z (2008) Upconverting nanoparticles as nanotransducers for
photodynamic therapy in cancer cells. Nanomedicine 3:73–82.
14. Lim SF, et al. (2006) In vivo and scanning electron microscopy imaging of upconverting
nanophosphors in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nano Lett 6:169–174.
15. Qin W, Zhang D, Zhao D, Wang L, Zheng K (2010) Near-infrared photocatalysis based
on YF3 ∶Yb 3þ , Tm 3þ ∕TiO2 core/shell nanoparticles. Chem Commun 46:2304–2306.
16. Carling CJ, Nourmohammadian F, Boyer JC, Branda NR (2010) Remote-control photorelease of caged compounds using near-infrared light and upconverting nanoparticles. Angew Chemie Int Ed 49:3782–3785.

8488 ∣

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1114551109

developmental biology for site-specific gene knockdown and for
patterning of biomolecules using safe NIR light.
Materials and Methods
Photoactivation of Caged siRNA in Cells. Caged GFP siRNA was first loaded
onto the mesoporous coating of NIR-to-UV UCNs. Mesoporous NIR-to-UV
UCNs (0.5 mg∕mL) were added dropwise to 20 μg of siRNA and agitated
gently at room temperature for 4 h. The solution was then centrifuged at
6;300 × g for 10 min and the pellet containing the UCNs loaded with caged
plasmids was resuspended in deionized water and used for further experiments. The loading was checked by absorbance spectrophotometry and agarose gel electrophoresis and was found to be approximately 7.23 μg siRNA/mg
UCN. B16-F0 cells were grown as described previously and transfected with
pEGFP using Lipofectamine 2000, according to manufacturer’s instructions.
The transfected cells were trypsinized and 0.5 mg∕mL mesoporous NIR-toUV UCNs loaded with the caged siRNA were then added into the cell suspension, and the mixture was plated onto culture plates at 62;500 cells∕cm 2 for
24 h. A similar set of cells were also plated with the addition of NIR-to-UV
UCNs loaded with noncaged siRNA as a control. After which, the cells were
washed twice with culture medium and then irradiated with a 980 nm CW
NIR laser for 0, 4, 8, and 12 min to make a specific dose of 0, 672, 1,344, and
2;016 J∕cm 2 . The control wells received no NIR irradiation. Confocal fluorescence imaging of the cells was done after 32 h to check for GFP fluorescence.
GFP expression was quantitated after cell lysis using a fluorescence microplate reader (FLUOstar Optima; BMG Labtech GmbH). Further information
on methods for caging nucleic acids and activating them in solution, mice
model, and through tissue phantoms can be found in SI Materials and
Methods.
Statistical Analysis. To compare the mean values of experimental group to
that of control ones, one-way ANOVA, at an alpha level of 0.05 (a P value
of less than 0.05 is considered as statistically significant), was performed using
OriginPro 8.5.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank Sounderya Nagarajan for providing the tissue
phantoms, Qingqing Dou for providing the upconversion nanoparticles,
Shashi Ranjan for PDMS device fabrication, Kerwin Kwek Zeming for stencil
preparation, Akshaya Bansal for help with cytotoxicity studies, and Selva
Rajan for support in preparing the schematic illustrations. Financial support
from Singapore Ministry of Health National Medical Research Council
(NMRC) Grant R-397-000-105-275 and Ministry of Education AcRF Tier 1 Grant
R-397-000-075-112 are also gratefully acknowledged.
17. Carling CJ, Boyer JC, Branda NR (2009) Remote-control photoswitching using NIR light.
J Am Chem Soc 131:10838–10839.
18. Abdul Jalil R, Zhang Y (2008) Biocompatibility of silica coated NaYF(4) upconversion
fluorescent nanocrystals. Biomaterials 29:4122–4128.
19. Xiong L, Yang T, Yang Y, Xu C, Li F (2010) Long-term in vivo biodistribution imaging
and toxicity of polyacrylic acid-coated upconversion nanophosphors. Biomaterials
31:7078–7085.
20. Wang F, Liu X (2008) Upconversion multicolor fine-tuning: Visible to near-infrared
emission from lanthanide-doped NaYF4 nanoparticles. J Am Chem Soc 130:5642–5643.
21. Wang M, et al. (2009) NIR-responsive silica-coated NaYbF4∶Er∕Tm∕Ho upconversion
fluorescent nanoparticles with tunable emission colors and their applications in immunolabeling and fluorescent imaging of cancer cells. J Phys Chem C 113:19021–19027.
22. Casey JP, Blidner RA, Monroe WT (2009) Caged siRNAs for spatiotemporal control of
gene silencing. Mol Pharmaceutics 6:669–685.
23. Blidner RA, Svoboda KR, Hammer RP, Monroe WT (2008) Photoinduced RNA interference using DMNPE-caged 2'-deoxy-2'-fluoro substituted nucleic acids in vitro and in
vivo. Mol BioSyst 4:431–440.
24. Monroe WT, McQuain MM, Chang MS, Alexander JS, Haselton FR (1999) Targeting
expression with light using caged DNA. J Biol Chem 274:20895–20900.
25. Rinaldo C, et al. (1997) A solid tissue phantom for photon migration studies. Phys Med
Biol 42:1971–1979.
26. Ortega R, Téllez A, Leija L, Vera A (2010) Measurement of ultrasonic properties of
muscle and blood biological phantoms. Phys Procedia 3:627–634.
27. Li X, Zhang J, Gu H (2011) Study on the adsorption mechanism of DNA with mesoporous silica nanoparticles in aqueous solution. Langmuir 28:2827–2834.
28. Wu HPP, Persinger MA (2011) Increased mobility and stem-cell proliferation rate in
Dugesia tigrina induced by 880 nm light emitting diode. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol
102:156–160.
29. El Sayed SO, Dyson M (1996) Effect of laser pulse repetition rate and pulse duration on
mast cell number and degranulation. Lasers Surg Med 19:433–437.
30. Patton WP, Chakravarthy U, Davies RJH, Archer DB (1999) Comet assay of UV-induced
DNA damage in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci
40:3268–3275.
31. Boyer JC, van Veggel FCJM (2010) Absolute quantum yield measurements of colloidal
NaYF4 ∶Er 3þ , Yb 3þ upconverting nanoparticles. Nanoscale 2:1417–1419.

Jayakumar et al.

