medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Genomic epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 transmission lineages in Ecuador
Bernardo Gutierrez1,2, Sully Márquez3, Belén Prado-Vivar3, Mónica Becerra-Wong3, Juan José
Guadalupe4, Darlan da Silva Candido1, Juan Carlos Fernandez-Cadena5, Gabriel Morey-Leon6,
Rubén Armas-Gonzalez7, Derly Madeleiny Andrade-Molina5, Alfredo Bruno8,9, Domenica de
Mora8, Maritza Olmedo8, Denisse Portugal8, Manuel Gonzalez8, Alberto Orlando8, Jan Felix
Drexler10, Andres Moreira-Soto10, Anna-Lena Sander10, Sebastian Brünink10, Arne Kühne10,
Leandro Patiño8, Andrés Carrazco-Montalvo11, Orson Mestanza8, Jeannete Zurita12,13,
Gabriela Sevillano13, Louis du Plessis1, John T. McCrone14, Josefina Coloma15, Gabriel
Trueba3, Verónica Barragán3, Patricio Rojas-Silva3, Michelle Grunauer16, Moritz U.G.
Kraemer1, Nuno R. Faria1,17, Marina Escalera-Zamudio1, Oliver G. Pybus1,18*, Paúl Cárdenas3*
1

Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Colegio de Ciencias Biológicas y Ambientales, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito,
Ecuador
3
Instituto de Microbiología, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
4
Laboratorio de Biotecnología Vegetal, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
5
Omics Sciences Laboratory, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidad de Especialidades
Espíritu Santo, Samborondón, Ecuador
6
Faculty of Medical Sciences, Universidad de Guayaquil, Guayaquil, Ecuador
7
Faculty of Sciences, Escuela Superior Politécnica del Litoral, Guayaquil, Ecuador
8
Instituto Nacional de Investigación en Salud Pública, Guayaquil, Ecuador
9
Universidad Agraria del Ecuador
10
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin,
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, and Berlin Institute of Health, Institute of Virology, Berlin,
Germany
11
Instituto Nacional de Investigación en Salud Pública, Quito, Ecuador
12
Facultad de Medicina, Pontificia Universidad Católica del Ecuador, Quito, Ecuador
13
Unidad de Investigaciones en Biomedicina, Zurita & Zurita Laboratorios, Quito, Ecuador
14
Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
15
School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, USA
16
Escuela de Medicina, Universidad San Francisco de Quito, Quito, Ecuador
17
MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, J-IDEA, Imperial College London,
London, UK
18
Department of Pathobiology and Population Sciences, Royal Veterinary College London,
London, UK
2

*Corresponding authors: Oliver G. Pybus (oliver.pybus@zoo.ox.ac.uk) and Paúl Cárdenas
(pacardenas@usfq.edu.ec)
Abstract
Characterisation of SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity through space and time can reveal trends
in virus importation and domestic circulation, and permit the exploration of questions
regarding the early transmission dynamics. Here we present a detailed description of SARSCoV-2 genomic epidemiology in Ecuador, one of the hardest hit countries during the early
NOTE: This
reports new research
that hasWe
not been
certified by
peeranalyse
review and160
should
not be used
to guidesequences
clinical practice.
stages
ofpreprint
the COVID-19
pandemic.
generate
and
whole
genome

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sampled from all provinces of Ecuador in 2020. Molecular clock and phylgeographic analysis
of these sequences in the context of global SARS-CoV-2 diversity enable us to identify and
characterise individual transmission lineages within Ecuador, explore their spatiotemporal
distributions, and consider their introduction and domestic circulation. Our results reveal a
pattern of multiple international importations across the country, with apparent differences
between key provinces. Transmission lineages were mostly introduced before the
implementation of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs), with differential degrees of
persistence and national dissemination.
Introduction
The rapid generation of substantial numbers of virus genomic sequences during the COVID19 pandemic is without precedent. During 2020, laboratories and institutes around the
world produced and shared over 300000 whole SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences in the
GISAID repository (1), providing an unparalleled data set that permits detailed analyses of
virus transmission and dissemination. These achievements have provided insights into the
sources of SARS-CoV-2 importation and early transmission dynamics in individual countries
and geographical regions (2-5), and have enabled the exploration of viral transmission
history at a global scale (6). Phylogenetic methods, including molecular clock models and
phylogeographic and phylodynamic methods, are now used routinely to analyse such
genomic data from emerging outbreaks (7). The resolution level of evolutionary and
transmission history obtained using these methods is contingent on the virus’ evolutionary
rate and the depth and representativeness of sampling of cases across space and time (8).
While heterogeneous sampling and sequencing among countries can bias and affect the
output of some phylogeographic methods (9, 10), general trends in the transmission of viral
lineages can still be inferred from smaller samples of genomic sequences from individual
locations.
The utility of pathogen genomic surveillance during outbreaks has developed during various
past emerging epidemics (11-13) and has gained further momentum during the current
global health crisis. Information about epidemiological trends can be effectively
complemented with genomic analyses in order to understand case-specific (14) and general
transmission patterns (15). This framework can be extended to account for other factors
that affect the spread of pathogens, ranging from human mobility on a global scale (16) to
particular social networks (17). The analysis of local- and national-scale data sets during the
current pandemic has provided insights into the processes affecting the introduction and
circulation of the virus into new locations (18) and provided genomic context for other data
sources (19-21). Indeed, the integration and analysis of multiple data sources about an
emerging epidemic has the potential to compensate for surveillance blind spots and better
understand poorly sampled outbreaks (22).
The COVID-19 epidemic in Ecuador was marked by a dramatic and widely publicised early
phase (23) with an estimated basic reproductive number (R0) of 3.54 (24). Ecuador is a small
middle-income South American country with the seventh largest population in the
continent; half of the country’s population lives in Guayas province (host of the country’s
most populated city, Guayaquil) and Pichincha province (host of the country’s second most
populated city, the capital Quito; Fig 1A). The first case was reported in the country on 27th

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

February 2020 (a patient who returned from abroad through Guayaquil with date of
symptom onset of February 15) and was followed by the declaration of a National Health
Emergency on 11th March 2020. Public health interventions were implemented shortly
thereafter: mass gatherings were restricted on March 13, and a partial lockdown that
included the closure of international borders was implemented on March 17. Finally, a full
lockdown that included a curfew and the limitation of domestic mobility in private and
public vehicles came into effect on March 25 (24). The country’s port city of Guayaquil was
the first epicentre of the epidemic, facing a severe increase in the numbers of cases
between late February and early April. The province of Guayas reached its highest effective
reproductive number Rt (defined as the average number of secondary cases caused by a
primary cases at a point in time t; 25) on March 14 (Rt estimates vary between 3.96 and
4.91) with 1462 cases reported that day (26) and reported a cumulative incidence of 146.94
cases per 100000 people by April 18 (24). The actual number of cases are likely to have been
much higher when evaluated through the lens of excess mortality data (as obtained from
the National Institute of Statistics and Census; Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos,
INEC), and would explain why local diagnostic and healthcare services became rapidly
overwhelmed (23, 24). After the peak and decline of the epidemic’s first wave in Ecuador,
restrictions were maintained during April and May and progressively relaxed over the
following months, as the epicentre of Ecuador’s epidemic moved to the capital city of Quito,
located in Pichincha province (which on 23rd July 2020 overtook Guayaquil as the city with
the greatest number of COVID-19 confirmed cases). The last restrictions were finally lifted
on September 13, although use of personal protective equipment and social distancing
guidelines remained in place.
To date, the source and diversity of circulating transmission lineages in Ecuador and their
reach across the country remain unexplored. International importations are expected to
have played an important role in seeding transmission chains in Ecuador, as observed in
other countries (15). We undertake phylogenetic analyses of 160 SARS-CoV-2 whole
genome sequences sampled from Ecuadorian cases and place them within the context of
global viral genetic diversity in order to characterise the genomic epidemiology of SARSCoV-2 in the country. We identify introduction events and transmission lineages within
Ecuador and investigate their spatio-temporal distribution, and we hypothesise about the
role of domestic seeding on viral transmission dynamics within Ecuador.
Methods
Genomic sequencing of SARS-CoV-2 samples from Ecuador
Clinical samples were collected from patients with a laboratory confirmed SARS-CoV-2
infection in Ecuador during 2020 (Fig 1A-C). Samples collected by the Microbiology Institute
at Universidad San Francisco de Quito (IM-USFQ) were obtained from third-level hospitals
(i.e. specialised tertiary referral hospitals) across all 24 provinces in the country without
unified selection criteria (27). Samples collected by the Omics Sciences Laboratory at
Universidad de Especialidades Espiritu Santo (UEES) were obtained from samples collected
from the laboratory’s diagnostic service and selected at random for sequencing. Samples
collected by the National Institute of Investigations in Public Health (Instituto Nacional de
Investigación en Salud Pública, INSPI) were obtained from the national epidemiological
SARS-CoV-2 surveillance system. Samples collected by the Biomedical Research Unit at

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Zurita & Zurita Laboratories (ZZL) were obtained from community patients from Quito who
presented clinical signs of reinfection. This complete Ecuadorian sample set was collected
between March 9 and December 9 2020, with limited representation during the early
months of the epidemic when compared to excess mortality data (Fig 1C).
From these samples we generated 160 complete SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences using
different methodologies. IM-USFQ generated 108 whole genome sequences using Oxford
Nanopore MinION sequencing and the ARTIC Network primer scheme approach as
previously described (27). UEES generated 33 whole genome sequences through Illumina
sequencing on a MiniSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA). INSPI generated 15 sequences
either in collaboration with Charité - Berlin University of Medicine (through Illumina
sequencing) or on site at the Centre for Multidisciplinary Research of the Direction of
Research, Development and Innovation (through Oxford Nanopore MinION sequencing as
described in 28). Zurita & Zurita Laboratories generated 4 sequences through Illumina
sequencing on a MiSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Details of sample collection,
sequencing and genome assembly are summarised in Table S1. Sample collection dates and
the province-level geographical location of residence of the patient were included as
metadata for all sequences in the country.
To determine the viral genetic diversity circulating in the country during the sampling
period, all sequences from Ecuador were phylogenetically assigned under the global Pango
lineage system using the Pangolin v2.2.2 tool (https://virological.org/t/pangolin-webapplication-release/482).
Global SARS-CoV-2 data sets
The Ecuadorian virus sequences were analysed in the context of global SARS-CoV-2 genomic
diversity by including all high-quality SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences and their
accompanying metadata available in GISAID (1) on January 1 2021 (sequences were retained
if they were > 29000 nucleotides long and < 5% of the sequence was missing). Sequences
without a complete sample collection date or not attributed to human hosts were excluded,
yielding a total of 218771 sequences from samples collected from December 1, 2019 up
until December 10, 2020.
The large number of SARS-CoV-2 genomes generated during 2020 makes full-scale
phylogenomic analyses computationally prohibitive. We therefore subsampled sequences
from the abovementioned full data set (i.e. all GISAID sequences included in our analyses,
excluding the complete set of Ecuadorian sequences) using two approaches. First, we
randomly sampled one sequence per country per day from the full data set over the
complete sampling period, to create a “systematically-subsampled data set” (comprised of
8606 sequences). In parallel, we arbitrarily generated three “randomly-subsampled data
sets” consisting of 8606 randomly chosen sequences from the full data set, to match the size
of the systematically-subsampled data set. These randomly-subsampled data sets were used
to evaluate the performance of the background SARS-CoV-2 sequences as the genomic
context for the identification of transmission lineages within Ecuador (see the Phylogenetic
identification of transmission lineages section below). Finally, we added the sequences from
Ecuador to each data set, resulting in a total of 8766 sequences per data set.

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Each data set was aligned to the Wuhan-Hu-1 (GenBank accession: MN908947.3) reference
genome sequence (29) using Minimap 2.17 (30) to generate multiple sequence alignments.
Sites containing >90% gaps relative to the sequences in their respective alignment were
masked, whilst the untranscribed terminal regions (UTRs) were trimmed. After masking and
trimming, the resulting alignments had a final length of 29,409 nucleotides, with the
shortest partial genome sequences being cut down to 28,955 nucleotides long.
Phylogenetic identification of transmission lineages
We followed a similar rationale and methodology to that described in du Plessis et al (15) to
identify local transmission lineages. Phylogenetically linked sequences were inferred to have
descended from a common ancestor if they were associated with a single inferred
introduction event into Ecuador from an international location (5, 15). Ecuadorian
transmission lineages therefore correspond to lineages of sequences sampled within the
country that descend from a node inferred to have also occurred in Ecuador, which must in
turn have descended from outside of the country. Given the unstructured sampling of the
Ecuadorian sequences, some transmission lineages will likely correspond to
epidemiologically linked cases (i.e. targeted investigation of epidemiological clusters); these
have been identified as such in the text whenever the information was available.
Maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic trees were estimated from the systematicallysubsampled data set and the randomly-subsampled data sets using IQtree 2.1.1 (31) under a
GTR+G substitution model. Node support was estimated through an SH-like approximate
Likelihood Ratio Test (aLRT) (32). The tree for the systematically-subsampled data set was
re-rooted by heuristically searching for the root placement that minimises the mean
squared residual of a regression of sequence sample date against root-to-tip genetic
distance, calculated using TempEst v1.5.3 (33), to maximise the temporal signal of the data
set. The same regression was used to assess the clock-like behaviour of the data set.
Subsequent analyses in our pipeline require an evolutionary rate estimation. We performed
an exploratory analysis on a random selection of 866 genomes from the systematicallysubsampled data set (~10% of the sequences, ensuring that representatives of the earliest
and latest collection dates were included) in order to estimate the evolutionary rate of the
data set over the sampling period. We used BEAST v.1.10.4 (34) to obtain a clock rate
estimate using the HKY substitution model and a strict molecular clock with a continuoustime Markov chain (CTMC) prior (35). We employed a Skygrid coalescent tree prior (36) that
accounts for the 50 epidemiological weeks over which the genomes were sampled, plus a
cut-off period that precedes the earliest collected SARS-CoV-2 sequences. Independent
Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) chains were run for 40 million steps and subsequently
combined after discarding the initial 10% of each run as a burn-in. Parameter convergence
was assessed using the effective sample size (ESS) estimates of the combined chains using
Tracer v1.7.1 (37).
The systematically subsampled data set was analysed with BEAST v1.10.5
(https://github.com/beast-dev/beast-mcmc/releases/tag/v1.10.5pre_thorney) using a
newly implemented method that estimates the tree likelihood at each point of the MCMC
chain. This approach takes a data tree (the aforementioned re-rooted ML tree) instead of an
alignment and significantly reduces analysis time by using a simple model to rescale the ML

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

phylogeny into a time-calibrated tree (see 38). Under this approach, the likelihood of each
branch length is defined as a function of a Poisson distribution with a mean directly
proportional to the clock rate (38, 39); we therefore used a rate of 6.28x10-4
substitutions/site/year, based on the median clock rate estimate obtained from our
exploratory analysis. We also defined a coalescent Skygrid prior, similar to the one
described for the exploratory analysis. A version of the data tree re-scaled to time by BEAST
was used as a starting tree, and independent MCMC chains were run for 100 million steps
and combined after discarding 10% of each run as burn-in.
To identify nodes associated with transmission lineages in Ecuador, we used a discrete
phylogeographic model consisting of a two-state discrete trait analysis (DTA) (40)
implemented in BEAST v1.10.4 (34). Tips were assigned to one of two possible states
(Ecuador vs non-Ecuador) and reconstruction of ancestral node states was undertaken using
an asymmetric substitution model (40). The estimation of the source location for all nodes
was performed on an empirical distribution of 500 time-calibrated trees obtained in the
previous step. The expected number of DTA transitions between international locations and
Ecuador were estimated using a robust counting approach (41). Two independent MCMC
chains of 5 million steps each were combined for this analysis, after discarding the first
500000 steps of each run as burn-in. A Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree was
generated from the DTA posterior tree distribution by sampling 1000 trees from the
combined MCMC runs in TreeAnnotator v.1.10. Each internal node was assigned a posterior
probability for its inferred location, and these were used to evaluate uncertainty regarding
the assignment of potential transmission lineages in Ecuador.
Transmission lineages and transmission lineage groups
All phylogenetic clusters of sequences from Ecuador were inspected visually on the MCC
tree to assign individual transmission lineages. The nomenclature of these country-specific
transmission lineages followed a one-letter code in alphabetical order, defined by the
earliest sample collection date in each transmission lineage. General features of each
transmission lineage were summarised, such as the earliest and latest sample in each
lineage, the number of provinces in which the transmission lineage had been identified and
the number of sequences belonging to said lineage (used as a proxy of transmission lineage
size). The consistency with which sequences were grouped into these transmission lineages
was evaluated by visually inspecting the ML trees for the randomly-subsampled data sets
and comparing the clusters of Ecuadorian sequences to those from the DTA analysis.
In two instances, transmission lineages within Ecuador clustered together in the DTA
analysis into monophyletic groups that also included some international sequences (see
Results). This topology includes the possibility that these groups of transmission lineages in
fact correspond to single introduction events, misidentified by our analyses as multiple
introductions. This might indeed be the case given the variation in intensity of SARS-CoV-2
sampling across countries (6, 9), including Ecuador, and the limited genetic divergence
observed in SARS-CoV-2 over the time span being analysed (42). We therefore identified
these pairs of transmission lineages under a single letter (highlighted with an asterisk) for
summarisation purposes, and evaluated and discussed their individual trajectories further.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity in Ecuador
The samples from laboratory-confirmed individuals obtained across mainland Ecuador (and
one sample from the Galápagos Islands) were collected as they became available through
different hospitals and laboratories and yielded representative genomes from all provinces
in the country (Fig 1A). The number of sequences per province correlates with the
cumulative laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases (Spearman’s rho = 0.597, p = 0.002) and
number of deaths of patients with a positive or suspected-positive COVID-19 PCR test over
the sampling period (Spearman’s rho = 0.492, p = 0.015), suggesting that the number of
sequences per province is proportional to the number of infections. Despite the limited
number of sequences from Ecuador, the representativeness of our sample is similar to that
of other countries in the region. We estimate Ecuador produced 8 sequences for every
10000 reported cases or 12 sequences for every 1000 officially reported COVID-19 deaths.
This is better than Peru (4 sequences per 10000 cases/10 sequences per 1000 deaths) or
Brazil (3 sequences per 10000 cases/10 sequences per 1000 deaths) but less representative
than Uruguay (159 sequences per 10000 cases, and a higher number of SARS-CoV-2 genome
sequences than reported deaths) (Fig S1, File S1). It should be noted however that these
estimates rely on the testing intensities between provinces in Ecuador and between
different countries; limited testing in Ecuador could mean that the overall representation is
lower than estimable from official reports.
Wide variation in the total numbers of cases across provinces in Ecuador is reflected in
variation in number of sequences obtained. While heavily affected provinces such as
Pichincha (72,305 confirmed cases until December 10) and Guayas (26,080 confirmed cases)
account for larger numbers of sequences (47 and 18 for Guayas and Pichincha respectively),
less affected provinces in the southern Highlands (Azuay – 12,670 confirmed cases, and Loja
– 7252) and the Amazon (Morona Santiago – 3422, Napo – 1605, Orellana – 2100, Pastaza –
2360 and Zamora Chinchipe – 1628) are represented by few sequences (28 in total). The
single sequence obtained from the Galápagos corresponds to the low number of cases
there. Manabí province appears to be underrepresented (14,061 confirmed cases) while
Imbabura (5695 confirmed cases) and Los Ríos (4707 confirmed cases) are represented by
higher numbers of genomes per death (Fig. 1B). Sequence sampling rates for each province
(excluding Galápagos) varied between 3 and 86 sequences per 1000 deaths (File S2). The
temporal distribution of samples collected in Ecuador during 2020 do not strongly match
trends in reported excess deaths. More samples were collected in July and August, but
fewer genomes were sampled in the early epidemic months (March to May) despite the
high number of excess deaths reported then (Fig 1C). Sequence representation is greater for
the coastal provinces during the early months of the epidemic (March to June), when the
epicentre of the epidemic was based in the port city of Guayaquil (in the Guayas province,
(23), and shifted towards higher sampling in the highlands and Amazon provinces, as the
epicentre of the epidemic shifted towards the capital city of Quito (in Pichincha province)
and as more cases were reported in the Amazon.
Virus genomes from Ecuador were assigned to specific Pango lineages (43) using the
pangolin tool (https://virological.org/t/pangolin-web-application-release/482). The
genomes were assigned to 33 different global lineages and predominantly B.1.1.74 (39.4%
of all Ecuadorian sequences ; Fig. 1D), one of the lineages descended from B.1.1 which

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

became one of the most dominant lineages during the early phase of the pandemic in
Europe and North America (after the virus was introduced from Asia; 3, 43). The geographic
distribution of the SARS-CoV-2 lineage diversity in the country shows distinctive patterns.
While the majority of the lineages observed at low-frequencies in Ecuador were found in
Pichincha, the heavily affected (and highly populated) province of Guayas (where Guayaquil
is located) exhibits a predominance of the B.1.1.74 lineage (59.1% of all sequences from this
province; Fig 1D). B.1.1.74 is also abundant in the provinces of Los Ríos, which neighbours
Guayas (49%), and Imbabura, which neighbours Pichincha (38.9%). Other common lineages,
such as B.1 (16.9% of all sequences from Ecuador) and B.1.1.1 (6.9% of all sequences from
Ecuador), are distributed across various geographical regions.

Figure 1. Overview of genomic sampling and SARS-CoV-2 genetic diversity in Ecuador. A. Number of

sequences from Ecuador analysed in this study per province across the four main geographic regions: the coast (shades of
green), the highlands (shades of yellow), the Amazon (shades of orange) and the Galápagos (blue). B. Number of deaths
(attributed to laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 cases) versus number of whole genome sequences available per province.
Circle radius shows the number of cases per province. C. Timelines showing collection dates of sequences from the four
geographic regions across time (upper panel) and the COVID-19 epidemiological curves in Ecuador during 2020 (cumulative
number of laboratory-confirmed cases as reported by the Ministry of Health in the blue line, number of daily excess deaths
compared to the same dates in 2019 as reported by the National Institute of Statistics and Census in grey; lower panel). D.
Geographic distribution of SARS-CoV-2 lineages identified in Ecuador.

Identification of Ecuadorian transmission lineages
We undertook exploratory phylogenetic analyses using different sequence subsampling
schemes, as the exceptionally large number of available SARS-CoV-2 sequences prevents full
analysis of the complete global data set. We estimated maximum likelihood (ML) trees of
the Ecuador sequences in the context of different background data sets and performed
Bayesian phylogenetic inference on a systematically-subsampled data set. The clustering
patterns of Ecuadorian sequences in the ML trees showed some variation between data
8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

sets, but in the majority of cases remained consistent (File S3). We therefore derive our
results from the systematically subsampled data set and discuss these in light of the
randomly subsampled data sets.
We consistently found that a sizeable proportion of sequences from Ecuador did not cluster
with other sequences from the country (54/160 sequences for the systematically
subsampled data set, 48 to 51/160 for the randomly-subsampled data sets; File S3), and
were therefore assigned as singletons and not associated with further virus spread within
Ecuador detectable through genomic analysis. These singletons could in fact represent
introduction events after which forward transmission in Ecuador did occur but this was not
captured by the sample size of this study. We note that the majority of the singleton
sequences were collected before mid-July (Fig S2); we speculate that they could represent
predominantly early introduction events that occurred before the implementation of a
national lockdown on March 16. While it is possible to establish a possible limit of dates on
which each singleton was introduced, based on the last ancestral node inferred to have
occurred outside of Ecuador, the precise importation date will fall somewhere between the
inferred age of this preceding node and the collection date of the singleton sequence. The
low sampling density in Ecuador and our subsampling schemes are likely to introduce
uncertainty in estimating the age of these nodes and we therefore excluded these analyses
from our results.
The remaining sequences (106/160 sequences for the systematically-subsampled data set)
fell into two distinct categories. Firstly, 20 monophyletic clusters of Ecuadorian sequences
were identified, capturing multiple introduction events and some local viral circulation
patterns. These clusters were assigned to be separate Ecuadorian transmission lineages,
named A through V (with exceptions detailed in the paragraph below). Each represents a
single introduction event of the virus from an international destination, followed by local
forward transmission in Ecuador (15).
Secondly, we identified two large monophyletic clusters that included sequences from
international locations and Ecuador. These were not identified strictly as individual
transmission lineages through our DTA approach, but rather as genetically similar groups of
individual transmission lineages (Fig S3-S9). These results were likely driven by the
phylogenetic placement of the non-Ecuadorian sequences resulting in the ancestral nodes
being inferred to have existed outside of Ecuador (Fig 2A). While there is a possibility that
these in fact represent multiple closely related yet independently introduced transmission
lineages, we here label them as transmission lineage groups (highlighted with an asterisk,
D* and H*) for summary purposes.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Time calibrated phylogenetic trees for the major transmission lineages in Ecuador. A. Subtrees

extracted from a time-calibrated Maximum Clade Credibility (MCC) tree of SARS-CoV-2 whole genome sequences,
corresponding to the two largest clusters of sequences from Ecuador. Tree tips are coloured by sampling location (in
Ecuador, red, versus outside of Ecuador, grey); nodes and branches are coloured by inferred location through a two-state
DTA analysis. The province where each sequence was sampled is annotated on the tips, and maps highlight these
provinces. Tips that correspond to sequences that cluster together within the major Ecuadorian clusters are also annotated
with the region where the samples were collected. B. Detection lag of individual transmission lineages in Ecuador, showing
the median TMRCA of each transmission lineage from our data set (blue) connected by a grey line to the date of the
earliest sequence in that transmission lineage (red). C. Root -to-tip genetic distances (based on a heuristically rooted
Maximum Likelihood tree) versus sample collection dates for the SARS-CoV-2 data set used in this analysis. Data points
corresponding to sequences collected in Ecuador are highlighted in red, and the linear regression trendline is shown in
blue.

Table 1 provides details for each Ecuador transmission lineage (named sequentially
according to the collection date of the earliest sequence in each lineage). We identify 82
(95% HPD: 81-84) SARS-CoV-2 introduction events from other countries into Ecuador
through a robust counting approach (41). This estimate assumes that transmission lineage
groups D* and H* are comprised of 2 and 3 individual transmission lineages respectively
(with an additional singleton inferred as part of H*; Fig 2A). The detection lag (defined as
the number of days between the inferred transmission lineage TMRCA and its earliest
sampled sequence) ranged between 1 and 140 days (Table 1), with a median of 16 days
(IQR: 7-31 days; Fig 2B, Fig S10).

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Summary of transmission lineages identified in Ecuador.

Size and persistence of transmission lineages
Initial molecular clock analyses showed our data set contained strong temporal signal
overall, although many sequences from Ecuador showed lower than average genetic
divergence from the root (Fig 2C). The inferred TMRCAs of Ecuadorian transmission lineages
ranged from February to November 2020 (Table 1); from this list, transmission lineages C
and S are composed of pairs of sequences that share an epidemiological link.
The TMRCAs estimated for the two large transmission lineage groups D* and H* are the
earliest in our data, however, these might not represent true lineage ancestors within
Ecuador, because each group could represent more than one introduction from other
countries. After excluding these larger groups, we still identified six transmission lineages
for which the 95% HPDs of the TMRCA include a time point that predates the
implementation of the national lockdown, set on March 16. Therefore, these transmission
lineages likely correspond to introduction events that occurred before restrictions on
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

incoming international flights were adopted in Ecuador. An additional four transmission
lineages have TMRCA estimates between late March and November 2020. These may
correspond to more recent introductions (following the progressive relaxation of the
lockdown in Ecuador between May and September). The most likely exceptions to this are
transmission lineages C (TMRCA: 2020.2412, 95% HPD: 2020.2328-2020.2446) and M
(TMRCA: 2020.3278, 95% HPD: 2020.1864-2020.4187). Incomplete sampling of these
lineages and detection lags could result in the date of introduction being substantially
earlier than the date of the TMRCA (44), which would place the introduction date for these
transmission lineages prior to the implementation of the lockdown.
Transmission lineages varied in size from sequence pairs (transmission lineages C, J, K, Q, R,
S, T and U) to larger clusters of 16 to 21 sequences (transmission lineage group D*,
depending on whether D* is considered as a single lineage or as multiple lineages). The
number of sequences in each transmission lineage was correlated with the number of days
between the earliest and most recent sampling dates of sequences within the lineage
(assuming that D* and H* are composed of multiple individual transmission lineages each).
However, this result could be driven by the single largest transmission lineage in the data
set. A similar pattern is observed when considering the time between the inferred TMRCA
and the most recent sampled sequence of each transmission lineage (equivalent to the
persistence time plus the detection lag; Fig S11). We also observed that lineages that were
detected earlier tended to be larger (contain more sequences) and persisted longer but
were not more geographically widespread (Fig 3A; Fig S12-S14). However, transmission
lineages first detected between June and August did appear to be found in a greater
number of provinces (Fig 3A). A similar pattern is observed when considering the TMRCA of
each transmission lineage, where a greater persistence was also observed for lineages with
a TMRCA between May and July (Fig 3A; Fig S13).
Geographical distribution of transmission lineages
Singletons and transmission lineages were found across multiple provinces and regions of
Ecuador (Fig 3B-3C). Singletons represent an important proportion of the sequences in
various provinces across central Ecuador ranging between 33.3% in Tungurahua and 52.3%
in Guayas (Fig 3B), an observation that is particularly important for provinces with large
numbers of sequences (Fig S14). On the other hand, different transmission lineages were
found either in single provinces or across multiple regions (Fig 3C). The large transmission
lineage groups D* and H* include sequences from provinces across three geographical
regions each (the coastal region, the highlands and the Amazon region), and potentially
show internal seeding events of the virus across provincial boundaries (Fig 2A, 3C). Even
when accounting for the possibility that these lineage groups are comprised of multiple
transmission lineages, sequences from different provinces and regions clustered together
(Fig 2A).

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. SARS-CoV-2 transmission lineages in Ecuador. A. Summary of the geographic spread of transmission

lineages in Ecuador, showing the number of provinces where each transmission lineage is found compared to the
collection date of the earliest sequence in each transmission lineage (upper panel) or the inferred median TMRCA for each
transmission lineage (lower panel). The trend lines show a linear regression in light blue and a fitted local polynomial
regression in dark blue. B. Contribution of individual transmission lineages and singleton sequences in each province.
Transmission lineages (shades of blue) are ordered based on the earliest sample collection date in the group from earliest
(darker) to more recent (lighter). C. Bar plot summarising the provinces where each transmission lineage was sampled over
the study sampling period.

Consistent with the spatio-temporal sampling patterns (Fig 1C), the older transmission
lineages (shown in darker blue in Fig 3B) were identified predominantly in provinces on the
coast and highland regions, while younger transmission lineages (shown in lighter blue in Fig
3B) have been identified in specific provinces in the north and more broadly in the south.
The first epicentre of the COVID-19 epidemic in Ecuador, the province of Guayas, is
represented by a high frequency of singleton lineages, with a high diversity of individual
transmission lineages first identified at different times during 2020. A similar pattern is
observed for the second epicentre of the epidemic, the province of Pichincha, but with
fewer different transmission lineages and less representation of the youngest transmission
lineages (Fig 3A). We note that these patterns could be affected by differences in the
number of sequences available for each province (Fig 1A; Fig S15).
Discussion
The early weeks of the COVID-19 epidemic in Ecuador were characterised by a severe spike
in the number of cases in city of Guayaquil, the largest in the country located in the province
of Guayas, and by high attack rates (i.e. new cases in a population at risk divided by the size
of that population at risk) across various coastal provinces (24). The outbreak overwhelmed
local healthcare systems, resulting in one of the highest excess death rates in the world
during early 2020 (23). Information about the importation of SARS-CoV-2 into Ecuador and
the domestic spread of the virus is needed to explain the drastic effects of the pandemic in
the country during March and April 2020, and to explain the large difference in disease
burden between Guayaquil and the capital, Quito.
An important determinant of the early dynamics of COVID-19 outbreaks has been human
mobility and the number of introduction events of the virus into a new location with an
immunologically naïve population, as was observed during the early stages of the

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in China (45). The large proportion of singletons observed in
Guayas and various other coastal provinces, particularly given their tendency to occur early
in the epidemic (Fig S2), could be suggestive of multiple independent introduction events
with limited forward transmission. This would also explain why the earliest sequences in the
local transmission lineages and the sequences assigned to the most common Pango lineage
in Ecuador (B.1.1.74) were predominantly sampled in coastal provinces during the early
weeks of the epidemic (Fig 2A, Fig S16).
Two additional factors support the hypothesis that Guayas played an important role in
seeding of viral transmission to other regions in Ecuador: i) the city of Guayaquil hosts the
second busiest international airport in the country and one of only two in the coastal region
(the second international airport located in the province of Manabí hosts limited flights to a
few international destinations; 46), and ii) the overall timing of the seeding events (which
necessarily have to predate the inferred TMRCA of a lineage) corresponds to the school
holiday period in the coastal region (February to April), when international travel and large
social gatherings are more likely to occur. The inferred TMRCAs, which can serve as an
upper bound for the true introduction dates of the largest lineages (assuming these are
better represented with the available sequences), show that these transmission lineages
most likely arrived in Ecuador before the date when NPIs were implemented and before
travel restrictions came into place.
The genetic diversity of SARS-CoV-2 can be quantified using the Pango dynamic
nomenclature system. Pango lineages reflect the history of significant events in the
epidemic and geographic spread of the virus (47) and can be used to explore likely source
locations of virus importations, for example, the high representation of lineages descended
from B.1.1 in the province of Guayas (Fig 1D). The emergence of B.1.1 in Europe and North
America around February 2020 (43) might suggest these regions contributed to seeding the
epidemic in this province of Ecuador (despite the limitations on identifying exact source
locations due to poor surveillance in many countries). B.1.1.74, the most prevalent lineage
in Ecuador, is descended from B.1.1 and was more frequently sampled in Guayas during the
early months of the epidemic (Fig S16), further revealing the role of locations where B.1.1
was prevalent as importation sources during the epidemic’s first wave. However, the high
proportion of singletons observed in Guayas also suggests that onward transmission of
introduced virus was less common. Insights from regions sampled at very high intensities,
such as the United Kingdom, show that the majority of introductions lead to small,
transient, dead-end transmission lineages, whereas a smaller number of introductions lead
to larger and longer-lasting transmission lineages (15). If this phenomenon is a general
property of the first wave of SARS-CoV-2 transmission, as appears to be the case given
similar early observations in Brazil (5), Panama (48), Uruguay (49), Spain (50) and the
Netherlands (51), we can expect that many of the introductions to Guayas led to few new
cases, and that most of the ongoing transmission was derived from only a few introductions.
The larger transmission lineages identified here suggest that virus transmission was high
between neighbouring and well-connected provinces. This might have been an important
factor determining the transmission dynamics between the main cities in the country. In
contrast to Guayaquil, Quito is the second-largest city in the country and presented a much
less severe first epidemic wave, despite hosting the busiest international airport in the

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

country. The city is located in the province of Pichincha, which exhibits a large proportion of
singletons but fewer distinct transmission lineages overall. Pichincha also shows a lower
diversity of global lineages and fewer different transmission lineages; furthermore, the
transmission lineages observed in Pichincha are mostly not shared with Guayas. This
suggests that either independent international introductions or domestic seeding events
likely drove the early epidemic in Pichincha. Our phylogenetic analyses suggest that some
transmission lineages in Pichincha were introduced from other provinces (Fig 2A, e.g. the
monophyletic Pichincha clade in lineage group D*; Fig S6), suggesting that domestic travel
might have played an important role in the establishment of SARS-CoV-2 transmission in this
region. While it is also possible that a later burst of introductions of new lineages occurred
from locations abroad, once international travel and lockdown measures were lifted, the
sampling dates of singleton genomes from Pichincha (between March and July) suggest that
introductions into Pichincha likely occurred before the lockdown rather than during the
relaxation of NPIs. The Pichincha singletons account for the earliest sequences of this kind in
our data set, but could represent instances where limited or no additional spread occurred
following their introduction.
Ultimately, more comprehensive analyses on the sources and drivers of transmission would
require a deeper sampling of key locations where transmission was high, and the inclusion
of complementary data sources such as real-time mobility and transportation data, could
provide a better overview of the forces shaping the observed viral genetic diversity in
Ecuador. Provinces such as Azuay, Guayas and Pichincha represent the main air travel entry
points, but the role of land mobility across the northern border with Colombia and the
southern border with Peru should also be considered to further understand the role of
other Latin American countries in regional viral transmission.
Our analysis highlights some important patterns but is limited by various factors. Most
notably, the number of genome sequences in our study, although large by historical
standards, is small compared to the new expectations set for virus genome sequencing
during the COVID-19 pandemic. The sample size restricts our ability to infer further details
about local virus transmission dynamics from sequence data alone. The trajectories of
individual lineages, from their international sources to their spread across the country and
their subsequent local circulation, are best analysed from larger data sets, or in conjunction
with additional data sources to manage and ameliorate the potential consequences of
sampling biases (10, 52). Incorporating data from self-reported travel histories and human
mobility can help to maximise the utility of smaller samples, collected in settings where the
sequencing of large numbers of genomes lies beyond local technological or financial
capacity, or where high sampling densities are unfeasible (e.g. in remote locations).
The first year of the COVID-19 pandemic has shown how global connectivity plays a key role
in the development of national epidemics caused by respiratory viruses, reminiscent of
other pathogens such as Influenza viruses (16). Our results from Ecuador showcase the
relevance of importations in establishing local viral circulation and the potential
consequences of interprovincial mobility for highly connected locations. In particular, it
shows that importations have been a common occurrence even after the implementation of
lockdown measures and travel restrictions, and that seeding events across provinces can
occur frequently. While air travel is limited between provinces, the connectivity provided by

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

land travel can serve as a means for pathogen spread, highlighting the vulnerability of highly
connected and remote locations alike. The notion that two large cities with busy
international airports can manifest such different transmission dynamics and viral genetic
diversity is also relevant, as it shows that a combination of multiple factors determines the
outcome of an epidemic within a specific location. Ultimately, the type of interventions
chosen to mitigate this high degree of connectivity, the necessity of an early
implementation of these interventions and the adherence to these by the general
population are paramount in determining their efficacy.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank all the clinical personnel from numerous public and private
healthcare institutions who provided access to laboratory-confirmed samples to generate
SARS-CoV-2 genomic sequences. We also thank the Centre for Arbovirus Discovery,
Diagnosis, Genomics and Epidemiology (CADDE), Eva Harris from the A2CARES network and
Lourdes Torres, Diego Quiroga and Stella de la Torre for their methodological, logistical and
financial support (through the USFQ Emergency Grants) towards the sequencing of viral
genomes. We are grateful to all laboratories and institutions worldwide involved in the
generation of virus genome data shared on GISAID. Financial support was provided by the
Clarendon Fund and the Department of Zoology of the University of Oxford (D.S.C.); WT
fellowship 204311/Z/16/Z and MRC-FAPESP awards MR/S0195/1 and 18/14389-0 (N.R.F.);
Branco Weiss Fellowship and EU grant 874850 MOOD (M.U.G.K.); WT Collaborators Award
206298/Z/17/Z (J.T.M.); Leverhulme Trust ECR Fellowship ECF-2019-542 (M.E.Z.); the Oxford
Martin School (O.G.P., M.U.G.K. and L.d.P.); and the NIH Global Health Equity Scholars
award FIC D43TW010540 (P.C.). The authors report no conflicts of interest.
Data availability
The newly generated sequences have been publicly shared through the GISAID platform.
The data sets (including Ministry of Health and National Institute of Statistics and Census
data) and code used to generate the analyses presented in this study, as well as a list of
accession numbers for the Ecuador SARS-CoV-2 genome sequences analysed here are
available through GitHub at https://github.com/BernardoGG/SARS-CoV2_Genomic_lineages_Ecuador. We thank Andrés N. Robalino and Carlos Oporto for their
contribution to the open licence Ecuacovid repository
(https://github.com/andrab/ecuacovid) used to extract epidemiological data for this study.
References
1.
Shu Y, McCauley J. 2017. GISAID: Global initiative on sharing all influenza data - from
vision to reality. Euro Surveill 22.
2.
Geoghegan JL, Ren X, Storey M, Hadfield J, Jelley L, Jefferies S, Sherwood J, Paine S,
Huang S, Douglas J, Mendes FK, Sporle A, Baker MG, Murdoch DR, French N, Simpson
CR, Welch D, Drummond AJ, Holmes EC, Duchêne S, de Ligt J. 2020. Genomic
epidemiology reveals transmission patterns and dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 in Aotearoa
New Zealand. Nat Commun 11:6351.
3.
Alteri C, Cento V, Piralla A, Costabile V, Tallarita M, Colagrossi L, Renica S, Giardina F,
Novazzi F, Gaiarsa S, Matarazzo E, Antonello M, Vismara C, Fumagalli R, Epis OM,

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.
9.

10.
11.

12.
13.

Puoti M, Perno CF, Baldanti F. 2021. Genomic epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 reveals
multiple lineages and early spread of SARS-CoV-2 infections in Lombardy, Italy. Nat
Commun 12:434.
Lu J, du Plessis L, Liu Z, Hill V, Kang M, Lin H, Sun J, François S, Kraemer MUG, Faria
NR, McCrone JT, Peng J, Xiong Q, Yuan R, Zeng L, Zhou P, Liang C, Yi L, Liu J, Xiao J, Hu
J, Liu T, Ma W, Li W, Su J, Zheng H, Peng B, Fang S, Su W, Li K, Sun R, Bai R, Tang X,
Liang M, Quick J, Song T, Rambaut A, Loman N, Raghwani J, Pybus OG, Ke C. 2020.
Genomic Epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 in Guangdong Province, China. Cell 181:9971003.e9.
Candido DS, Claro IM, de Jesus JG, Souza WM, Moreira FRR, Dellicour S, Mellan TA,
du Plessis L, Pereira RHM, Sales FCS, Manuli ER, Thézé J, Almeida L, Menezes MT,
Voloch CM, Fumagalli MJ, Coletti TM, da Silva CAM, Ramundo MS, Amorim MR,
Hoeltgebaum HH, Mishra S, Gill MS, Carvalho LM, Buss LF, Prete CA, Ashworth J,
Nakaya HI, Peixoto PS, Brady OJ, Nicholls SM, Tanuri A, Rossi Á, Braga CKV, Gerber
AL, de C Guimarães AP, Gaburo N, Alencar CS, Ferreira ACS, Lima CX, Levi JE, Granato
C, Ferreira GM, Francisco RS, Granja F, Garcia MT, Moretti ML, Perroud MW,
Castiñeiras TMPP, Lazari CS, et al. 2020. Evolution and epidemic spread of SARS-CoV2 in Brazil. Science 369:1255-1260.
Worobey M, Pekar J, Larsen BB, Nelson MI, Hill V, Joy JB, Rambaut A, Suchard MA,
Wertheim JO, Lemey P. 2020. The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 in Europe and North
America. Science 370:564-570.
Grubaugh ND, Ladner JT, Lemey P, Pybus OG, Rambaut A, Holmes EC, Andersen KG.
2019. Tracking virus outbreaks in the twenty-first century. Nat Microbiol 4:10-19.
Duchene S, Featherstone L, Haritopoulou-Sinanidou M, Rambaut A, Lemey P, Baele
G. 2020. Temporal signal and the phylodynamic threshold of SARS-CoV-2. Virus Evol
6:veaa061.
Lemey P, Hong SL, Hill V, Baele G, Poletto C, Colizza V, O'Toole Á, McCrone JT,
Andersen KG, Worobey M, Nelson MI, Rambaut A, Suchard MA. 2020.
Accommodating individual travel history and unsampled diversity in Bayesian
phylogeographic inference of SARS-CoV-2. Nat Commun 11:5110.
Kalkauskas A, Perron U, Sun Y, Goldman N, Baele G, Guindon S, De Maio N. 2021.
Sampling bias and model choice in continuous phylogeography: Getting lost on a
random walk. PLoS Comput Biol 17:e1008561.
Faria NR, Quick J, Claro IM, Thézé J, de Jesus JG, Giovanetti M, Kraemer MUG, Hill SC,
Black A, da Costa AC, Franco LC, Silva SP, Wu CH, Raghwani J, Cauchemez S, du
Plessis L, Verotti MP, de Oliveira WK, Carmo EH, Coelho GE, Santelli ACFS, Vinhal LC,
Henriques CM, Simpson JT, Loose M, Andersen KG, Grubaugh ND, Somasekar S, Chiu
CY, Muñoz-Medina JE, Gonzalez-Bonilla CR, Arias CF, Lewis-Ximenez LL, Baylis SA,
Chieppe AO, Aguiar SF, Fernandes CA, Lemos PS, Nascimento BLS, Monteiro HAO,
Siqueira IC, de Queiroz MG, de Souza TR, Bezerra JF, Lemos MR, Pereira GF, Loudal
D, Moura LC, Dhalia R, França RF, et al. 2017. Establishment and cryptic transmission
of Zika virus in Brazil and the Americas. Nature 546:406-410.
Rambaut A, Holmes E. 2009. The early molecular epidemiology of the swine-origin
A/H1N1 human influenza pandemic. PLoS Curr 1:RRN1003.
Park DJ, Dudas G, Wohl S, Goba A, Whitmer SL, Andersen KG, Sealfon RS, Ladner JT,
Kugelman JR, Matranga CB, Winnicki SM, Qu J, Gire SK, Gladden-Young A, Jalloh S,
Nosamiefan D, Yozwiak NL, Moses LM, Jiang PP, Lin AE, Schaffner SF, Bird B, Towner

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

14.

15.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

J, Mamoh M, Gbakie M, Kanneh L, Kargbo D, Massally JL, Kamara FK, Konuwa E, Sellu
J, Jalloh AA, Mustapha I, Foday M, Yillah M, Erickson BR, Sealy T, Blau D, Paddock C,
Brault A, Amman B, Basile J, Bearden S, Belser J, Bergeron E, Campbell S, Chakrabarti
A, Dodd K, Flint M, Gibbons A, et al. 2015. Ebola Virus Epidemiology, Transmission,
and Evolution during Seven Months in Sierra Leone. Cell 161:1516-26.
Meredith LW, Hamilton WL, Warne B, Houldcroft CJ, Hosmillo M, Jahun AS, Curran
MD, Parmar S, Caller LG, Caddy SL, Khokhar FA, Yakovleva A, Hall G, Feltwell T,
Forrest S, Sridhar S, Weekes MP, Baker S, Brown N, Moore E, Popay A, Roddick I,
Reacher M, Gouliouris T, Peacock SJ, Dougan G, Török ME, Goodfellow I. 2020. Rapid
implementation of SARS-CoV-2 sequencing to investigate cases of health-care
associated COVID-19: a prospective genomic surveillance study. Lancet Infect Dis
20:1263-1271.
du Plessis L, McCrone JT, Zarebski AE, Hill V, Ruis C, Gutierrez B, Raghwani J,
Ashworth J, Colquhoun R, Connor TR, Faria NR, Jackson B, Loman NJ, O'Toole Á,
Nicholls SM, Parag KV, Scher E, Vasylyeva TI, Volz EM, Watts A, Bogoch II, Khan K,
Aanensen DM, Kraemer MUG, Rambaut A, Pybus OG, Consortium C-GUC-U. 2021.
Establishment and lineage dynamics of the SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in the UK. Science.
Lemey P, Rambaut A, Bedford T, Faria N, Bielejec F, Baele G, Russell CA, Smith DJ,
Pybus OG, Brockmann D, Suchard MA. 2014. Unifying viral genetics and human
transportation data to predict the global transmission dynamics of human influenza
H3N2. PLoS Pathog 10:e1003932.
Vasylyeva TI, Friedman SR, Paraskevis D, Magiorkinis G. 2016. Integrating molecular
epidemiology and social network analysis to study infectious diseases: Towards a
socio-molecular era for public health. Infect Genet Evol 46:248-255.
Moreno GK, Braun KM, Riemersma KK, Martin MA, Halfmann PJ, Crooks CM, Prall T,
Baker D, Baczenas JJ, Heffron AS, Ramuta M, Khubbar M, Weiler AM, Accola MA,
Rehrauer WM, O'Connor SL, Safdar N, Pepperell CS, Dasu T, Bhattacharyya S,
Kawaoka Y, Koelle K, O'Connor DH, Friedrich TC. 2020. Revealing fine-scale
spatiotemporal differences in SARS-CoV-2 introduction and spread. Nat Commun
11:5558.
Gudbjartsson DF, Helgason A, Jonsson H, Magnusson OT, Melsted P, Norddahl GL,
Saemundsdottir J, Sigurdsson A, Sulem P, Agustsdottir AB, Eiriksdottir B,
Fridriksdottir R, Gardarsdottir EE, Georgsson G, Gretarsdottir OS, Gudmundsson KR,
Gunnarsdottir TR, Gylfason A, Holm H, Jensson BO, Jonasdottir A, Jonsson F,
Josefsdottir KS, Kristjansson T, Magnusdottir DN, le Roux L, Sigmundsdottir G,
Sveinbjornsson G, Sveinsdottir KE, Sveinsdottir M, Thorarensen EA, Thorbjornsson B,
Löve A, Masson G, Jonsdottir I, Möller AD, Gudnason T, Kristinsson KG,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K. 2020. Spread of SARS-CoV-2 in the Icelandic
Population. N Engl J Med 382:2302-2315.
Sekizuka T, Itokawa K, Kageyama T, Saito S, Takayama I, Asanuma H, Nao N, Tanaka
R, Hashino M, Takahashi T, Kamiya H, Yamagishi T, Kakimoto K, Suzuki M, Hasegawa
H, Wakita T, Kuroda M. 2020. Haplotype networks of SARS-CoV-2 infections in the.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117:20198-20201.
Popa A, Genger JW, Nicholson MD, Penz T, Schmid D, Aberle SW, Agerer B, Lercher
A, Endler L, Colaço H, Smyth M, Schuster M, Grau ML, Martínez-Jiménez F, Pich O,
Borena W, Pawelka E, Keszei Z, Senekowitsch M, Laine J, Aberle JH, Redlberger-Fritz
M, Karolyi M, Zoufaly A, Maritschnik S, Borkovec M, Hufnagl P, Nairz M, Weiss G,

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
31.
32.

Wolfinger MT, von Laer D, Superti-Furga G, Lopez-Bigas N, Puchhammer-Stöckl E,
Allerberger F, Michor F, Bock C, Bergthaler A. 2020. Genomic epidemiology of
superspreading events in Austria reveals mutational dynamics and transmission
properties of SARS-CoV-2. Sci Transl Med 12.
Grubaugh ND, Saraf S, Gangavarapu K, Watts A, Tan AL, Oidtman RJ, Ladner JT,
Oliveira G, Matteson NL, Kraemer MUG, Vogels CBF, Hentoff A, Bhatia D, Stanek D,
Scott B, Landis V, Stryker I, Cone MR, Kopp EW, Cannons AC, Heberlein-Larson L,
White S, Gillis LD, Ricciardi MJ, Kwal J, Lichtenberger PK, Magnani DM, Watkins DI,
Palacios G, Hamer DH, Gardner LM, Perkins TA, Baele G, Khan K, Morrison A, Isern S,
Michael SF, Andersen KG, Network GS. 2019. Travel Surveillance and Genomics
Uncover a Hidden Zika Outbreak during the Waning Epidemic. Cell 178:10571071.e11.
Long G. April 5, 2020 2020. Ecuador’s virus-hit Guayaquil is grim warning for region.
Financial Times.
Ortiz-Prado E, Simbaña-Rivera K, Barreno LG, Diaz AM, Barreto A, Moyano C, Arcos
V, Vásconez-González E, Paz C, Simbaña-Guaycha F, Molestina-Luzuriaga M,
Fernández-Naranjo R, Feijoo J, Henriquez-Trujillo AR, Adana L, López-Cortés A,
Fletcher I, Lowe R. 2021. Epidemiological, socio-demographic and clinical features of
the early phase of the COVID-19 epidemic in Ecuador. PLoS Negl Trop Dis
15:e0008958.
Nishiura H, Chowell G. 2009. The Effective Reproduction Number as a Prelude to
Statistical Estimation of Time-Dependent Epidemic Trends, p 103-121. In Chowell G,
Hyman JM, Bettencourt LMA, Castillo-Chavez C (ed), Mathematical and Statistical
Estimation Approaches in Epidemiology. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
Fernández-Naranjo RP, Vásconez-González E, Simbaña-Rivera K, Gómez-Barreno L,
Izquierdo-Condoy JS, Cevallos-Robalino D, Ortiz-Prado E. 2021. Statistical data driven
approach of COVID-19 in Ecuador:. Infect Dis Model 6:232-243.
Marquez S, Prado-Vivar B, Guadalupe JJ, Gutierrez Granja B, Jibaja M, Tobar M, Mora
F, Gaviria J, Garcia M, Ligna E, Espinosa F, Reyes J, Barragan V, Rojas-Silva P, Trueba
G, Grunauer M, Cardenas P. 2020. Genome sequencing of the first SARS-CoV-2
reported from patients with COVID-19 in Ecuador. medRxiv.
Lopez-Alvarez D, Parra B, Cuellar WJ. 2020. Genome Sequence of SARS-CoV-2 Isolate
Cali-01, from Colombia, Obtained Using Oxford Nanopore MinION Sequencing.
Microbiol Resour Announc 9.
Wu F, Zhao S, Yu B, Chen YM, Wang W, Song ZG, Hu Y, Tao ZW, Tian JH, Pei YY, Yuan
ML, Zhang YL, Dai FH, Liu Y, Wang QM, Zheng JJ, Xu L, Holmes EC, Zhang YZ. 2020. A
new coronavirus associated with human respiratory disease in China. Nature
579:265-269.
Li H. 2018. Minimap2: pairwise alignment for nucleotide sequences. Bioinformatics
34:3094-3100.
Minh BQ, Schmidt HA, Chernomor O, Schrempf D, Woodhams MD, von Haeseler A,
Lanfear R. 2020. IQ-TREE 2: New Models and Efficient Methods for Phylogenetic
Inference in the Genomic Era. Mol Biol Evol 37:1530-1534.
Guindon S, Dufayard JF, Lefort V, Anisimova M, Hordijk W, Gascuel O. 2010. New
algorithms and methods to estimate maximum-likelihood phylogenies: assessing the
performance of PhyML 3.0. Syst Biol 59:307-21.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.
47.
48.

49.

Rambaut A, Lam TT, Max Carvalho L, Pybus OG. 2016. Exploring the temporal
structure of heterochronous sequences using TempEst (formerly Path-O-Gen). Virus
Evol 2:vew007.
Suchard MA, Lemey P, Baele G, Ayres DL, Drummond AJ, Rambaut A. 2018. Bayesian
phylogenetic and phylodynamic data integration using BEAST 1.10. Virus Evol
4:vey016.
Ferreira MA, Suchard MA. 2008. Bayesian analysis of elapsed times in continuoustime Markov chains. 36:355-368.
Gill MS, Lemey P, Faria NR, Rambaut A, Shapiro B, Suchard MA. 2013. Improving
Bayesian population dynamics inference: a coalescent-based model for multiple loci.
Mol Biol Evol 30:713-24.
Rambaut A, Drummond AJ, Xie D, Baele G, Suchard MA. 2018. Posterior
Summarization in Bayesian Phylogenetics Using Tracer 1.7. Syst Biol 67:901-904.
Didelot X, Siveroni I, Volz EM. 2021. Additive Uncorrelated Relaxed Clock Models for
the Dating of Genomic Epidemiology Phylogenies. Mol Biol Evol 38:307-317.
Volz EM, Frost SDW. 2017. Scalable relaxed clock phylogenetic dating. Virus
Evolution 3:vex025.
Lemey P, Rambaut A, Drummond AJ, Suchard MA. 2009. Bayesian phylogeography
finds its roots. PLoS Comput Biol 5:e1000520.
Minin VN, Suchard MA. 2008. Counting labeled transitions in continuous-time
Markov models of evolution. J Math Biol 56:391-412.
Villabona-Arenas CJ, Hanage WP, Tully DC. 2020. Phylogenetic interpretation during
outbreaks requires caution. Nat Microbiol 5:876-877.
Rambaut A, Holmes EC, O'Toole Á, Hill V, McCrone JT, Ruis C, du Plessis L, Pybus OG.
2020. A dynamic nomenclature proposal for SARS-CoV-2 lineages to assist genomic
epidemiology. Nat Microbiol 5:1403-1407.
Duchêne D, Duchêne S, Ho SY. 2015. Tree imbalance causes a bias in phylogenetic
estimation of evolutionary timescales using heterochronous sequences. Mol Ecol
Resour 15:785-94.
Kraemer MUG, Yang CH, Gutierrez B, Wu CH, Klein B, Pigott DM, du Plessis L, Faria
NR, Li R, Hanage WP, Brownstein JS, Layan M, Vespignani A, Tian H, Dye C, Pybus OG,
Scarpino SV, Group OC-DW. 2020. The effect of human mobility and control
measures on the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science 368:493-497.
Hidalgo G, León J, Jácome R, Vélez D. 2020. Anuario de Estadísticas de Transporte
2019. Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas y Censos, Quito.
Fountain-Jones NM, Appaw RC, Carver S, Didelot X, Volz E, Charleston M. 2020.
Emerging phylogenetic structure of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. Virus Evol 6:veaa082.
Franco D, Gonzalez C, Abrego LE, Carrera JP, Diaz Y, Caicedo Y, Moreno A, Chavarria
O, Gondola J, Castillo M, Valdespino E, Gaitán M, Martínez-Mandiche J, Hayer L,
Gonzalez P, Lange C, Molto Y, Mojica D, Ramos R, Mastelari M, Cerezo L, Moreno L,
Donnelly CA, Pascale JM, Faria NR, Lopez-Verges S, Martinez AA, Network GCtaPCL.
2021. Early Transmission Dynamics, Spread, and Genomic Characterization of SARSCoV-2 in Panama. Emerg Infect Dis 27:612-615.
Elizondo V, Harkins GW, Mabvakure B, Smidt S, Zappile P, Marier C, Maurano MT,
Perez V, Mazza N, Beloso C, Ifran S, Fernandez M, Santini A, Estevez V, Nin M,
Manrique G, Perez L, Ross F, Boschi S, Zubillaga MN, Balleste R, Dellicour S, Heguy A,

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

50.

51.

52.

Duerr R. 2021. SARS-CoV-2 genomic characterization and clinical manifestation of
the COVID-19 outbreak in Uruguay. Emerg Microbes Infect 10:51-65.
Díez-Fuertes F, Iglesias-Caballero M, García-Pérez J, Monzón S, Jiménez P, Varona S,
Cuesta I, Zaballos Á, Jiménez M, Checa L, Pozo F, Pérez-Olmeda M, Thomson MM,
Alcamí J, Casas I. 2021. A Founder Effect Led Early SARS-CoV-2 Transmission in Spain.
J Virol 95.
Oude Munnink BB, Nieuwenhuijse DF, Stein M, O'Toole Á, Haverkate M, Mollers M,
Kamga SK, Schapendonk C, Pronk M, Lexmond P, van der Linden A, Bestebroer T,
Chestakova I, Overmars RJ, van Nieuwkoop S, Molenkamp R, van der Eijk AA,
GeurtsvanKessel C, Vennema H, Meijer A, Rambaut A, van Dissel J, Sikkema RS,
Timen A, Koopmans M, team D-C-r. 2020. Rapid SARS-CoV-2 whole-genome
sequencing and analysis for informed public health decision-making in the
Netherlands. Nat Med 26:1405-1410.
De Maio N, Wu CH, O'Reilly KM, Wilson D. 2015. New Routes to Phylogeography: A
Bayesian Structured Coalescent Approximation. PLoS Genet 11:e1005421.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Information

22

Table S1. Summary of sample collection and sequencing methods used by different laboratories in Ecuador.
Laboratory

Sample collection

Whole genome sequencing

Genome assembly

Whole-genome amplification was done
using the Artic Consortium PCR-based
protocol (https://artic.network/ncov2019). Library preparation and Illumina
MiSeq sequencing were done using the
KAPA Frag kit and KAPA Hyper Prep kit
(Roche Molecular Diagnostics,
Switzerland) and MiSeq reagent v2
chemistry (Illumina, USA) according to
the manufacturers’ protocols.

A modified pipeline dark-matter v3.1.88
(https://pypi.org/project/dark-matter/),
using the tools AdapterRemoval,
Bowtie2, samtools, gatk4, bcftools, mafft
and ivar was used. In addition, the de
novo assembly produced by Geneious
software to the reference SARS-CoV-2
genome Wuhan-Hu-1 (GenBank
accession number NC_045512.2) using
default, was used to cross-validate as an
internal control.

Nasopharyngeal swab samples were
collected by the SARS-CoV-2
epidemiological surveillance system
which were received at the National
Reference Center for Influenza and other
Respiratory Viruses at INSPI, under cold
chain conditions.

See Lopez-Alvarez et al., 2020.

See Lopez-Alvarez et al., 2020.

Nasopharyngeal swabs preserved in 400
µL of 1X DNA/RNA Shield™ solution
(Zymo Research, USA); saliva, urine,
blood and semen samples were used for
RNA extraction by Quick RNA viral kit
(Zymo Research, CA, USA) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol in a
biosafety type II chamber with HEPA

Nasopharyngeal swab RNA samples were
further analyzed with the CleanPlex®
SARS-CoV-2 FLEX Panel (Paragon
Genomics, Hayward, CA, USA) following
the manufacturer’s protocol and
sequenced on a MiniSeq platform
(Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) with a
depth of 1000X.

Assembly and annotation procedures
were performed in SOPHIA-DDM-v4.

Nasopharyngeal swab samples were
collected by the SARS-CoV-2
Institute of Virology,
epidemiological surveillance system
Charitéwhich were received at the National
Universitätsmedizin
Reference Center for Influenza and other
Berlin
Respiratory Viruses at INSPI, under cold
chain conditions.

Centre for
Multidisciplinary
Research of the
Direction of
Research,
Development and
Innovation,
National Institute
of Investigations in
Public Health
(INSPI)

Omics Sciences
Laboratory, Faculty
of Medical Sciences,
Universidad de
Especialidades
Espíritu Santo (UEES)

filters. The RNA extracted was screened
for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 genetic
material by reverse transcriptase
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) using
Allplex™ SARS-CoV-2 Assay, a multiplex
real-time PCR assay to detect 4 target
genes: E, N, RdRp and S (Seegene Inc,
CA, USA).
Instituto de
Microbiología,
Universidad San
Francisco de Quito
(IM-USFQ)

Biomedical Research
Unit, Zurita & Zurita
Laboratorios (ZZL)

Bronchi-alveolar lavage (BAL),
nasopharyngeal swabs; see Márquez et
al., 2020.

Nasopharyngeal swab samples from
patients with suspected re-infections.

See Márquez et al., 2020.

See Márquez et al., 2020.

Whole genome sequencing of the SARSCoV-2 samples was performed using the
Paragon Genomics CleanPlex® SARS-CoV2 Panel following the manufacturer's
instructions on a MiSeq platform
(Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA).

FastQC was used to assess the raw reads’
quality (Sah et al., 2020) before cleaning
them with Trimmomatic 0.39 (PE phred33 ILLUMINACLIP: TruSeq3PE.fa:2:30:10:2:keepBothReads (Tillett et
al., 2020), LEADING:20 TRAILING:20
SLIDINGWINDOW:4:20 MINLEN:40) (Sah
et al., 2020). Clean reads were mapped
to the reference SARS-CoV-2 genome
Wuhan-Hu-1 (GenBank accession number
NC_045512.2) (Sah et al., 2020; Tillett et
al., 2020), using BWA-MEM 0.7.17 with
default parameters (Sah et al., 2020). PCR
duplicates were marked and removed
with Picard 2.23.8 (Tillett et al., 2020).
Variant calling was performed with
bcftools 1.11 (-q 25 -Q 35) (Li et al.,
2020). Only high-quality variants (QUAL ≥
20 and DP≥ 5) (Karamitros et al., 2020;
Tillett et al., 2020), were retained and

used to generate consensus genomic
sequences. In addition, the de novo
assembly produced by MEGAHIT 1.2.9
using default parameters (Sah et al.,
2020), was used to cross-validate with
the reference-based method as an
internal control using blastn (Johnson et
al., 2008).

Supplementary references
Johnson, M., Zaretskaya, I., Raytselis, Y., Merezhuk, Y., McGinnis, S., & Madden, T. L. (2008). NCBI BLAST: a better web interface. Nucleic Acids
Research, 36((Web Server issue)), W5–W9. https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkn201
Karamitros, T., Papadopoulou, G., Bousali, M., Mexias, A., Tsiodras, S., & Mentis, A. (2020). SARS-CoV-2 exhibits intra-host genomic plasticity
and low-frequency polymorphic quasispecies. Journal of Clinical Virology, 131, 104585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcv.2020.104585
Li, Y., Yang, X., Wang, N., Wang, H., Yin, B., Yang, X., & Jiang, W. (2020). SNPs or RNA modifications? Concerns on mutation-based evolutionary
studies of SARSCoV-2. PLoS ONE, 15(8), e0238490. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0238490
Lopez-Alvarez, D., Parra, B., Cuellar, W.J. (2020). Genome Sequence of SARS-CoV-2 Isolate Cali-01, from Colombia, Obtained Using Oxford
Nanopore MinION Sequencing. Microbiol Resour Announc, 9(26), e00573-20. https://doi.org/10.1128/mra.00573-20
Marquez, S., Prado-Vivar, B., Guadalupe, J.J., Gutierrez, B., Jibaja, M., Tobar, M., Mora, F., Gaviria, J., García, M., Espinosa, F., Ligña, E., Reys, J.,
Barragán, V., Rojas-Silva, P., Trueba, G., Grunauer, M., Cárdenas, P. (2020). Genome sequencing of the first SARS-CoV-2 reported from patients
with COVID-19 in Ecuador. medRxiv, https://dx.doi.org/10.1101%2F2020.06.11.20128330
Sah, R., Rodriguez-Morales, A. J., Jha, R., Chu, D. K. W., Gu, H., Peiris, M., Bastola, A., Lal, B. K., Ojha, H. C., Rabaan, A. A., Zambrano, L. I.,
Costello, A., Morita, K., Pandey, B. D., & Poon, L. L. M. (2020). Complete Genome Sequence of a 2019 Novel Coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) Strain
Isolated in Nepal. Microbiology Resource Announcements, 9(11), e00169-20. https://doi.org/10.1128/mra.00169-20
Tillett, R. L., Sevinsky, J. R., Hartley, P. D., Kerwin, H., Crawford, N., Gorzalski, A., Laverdure, C., Verma, S. C., Rossetto, C. C., Jackson, D., Farrell,
M. J., Van Hooser, S., & Pandori, M. (2020). Genomic evidence for reinfection with SARS-CoV-2: A case study. The Lancet Infectious
Diseases, 21(1), 52–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30764-7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Brazil
Argentina
Colombia
Peru
Chile
Ecuador

6

Panama
Bolivia

4

Venezuela

2

Paraguay
0e+00

2e+06

4e+06

6e+06

0

50000 100000 150000

0

25

50

75

0

100

Uruguay
Suriname
0

2000

4000

6000

No. of cases

8000

0

50

we
d

Guyana
100

No. of deaths

150

0

500

1000

1500

No. of sequences per 1000 deaths

vie

Fig S1. Comparison of the reported numbers of cases and deaths and the publicly available SARS-CoV-2 genomes

r-r
e

generated per country in South America. Numbers of sequences were taken from the GISAID database, and the reported
numbers of cases and deaths were taken from Our World in Data. Data retrieved on February 14 2021, with a cutoff date
on 2020-12-10. Lower panels show data from countries at a different scale compared to the upper panels for visualisation
purposes. Color scheme shows the (logarithmic) numbers of sequences per cumulative number of reported death.

tp
ee

8
6
4
2

B.1.9
B.1.6
B.1.375
B.1.371
B.1.225
B.1.1.74
B.1.1.290
B.1.1.264
B.1.1.250
B.1.1.231
B.1.1.208
B.1.1.161
B.1.1.130
B.1.1.107
B.1.1.10
B.1.1.1
B.1.1
B.1
B
A.2
A.1

No

Lineage

0

Province

Galapagos
Pastaza
Morona Santiago
Tungurahua
Pichincha
Loja
Imbabura
Santo Domingo
Santa Elena
Manabi
Los Rios
Guayas
El Oro
Mar−20

Apr−20

May−20

Jun−20

Jul−20

Aug−20

Sep−20

Singleton sample collection date

Oct−20

Nov−20

Dec−20

Fig S2. Summary of singletons identified in Ecuador. The upper panel shows the number of singletons per two-week

epidemiological weeks. The middle panel shows the Pango lineages to which singletons were assigned, and the lower
panel shows the province where singletons were identified by sample collection date. Dot colours correspond to the
province where the samples were collected.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-203/2020|EPI_ISL_527816|2020-08-20
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-228/2020|EPI_ISL_660529|2020-10-01
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-193/2020|EPI_ISL_527809|2020-08-04
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-207/2020|EPI_ISL_527819|2020-04-07
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-201/2020|EPI_ISL_527815|2020-08-20
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-249/2020|EPI_ISL_697787|2020-09-22
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-528/2020|EPI_ISL_697797|2020-07-17
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-206/2020|EPI_ISL_527818|2020-08-14
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-1026/2020|EPI_ISL_594118|2020-08-14
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-106/2020|EPI_ISL_471271|2020-05-19
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-707/2020|EPI_ISL_471269|2020-06-04
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-112/2020|EPI_ISL_471270|2020-05-19
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-322/2020|EPI_ISL_697788|2020-08-19
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-1188/2020|EPI_ISL_697785|2020-08-12
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-054/2020|EPI_ISL_481246|2020-04-17
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-066/2020|EPI_ISL_481248|2020-04-17
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-433/2020|EPI_ISL_697793|2020-09-07
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-524/2020|EPI_ISL_697795|2020-09-29
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-226/2020|EPI_ISL_539793|2020-08-15
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-120/2020|EPI_ISL_491932|2020-07-03
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-253/2020|EPI_ISL_574431|2020-09-14
hCoV-19/Wales/PHWC-166C8B/2020|EPI_ISL_494099|2020-06-27

we
d

hCoV-19/Portugal/PT0689/2020|EPI_ISL_510948|2020-04-15
hCoV-19/Canada/QC-LSPQ-L00242384/2020|EPI_ISL_536319|2020-03-29

hCoV-19/England/ALDP-49CD59/2020|EPI_ISL_559601|2020-06-14

hCoV-19/Latvia/090/2020|EPI_ISL_512645|2020-07-22
hCoV-19/Bangladesh/BCSIR-NILMRC-084/2020|EPI_ISL_464160|2020-06-01

r-r
e

vie

Fig S3. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineages group D.

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-224/2020|EPI_ISL_539792|2020-08-15

tp
ee

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-204/2020|EPI_ISL_527817|2020-08-20
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-196/2020|EPI_ISL_527812|2020-08-20

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-222/2020|EPI_ISL_539791|2020-08-15
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-214/2020|EPI_ISL_539787|2020-08-05
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-199/2020|EPI_ISL_527814|2020-08-20
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-402/2020|EPI_ISL_660532|2020-10-02

No

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-113/2020|EPI_ISL_486848|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Belgium/SN-03031/2020|EPI_ISL_416469|2020-03-03

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-026/2020|EPI_ISL_481244|2020-04-17
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-177/2020|EPI_ISL_525431|2020-08-12
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-188/2020|EPI_ISL_525437|2020-08-12
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-184/2020|EPI_ISL_525435|2020-08-14
hCoV-19/Belgium/DA-030691/2020|EPI_ISL_420347|2020-03-06
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-487/2020|EPI_ISL_660534|2020-10-05
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-515/2020|EPI_ISL_660538|2020-10-10
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-509/2020|EPI_ISL_660536|2020-10-10
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-531/2020|EPI_ISL_697798|2020-11-30
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-539/2020|EPI_ISL_697800|2020-11-30
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-533/2020|EPI_ISL_697799|2020-11-30
hCoV-19/Latvia/09/2020|EPI_ISL_426289|2020-03-30
hCoV-19/Austria/CeMM0351/2020|EPI_ISL_475810|2020-04-06

Fig S4. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineages group H.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-108/2020|EPI_ISL_486843|2020-07-01

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-109/2020|EPI_ISL_486844|2020-07-01

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-118/2020|EPI_ISL_486850|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-114/2020|EPI_ISL_486849|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-111/2020|EPI_ISL_486846|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-119/2020|EPI_ISL_486851|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-045/2020|EPI_ISL_471268|2020-04-17

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-105/2020|EPI_ISL_486842|2020-07-01

hCoV-19/Vietnam/VNHN_0899/2020|EPI_ISL_511895|2020-03-16

we
d

hCoV-19/France/IDF-3577/2020|EPI_ISL_428354|2020-03-25

hCoV-19/Mexico/NLE-UANL-2098/2020|EPI_ISL_648602|2020-05-23

hCoV-19/HongKong/HKU-200723-064/2020|EPI_ISL_497831|2020-03-13

No

tp
ee

r-r
e

vie

Fig S5. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineage G.

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-186/2020|EPI_ISL_525436|2020-08-12

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-216/2020|EPI_ISL_539788|2020-08-05

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-167/2020|EPI_ISL_516651|2020-07-25

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-MC01/2020|EPI_ISL_525438|2020-08-14

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-171/2020|EPI_ISL_516652|2020-07-29

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-162/2020|EPI_ISL_516649|2020-07-14

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-197/2020|EPI_ISL_527813|2020-08-20

hCoV-19/Poland/PL_MCB_29/2020|EPI_ISL_645028|2020-05-12

hCoV-19/Wales/QEUH-96B820/2020|EPI_ISL_531375|2020-08-14

hCoV-19/Norway/2454/2020|EPI_ISL_471172|2020-04-17

hCoV-19/Canada/MB-NML-643/2020|EPI_ISL_632922|2020-03-21

Fig S6. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineage O.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-195/2020|EPI_ISL_527811|2020-08-04
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-513/2020|EPI_ISL_660537|2020-10-10
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-194/2020|EPI_ISL_527810|2020-08-04
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-212/2020|EPI_ISL_539785|2020-08-04
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-219/2020|EPI_ISL_539789|2020-08-15
hCoV-19/Belgium/rega-0408286/2020|EPI_ISL_464080|2020-04-08
hCoV-19/DRC/523/2020|EPI_ISL_420849|2020-03-28
hCoV-19/Guadeloupe/IPG-7333/2020|EPI_ISL_613432|2020-03-20
hCoV-19/Serbia/NoviSad-158472905/2020|EPI_ISL_676590|2020-05-28
hCoV-19/Peru/LIM-INS-020/2020|EPI_ISL_490976|2020-03-27
hCoV-19/SouthAfrica/NHLS-UCT-GS-0046/2020|EPI_ISL_640040|2020-03-22
hCoV-19/Poland/Pom4/2020|EPI_ISL_451645|2020-05-02
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-131/2020|EPI_ISL_491935|2020-04-13
hCoV-19/Poland/Pom7/2020|EPI_ISL_451648|2020-04-26

hCoV-19/CostaRica/INC-0051/2020|EPI_ISL_512657|2020-03-22
hCoV-19/Peru/LIM-INS-022/2020|EPI_ISL_491428|2020-03-24
hCoV-19/Belgium/rega-0508544/2020|EPI_ISL_734713|2020-05-08

we
d

hCoV-19/Peru/ANC-INS-132/2020|EPI_ISL_536529|2020-03-31

tp
ee

r-r
e

vie

Fig S7. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineage F.

No

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-039/2020|EPI_ISL_481245|2020-04-17

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-004/2020|EPI_ISL_477014|2020-03-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-020/2020|EPI_ISL_471267|2020-04-17

hCoV-19/Malaysia/UNIMAS-0803/2020|EPI_ISL_718136|2020-04-08

hCoV-19/Denmark/SSI-02/2020|EPI_ISL_416143|2020-02-28

Fig S8. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineage B.

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-1112/2020|EPI_ISL_486847|2020-06-30

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-110/2020|EPI_ISL_486845|2020-06-30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .
hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-209/2020|EPI_ISL_539784|2020-08-19

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-220/2020|EPI_ISL_539790|2020-08-15

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-213/2020|EPI_ISL_539786|2020-08-05

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-127/2020|EPI_ISL_491940|2020-07-03

hCoV-19/Ecuador/USFQ-126/2020|EPI_ISL_491939|2020-07-03

hCoV-19/Iceland/201/2020|EPI_ISL_417824|2020-03-16

we
d

hCoV-19/Iceland/172/2020|EPI_ISL_417712|2020-03-15

hCoV-19/Iceland/568/2020|EPI_ISL_424588|2020-03-28

hCoV-19/Iceland/553/2020|EPI_ISL_424573|2020-03-27

r-r
e

vie

Fig S9. Subtree from the MCC tree, corresponding to transmission lineage M.

4
2
0

0

50

100

Detection lag (days)

No

Detection lag (days)

100

tp
ee

6

50

0
Apr

Jul

Oct

Collection date of earliest sequence in transmission lineage

Fig S10. Changes in detection lag over time. Figure shows the detection lag of every transmission lineage (time between
the TMRCA of a transmission lineage and the collection date of its earliest sequence), plotted against the collection date
of the earliest sequence in said lineage. The inset shows the distribution of detection lag times in the data set.

Transmission lineage size (no. of sequences)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

15

10

5

0

50

100

Transmission lineage
sampling period (no. of days)

we
d

0
150

0

50

100

150

200

Transmission lineage sampling period +
detection lag (no. of days)

250

vie

Fig S11. Comparison between the size of transmission lineages (i.e. number of sequences assigned to a transmission

r-r
e

Transmission lineage size
(no. of sequences)

lineage) and their persistence in time estimated as either the number of days between the earliest and most recent
sequences in said lineage (left) or the number of days between the transmission lineage TMRCA and the most recent
sequence (right).

tp
ee

16

8
4
Apr

16

No

Transmission lineage size
(no. of sequences)

12

Jul

Oct

Collection date of earliest sequence in transmission lineage

12
8
4
Apr

Jul

Transmission lineage median TMRCA

Oct

Fig S12. Comparison between the size of transmission lineages (i.e. number of sequences assigned to a transmission

lineage) and the collection date of the first sequence identified in said lineage (upper panel) or the TMRCA for said
transmission lineage (lower panel). Trend lines show a linear regression (green) and a fitted local polynomial regression (R
function stats::loess, black and dashed).

Transmission lineage
persistence(no. of days)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

150
100
50

Transmission lineage
persistence (no. of days)

0

Apr

Jul

Oct

Collection date of earliest sequence in transmission lineage

150
100

0

Apr

Jul

we
d

50

Oct

Transmission lineage median TMRCA

r-r
e

vie

Fig S13. Comparison between the persistence in time of transmission lineages (number of days between the
earliest and most recent sequences in said lineage) and the collection date of the first sequence identified in
said lineage (upper panel) or the TMRCA for said transmission lineage (lower panel). Trend lines show a linear
regression (green) and a fitted local polynomial regression (R function stat::loess, black and dashed).

tp
ee

Number of provinces
where found

8
6
4

Apr

Number of provinces
where found

8

No

2

Jul

Oct

Collection date of earliest sequence in transmission lineage

6
4
2
Apr

Jul

Transmission lineage median TMRCA

Oct

Fig S14. Comparison between the geographic spread of transmission lineages (number of provinces where
they’ve been detected) and the collection date of the first sequence identified in said lineage (upper panel) or
the TMRCA for said transmission lineage (lower panel). Trend lines show a linear regression (green) and a fitted
local polynomial regression (R function stat::loess, black and dashed).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.31.21254685; this version posted April 5, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Sequences

47

Transmission lineage

we
d

18
7

V

J

U

I

T

H*

S

G

R

F

Q

E

P

D*

O

C

N

B

M

A

L

singletons

K

r-r
e

vie

Fig S15. Map of Ecuador showing the contribution of individual transmission lineages (shades of blue) and
sequences not associated with them (singletons) in each province. Circle radii represent the number of
sequences per province.

4
2

Province

Sucumbios
Pastaza
Napo
Morona Santiago
Tungurahua
Pichincha
Loja
Imbabura
Carchi
Canar
Bolivar
Santo Domingo
Santa Elena
Manabi
Los Rios
Guayas
Esmeraldas

No

6

tp
ee

B.1.1.74

Apr−20

May−20

Jun−20

Jul−20

Aug−20

Sep−20

Sample collection date

Oct−20

Nov−20

Dec−20

Fig S16. Summary of the identification of Pango lineage B.1.1.74 in Ecuador. The upper panel shows the
number of sequences assigned to B.1.1.74 per 7-day time period, and the lower panel shows the province
where these sequences were identified by sample collection date. Dot colours correspond to the province
where the samples were collected.

