medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.20.21255817; this version posted April 23, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Comparing mental health trajectories of four different types of key workers
with non-key workers: A 12-month follow-up observational study of 21,874
adults in England during the COVID-19 pandemic

Elise Paula, Hei Wan Maka, Daisy Fancourta, Feifei Bua*
a

Department of Behavioural Science and Health, Institute of Epidemiology & Health Care,
University College London
* Corresponding author: Feifei Bu
Address: 1-19 Torrington Place, London, UK, WC1E 7HB
Email: f.bu@ucl.ac.uk

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

Comparing mental health trajectories of four different types of key workers with
non-key workers: A 12-month follow-up observational study of 21,874 adults in
England during the COVID-19 pandemic

Abstract
Background: There are concerns that key workers may be at a greater risk for psychological
distress than non-key workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. However, little research has
included key workers outside of the healthcare sector or has disaggregated key workers into
different subgroups.
Aims: To examine longitudinal changes in mental health over 12 months during the COVID-19
pandemic comparing four different groups of key workers with non-key workers.
Method: Longitudinal data were from 21,874 adults living in England (21 March 2020 to 22
February 2021). Latent growth modelling (LGM) was utilised to compare growth trajectories of
depressive and anxiety symptoms in non-key workers and four types of key workers: i) health
and social care workers, ii) teachers and childcare workers, iii) public service workers, and iv)
essential services key workers (e.g., food chain or utility workers).
Results: When accounting for both time-invariant and time-varying covariates, key workers in the
essential services category had consistently higher levels of depressive and anxiety symptoms
than non-key workers across the whole of the study period. There was little difference in mental
health trajectories between health/social care, teachers/childcare and public service worker
categories and non-key workers.
Conclusions: Our findings suggest risk for poorer mental health during the COVID-19 pandemic
varies within the broad category of key workers generally, and that those working in utility, food
chain, and transport roles are especially at risk. Future research should focus on identifying which
aspects of working conditions may be contributing to occupational stress in these groups.
Keywords: COVID-19, pandemic, depression, anxiety, keyworker

1

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has had substantial detrimental effects on public mental health.1 Certain
subgroups such as key workers (e.g., individuals working in the health care and social support
sectors, delivery workers, teachers) have been posited to be more adversely affected than the
rest of the population.2 However, despite key workers comprising a significant proportion of the
population (33% in the UK),3 and fulfilling a large variety of roles with differing levels of exposure
to the public and thus to the virus itself,4 the majority of the research on key worker mental
health has focused exclusively on healthcare workers5,6 or has examined key workers broadly as
a collective.7–10 Key workers in general have been found to be more likely than non-key workers
to meet criteria for clinically significant mental distress9 and probable criteria for depression,
anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorders than non-key workers.11 However, other studies
conducted during the COVID-19 pandemic have not found key workers to report more depressive
or anxiety symptoms than non-key workers.7,8,12 These equivocal findings may be due to the
heterogeneity involved when grouping all key workers together. For example, even amongst the
specific category of healthcare workers, those whose jobs require direct contact with COVID-19
patients display more symptoms of anxiety, depression, insomnia and traumatic stress than
healthcare workers not working directly with COVID-19 patients.5,6
These varied findings may also be due to variation in the amount of stress experienced across
other key worker groups in different sectors. The mental health of key workers fulfilling roles
other than in healthcare may have been disproportionately impacted during the current
pandemic for several reasons. First, like healthcare workers, they have also been required to
leave their homes for work despite the associated risk of infection and mortality in themselves
and in family and friends.4,13 They may have also been challenged by longer working hours and
more intense working circumstances, sometimes with inadequate personal protective
equipment (PPE),14,15 the latter of which has been found to be associated with depressive and
anxiety symptoms amongst key workers during the current pandemic.16 Degree of exposure to
the public and therefore to the virus may also correlate with increased distress in other key
worker roles as well. One US study conducted in the first few months of the pandemic found that
grocery store workers who interacted directly with the public were more anxiety and depressed
than those who do not interface with customers.17 Some key workers may be additionally have
already been at greater risk for severe infection and death from COVID-19 due to age, pre-existing
health conditions, living in areas of high socioeconomic deprivation, and belonging to an ethnic
minority group.4,13
Only two studies have disaggregated and compared the mental health of different key worker
groups other than in the healthcare sector. In the first few months of the pandemic in the UK,
one study found that food workers were the only key worker group of the eight groups studied
2

more likely than the others (e.g., utility workers, transport workers, health and social care
workers) to meet probable criteria for anxiety disorder.11 In the same study, all key worker groups
besides transport workers were more likely to meet criteria for probable post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) than non-key workers, and odds for meeting this criterion varied substantially,
from 1.7 in health and social care workers to 3.4 in public service workers.11 A second study
conducted in Australia reported key workers other than in the healthcare sector to have higher
levels of anxiety, depression, stress, and poorer quality of life than healthcare workers and the
rest of the population.18
Together, these findings suggest that while key workers broadly may be more vulnerable to
experiencing poorer mental health than the rest of the population during the current
pandemic,9,11 key workers in other roles may be more at risk than those in the health care
sector.11,18 However, research on the longitudinal changes of mental health of the key workers
as the COVID-19 pandemic develops is lacking. It is also unknown whether mental health
trajectories vary amongst different key worker groups. Therefore, the aim of this study was to
compare the growth trajectories of anxiety and depressive symptoms of four categories of key
workers with non-key workers over the first 12 months (March 2020 to February 2021) of the
pandemic in the UK. The findings will inform our understanding of which specific key worker
groups may be most in need of psychosocial support during the current and in future pandemics.
Further, given that the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on mental health could be long-lasting,
it is crucial to identify various mental health experiences amongst key workers that could help in
designing policies and implementations to support those who may be continued to be affected
by the COVID-19 crisis in post-pandemic times.

Methods
Study design and participants
This study analysed data from the University College London (UCL) COVID-19 Social Study; a large
panel study of the psychological and social experiences of over 75,000 adults (aged 18+) in the
UK during the COVID-19 pandemic. The study commenced on 21 March 2020 and involves weekly
and then monthly (four-weekly) online data collection from participants for the duration of the
pandemic. The study did not use a random sample design and therefore the original sample is
not representative of the UK population. However, it does contain a heterogeneous sample that
was recruited using three primary approaches. First, convenience sampling was used, including
promoting the study through existing networks and mailing lists (including large databases of
adults who had previously consented to be involved in health research across the UK), print and
digital media coverage, and social media. Second, more targeted recruitment was undertaken
focusing on (i) individuals from a low-income background, (ii) individuals with no or few
3

educational qualifications, and (iii) individuals who were unemployed. Third, the study was
promoted via partnerships with third sector organisations to vulnerable groups, including adults
with pre-existing mental health conditions, older adults, carers, and people experiencing
domestic violence or abuse. The study was approved by the UCL Research Ethics Committee
[12467/005] and all participants gave informed consent. A full protocol for the study is available
online at www.COVIDSocialStudy.org.
In the present study, we restricted the sample to participants who were in employment at
baseline and living in England (N= 39,255). Further, we included only participants with at least
three repeated measures between 21 March 2020 and 22 February 2021. These criteria provided
us with data from 22,012 participants. Around 1% of these participants withheld data or
preferred not to self-identify on demographic and health-related factors and were therefore
excluded from our analysis. This provided us with a final analytic sample size of 21,874
participants who were followed up for a maximum of 12 months.

Measures
Key worker status
When participants first joined the study, they were asked if they were currently fulfilling any of
the government's nine identified key worker roles. These were categorised into five groups: (1)
non-key worker (reference category), (2) health, social care or relevant related support worker,
(3) teacher or childcare worker, (4) public service worker (e.g., justice staff, religious staff, public
service journalist or mortuary worker, local or national government worker), and (5) essential
services key worker (e.g., food chain, utility, public safety or national security worker, worker
involved in medicines or protective equipment production or distribution).
Outcome variables
Depressive symptoms were measured using the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9);19 a
standardised instrument for screening for depression in primary care. Unlike the original PHQ-9,
the current study enquired about symptoms ‘over the last week’ instead of ‘over the last two
weeks’ as data were initially collected weekly. The questionnaire includes 9 items with 4-point
responses ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘nearly every day’. Higher overall scores indicate more
depressive symptoms, ranging from 0 to 27. Anxiety symptoms were measured using the
Generalized Anxiety Disorder assessment (GAD-7);20 a well-validated tool used to screen for
Generalized Anxiety Disorder in clinical practice and research. These questions were also worded
as ‘over the last week’ for the same reason as the depression items. The GAD-7 comprises 7 items
with 4-point responses ranging from ‘not at all’ to ‘nearly every day’, with higher overall scores
indicating more symptoms of anxiety, ranging from 0 to 21. These data were collected weekly
4

between 21 March and 21 August 2020, and then monthly (four-weekly) starting from 24 August
2020 onwards (see Table S1). Our analyses used months as the unit of time. Mean values of
depressive and anxiety symptoms across four weeks were used when data were collected weekly.
Time-invariant covariates
A range of socio-demographic and health factors were considered as potential confounders.
These included gender (women vs men), ethnicity (white vs ethnic minorities), age groups (age
18-29, 30-45, 46-59, 60+) and education (up to GCSE levels, A-levels or equivalent, and university
degree or above). We included two health-related factors: self-reported diagnosis of any longterm physical health condition (e.g., asthma or diabetes) or any disability (yes vs no), and selfreported diagnosis of any long-term mental health condition (e.g., depression, anxiety) (yes vs
no). All of these were time-invariant covariates that were measured when participants first joined
the study.
Time-varying covariates
First, we considered a time-varying covariate to indicate if participants had gone to work outside
of the home (yes/no). To provide consistent measurement between the weeks of the study when
participation was weekly vs monthly, we coded this variable as whether participants worked
outside at any point during the prior four-week period. Second, in December 2020 the UK began
its COVID-19 vaccination programme and health and social care workers were one of the priority
groups to be vaccinated. Therefore, we considered another time-varying covariate indicating if
participants had had their first dose of the vaccine (yes/no) from December 2020 onwards
(months 10-12).

Statistical analysis
Data were analysed using the latent growth modelling (LGM) approach. We used unspecified
LGM which allows the shape of growth trajectories to be determined by data by using free time
scores. In this model, two time scores were fixed at 0 and 1 respectively for the purpose of model
identification, while the rest were estimated freely, allowing for an empirically based nonlinear
shape for the outcome growth trajectory. In models for depressive and anxiety symptoms
respectively, key worker status and other time-invariant covariates were allowed to predict the
growth factors (intercept and slope; Model I). Then, we added the time-varying covariates
allowing them to predict the outcomes directly (Model II). The full model specification is
presented in Figure S1 in the Supplementary Materials.
Weights were applied throughout the analyses. The final analytical sample was weighted to the
proportions of gender, age, ethnicity and education among adults in employment in England
5

based on the Quarterly Labour Force Survey (March-May 2020).21 Main analyses were
implemented in Mplus Version 8.

Results
Descriptive characteristics
In the unweighted analytic sample of 21,874 participants, women (78.8%) and people with a
universiy degree or above (75.2%) were overrepresented, whereas younger adults (aged 18-29;
6.7%) and people from ethnic minority groups (5.4%) were underrepresented (Table 1). After
weighting, the sample reflected population proportions, with 51.0% women, 39.4% participants
with a university degree or above, 15.3% aged under 30, and 10.9% participants belonging to an
ethnic minority group. Noticably, demographic and health charateristics differed across the key
worker groups. For example, while there were more women than men in the ‘teacher/childcare’
category (74.2% vs 25.8%) and in the ‘health/social care’ category (69.8% vs 30.2%), the gender
proportions in non-key worker and public service workers were similar. Only 15.0% of key
workers in the essential services category had a degree or above, which was 35.8% amongst
public service key workers, 41.9% amongst non-key workers, 47.1% amongst health and social
care workers and 51.6% amongest teachers or childcare workers.
(Table 1)
Figures 1a and 1b depict changes in the mean level of depressive and anxiety symptoms
respectively and suggest some differences in the longitudinal changes in mental health by key
worker status. Figure 1c shows the pecentages of participants who went outside their homes for
work in each key worker category across different time points. Descriptive statistics of timevarying variables are shown in Figure 1. Generally speaking, key workers were more likely to have
left home for work than non-key workers, especially teachers (when schools reopened in the
Autumn 2020) and key workers in the essential services category. The latter group seemed to
have left home for work most consistently over the course of the study period. As expected, the
percentage of those who were vaccinated from December 2020 onwards increased dramatically
for health and social care workers (Figure 1d). By contast, key workers in the essential services
category had the lowest level of vaccination across all groups including non-key workers, with
the gaps apprearing to widen over time.
(Figures 1a-1d)

Latent growth modelling
(Figures 2a-2d)
6

Overall, depressive and anxiety symptoms were worst at the start of the pandemic but then
improved as restrictions from the first lockdown eased over the summer before worsening as
cases increased again in the autumn of 2020. There was little evidence that the intercept or slope
of depressive symptom growth trajectories differed by key worker status when only controlling
for time-invariant socio-demographic and health factors (Figure 2a, see also Table S2 in the
Supplementary Materials for full results). However, after controlling for the time-varying factors
(leaving the house for work and COVID-19 vaccination status), key workers in the essential
services category had significantly higher depressive symptoms at the start of the observational
period (intercept) compared with non-key workers (Figure 2b). This was mainly due to the
introduction of leaving the home for work, which was associated with higher levels of depressive
symptoms at the start (month one) but reduced depressive symptoms between months four and
seven (Table S2). There was no evidence that having had the COVID-19 vaccine was associated
with changes in depressive symptoms. The difference in the intercept between teacher/childcare
workers and non-key workers was also statistically significant. Specifically, teacher/childcare
workers had fewer depressive symptoms at the start of the study. There was little difference in
slopes across key worker status. Key workers in the essential services category had more, and
teacher/childcare workers had fewer depressive symptoms than non-key workers consistently
across the 12-month observational period.
The growth trajectories for anxiety symptoms were similar between non-key workers and each
of the key worker categories when only including time-invariant covariates (Figure 2c). However,
after controlling for time-varying covariates, in particular leaving the house for work, key workers
in the essential services category had more anxiety symptoms compared with non-key workers
and the other key worker groups across the entire study period. There was little difference in the
slopes across the remaining key worker groups. Similar to the results for depressive symptoms,
essential services key workers had a consistently higher score of anxiety symptoms than non-key
workers across the whole of the observation period.

Discussion
Our results show that key workers in essential service sectors (e.g., food chain, utility, transport,
and public security or safety) had consistently higher depressive and anxiety symptoms over the
entire one-year study period. In contrast, teacher/childcare workers had fewer depressive
symptoms than non-key workers at the start and for the duration of the study. Despite the
disproportionate research attention paid to the mental health of healthcare key workers during
the pandemic, we did not find evidence that those working in the ‘health/social care’ and ‘public
service’ sectors had levels of depressive and anxiety symptoms that were higher than the general
population.

7

This is now the third study to have found worse mental health outcomes in key workers employed
in sectors other than healthcare.11,18 In our study, key workers within essential services reported
consistently, on average, 2- point higher levels of depressive symptoms and 1-point higher
anxiety symptoms than non-key workers independent of potential confounding factors. There
are a number of potential explanations for why this group may have been particularly badly
affected. First, qualitative studies of such key workers have documented particular challenges
such as adapting to duties under more stressful circumstances (e.g., increased workloads and
fears of transmitting the virus to family members15). Second, individuals in essential services key
worker roles (e.g., transport, postal, and retail workers) have received less recognition from the
public or their employers for their efforts, which could have resulted in a feeling of inadequacy
and further exacerbate their mental health.15 Third, essential services key workers are
disproportionally more likely to have lower levels of educational attainment, to be in more
routine occupational roles, and to experience financial hardship than other categories of key
workers and the general population. Studies focusing on the experiences of people in roles of
lower socio-economic position have consistently shown poor mental as well as physical health,22
these findings could therefore reflect existing socio-economic health inequalities within society.23
Finally, key workers in essential services roles have also been at particularly high risk for
contracting COVID-19.4,13 It is notable that the distinctions between the mental health
experiences of essential services key workers and other key worker roles were exacerbated when
taking into account having to work outside the home, suggesting that exposure to risk may have
had an adverse effect on mental health. This theory is also supported by qualitative work
highlighting the challenges faced by essential services key workers in often being unable to access
personal protective equipment (PPE) through their employers in comparison to other key worker
groups such as health/social care workers and teachers where although challenges with PPE
remained, there was more attention given to safe working environments.15
Another key finding from this study was that health and social care workers did not show higher
levels of anxiety or depressive symptoms than non-key workers, although their levels were
descriptively higher than some other groups such as teachers/childcare key workers and public
service key workers. However, our findings should not necessarily be taken to imply that mental
health has not been adversely affected amongst health and social care workers. First, this study
looked just at symptoms of anxiety and depression and only measured from the start of the first
lockdown in 2020. By this point, hospitals were already overwhelmed with COVID-19 patients. As
we lack data on mental health in this group prior to the pandemic, it is therefore unclear whether
symptoms recorded here were higher than usual baselines. Second, this study looked at general
symptoms of anxiety and depression, but other studies have suggested effects on wider aspects
of mental health that these measures may not have captured such as post-traumatic stress.11
Finally, our category combined the experiences of health and social care workers without
8

differentiating between frontline workers vs those working in other roles that might not have
involved exposure to COVID-19 patients. As documented in other studies,5,6 the nature of health
and social care roles within the pandemic has been shown to have differential effects on mental
health. Therefore, future studies are encouraged that explore in more depth the types of health
and social care roles that may have been most adversely affected.
It is also notable that key workers in the teacher/childcare sector appeared to have fewer
depressive symptoms than non-key workers at the beginning of the pandemic in March 2020 and
over the course of follow-up, although the differences were slight. There are several possible
explanations for this. First, the start of lockdown in 2020 in the UK involved the closure of schools.
This reduced the workload for many in these professions as most schools were unable to deliver
a full curriculum online and also reduced changes of exposure to the virus amongst this group.
At the same time, teachers did not face the stress of furlough schemes or unemployment as their
jobs were recognised as essential when society did reopen, which may contrast with non-key
worker sectors where a greater proportion of people were furloughed. Nonetheless, some other
workers within this key worker category such as nursery workers did experience furlough and
redundancy. As the pandemic continued and schools reopened, teaching and childcare then
offered an opportunity to maintain face-to-face social interactions with a population less likely
to be physically affected by the virus (children and adolescents),24 which could have helped
improve their wellbeing during lockdowns and when the strictest physical distancing measures
were in place.
Our study did not find any statistical differences between the mental health of public service
workers and non-key workers. Many in the former group may enjoy greater job security and
lower furlough rates, as well as the ability to work from home. Whilst many non-key workers may
have also been able to work from home, they may have been faced with fears of job losses,
financial concerns, and stress due to not being able to leave home for work. Although the aim of
this study was to report trajectories rather than prevalence, non- key workers evidenced anxiety
symptoms which were higher than averages in other studies pre-pandemic using the same
measure (2.7-3.225). These findings point to the importance for monitoring and supporting
mental health in the population as a whole in the current and in future pandemics.
This study has a number of strengths. It utilised a large sample with sufficient heterogeneity to
include good stratification across all major socio-demographic groups. The analyses were
weighted on the basis of population estimates of core demographics, with the weighted data
showing good alignment with national statistics from the Labour Force Survey;21 a nationally
representative study. Due to the richness of the dataset, we were able to employ advanced
statistical analyses to examine the trajectories of depressive symptoms and anxiety amongst key
workers in various sectors since the first lockdown in the UK across different stages of the
9

pandemic over 12 months. Despite these strengths, the limitations of our study raise important
points for future search on mental health amongst key workers. First, despite the effort to make
our sample representative to the working population in England, there is still the possibility of
potential biases due to omitting other demographic factors that could be associated with survey
participation in the weighting process. Second, we were only able to analyse data with
respondents who reported themselves in government identified ‘key worker’ roles at the start of
the pandemic, but the definition of this changed throughout the pandemic. Future study is
required to capture how changes in key worker status designation may have impacted mental
health of these groups. Moreover, we lacked data on participants’ mental health prior to the
COVID-19 pandemic. It therefore remains unclear whether the levels of depressive and anxiety
symptoms had already been consistently high amongst the key workers in sectors such as utility,
food-chain, transport, and delivery prior to COVID-19, or whether the conditions exacerbated
their mental health during the pandemic. Future research is encouraged to look at the longerterm mental health trajectories of key worker in these groups, including after the current
pandemic is under control. Although due to our large sample size we were able to examine more
key worker categories than prior studies, there was still some heterogeneity within the key
worker groups in our study. Due to data limitations, we also were unable to include information
on the frontline nature of key workers’ roles, which will be an important confounder to explore
in future studies. Finally, we were unable to account for whether and to what extent individual
key workers within each category interfaced directly with the public, which might affect their
levels of depression and anxiety.5,6,17
Our findings indicate that the mental health of individuals in key worker roles such as essential
services that have been less visible than health and social care has been worst affected during
the current pandemic, suggesting the potential importance of mental health screening in at-risk
occupations during pandemics. More mental health support will therefore be needed to deal
with these symptoms as the pandemic eases. There is also a need for more fine-grained analyses
of the mental health of different types of key workers, particularly those working in utility,
transport, and food chain roles to identify individuals in specific occupations who will need this
support most. Future research should also seek to understand ways in which workplace measures
to mitigate risk may have been inadequate during the current pandemic, to inform policies for
future pandemics.

Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Ethical approval for the COVID-19 Social Study was granted by the UCL Ethics Committee. All
participants provided fully informed consent. The study is GDPR compliant.
10

Competing interests
All authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Funding
This Covid-19 Social Study was funded by the Nuffield Foundation [WEL/FR-000022583], but the
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily the Foundation. The study was also
supported by the MARCH Mental Health Network funded by the Cross-Disciplinary Mental Health
Network Plus initiative supported by UK Research and Innovation [ES/S002588/1], and by the
Wellcome Trust [221400/Z/20/Z]. DF was funded by the Wellcome Trust [205407/Z/16/Z]. The
researchers are grateful for the support of a number of organisations with their recruitment
efforts including: the UKRI Mental Health Networks, Find Out Now, UCL BioResource, SEO Works,
FieldworkHub, and Optimal Workshop. The study was also supported by HealthWise Wales, the
Health and Car Research Wales initiative, which is led by Cardiff University in collaboration with
SAIL, Swansea University. The funders had no final role in the study design; in the collection,
analysis, and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; or in the decision to submit the
paper for publication. All researchers listed as authors are independent from the funders and all
final decisions about the research were taken by the investigators and were unrestricted.
PPI
The research questions in the UCL COVID-19 Social Study built on patient and public involvement
as part of the UKRI MARCH Mental Health Research Network, which focuses on social, cultural
and community engagement and mental health. This highlighted priority research questions and
measures for this study. Patients and the public were additionally involved in the recruitment of
participants to the study and are actively involved in plans for the dissemination of findings from
the study
Author contributions
FB designed the study. FB analysed the data. EP, FB, and KM wrote the first draft. All authors
provided critical revisions. All authors read and approved the submitted manuscript.
Data availability
Anonymous data will be made available in early 2022.

11

References
1.

Aknin L, De Neve J-E, Dunn E, Fancourt D, Goldberg E, Helliwell J, et al. A Review and Response to the
Early Mental Health and Neurological Consequences of the COVID-19 Pandemic. 2021.

2.

Kisely S, Warren N, McMahon L, Dalais C, Henry I, Siskind D. Occurrence, prevention, and management of
the psychological effects of emerging virus outbreaks on healthcare workers: rapid review and metaanalysis. BMJ. 2020;369.

3.

Office for National Statistics. Coronavirus and key workers in the UK [Internet]. 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 16].
Available from:
https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/articles
/coronavirusandkeyworkersintheuk/2020-05-15

4.

The Lancet. The plight of essential workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. The Lancet [Internet]. 2020
[cited 2021 Mar 8];395(10237). Available from:
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(20)31200-9/fulltext

5.

Cai Q, Feng H, Huang J, Wang M, Wang Q, Lu X, et al. The mental health of frontline and non-frontline
medical workers during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak in China: A case-control study.
J Affect Disord. 2020 Oct 1;275:210–5.

6.

Rossi R, Socci V, Pacitti F, Di Lorenzo G, Di Marco A, Siracusano A, et al. Mental Health Outcomes Among
Frontline and Second-Line Health Care Workers During the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Pandemic in Italy. JAMA Netw Open. 2020 May 28;3(5):e2010185.

7.

Ayling K, Jia R, Chalder T, Massey A, Broadbent E, Coupland C, et al. Mental Health of Keyworkers in the
UK during the COVID-19 Pandemic: a Cross-sectional Analysis of a Community Cohort. medRxiv. 2020.

8.

Kwong AS, Pearson RM, Adams MJ, Northstone K, Tilling K, Smith D, et al. Mental health before and
during COVID-19 in two longitudinal UK population cohorts. Br J Psychiatry. 2020;1–27.

9.

Pierce M, Hope H, Ford T, Hatch S, Hotopf M, John A, et al. Mental health before and during the COVID19 pandemic: a longitudinal probability sample survey of the UK population. Lancet Psychiatry.
2020;7(10):883–92.

10. Saunders R, Buckman JEJ, Fonagy P, Fancourt D. Understanding different trajectories of mental health
across the general population during the COVID-19 pandemic. Psychol Med. 2021;1–17.
11. Murphy J, Spikol E, McBride O, Shevlin M, Hartman TK, Hyland P, et al. The psychological wellbeing of
frontline workers in the United Kingdom during the COVID-19 pandemic: First and second wave findings
from the COVID-19 Psychological Research Consortium (C19PRC) Study. PsyArXiv. 2020.
12. Iob E, Frank P, Steptoe A, Fancourt D. Levels of Severity of Depressive Symptoms Among At-Risk Groups
in the UK During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA Netw Open. 2020 Oct 26;3(10):e2026064.
13. Goldblatt P, Morrison J. Initial assessment of London bus driver mortality from COVID-19. London: UCL
Institute of Health Equity; 2020.
12

14. Aughterson H, McKinlay AR, Fancourt D, Burton A. Psychosocial impact on frontline health and social care
professionals in the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic: a qualitative interview study. BMJ Open. 2021
Feb 1;11(2):e047353.
15. May T, Aughterson H, Fancourt D, Burton A. ‘Stressed, uncomfortable, vulnerable, neglected’: a
qualitative study of frontline keyworker experiences during the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK. SocArXiv.
2021.
16. van Mulukom V, Muzzulini B, Rutjens B, Van Lissa CJ, Farias M. The Psychological Impact of Lockdown
During the COVID-19 Pandemic. PsyArXiv. 2020.
17. Lan F-Y, Suharlim C, Kales SN, Yang J. Association between SARS-CoV-2 infection, exposure risk and
mental health among a cohort of essential retail workers in the USA. Occup Environ Med [Internet]. 2020
Oct 11 [cited 2021 Mar 8]; Available from: https://oem.bmj.com/content/early/2020/10/11/oemed2020-106774
18. Toh WL, Meyer D, Phillipou A, Tan EJ, Van Rheenen TE, Neill E, et al. Mental health status of healthcare
versus other essential workers in Australia amidst the COVID-19 pandemic: Initial results from the collate
project. Psychiatry Res. 2021 Apr 1;298:113822.
19. Löwe B, Kroenke K, Herzog W, Gräfe K. Measuring depression outcome with a brief self-report
instrument: sensitivity to change of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9). J Affect Disord.
2004;81(1):61–6.
20. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB, Löwe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized anxiety disorder:
the GAD-7. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1092–7.
21. Office for National Statistics, Social Survey Division, Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency,
Central Survey Unit. Quarterly Labour Force Survey, March - May, 2020. [data collection]. 3rd Edition.
[Internet]. UK Data Service; 2020 [cited 2021 Mar 29]. Report No.: SN:8659. Available from:
https://beta.ukdataservice.ac.uk/datacatalogue/doi/?id=8659#!#2
22. Kivimäki M, Batty GD, Pentti J, Shipley MJ, Sipilä PN, Nyberg ST, et al. Association between socioeconomic
status and the development of mental and physical health conditions in adulthood: a multi-cohort study.
Lancet Public Health. 2020;5(3):e140–9.
23. Marmot M, Friel S, Bell R, Houweling TA, Taylor S. Closing the gap in a generation: health equity through
action on the social determinants of health. The Lancet. 2008 Nov 8;372(9650):1661–9.
24. Bhopal SS, Bagaria J, Olabi B, Bhopal R. Children and young people remain at low risk of COVID-19
mortality. Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2021.
25. Löwe B, Decker O, Müller S, Brähler E, Schellberg D, Herzog W, et al. Validation and standardization of
the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Screener (GAD-7) in the general population. Med Care. 2008;266–74.

13

Figures and Tables

Figure 1. Descriptive statistics of the time-varying variables across time points by key worker status.

14

Figure 2. Predicted growth trajectories of depressive and anxiety symptoms by key worker
status from latent growth models.
Notes: Model I controlled for time-invariant covariates; Model II controlled for both time-invariant and varying
covariates

15

Table 1. Descriptive statistics of the total analytical sample and by key worker status (weighted)
Total
Health/
Non-key
Teacher/
social
worker
childcare
care
N=21,874
N=14,252
N=3,326
N=1,241
raw
weighted
weighted
weighted weighted
Gender
Women
78.8%
51.0%
49.1%
69.8%
74.2%
Men
21.2%
49.0%
50.9%
30.2%
25.8%
Ethnicity
Ethnic minority groups
5.4%
10.9%
10.7%
15.6%
16.5%
White
94.6%
89.1%
89.3%
84.4%
83.5%
Age
18-29
6.7%
15.3%
15.9%
19.0%
16.2%
30-45
35.0%
36.9%
36.5%
36.9%
40.0%
46-59
42.7%
34.4%
33.1%
31.7%
37.7%
60+
15.7%
13.4%
14.6%
12.4%
6.2%
Education
Low (Up to GCSEs)
9.6%
28.9%
27.4%
24.6%
16.8%
Medium (A-levels or equivalent)
15.2%
31.7%
30.8%
28.3%
31.6%
High (University degree or above) 75.2%
39.4%
41.9%
47.1%
51.6%
Physical health diagnosis
Yes
31.7%
31.4%
30.5%
35.5%
24.0%
No
68.3%
68.6%
69.5%
64.5%
76.0%
Mental health diagnosis
Yes
16.4%
16.7%
16.0%
21.0%
15.8%
No
83.6%
83.3%
84.0%
79.0%
84.2%

N=1,815
weighted

Essential
services key
workers†
N=1,240
weighted

51.3%
48.7%

33.2%
66.8%

10.6%
89.4%

5.1%
94.9%

11.9%
35.2%
42.0%
10.9%

9.8%
39.6%
38.2%
12.4%

30.6%
33.5%
35.8%

46.0%
39.0%
15.0%

34.1%
65.9%

32.9%
67.1%

16.7%
83.3%

16.1%
83.9%

Public
service

Notes: † Essential services key workers includes utility worker (e.g., energy, sewerage, postal service), public safety or national security workers,
workers involved in medicines or protective equipment production or distribution, transport workers still travelling in to work, and food chain
workers (e.g., production, sale, delivery).

16

