medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Higher COVID-19 Vaccination
Rates among Unemployed in the
United States: State Level Study
in the First 100 days of Vaccine
Initiation
Ali Roghani 1 , Samin Panahi 1
1- Division of Epidemiology - University of Utah
Corresponding author: Ali Roghani
Email: ali_roghani@hotmail.com

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Background: Socioeconomic factors may impact the efficiency of COVID vaccine rollout; however,
there are limited studies that examine how state socioeconomic status influences the speed of vaccine
distribution. This study aimed to demonstrate how employment rates as one of the main socioeconomic
factors affect vaccine coverage in 50 states of the United States.
Methods: This study has obtained vaccine data for the 50 states in the United States, available in the
electronic online database ourworldindata.org. In addition to employment rates, other socioeconomic
determinants including poverty level, uninsured rates, population density, homeownership, educational
level, the percentage of the elderly population, and educational level were obtained from
ourworldindata.org data platform. Data from these 50 states were used for regression analyses to examine
the relationship between socioeconomic and vaccination rates.
Results: Our study revealed a positive linear association between unemployment and vaccine rates, and
states with higher unemployment rates were more likely to have higher vaccination rates. However, other
socioeconomic measures do not significantly associate with vaccine coverage.
Conclusion: Despite other studies showing that vulnerable populations had lower vaccine rates, this
study shows that states with higher unemployment rates are more likely to be vaccinated. However, the
finding suggests a need for more research for the states with higher than 5% unemployment rates, as they
had a lower vaccine coverage than states with a range of 4% to 5% unemployment rates.

Keywords: Covid-19, socio-economic factors, vaccination, unemployment

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The United States has been one of the fastest countries in COVID-19 vaccine rollout globally
(1). However, many factors may influence the efficiency and speed of vaccine rollout, which
lagged some states considerably behind the average. Although it is well known that
socioeconomic (SES) determinants have a tremendous impact on a faster vaccine rate globally
(2), there are limited studies that examine the relationship between SES and vaccine level at a
state level. Previous studies show that COVID-19 has impacted those economically
disadvantaged (3); therefore, achieving vaccine equality and equity are crucial factors that can
protect more vulnerable populations.
Previous research indicates COVID-19 vaccination equity differed among states in which
coverage was greater in low vulnerability counties than in high vulnerability counties. However,
states such as Arizona and Montana had higher vaccination rates in high vulnerability counties
(3). Lindemer and colleagues showed counties with high uninsured rates and unemployed adults
have lower vaccination rates (4). Therefore, it can be concluded lower socioeconomic status is
associated with a lower vaccine. Using publicly available data, we evaluate the association
between unemployment rates and vaccine coverage in 50 states across the United States. This
study will demonstrate that variables related to socioeconomic status predict vaccine coverage.
Methods
We analyzed 50 states in the United States that have cumulative vaccination data available up to April
2021. Ninety-nine million and five hundred sixty-five thousand and three hundred individuals received at
least one dose, and 56,089,614 were fully vaccinated. Vaccination data were obtained from
https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccinations(5). For each state, the vaccination rate was defined as the
percentage of individuals in the county with at least one dose of an FDA-emergency authorized COVID19 vaccine. Figure 1 and 2 show vaccine distribution at the end of March, which indicate 60% residents of

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

some states received the first dose and in some states, 20% of residents were vaccinated. Demographic
and socioeconomic data for each state were obtained from the https://github.com/stccenter/COVID-19Data/tree/master/US. The leading independent variable is state-level unemployment claims, which can be
used in any economic analysis of unemployment trends in the United States. Initial claims measure
emerging unemployment, and continued weeks count the number of persons claiming unemployment
benefits. The data sheds light on the current economic response to COVID-19 and how the numbers in
certain states fluctuate over time. This research used the first-week unemployment rates in March to
examine the impact of unemployment on COVID-19 vaccine distribution. To determine the association
between unemployment rate and vaccine rates, ordinary least squares regression was used. Model 1 is the
regression of unemployment rates and vaccine distribution, and Model 2 is adjusted, including other
socioeconomic and demographic factors.
Figure 1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2

Figure 3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Result

Alaska, Connecticut, and Nevada have the highest unemployment rates (more than 5%) in the
US in March 2021. North Dakota, New Mexico, Wisconsin, and Minnesota have the highest
percentage of COVID-19 vaccine rates. In terms of other demographic determinants, Texas has
the highest rate of uninsured residents. Mississippi and Las Vegas have the highest poverty rate
in the US. Maine is the oldest state in the US, and New Jersey has the highest percentage of the
White population. Wyoming residents have the highest rate of homeownership, and Colorado
residents are the most educated in the US.

Table 2 shows the relationships between the measure of the unemployment rate and vaccine
distribution. The scatterplot also indicates a positive linear relationship between the
unemployment rate and vaccine distribution. The range of unemployment rate between states
was from 0.90% to 4.69%. The regression coefficient indicates that a 1 unit increase in
unemployment rate coefficient was associated with a rise of 1.6 vaccine distribution (p <0.001).
Although the association has been positive and linear, states with higher than 5 percent had lower
vaccine distribution than their counterparts between 4 to 5 unemployment rates. The second
model is adjusted analysis, which shows higher unemployment is associated with higher vaccine
coverage, and states with higher population density are less likely to have higher vaccine
distribution. Higher vaccine coverage is across all states with higher unemployment rates;
however, this relationship is not consistent in states whit higher than 5% unemployment rates.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
This study examines how the unemployment rate as one of the leading indicators of
socioeconomic status predicts vaccine distribution at the USA's state level. Despite previous
studies indicating a strong positive correlation between low levels of health insurance coverage
and low vaccination rates(3, 4), the current study's findings show higher unemployment is
associated with higher vaccination rates. The present study examines other socioeconomic
factors, including poverty level, uninsured rates, population density, homeownership, educational
level, the percentage of the elderly population, and educational level. Unlike higher population
density which is associated with lower vaccination rates, other socioeconomic measures do not
significantly associate with vaccine coverage.
One reason that can explain the opposite direction between unemployment and vaccine rates can
be the vaccine eligibility of unemployed people, and they might have enough knowledge about
vaccine eligibility from their primary care providers. This association does not exist for other
socioeconomic and demographic factors. The findings highlight the complexities of
socioeconomic disparities in the United States, while the USA's vaccine distribution policy has
successfully reduced inequalities despite higher unemployment rates. This study shows improved
public health, emphasizing that employment is unnecessary for any of the FDA-authorized
COVID-19 vaccines in the United States. However, figure 3 indicates that states with higher than
5% percent did not have similar outcomes than other states that have a range of 4% to 5%
unemployment rates. This can imply that although higher employment is associated with higher
vaccination rates in the US, this association might not be consistent in the states with the highest
unemployment rates.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This study has some limitations. First, due to prioritizing a specific population for vaccination,
the results might be influenced and prioritized for the elderly, occupational exposures, and
people who have higher risks. Second, these associations are based on the overall information of
each state, while individual-level data for each state could determine vulnerability in more detail.

Conclusion
Our study indicates a positive relationship between higher vaccination rates and higher
unemployment rates in the US at the state level. Although the regression analysis significantly
shows this association, there is a contradiction in the states with higher than 5% unemployment,
suggesting more research to understand this relationship. However, the current study reveals no
association between most of the socioeconomic factors and vaccination coverage after the first
100 days of the vaccine initiation program. The high rate of vaccination among the unemployed
population could be positive news on the economy, suggesting a decrease in disparity in the US.
This finding represents a starting point for future research to look at individual-level data to
determine vulnerability.
Code Availability
The code to perform all analyses described in Methods and Usage Notes sections was written in
R-3.6.2 and is publicly available at https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccinations and
https://github.com/stccenter/COVID-19-Data/tree/master/US.
Author Approval
All authors have seen and approved the manuscript.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.17.21255668; this version posted April 21, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Funding/Financial Support
None Reported
Author Contributions
Ali Roghani designed the study and implemented methods and analyses. Samin Panahi contributed to
evaluate and develop the methods, and structure. All authors were involved in developing the ideas and
drafting the paper.

References
1-

2-

3-

4-

5-

Goldhill, O., Brodwin, E., Cohrs, R. & Silverman, E. Vaccination rates follow the money
in states with big wealth gaps - STAT. https://www.statnews.com/2021/02/11/covid19vaccination-rates-follow-the-money-in-states-withbiggest-wealth-gaps/ (2021).
Roghani, A., & Panahi, S. (2021). The global distribution of COVID-19 vaccine: The role of
macro-socioeconomics measures. Medrxiv. doi: 10.1101/2021.02.09.21251436
Hughes, M. M., Wang, A., Grossman, M. K., Pun, E., Whiteman, A., Deng, L., ... & Toblin, R. L.
(2021). County-Level COVID-19 Vaccination Coverage and Social Vulnerability—United States,
December 14, 2020–March 1, 2021. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 70(12), 431.
Lindemer, E., Choudhary, M., Donadio, G., Pawlowski, C., & Soundararajan, V. (2021). Counties
with lower insurance coverage are associated with both slower vaccine rollout and higher COVID19 incidence across the United States. medRxiv.
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Vaccinations. https://ourworldindata.org/covid-vaccinations

