medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Elevated Blood Glucose Levels as a Primary Risk Factor for
the Severity of COVID-19

Emmanuelle Logette*, Charlotte Lorin, Cyrille Favreau, Eugenia Oshurko, Jay S. Coggan,
Francesco Casalegno, Mohameth François Sy, Caitlin Monney, Marine Bertschy, Emilie
Delattre, Pierre-Alexandre Fonta, Jan Krepl, Stanislav Schmidt, Daniel Keller, Samuel
Kerrien, Enrico Scantamburlo, Anna-Kristin Kaufmann and Henry Markram*.
Blue Brain Project, École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Geneva, Switzerland

*Correspondence:
Corresponding authors:
Emmanuelle.logette@epfl.ch
henry.markram@epfl.ch

Keywords: ASL, Carbohydrates, COVID-19, Glucose, Glycolysis, Glycosylation,
Hyperglycemia, Ketogenic Diet, SARS-CoV-2.

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Highlights
●
●
●
●
●

Patients with severe COVID-19 commonly present with elevated blood glucose levels.
Elevated blood glucose impacts numerous biochemical pathways that can facilitate
many steps of the SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Elevated blood glucose increases glucose in the pulmonary airway surface liquid
(ASL), which breaks down the primary innate antiviral defenses of the lungs and
facilitates viral infection and replication.
Elevated blood glucose causes dysregulations of the immune response that facilitates
the cytokine storm and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Elevated glucose levels act synergistically with SARS-CoV-2-dependent inactivation
of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) to escalate the disease to multi-organ
failure and thrombotic events.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 started spreading towards the end of 2019 causing COVID-19, a disease that
reached pandemic proportions among the human population within months. The reasons for
the spectrum of differences in the severity of the disease across the population, and in
particular why the disease affects more severely the aging population and those with specific
preconditions are unclear. We developed machine learning models to mine 240,000 scientific
papers openly accessible in the CORD-19 database, and constructed knowledge graphs to
synthesize the extracted information and navigate the collective knowledge in an attempt to
search for a potential common underlying reason for disease severity. The literature
repeatedly pointed to elevated blood glucose as a key facilitator in the progression of COVID19. Indeed, when we retraced the steps of the SARS-CoV-2 infection we found evidence
linking elevated glucose to each step of the life-cycle of the virus, progression of the disease,
and presentation of symptoms. Specifically, elevations of glucose provide ideal conditions for
the virus to evade and weaken the first level of the immune defense system in the lungs, gain
access to deep alveolar cells, bind to the ACE2 receptor and enter the pulmonary cells,
accelerate replication of the virus within cells increasing cell death and inducing an
pulmonary inflammatory response, which overwhelms an already weakened innate immune
system to trigger an avalanche of systemic infections, inflammation and cell damage, a
cytokine storm and thrombotic events. We tested the feasibility of the hypothesis by
analyzing data across papers, reconstructing atomistically the virus at the surface of the
pulmonary airways, and performing quantitative computational modeling of the effects of
glucose levels on the infection process. We conclude that elevation in glucose levels can
facilitate the progression of the disease through multiple mechanisms and can explain much
of the variance in disease severity seen across the population. The study proposes diagnostic
recommendations, new areas of research and potential treatments, and cautions on treatment
strategies and critical care conditions that induce elevations in blood glucose levels.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. Introduction
SARS-CoV-2, a novel coronavirus closely related to its predecessor SARS-CoV-1 that was
responsible for an outbreak in 2003, emerged towards the end of 2019 in China and reached
pandemic proportions, probably within a month (1, 2) causing the disease COVID-19. The
actual average mortality rate is lower than the current 2-3% of all confirmed infections
because this coronavirus also causes asymptomatic infections in a larger proportion of the
population (3, 4). Nevertheless, even with an order of magnitude more asymptomatic than
symptomatic infections, this virus would cause over a 100 million hospitalizations and tens of
million deaths if allowed to penetrate the world population fully. There are also increasing
reports of persistent symptoms and various long-term sequelae from COVID-19 (5–8),
warning of an even deeper health crisis. Containment strategies, and lockdown when these
fail, slow down full penetration of the world’s population allowing nations time to prepare a
public health strategy, improve treatments and develop vaccines. Vaccinating a major fraction
of the world population could eradicate the virus, but this would need to be performed in a
globally coordinated manner and fast enough to drastically cut transmission rates before the
virus can mutate sufficiently to necessitate restarting a global vaccination program with a new
vaccine. This is a major challenge since the current rate of infections is still in the hundreds of
thousands per day, which provide ideal conditions for the virus to mutate. The disease has
thus become endemic in the world and will most likely remain a health crisis for many years
to come. It is thus of paramount importance to gain deep insight into the factors responsible
for the progression of the disease, to improve disease management, and to develop new
treatment strategies.
The main symptoms of COVID-19 are fever, cough, fatigue, dyspnea, myalgia, and chest
pain, with diarrhea included among the less common symptoms (9–13). In addition, anosmia
and a loss of taste are other early and long-lasting symptoms (14, 15). In 70-80% of known
cases patients present with mild to moderate symptoms and the disease is manageable without
hospitalization, with patients recovering within a few days or weeks. However, in about 15%
of known infections the disease progresses to a severe form, with pneumonia as the primary
complication often requiring hospitalization. Lung capacity decreases significantly and blood
oxygen levels drop dangerously low, requiring nasal oxygen, and in more severe cases,
intubation using mechanical ventilators. In 4-7% of known cases the disease becomes life
threatening, requiring intensive care (16), with acute respiratory failure in around 20% of
these cases (17).
The substantial amount of patient data that has become available has allowed the
identification of groups of people at higher risk of the disease progressing to a severe form
and with a higher mortality rate. Of all COVID-19 deaths, more than 50% are patients over 80
years old (Supplementary Figure 1A). Indeed, the case fatality rate (CFR; the percentage of
deaths among positively diagnosed infections) increases sharply with age: from <1% below
the age of 50 years, to 2-3% around 60 years, and as much as 10-20% above the age of 80
(Supplementary Figure 1B). The main risk factors that add to this age-related CFR include
hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, diabetes mellitus (DM) and severe obesity (18–24),
with varying impact depending on the country (25). The precedent SARS-CoV-1 showed a
similar clinical profile and also affected more severely the elderly and those with diabetes and
hypertension (26–28). In fact, the mortality rate (MR; the percentage of deaths among all
people) increases with age for many other diseases as well, and diabetics and patients with
hypertension or cardiovascular disease are also more susceptible to succumbing to a range of
diseases (29, 30), including even seasonal influenza infections (31, 32).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A puzzling aspect of COVID-19 is why the disease becomes so severe with age and
preconditions, and in some apparently healthy or young patients. Most of these critical cases
seem to be associated with a “cytokine storm” in the lungs (33, 34), an exaggerated immune
response that produces high levels of cytokines that damages the airway epithelium, leading
to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), requiring ventilation or intensive care with
intubation, which is fatal in 20%-50% of cases (24, 35-38). Survivors of the cases that require
invasive ventilation also need long-term rehabilitation (39). The 20%-50% deaths in intensive
care units (ICU) is due to respiratory failure, multi-organ failure and/or septic shock (40, 41).
It has furthermore emerged that the virus affects blood coagulation, leading to micro- or
macrovascular thromboses often associated with acute pulmonary embolism and cardiac
injury (42–46). Data from China indicates that 53% of deaths were related to respiratory
failure, 7% to septic shock, 33% to both and 7% to unclear mechanisms (39). Importantly,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is observed in 71% of fatalities, but only in
0.6% of surviving patients (47).
Several biomarkers predict a poor outcome of the disease, including increased levels of IL-6
(interleukin 6), serum ferritin, CRP (C-reactive protein), LDH (lactate dehydrogenase), Ddimer and fibrinogen (11, 12, 48-50), as well as reduced levels of antithrombin (45) and
lymphopenia (51). Fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level at admission has more recently
emerged as an additional strong risk factor for COVID-19 mortality (52–56). However, there
is still no definitive treatment strategy or biomarker(s) that can help reduce the mortality rate
sufficiently to resolve the health crisis. Treatments with many drugs such as lopinavirritonavir, interferon, hydroxychloroquine, remdesivir or corticosteroids were investigated (57)
however have shown no or controversial efficacy (58, 59). Other treatments that try to
dampen down the cytokine storm (such as anti-IL-6 antibody tocilizumab (60) or the anti-IL-1
anakinra (61) among others (62-64) were also investigated with variable success. Thus far,
only the use of anticoagulants seems to consistently improve the outcome for patients (65,
66).
This pandemic has accelerated the development of a large number of vaccines on an
unprecedented timeline (67–69). Several vaccines, based on different strategies (vector-based,
mRNA-based or protein-based) and delivery systems (lipid nanoparticles, attenuated viruses)
with proven efficacy and safety, are now available (70–74). The vaccination campaign has
started in many countries, but the time required to get enough people vaccinated worldwide to
eradicate the virus, is still too slow to stop the spread of the virus. The majority of the world
population needs to be vaccinated to sufficiently reduce global transmissions and lower the
risk of new variants emerging and having to restart the global vaccination campaign with a
new vaccine. With global travel mobility, virus variants may require vaccination boosters or
complete restarts in nations previously fully vaccinated. Other uncertainties include the period
of immunity and efficacy of the vaccines in the various groups at risk (75) and hence,
investigations into the pathophysiology of SARS-CoV-2 and new treatments must continue in
parallel and with urgency.
Understanding why some groups are naturally protected while others are vulnerable (76) may
improve management of this disease. All the known preconditions (i.e., aging, DM, obesity,
hypertension) are commonly accepted to be associated with chronic inflammation and a
weaker immune system, which could explain the higher sensitivity and complications of the
disease (77–81). Another association with severe cases that is emerging is hyperglycemia (54,
56, 82, 83), and it is now well accepted that a tight control of glucose levels is important in
the management of COVID-19, not only in diabetic patients (84–88) but also in general (89).

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

However, the role that glucose plays in the progression of the disease and the importance of
managing glucose levels in the aging population, in diabetic people and in apparently healthy
groups, is unclear.
In 2020, the White House launched the CORD-19 database (COVID-19 open Research
Dataset), a dataset of full text articles on COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, and related coronaviruses
(90) that has been made open access to facilitate global collaboration in understanding and
management of the pandemic and to accelerate development of treatments. Since it is
humanly impossible for any researcher to read all these papers, let alone synthesize all the
results, findings and knowledge, we developed natural language and machine learning tools to
automatically mine the contents and constructed a knowledge graph to synthesize the data and
navigate the knowledge. We found strong support for blood glucose as a fundamental risk
factor that could explain most of the variance in the severity of the disease across age groups
and groups with the identified preconditions. The knowledge graph allowed us to navigate
deep into numerous biochemical, homeostatic and metabolic mechanisms of action of glucose
in the context of this disease and find papers that implicate glucose at virtually every step of
the SARS-CoV-2 infection.
The literature shows that elevated blood glucose impairs the first level of innate immune
defense in the lung and creates ideal conditions for the virus to access, enter and replicate in
target cells. It also shows that elevated glucose facilitates the development of multiple
complications of the disease such as the hyperinflammation and pro-coagulation. A case for
impaired glucose metabolism as the primary pre-condition for the severity of COVID-19
becomes even more compelling when the data published in the CORD-19 dataset is combined
with established knowledge of glucose biochemistry, metabolism, and homeostasis, and with
the role of glucose in related pathologies.
A clinical hypothesis must be tested in well controlled clinical trials before it can be used to
take any medical actions. If clinically validated, the hypothesis of reduced glucose metabolic
capacity as a pre-condition underlying age dependency and other pre-conditions of disease
severity, and induced elevations of glucose as favoring disease progression, would have
implications for diagnostic measures during admission. These include measurement of
postprandial glucose (PPG) combined with HbA1c (glycated hemoglobin A1c) and not only
FPG measurements. In addition, other measurements of insulin metabolism that not only aim
at detecting diabetes, but any possible dysregulation of glucose metabolism such occurring in
pre-diabetes, acute hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance (IGT), or stress induced
hyperglycemia would be indicated. This hypothesis also has implications for disease
management where assisted control of blood glucose levels during hospitalization, prevention
of hyperglycemia during critical care, and avoiding high levels of intravenous glucose in ICU
becomes important. Glucose tolerance screening of those not yet infected by the virus could
predict those groups with the highest risk of severe disease and enable improved prioritization
for vaccinations.

2 Results
2.1

Analysis of the CORD-19 dataset

For our analysis, we used the CORD-19v47 dataset that contained, at the time of the study,
over 240,000 scientific articles (see Methods). Given that it is humanly impossible to read this
number of papers, we developed machine learning models to extract the most frequent entities

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mentioned in the context of respiratory viral infections, coronaviruses in general, and SARSCoV-2 in particular. We then constructed a knowledge graph of these entities to synthesize
the data and navigate the subset of knowledge that specifically relates to a potential role of
glucose in the progression of COVID-19 (Figure 1).
We began by extracting entities using named entity recognition (NER) models trained to
recognize nine selected entity types (see Methods, Entities Extraction). Each extracted entity
was mapped to a term in the National Cancer Institute Thesaurus (NCIt) ontology allowing to
resolve most of the ambiguities of lexical variations as well as synonyms, aliases and
acronyms (see Methods, Entity linking). Linking to the NCIt ontology also enabled access to
standardized semantics of the entities, their human-readable definitions, and their hierarchical
structure within the ontology. This approach yielded over 400,000 unique and relevant
entities.
Next, we constructed a knowledge graph by creating a node for each extracted entity and
building a link when entities were co-mentioned. The importance of a node was computed as
the weighted degree centrality and the strength of a link was computed using mutual
information techniques (see Methods). In this context, the weighted degree centrality can be
interpreted as the relative importance of the entity in the dataset, an edge between a pair of
entities as the presence of some association between them, and the corresponding edge weight
as a quantification of the strength of the association. The links do not on their own represent
the type of association, which rather emerges from the overall structure of the graph. The
network was then partitioned into the nine entity types to obtain a first high level view of the
contents of the CORD-19 dataset (Figure 2). The entity types protein and symptom/disease
are the most represented entities in the CORD-19 dataset (27% and 21% respectively),
whereas cell compartment is the least common. The six remaining entity types are roughly
equally represented (between 6% and 11%). This rather trivial analysis does provide a first
high-level view of the distribution of different entity types found in the dataset.
To validate that the associations between entities are semantically meaningful (as opposed to
incidental), we applied community detection methods to objectively partition the knowledge
graph into clusters of strongly associated entities (see Methods, Community detection). The
emergent communities that were automatically detected, revealed five different conceptually
coherent topics (biology of viruses, diseases and symptoms, immune response, infectious
disorders, and chemical compounds) supporting some degree of relevance of the associations
(Supplementary Figure 3).
2.1.1

Presence of the entity glucose in the CORD-19 database

To obtain a next deeper level view of the contents of the dataset, we measured the frequency
of entity mentions in each paper. COVID-19 is indeed the most frequently mentioned entity
providing a minimal validation of the automatic entity extraction by the ML models (Table 1).
The entity glucose is found in 6,326 of the 240,000 papers, making it the 179th most
frequently mentioned entity among more than 400,000 entities extracted. It is also the 17th
most frequently mentioned entity in the entity type chemical (over >20,000 chemical entities
extracted) (Supplementary Table 2B), indicating the extent to which glucose is present in the
CORD-19 database. Of these chemicals, the entity glucose in the one biochemical with the
deepest and broadest association with all stages of the virus infection (see below).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ran
k

Entity

Frequency

1

COVID-19

110,145

2

virus

75,012

3

infectious disorder

73,574

4

coronavirus

67,945

Organism

5

human

61,816

6

viral

7

Entity type

Rank

Entity

Frequency

Entity type

spike protein

6,438

Protein

175

fatigue

6,397

Symptom / Disease

Symptom / Disease 176

asthma

6,370

Symptom / Disease

177

CO2

6,356

Chemical

Organism

178

hepatitis virus

6,343

Organism

52,801

Organism

179

glucose

6,326

Chemical

SARS-COV-2

49,386

Organism

180

immunocompromised

6,310

Symptom / Disease

8

SARS coronavirus

41,463

Organism

181

vomiting

6,275

Symptom / Disease

9

blood

33,970

Organ / System

182

erythrocyte

6,254

Cell Type

10

person

33,893

Organism

183

pain

6,233

Symptom / Disease

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Symptom / Disease 174
Organism

Table 1: Entity Ranking. The entity glucose (the term glucose and any semantics of the term) rank (179th)
mentions in the CORD-19v47 database following COVID-19-related entity-types recognition. The list of the 100
most frequent entities is available in Supplementary Table 2A.

2.1.2

Knowledge graph of “glucose in coronaviruses infection”

In order to obtain the context in which glucose is mentioned in the dataset, we performed a
mutual information-guided search of the paths that are formed by the links of the knowledge
graph from “glucose” to “SARS-CoV-2”. Since there are a large number of potential paths
between any two entities, we filtered them by the best mutual information pathways approach
(see Methods “BMIPs Search”), and then aggregated the entities according to their BMIP.
Examination of the clusters revealed five coherent coronavirus-specific topics (comorbidities
in high-risk group, SARS-related symptoms and complications, SARS-related drugs, SARS
disease biomarkers and inflammation, and coronavirus receptors and RAAS (renin–
angiotensin–aldosterone system), see Figure 3), showing that glucose is mentioned in the
context of numerous stages of the coronavirus infection: from high-risk groups through to
disease development and complications. In addition, three entities directly associated with
glucose (glucose transport, glucose uptake and glucose tolerance test) were found in the
BMIPs (Figure 3, red nodes), indicating that glucose is also mentioned in the context of
glucose metabolism.
2.1.3

Knowledge graph of “glucose in COVID-19”

The first level of analysis thus far shows that glucose is extensively covered in the CORD-19
dataset and is associated with numerous key events in the infection process of coronaviruses
in general. Our next level of analysis aimed to understand to what extent, and how, glucose is
associated specifically with COVID-19. First, we extracted the 3,000 of the most relevant
articles in the CORD-19 database using a customized ML semantic search with the phrase
“glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19,” and then subjected these articles to entity extraction,
that yielded over 20,000 entities extracted. We then constructed a knowledge graph as above,
but using only the 1,500 most frequent entities, from these 20,000 extracted. Since the

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

resulting graph is still extremely dense (see CORD-19 Knowledge graphs in Methods), we
constructed a minimum spanning-tree (see Methods) from the 150 most frequent entities
(Figure 4) to allow focusing only on the most important associations between entities, in the
context of “glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19”. The tree structure that emerged reflects
those associations that survive the greedy minimum spanning tree algorithm, guided us to the
most frequent entities linking glucose to various aspects of the disease. For example, we
could identify hyperglycemia as the main entity that links glucose to all groups at risk for
COVID-19 (i.e. DM, obesity, hypertension and cardiovascular disorder) in this dataset. It also
shows links from glucose to immune responses, inflammatory processes, and oxidative stress
in one part of the tree, vascular system and thromboses in another, and to airways of the lung,
ARDS, multi-organ failure and death in another part, among other important entities (Figure
4).
From the graph created with the 1,500 most frequent entities, we next identified the top 25
BMIPs from glucose to COVID-19 as further analysis. Figure 5 shows all the most important
entities linking glucose to COVID-19 in this subset of the CORD-19 dataset. Most of the
entities are pathologies and biomarkers known to be associated with COVID-19. The BMIP
graph in Figure 5 shows the context in which glucose is found in the CORD-19 dataset
obtained from a search for “glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19”. On the other hand,
BMIPs subgraphs of entities linking glucose to COVID-19 according to each entity-type (as
described in Figure 2), show the strongest associations with the immune defense of the lung
through the entities respiratory system, alveolar epithelium, innate immunity, alveolar cell
type II, immune cells, interleukins, chemokines among others (Figure 6). The subgraphs also
show strong associations between glucose and the entities that concern viral entry and
replication: entities such as glycosylation, glycolysis, glucose uptake, lactic acid or lactate
dehydrogenase. Finally, the subgraphs show associations with COVID-19 symptoms and
complications through the entities inflammation, CRP, ARDS, cardiovascular complication,
thrombosis and associations with the vasculature by the entities vascular system, fibrinogen,
D-dimer, ferritin, platelet or endothelial cells.
The subgraphs linking glucose to COVID-19 generated according to entity types additionally
guided us to and through the specific symptoms, drugs, pathways, chemicals, organs, celltypes, cell compartments, and proteins where the strongest associations with glucose exist in
the dataset (see Figure 6A-H). For example, the associations found in the context of the
phrase “glucose as a risk factor in COVID-19” in the organ/system entity type, includes all
organs known to be affected in COVID-19. In the entity type pathways, we find homeostatic,
immune, infectious pathways as well as other biochemical and metabolic pathways where
glucose is known to be involved.
The minimum spanning tree enables a different and deeper way to navigate the knowledge
contained in the dataset. We therefore again constructed a minimum spanning tree, but this
time from the entire knowledge graph containing all the 1,500 most frequent entities. This
allowed us to then zoom into specific entities and navigate to deeper associations in the
dataset (Supplementary figure 4 and Figure 7). For example, a zoom-in on the entity glucose
reveals the entities prediabetes, glucose tolerance test, homeostatic process, HbA1c, insulin
or beta-cells as key entities associated with the groups at risk to COVID-19 (Figure 7A).
Zooming in on lung and alveolar epithelium, close entities in the spanning tree, reveals
airway, mucociliary clearance, airway surface liquid, mucus, alveolar macrophage, lung
surfactant, surfactant protein-D, phagocytosis and alveolar cell-type II as key entities
associating glucose in the lung (Figure 7B-C). Zooming in on viral entry (Figure 7D) reveals
viral load, DNA replication, S protein, glycoprotein, carbohydrates, lectin or glycosylation as
key entities in the viral entry process.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To summarize, the knowledge graphs generated from the CORD-19 database enables
navigation of the contents of the CORD-19 dataset in terms of entities, different associations
between entities, and in the specific context of “glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19”, and
enable instant access to the underlying paper(s) and the specific text where these entities are
mentioned. We chose this way to construct the knowledge graphs because it finds all types of
meaningful associations for an objective view of the dataset, rather than focusing our
extraction on a predetermined subset of association types that may bias the view. The
methodology used delivers unbiased access to all entities and their associations in over
240,000 scientific papers that are relevant to a potential role played by glucose in the
infection. We complemented this representative review by research in the general literature,
analyses and computational modeling of specific parameters extracted from multiple papers
and using atomistic reconstructions of the virus and its immediate environment to gain a
deeper insight into the biophysical constraints that may need to be considered.

2.2

Overview of blood glucose metabolism in high-risk patients

Two measures are frequently used as indicators of glucose metabolism: FPG (fasting plasma
glucose), that is the blood glucose concentration after a minimum fasting period of 8 hours,
and PPG (postprandial plasma glucose), the blood glucose concentration one or two hours
after a meal or ingestion of a bolus of glucose. Under normal conditions, FPG values range
from 4.4 to 6.1 mmol/L (79 – 110 mg/dL) (average of 5.5 mmol/L), and PPG values should
be lower than 7.8 mmol/L (<140 mg/dL). Hyperglycemia is generally diagnosed when FPG is
>7 mmol/L (>126 mg/dL) or PPG >11 mmol/L (>190 mg/dL). Such a high FPG value is
sufficient to diagnose chronic hyperglycemia, however normal or modestly elevated blood
glucose (FPG ranging 6.1 to 7 mmol/L or PPG ranging 7.8 to 11 mmol/L), called impaired
fasting glucose (IFG), could reveal an impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) that leads to greater
and more frequent glucose fluctuations than normal (91). Because there are no symptoms of
IGT, many people with this condition are unaware of their condition. IGT is diagnosed
following an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), the measure of blood glucose concentration
two hours after ingestion of a standardized bolus of glucose (usually 75 g) to detect how
quickly the body can clear the glucose from the blood. IGT is indicated when OGTT is
between 7.8 to 11 mmol/L and could be a sign of pre-diabetes or other metabolic disorders.
As mentioned, aging (>60 y.o.), hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, DM and obesity are
strong risk factors for more severe symptoms and higher death rates upon SARS-CoV-2
infection. We find that the literature strongly supports abnormal FPG, IGT or hyperglycemia
in all these conditions as described below.
2.2.1

Aging

A hallmark feature of COVID-19 is its preferential impact on the elderly, but the reason is not
clear. One of the many changes that occur with aging, is a steady increase in FPG and PPG,
increased rate of IGT (92-94), as well as an increase frequency of asymptomatic
hyperglycemia (95, 96). FPG reflects the steady-state of blood glucose, while PPG reflects
how well perturbations in glucose levels are tolerated, or the capacity to clear sudden
elevations in glucose. To examine the variations in blood glucose metabolism with age, we
compiled data from several papers (Supplementary Table 5) and plotted the average
trajectories of FPG and 2h PPG (following an OGTT test) within different age ranges (See
Figure 8A-C). Figure 8A shows that FPG concentration increases linearly by approximately
0.165 mmol/L per decade starting from around 30 years old, with a non-significant difference

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

between gender (Figure 8B). On the other hand, 2h PPG concentration only changes
marginally until the age of around 60, but then starts increasing markedly by around 0.64
mmol/L per decade (Figure 8C).
The fatality rate for COVID-19 with age of the patient is well characterized by an exponential
increase and also increases dramatically after the age of 60 (Supplementary Figure 1B). We
then evaluated the correlation between age-related COVID-19 CFR and blood glucose values
according to age range. The correlation coefficient between age-related COVID-19 CFR, is
0.87 (R2 = 0.75) with age-related changes in FPG (Figure 8D), and 0.95 (R2 = 0.90) with agerelated changes in 2h PPG (Figure 8E). While these correlations are high, they are not
identical, suggesting that the correlation with reduced capacity for glucose metabolism alone
is not sufficient to explain the exponential increase in CFR. Indeed, the exponential increase
in CFR is likely due to the convergence of multiple factors, including age-related
comorbidities. However, if a compromised capacity for glucose metabolism underlies the
contribution of the age-related comorbidities, then elevated glucose levels could be
considered a fundamental indicator of CFR. We therefore next reviewed the extent to which
dysregulation of glucose metabolism is common among some of the known comorbidities of
COVID-19.
2.2.2

Diabetes mellitus (DM)

DM is one of the comorbidities that is a clear risk factor for COVID-19 mortality since
around 50% of DM patients, independent of age (Supplementary Figure 5A), succumb to the
disease. A persistent hyperglycemia (FPG > 7 mmol/L or PPG > 11 mmol/L) is the hallmark
of DM. Because hyperglycemia could also be acute, glycated HbA1c (glycated hemoglobin),
a measure of the glycemic variation over the past 2-3 months, is an additional marker that is
used in the diagnosis of DM (97). Hence, FPG > 7 mmol/L with HbA1c > 6.5 % is the
definite indicator of DM, whereas FPG > 7 mmol/L with normal HbA1c (< 6%) reflects an
acute hyperglycemia without DM. Indeed, non-diabetic acute hyperglycemia is often
asymptomatic and therefore undiagnosed, but could mask an impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT). Finally, HbA1c ranging between 6 - 6.4% is a sign of pre-diabetes. Figure 9A shows
the average values of FPG, 2h-PPG and Hb1Ac in the diabetic population.
2.2.3

Hypertension

Hypertension is the second most frequent comorbidity in COVID-19 related deaths (25) and
is also correlated with age (Supplementary Figure 5A); in patients < 44 years, 35% of the
deaths are associated with hypertension, but in patients > 75 years, the association rises up to
70% of the deaths. Hypertension is one of the most prevalent conditions found in the general
population (from 20 to 45% depending on the country (98), and is positively correlated with
advancing age (99, 100). In addition, hypertension frequently coexists with the other risk
factors such as DM, overweight and obesity (96, 101–103). Indeed, a high proportion of
COVID-19 patients present with both diabetes and hypertension (Supplementary Figure 5A).
It is therefore difficult to separate hypertension as a risk factor by itself from its association
with advancing age and other age-related comorbidities, and there is a real need to address if
hypertension, by itself, is an independent risk factor for COVID-19 mortality (104, 105).
However, what is clear in the literature is that hypertension is strongly associated with poor
glucose metabolism.
Firstly, a hypertensive state is positively associated with increased FPG (Figures 9B and
Supplementary Figure 6A) and in parallel, higher levels of glucose are considered to be one of
the causes of hypertension (106). Secondly, in 70% of cases, hypertension is associated with a

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

disturbance in glucose metabolism (previously known or newly diagnosed DM (25%), IGT
(22%), insulin resistance (9%) or IFG (11%) (107)). Thirdly, a study on 63,443 men (ages 21
to 60 years) showed that IFG increases more with age if blood pressure is also elevated (100)
(Supplementary Figure 6B). Dysfunction in glucose metabolism in hypertensive patients is
therefore frequent and often undiagnosed because an OGTT test to detect IGT is not
commonly conducted in the management of hypertension (108). Additionally, some βblockers, the first drugs prescribed in the management of hypertension, have the common side
effect of inducing acute hyperglycemia (109, 110).
2.2.4

Obesity

Overweight and obesity are risk factors for COVID-19 complications and mortality (111,
112). Overweight is defined as a condition where the body mass index (BMI) is between 2530, while obesity is indicated when BMI > 35, and severe obesity when the value exceeds 40.
BMI is positively correlated with FPG levels (113–115) (Supplementary Figure 6A). Mild or
severe obesity is directly correlated with hyperglycemia and the incidence of diabetes (93),
and IGT is a common finding in obese patients (116). Additionally, it was shown that the
incidence of IGT and DM increase proportionally with BMI (i.e. the study shows 20% and
1% IGT and DM incidence respectively for BMI >21; 29% and 6% for BMI ranging 25-26.9;
and up to 55% and 20% for BMI >31 (from Figure 1 in Rosiek et al, 2015 (117)).
2.2.5

Intensive care

Patients in ICU have a high risk of hyperglycemia, independent of a history of diabetes, due
to the stress of the disease and/or hospitalization (termed “stress hyperglycemia”) (118), or
due to the enteral or parenteral feeding that is commonly rich in glucose (95, 119–121); and
hyperglycemia has been reported to predict a poor prognosis for diverse critically ill patients
(122–124). Additionally, common drugs, that are sometimes used for the treatment of severe
viral infection such as catecholamine vasopressors, and some immunosuppressants and
corticosteroids, can predispose patients to hyperglycemia (95, 125, 126).
A review of the literature thus far shows that different groups known to be at risk for severe
COVID-19 are all likely to present with some level of hyperglycemia, impaired fasting
glucose (increased FPG), or IGT (Figure 10), suggesting that reduced glucose metabolic
capacity and/or induced elevations in blood glucose could explain why the known
preconditions are risk factors for COVID-19 complications and mortality. Findings on the
role of glucose during the previous SARS-CoV-1 and MERS outbreaks and preliminary
reports on COVID-19 pathogenesis further support this hypothesis. Firstly, even a mild
increase in FPG (5.78-7.9 mmol/L) was linked to increased morbidity and mortality in SARSinfected patients during the 2003 outbreak (27). Secondly, corticosteroids, with
hyperglycemia as its most common side-effect (127), may exacerbate the severity of the
disease and were contra-indicated drugs for the treatment of MERS and SARS-CoV
infections (128). Thirdly, it was reported in China, in a small cohort, that 52% of patients
presenting clinical characteristics of COVID-19 were hyperglycemic (12). Finally, numerous
more recent studies showed that increased FPG is associated with a poor prognosis and
increased risk of death from COVID-19, whereas well-controlled FPG is associated with a
better outcome (Table 2). More importantly, not only diabetes or hyperglycemia, but IFG
specifically has been associated with a higher risk of poor outcome and mortality (53),
suggesting that even a modest increase in FPG is a prognostic indicator.
In summary, the literature supports the hypothesis of glucose dysregulation as a common
factor within all known groups at risk. To now understand whether this is a mere correlation

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or a cause, we investigated potential mechanisms of action of glucose in the life cycle of the
infection. To do so, we traced the various steps of the pathogenesis of COVID-19 that were
highlighted by the analyses of the knowledge graphs.

Table 2: Overview of the recent studies showing the association between increased FPG and a poor prognosis
and/or increased risk of death from COVID-19.

2.3

Glucose in the SARS-CoV-2 life cycle

SARS-CoV-2 belongs to the coronavirus family, whose name comes from the shape that the
structural spike gives to the virion; protruding as spikes at the surface of the envelope and
forming a crown (129). The S protein holds a receptor binding domain (RBD) at the termini
of the ectodomain that allows the recognition and binding to its host receptor angiotensinconverting enzyme 2 (ACE2) (130, 131). Each spike is a homotrimer of the S protein, but
only one RBD acquires the so-called up-conformation to allow the binding to ACE2 (132,
133). Subsequently, a complex sequence of cleavages by host proteases (membrane
TMPRSS2 (134) and furin (135)) allows conformational changes of the spike necessary for
the subsequent fusion of the virion with the host cell membrane, the cell entry and genome
delivery inside the cell for further replication (16, 136). Once inside the cell, the virus relies
entirely on the host for energy, and must hijack the cellular machinery of the host to produce
more copies of virions. Glycosylation and glycolysis are two key pathways necessary for viral
entry and replication and therefore hijacking these metabolic processes is of critical
importance for the infection.
2.3.1

Glycolysis as a key mechanism for viral replication

Viruses are nonliving entities and, as such, do not have their own metabolism. Hence, viruses
need a supply of nucleotides for genome replication, amino-acids for new protein synthesis,

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

fatty-acids for their membrane, as well as adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for the viral
packaging process (137). For this purpose, most viruses have evolved to modify the cellular
metabolism of host cells upon entry to increase the availability of energy and nutrients for
their own reproduction. One of the most common modifications is the switch to glycolysis as
the main metabolic pathway, a fast process for providing the virus with ATP without
requiring oxygen, but needing an increase in the uptake of extracellular glucose.
To achieve this, viruses induce glucose transporter expression, glucose uptake, glycolytic
enzymes expression (hexokinase 2) and lactic acid production (138, 139), as early as 8-12
hours post infection. The activation of any one of these metabolic pathways is dependent on
the cell type infected and on the type of virus (140, 141). The correlation between glucose
availability and viral replication is well known, especially for the influenza virus. For
example, Reading et al,(142) showed that viral replication of influenza in the lung is
proportional to blood glucose concentration. Kohio and Adamson (143) also showed that in
vitro exposure of pulmonary epithelial cells to elevated glucose concentrations significantly
increased influenza virus infection and replication, whereas the treatment of cells with
glycolysis inhibitors significantly suppressed the viral replication. Similarly, glucose
reduction during infection reduces viral replication (137, 144). Importantly, SARS-CoV-2
replication in monocytes was shown to rely entirely on ATP produced by glycolysis (145).
Glucose supply and glycolytic efficiency are therefore crucial parameters for viral replication.
2.3.2

Glycosylation as a key process in viral pathogenesis

Glucose is not only an essential energy and carbon source for viral replication, it is also the
precursor for glycan trees synthesis, a key process in viral pathogenesis. N-glycosylation, that
consists of the addition of glycan trees at N(X)T/S consensus sites of proteins, is a posttranslational modification that affects more than 50% of mammalian proteins, most
importantly membrane proteins (146). This modification has a crucial role in ensuring the
correct structure and function of the proteins, the regulation of protein-protein interactions,
cell signaling, and pathogen-host recognition (147, 148). Glycan trees are hydrophilic
structures also conferring a high solubility to secreted proteins. They consist of assemblies of
monosaccharides (sugar molecules such as glucose, galactose, N-acetylglucosamine, Nacetylgalactosamine, glucuronic acid, xylose, mannose, fucose or sialic acids; (149)) and can
be divided into three main types: 1) the oligomannose types (or high-mannose (HM)),
considered to be under-processed glycan trees, that exclusively contain mannose residues and
are rarely found in mammalian membrane proteins; 2) the complex types, that are bulky, but
flexible trees, containing multiple branches with any number of the other type of saccharides
mentioned, and 3) the hybrid types which are composed of one branch of mannose residues
and a second branch with complex residues (150). Importantly, glucose, the main
monosaccharide in carbohydrate metabolism, can be converted into all the types of sugars
required to build glycan trees.
Glycosylation is key in multiple biological mechanisms of viruses (infectivity, virulence,
immune interactions among others (151), and implicated in species-to-species transmissibility
(152). Transmission of zoonotic viruses into humans are accompanied by drastic changes in
glycosylation, as exemplified by the human influenza H3 hemagglutinin where the number of
glycosylation sites have doubled since the 1968 pandemic while its amino acid sequence has
remained 88% unchanged (153). Glycosylation is essential for particular mechanisms such as
maintaining the structural shape of the viruses, recognizing the host cells and binding sites, as
well as for cell entry (154–156). It is also used to evade the immune system; indeed, it allows
the virus to deceive the humoral and adaptive immune system of the host by imitating its
glycosylation coat (in a process called molecular mimicry), and shield its immunogenic

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

epitopes from antibody recognition (152, 154, 156-159). The glycan coat of SARS-CoV S
proteins is however relatively sparse compared to strong immune evaders such as HIV or
Ebola (152).
Viral glycoproteins are thought to be more heavily glycosylated than host glycoproteins, and
the glycan composition can differ from host compositions, and from host to host. The underprocessed HM type is, for example, rarely found on the host cells, but frequently found in
enveloped virus protein. This is explained because the distribution of oligo-mannose or
complex glycans is determined by the accessibility and crowding of the carbohydrate chains,
more than the protein sequence itself (160). Indeed, densification of glycans over a protein
sequence results in inhibition of glycan processing and poorer conservation of glycan trees
across viral copies (161). In SARS-CoV-2, the S protein forming the spike is particularly
highly glycosylated, with 22 sites of N-glycosylation per monomer, holding mostly complextype glycans, and ~30% oligomannose-type (132, 133, 162, 163).
We used an atomistic visualization tool (BioExplorer, see Methods) to reconstruct the
glycosylation profile of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein, in order to obtain a realistic view of the
organization of the different types of glycans on the different domains of the spike. Several
groups have reported the glycosylation profiling of the protein S (159, 162, 164), with some
discrepancies in the reports. This is likely because the glycosylation profile of a protein can
differ from cell type to cell type, and because of glycosylation microheterogeneity, i.e. the
inherent variation of glycan structure at a specific site (165). In our study, we considered data
reported in Watanabe et al, 2020 (162), considering only the most frequently represented
glycan type (HM, complex or hybrid) for each specific site, without including
microheterogeneity (see Methods, Glycan types and position). The resulting distribution of
glycans is schematically represented in Figure 11A (detailed in Methods). This atomistic
representation of the glycosylated spike shows the extent to which the spike is physically
shielded by glycan trees (Figure 11B-E) making the virus appear as a large sugar molecule to
the host.
Whereas the complex glycans are mostly localized at the extremities of the spikes and around
the connector domain (CD), the HM glycans are concentrated around the central core of the
spike (in a ring-like formation), and only rarely localized at the extremities (Figure 11A-E).
We can reasonably hypothesize that the bulky complex glycans, mimicking the host cell
glycan types, are exposed at the extremity to help hide the spike from detection by the
immune system. In contrast, under-processed HM glycans, that require less enzymatic
processing, could be sufficient to cover less exposed immunogenic domains such as the
fusion peptide (Figure 11A, D and E). In addition, the HM types, which are the glycans
recognized as foreign by the innate humoral immune system, are logically less exposed than
the host-like complex types (159). Complex glycans on the RBD are surrounding the RBM
(receptor binding motif), that is itself completely glycan-free to allow binding to its receptor
(Figure 11C and E). These complex glycans may also serve a different function such as aiding
the recognition and binding to the receptor. Indeed, ablation of two N-sites of the RBD (N331
– N343) drastically reduces infectivity (166). Glycans located on the N-terminal domain
(NTD) could also be involved in receptor recognition as molecular dynamics simulations
have suggested that, apart from the shielding, glycans at two sites, the N165 and N234 in the
NTD, may provide conformational stability of the receptor-binding domain during
recognition of ACE2 (167). ACE2 is also glycosylated, holding six putative N-glycosylation
sites ((168) and Methods). It has been reported that ACE2 glycosylation does not affect its
expression on the cell surface, but it is required for the binding to SARS-CoV-2 glycosylated
spike and for fusion with the membrane (169, 170). To gain insight into the involvement of
glycans in the spike-receptor interaction, we represented the interaction of the glycosylated
spike in its open conformation with glycosylated ACE2 (Figure 12). The domains on the

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

spike and ACE2 involved in the interaction (binding domains) are highlighted in green and
blue respectively, showing the accuracy of the models. Interestingly, one can observe that
both binding domains are almost exclusively surrounded by complex glycans (Figure 12) that
seem to be connected. The complex glycans on the spike might therefore not only serve to
protect the ACE2 binding domain when in closed conformation or to stabilize the interaction,
but could also enable the conformational change of the protein S into its up-position, required
to be able to bind to the receptor. This is in agreement with a recent proposal reported by
Casalino et al, (167), that the glycan composition of SARS-CoV-2 spike is crucial for the
RBD up/down conformational changes. Similarly, the complex glycans of ACE2, almost all
concentrated near the spike interacting domains, may serve to allow and stabilize the
interaction with the spike.
More than an effect in receptor binding and infectivity previously mentioned, mutations of
some glycosylation sites are known to render the virus resistant to neutralizing antibodies
(171). The S protein is the major antigen responsible for the adaptive immune response (133,
172-174); it is therefore natural to direct vaccines at the spike protein (175). Several amino
acid changes in the S protein could affect viral infectivity, transmissibility and efficacy of
neutralizing antibodies. If they involve glycosylation sites, then the virus can change its
glycan coat needed for infection, transmission, and deceive the host’s immune system. Three
variants of SARS-CoV-2 are of particular concern; the variant B.1.1.7 (or 501Y-V1) first
emerged in the UK, the variant 501Y-V2 first emerged in South Africa (SA), and the P.1
variant first emerged in Brazil - all with mutations identified in the sequence coding for the S
protein (see https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/en/publications-data/covid-19-risk-assessmentspread-new-variants-concern-eueea-first-update). All three variants share the N501Y
mutation, located in the RBM, responsible for a more infectious phenotype with higher
infectivity but apparently little change in severity (176, 177), due to increased binding affinity
for its receptor ACE2. The SA and Brazilian variants hold an additional mutation (E484K),
which may be an immune evader mutation (178, 179). They all have undergone additional
mutations, but none of these impact glycosylation sites. However, the Brazilian variant, from
which there is less information on infectivity, severity, immune evading, possesses a T20N
mutation, a mutation located at the beginning of the NTD region, which could potentially
become a functional glycosylation site according to the NetNGlyc 1.0 software
(http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetNGlyc/).
In order to better understand the potential impact of this additional glycan site, we modeled
the glycosylation profile of the P.1 variant using the BioExplorer tool we developed.
Interestingly, the additional 20N glycan would be localized at the very top of the spike
(Figure 11F), adding to the shielding of the RBM surrounding region (Figure 11G), which
may suggest that it would be better at evading the immune system. In addition, it is localized
very close to the N331 and N343 glycans sites (see Supplementary Figure 7 and (166)) shown
involved in receptor binding, which may also increase efficacy of receptor binding and
account for transmission with lower viral loads. Overall, this potentially new functional Nsite, in addition to the well-described N501Y and E484K mutations, could render the P.1
variant more infectious and even a stronger immune evader.

2.4

Glucose in the antiviral defense of the lung

SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 are respiratory viruses that mainly invade the human body
through droplets first inhaled into the upper airways, where they infect host cells by binding
to the host receptor ACE2, and then may migrate to the lower airways where more cells can
be more easily infected (180). ACE2 is expressed in many different tissues, but mainly found
in lungs, pancreas, kidneys, as well as the gastrointestinal tract and endothelial cells (181-

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

184). Because ACE2 is the entry point for the virus, several studies have focused on the role
of the ACE2-spike interaction, the expression level of ACE2, and the glycosylation status of
ACE2 to explain the severity of the disease. The data is however inconsistent with no clear
correlation between ACE2 expression levels and disease severity (185-189). However, before
reaching the lower airway where it can bind to ACE2, the virus has to break through the first
non-specific anti-pathogen defense system of the lung formed by the pulmonary epithelium
and the airway surface liquid (ASL). This defense system is the first-line protective barrier
from constant exposure to bacteria, fungi, viruses and toxic particles (190).
2.4.1
The pulmonary epithelium and the ASL as the first-lines of defense against
pathogens
The non-alveolar epithelium of the respiratory zone is composed of many types of secretory
cells that produce cytokines, antimicrobial agents as well as mucins forming the mucus
(Figure 13) (191-193). This epithelium possesses a high number of ciliated cells with hair-like
projections that beat rhythmically, propelling pathogens and inhaled particles trapped in the
mucus out of the airways. This process, called mucociliary clearance, is the very first defense
that starts in the upper airway and that attempts to expel the pathogen before it can reach the
epithelial cells (194, 195). Some pathogens may get through and reach the lower alveoli,
where the epithelium is mainly composed of alveolar epithelial cells type I and II (AECI and
AECII) along with numerous resident macrophages (193). The thin AECI cover 95% of the
alveolar surface area and are largely devoid of organelles since they specialize on passive gas
exchange (196), whereas the cuboidal AECII secrete surfactant, a fluid composed of a
mixture of proteins and lipids involved in both the maintenance of surface tension, to avoid
the collapse of the alveoli, and alveolar protection (197-199). The AECII pneumocytes are the
cells of the respiratory tract showing the highest expression of ACE2 as compared to lower
levels of ACE2 that are found on the clara cells, the ciliated airway cells and the epithelial
cells of the nasal cavity (200).
The ASL is composed of a periciliary layer and the overlying mucosal layer, and lines most of
the respiratory tract (Figure 13). The mucosal layer is composed of mucins, large glycosylated
proteins secreted by the specialized mucosal and goblet cells (191, 201) that form a physical
barrier to trap inhaled particles or pathogens. The periciliary layer has a lower viscosity to
allow the ciliary beating for mucociliary clearance. The ASL volume, depth and hydration
level are critical for the functioning of the mucociliary escalator and these parameters are
therefore homeostatically regulated by an intricate orchestration of mucin production and
expression of a complex combination of ion channels, exchangers and pumps (see (202) for
an extensive review). Na+ absorption and secretion of HCO3- and Cl- are mediated through the
specific transporters ENaC and CFTR (203, 204). Importantly, the deeper alveoli in the lungs
are lined with a thin surfactant layer to permit efficient gaseous exchange (198), which
contains several other molecules, including amino-acids, proteins, lipids and glucose, all of
which are under strict homeostatic control to avoid conditions that would support bacterial
growth (205), while ensuring a proper functioning of the ASL. The glucose concentration in
the ASL is especially carefully regulated (206).
2.4.1.1 Regulation of glucose concentration in the ASL
Glucose is 10-12 times less concentrated in the ASL than in blood (207). This low
concentration of glucose (0.4 mmol/L +/- 0.2 in normal condition) is necessary to maintain
the proper functioning and the sterility of the ASL (208). Glucose is exclusively supplied to
the airways from the circulating blood, reaching the basolateral side of epithelial cells, where
uptake of glucose can occur through glucose transporters (GLUT). The low concentration of

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

glucose in the ASL is tightly regulated by homeostatic mechanisms that include paracellular
passive diffusion controlled by tight junction barriers, and facilitative transcellular epithelial
glucose transport (Figure 14); the paracellular diffusion being the primary mechanism (209).
The transcellular transport of glucose is mediated by the facilitative transporter GLUT,
expressed at the basolateral membranes, and by GLUT or SGLT1 at the apical membrane of
the airway and alveoli respectively (Figure 14 left panel and (207, 210). Glucose normally
moves through GLUTs by passive diffusion down a concentration gradient generated by the
activity of hexokinases, which phosphorylate intracellular glucose to maintain a lowintracellular concentration of glucose (209). In contrast, transport via SGLT is driven by
sodium (Na+) and glucose gradients. This co-transport of Na+ in the alveolus would be
advantageous for the maintenance of the low volume of fluid required for efficient gaseous
exchange (211–213). Several pathological conditions lead to a disruption of glucose
homeostasis in the lung and a subsequent increased glucose concentration in the ASL (210,
211). Indeed, defects in tight junction permeability or an increase in blood glucose
concentration (hyperglycemia) could both lead to a rise of glucose in the ASL (Figure 14,
right panel), with the greatest effect when they coexist. Any elevation is directly countered by
apical reuptake by the epithelial cells through the GLUT and SGLT transporters, followed by
rapid metabolism by hexokinase in the glycolysis pathway. Hence, the direct conversion of
glucose to glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) allows the cells to maintain a steep gradient of glucose
concentration needed for a strong driving force for the reuptake of glucose from the ASL.
2.4.1.2 Elevated glucose in the ASL impairs primary lung defenses
A high concentration of glucose in the ASL has multiple effects that lead to general
impairment in its defense capability (210), as summarized in Figure 15 and detailed below.
2.4.1.2.1

Glucose impairs the humoral arm of lung defenses

As mentioned before, the airway epithelial cells secrete a wide range of antimicrobial agents
(see Figure 13). The combined activity of these proteins is a crucial step in the first phase of
the innate defense of the lung against infections by viruses, bacteria and fungi. Among them,
enzymes (lysozymes, proteases), proteases inhibitors, and soluble factors (cytokines,
lactoferrin, ß-defensin and LL-37 (cathelicidin-related peptide)) that are dedicated to humoral
immunity against a variety of pathogens (190, 192, 214, 215). However, the protection
against viruses is mainly mediated by the soluble C-type lectins SP-A and SP-D (surfactant
protein A and D, pattern recognition molecules of the collectins family) (216–218), produced
by the AECII cells and secreted in the distal alveolar airway (see Figure 13) (219, 220). In
case of viral invasion, C-type lectins bind to the high-mannose glycans exposed at the surface
of the enveloped viruses through their carbohydrate recognition domain (CRD) (221, 222),
and exert their antiviral activity through two different mechanisms: first, by aggregating the
pathogens, that physically impairs the binding to the receptors, and second, by recruiting and
activating the resident alveolar macrophages, neutrophils and chemo-attracted phagocytes to
phagocytose the aggregated viruses (216, 218, 220, 223, 224). SP-A and SP-D show
significant differences in ligand preferences; in the case of SARS-CoV, it seems to be mainly
targeted by SP-D recognition (218, 225). Using the BioExplorer, and the data reported in the
literature, we reconstructed a model of the environment of SARS-CoV-2 in the ASL during
primary infection under normal glucose concentration (Figure 16).
Importantly, the CRD domain of collectins recognize other varieties of carbohydrates with
different affinities (217, 226). C-type lectin with an EPN tripeptide motif on their CRD, such
as SP-D, show a high affinity for glucose (227). Hence, at high concentrations, glucose can

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bind to the CRD domain of these C-type lectin that competitively blocks the viral recognition
(142, 228–230). In addition, glucose can indirectly impair ß-defensins and lactoferrins
activities (see below on ASL acidosis). Finally, high ASL glucose concentrations could
impair not only the activity, but also the secretion of these antimicrobial factors (210) (Figure
15).

2.4.1.2.2

Elevated glucose impairs the cellular immunity in the lung

The alveolar phagocytes play a key role in the non-specific elimination of pathogens as well
as in the orchestration of the adaptive immune system through crosstalk. Alveolar
macrophages, interstitial macrophages and dendritic cells (DC) are some of the few cell types
that reside in healthy airspaces ((231) and Figure 13). In brief, at resting state, alveolar
macrophages participate in the homeostasis of the lung, mainly clearing apoptotic cells and
recycling surfactant. Upon infection, alveolar macrophages recognize early alarm signals
from infected cells, such as elevations in type 1 interferongamma (IFNγ) and pathogenassociated molecular patterns (PAMPs), migrate to the site of infection, and initiate a proinflammatory response. These activated macrophages (M1) express various cell surface
receptors, including surfactant-CRD receptors or pattern recognition receptors (PRRs),
leading to pathogens recognition, phagocytosis and clearance (232, 233). They also secrete
reactive oxygen species (ROS) to kill pathogens, as well as pro-inflammatory cytokines
necessary for the chemoattraction of additional phagocytes and immune cells that migrate
across the epithelium to access the site of infection. Additionally, they facilitate the clearance
of infected cells to limit the propagation of the infection. In a second phase, guided by antiinflammatory cytokines and surfactant proteins (such SP-A and SP-D that play a crucial
immunomodulatory function; (234)), macrophages switch to the alternatively activated
macrophage (M2) state to begin winding down the inflammatory response, phagocytose
apoptotic cells, repair damaged cells, and restore homeostasis (224, 235). Increasing glucose
above physiological concentrations is associated with a reduction in the chemotactic
migration capacity of neutrophils and in their phagocytotic efficiency (79, 236, 237).
Interestingly, aging and hyperglycemia are also two conditions associated with a decreased
number of alveolar macrophages and DCs, with altered function of antigen presenting cells
(APCs) (238–240), significantly impairing the cellular arm of innate defense.
2.4.1.2.3

Elevated Glucose causes acidosis of the ASL

Regulation of the pH of the ASL, neutral under normal conditions (6.9-7), is also tightly
controlled as it may affect the general capability of the innate immune defense of the ASL
(202). As previously mentioned, elevation in the glucose concentration in the ASL is
countered by apical reuptake by the epithelial cells and rapid metabolism by hexokinases in
the glycolytic pathway. One main consequence is the production of lactate, in part released
into the ASL (212, 241) through apical monocarboxylate transporters (MCT) that are
lactate/H+ cotransporters. Secretion of lactate into airway secretions leads to an acidification
of the ASL that inhibits numerous pH-dependent antimicrobial agents, such as lysozyme,
lactoferrin, ß-defensin and LL-37 (242, 243). Acidic pH could also affect the activity of the
surfactant protein (229).
The acidification is normally neutralized by secretion of HCO3 -rich fluid through CFTR
channels (202). However, the accompanying secretion of a HCO3--rich fluid leads to an

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

imbalance of ions and water, impacting the ASL osmolarity and volume, resulting in
increased viscosity of the ASL fluid, diminished beating of the cilia, and reduced mucociliary
clearance of waste and pathogens (202, 244–246) — direct consequences of hyperglycemia
(202, 241). Indeed, pathological conditions such DM, aging, and hypertension are associated
with impaired mucociliary clearance (247, 248). Acidification additionally impairs immune
cell migrations such as neutrophil chemotaxis and consequently the efficacy of innate
phagocytosis (249).

2.4.1.2.4

Elevated glucose leads to increased production of AGEs

In contrast to N-glycosylation, which requires a complex sequence of enzymatic reactions
during protein synthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi apparatus, advanced
glycation end products (AGEs) are proteins and lipids modified from a non-enzymatic
covalent linking through direct exposure to high amount of sugars (glucose, fructose and
derivatives) (250). Glycation of proteins can interfere with their normal functions by
disrupting molecular conformational changes, altering enzymatic activity, impeding proteinprotein interactions and functioning of receptors. The normal physiological rate of AGE
production is markedly increased in hyperglycemia (caused by diabetes for example, (251)),
but also increases with advancing age, oxidative stress, and inflammation (252–256).
The presence of high concentrations of glucose in the ASL changes its overall glycation
profiling with an increased expression of AGEs, leading to serious consequences for ASL
function. First, the activity of lysozymes and lactoferrins, the most abundant antimicrobial
peptides in the ASL (215), is significantly reduced (257, 258). Second, AGEs are known
ligands for RAGE (receptors for AGEs) that are highly expressed in lung tissue, such as in
AECI and AECII cells. RAGE is a pro-inflammatory mediator, with its main role being the
amplification of the cellular inflammatory response by producing reactive oxygen species
(ROS) (259). Hence, the presence of excessive AGEs in the ASL would lead to a proinflammatory status of the pulmonary epithelial cells. Indeed, RAGE was shown to be an
important factor in respiratory viral infection, as RAGE-/- mice showed delayed mortality and
accelerated viral clearance upon influenza A virus (IAV) infection (260). Finally, we
hypothesize that the properties of mucins, highly glycosylated proteins, may also be altered
by excessive glycation, leading to a disturbance of the mucus viscosity (261), affecting the
efficacy of the mucociliary clearance.
In summary, high glucose in the ASL is associated with the impairment of multiple aspects of
the innate antiviral defense of the lung, including the mucociliary clearance capacity, the
lectin-mediated recognition of the virus, the general activity of the antimicrobial agents, as
well as the number, the migration capacity and the function of the resident neutrophils and
macrophages (Figure 15). Taken together, the overall efficiency of the early phase of viral
elimination and clearance of infected cells could be seriously compromised by elevations of
glucose in the ASL. The integrity of this early non-pathogen-specific phase is critical because
if the virus breaks through these defenses, cascades of other pathogen-specific effects are
initiated that make it increasingly more difficult for the immune system to protect the body
from the virus, especially if it is a novel virus, as is the case of SARS-CoV-2.
2.4.2

Modeling of ASL glucose concentrations in patients at-risk

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

As mentioned before, defects in tight junction permeability or hyperglycemia could both lead
to a rise of glucose in the ASL, with the greatest effect when they coexist. Hence, DM,
obesity or acute hyperglycemia, are pathological conditions known to induce an increased
concentration of glucose in the ASL (119, 210, 262). For example, ASL glucose is reported
1.2 (+/-0.7) mmol/L in diabetic patients compared to 0.4 (+/-0.2) mmol/L in non-diabetic
(263). Concerning epithelial permeability, a defect in tight junction resistance can be induced
by exposure to toxic particles from air pollution or smoking, (264, 265), but also, and
especially, by chronic inflammatory conditions associated with chronic lung diseases such as
cystic fibrosis (CF), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or severe asthma (119,
265, 266). In such inflammatory conditions, glucose in the ASL has been reported to reach
1.6 (+/-0,1) mmol/L, or even 2 (+/-1.1) mmol/L depending on the pathology (211). Diabetic
patients not only suffer from hyperglycemia, but they also often present with chronic
inflammation (247, 267), aggravating the disruption of glucose flux from the blood to the
ASL.
To attempt to quantitatively evaluate to what extent changes in blood glucose can change
glucose levels in the ASL under various permeabilities of the tight junctions, we produced a
computational model using data obtained from the literature (see Methods and Figure 17) and
used this model to estimate the ASL glucose concentration for a control case (with normal
blood glucose and epithelial resistance (Rt)) and a diabetic case (hyperglycemic and impaired
Rt) (Figure 17). The model accurately reproduced the values of ASL glucose reported (263)
for a control case (0.6 mmol/L versus 0.4 (+/- 0.2) mmol/L reported) and a diabetic case (1.6
mmol/L versus 1.2 (+/- 0.7) mmol/L reported). The model suggests, that even moderate
increases in blood glucose, if combined with any impairment in paracellular lung permeability
(impaired Rt), could lead to large increases in ASL glucose concentrations.
Then, we used the model to predict ASL glucose concentration in the other group at-risk for
COVID-19, for which there is no data available in the literature.
Aging is a condition that, in addition to reduced glucose metabolic capacity, is strongly linked
to a general decrease in paracellular resistance in many tissues, including the lungs (268). We
therefore used the model to infer an age-related increase of FPG (Figure 8A) based on
reported increases in the paracellular permeability with aging (Figure 17). Indeed, the model
predicts that the glucose concentration in ASL increases significantly with age, as expected,
because FPG increases and epithelial resistance decreases with age.
Hypertension is associated with chronic inflammation (269), which could also be responsible
for a general impairment of cellular epithelial resistance. We reviewed above how
hypertension is linked to an increased FPG and a higher risk of developing IGT. Based on
these known qualitative effects and the quantitative modeling, it is reasonable to assume that
people with hypertension will also present with higher concentrations of glucose in their ASL.
Importantly, higher glucose in the airway secretions has been observed in ventilated patients
in the ICU (262, 270), not surprisingly correlated with stress hyperglycemia, and not
necessarily only in those patients with a chronically compromised glucose metabolism.
Hence, it is most likely that all groups defined at risk for COVID-19, present with a higher
concentration of glucose in their ASL as summarized in Figure 18.
It is also important to emphasize that viral infection itself is a condition known to affect the
tight junction resistance (271), which would act synergistically to facilitate the infection if the
virus breaks through the primary defenses of the lungs.

2.5
2.5.1

The multiple effects of glucose on SARS-CoV-2 infection
Infection in healthy patients

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In brief, when a healthy person becomes infected, droplets containing virions that reach the
respiratory tract will activate the mucociliary clearance as well as a reflex cough to normally
expel the virus. If some virions reach the deeper airways and alveoli, they become trapped
and inactivated by a second layer of defense, namely the humoral defense of the ASL,
composed of numerous antimicrobial peptides, such as the lactoferrin, ß-defensins or the SPD proteins (see Figure 16), as previously mentioned. Beyond this barrier, those cells that do
get infected quickly produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and type 1 IFN to alert the immune
system and the neighbor’s healthy cells to protect themselves. The resident macrophages and
DC cells, also activated by PAMPs, convert into the M1 phenotype and promptly release
proinflammatory molecules, such as type 1 IFN, TNF-a and Il-1b (272), as well as a panel of
chemokines to attract and activate more resident and circulating phagocytes and immune cells
(neutrophils, DC cells and monocytes, as well as cytotoxic NK cells). SP-D proteins help
drive the phagocytosis of the virus by the alveolar macrophages that also produce ROS to
help clear the virus and the infected cells. Once at the infected site, immune cells themselves
release a battery of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines as well as ROS to
further orchestrate an even more elaborate immune response (273). The infected AECII cells
express damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) on their plasma membrane, produce
ROS and cytokines to activate their own phagocytosis and clearance by macrophages,
converted to the M2 phenotype - all to limit viral propagation to the neighboring cells (273).
AECII cells also secrete more surfactant proteins to further amplify the local innate defense
and help drive the resolution of the inflammation through their immunomodulatory activity
and their capacity to stimulate phagocytosis of apoptotic cells (219, 224). Viral replication is
contained by this timely orchestration of non-pathogen specific humoral and cellular innate
pulmonary defenses (274) and is therefore a determining step to avoid a deeper infection
(192). Complete viral clearance is finally achieved through the adaptive immune response
orchestrated by the T and B lymphocytes coming from the bloodstream (68), reaching the site
of infection by diapedesis: but of course, even more effectively if the body has previously
been exposed to the pathogen.
2.5.2
2.5.2.1

Elevated glucose favors the primary infection and viral replication
Elevated glucose impairs the primary non-specific defense of the ASL

We reviewed and showed above that all groups at high risk for COVID-19 are likely to
present with higher glucose in their ASL (see Figure 18), which acts to impair numerous
facets of the primary innate humoral and cellular defenses (detailed in Figure 15). Reduced
capacity of the early innate immune response and in consequence reduced physical viral
clearance by glucose in these patients may explain the general increased susceptibility to
infection with respiratory viruses such as SARS-CoV and influenzae (see Figure 19). Using
the BioExplorer, we have produced a movie showing the main impacts of high glucose in
ASL on the primary step of infections in the lung, to explain the increased susceptibility to
respiratory viruses in at-risk patients (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hkgqG0nzW9I).
2.5.2.2

Elevated glucose levels facilitate ACE2 binding and cell entry

When the virus reaches the receptor, the RBD domain of the spike must move into the “upconformation” to bind to the receptor, which triggers a sequence of cleavages by host
proteases (membrane TMPRSS2 and furin) required for the virus to fuse with the host cell
membrane and enter the cell. The virus must then strip off its coat to deliver the mRNA
package inside the cell. We have described how elevated blood glucose can elevate glucose in

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the ASL and cause acidification of the ASL. Additionally, a study has shown that a mere
bolus of glucose can also produce a more acidic intracellular environment (143, 279). A lower
pH in the ASL is thought to help the SARS-CoV-2 spike conformational masking to avoid
detection by the immune system while it binds to the receptor (275). According to the
literature, we speculate that more acidic pH in the ASL increases proteases activity (246), that
would facilitate the membrane fusion (276-278). In addition, lowered pH intracellularly could
further help the uncoating of the virus (143-279). Taken together, elevated blood glucose can
not only compromise the early physical and immune barriers making it easier for the virus to
reach its target receptor, but can also facilitate all the main steps of the actual process of
infecting the cells, such as receptor binding, membrane fusion and cell entry.

2.5.2.3

Elevated glucose favors viral replication

2.5.2.3.1 Increased glycolysis rate
Enveloped viruses have evolved the ability to reprogram carbon metabolism of cells and
hijack the glycolysis pathway for their own replication (137, 144). As mentioned above, in the
case of high glucose in the ASL, the epithelial cells have the capacity to uptake this glucose
from the apical side to keep concentration low in the ASL. However, glucose levels (for
example blood glucose reaching > 6.7-9.7 mmol/L) can exceed the capacity for re-uptake
(119). As a consequence, not only the glucose concentration in the airway, but also the
glucose level inside the cells rises, saturating the hexokinase capacity for glucose
phosphorylation. This negative feedback could lead to an abrupt runaway elevation of glucose
levels in the ASL as the increased concentration of unmetabolized glucose inside the cells
lowers the driving force for the reuptake of glucose from ASL. Thus, once inside the cell, the
virus has access to an abundant supply of glucose for producing the nucleotides, amino acids,
lipids and the ATP needed for replication (145). Therefore, not only does elevated glucose
allow more viral particles to access and enter the cells, but also provides an ideal environment
for efficient and fast intracellular replication. This analysis is in agreement with a recent study
showing that the use of the glucose analogue 2-deoxy-D-glucose blocks SARS-CoV-2
replication in Caco-2 cells (280).
2.5.2.3.2

Efficient glycosylation process

A specific glycosylation coating is required for viruses to efficiently evade the immune
system and invade cells (see above and (167)). Enveloped viruses have the capability to
hijack the host cell N-glycosylation machinery to adorn their own glycoproteins with host
glycans; however, to do so, a readily available glucose supply is essential. Glycosylation of
some of the host proteins, such as ACE2 are also essential to allow more viruses to enter (170,
181). A large supply of intracellular glucose therefore provides the ideal environment to
ensure maintenance of glycosylation profiles of both viral and host proteins throughout the
progression of the infection.
2.5.2.3.3

Exponential viral replication

High viral replication rates result in host cell damage and death, with numerous adverse
effects. In the non-alveolar epithelium, damaged ciliated cells lead to reduced mucociliary
clearance capacity (281, 282), and compromised integrity of tight junctions increases
paracellular flux of glucose into the ASL (119, 207), escalating the damage through the

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

numerous mechanisms described before (see Figure 20). This is in agreement with a recent
publication on IAV infection showing that elevated glucose prior to viral infection increases
virus-induced pulmonary barrier damage (283). Host cell damage together with elevated
glucose turns negative feedback homeostatic mechanisms into a positive feedback loop of
pathological processes. Increased production of ROS caused by cellular damages and hypoxia
induces expression of the HIF1α (hypoxia inducible factor 1α) transcription factor (145)
stimulating the expression of GLUT transporters (211, 212, 284, 285) and glycolytic genes
(286, 287), that increase extracellular glucose uptake and glycolytic capacity, amplifying the
viral replication (287–290). HIF1α also induces the expression of LDH (286) causing an
increase in the conversion of pyruvate into lactate (a biomarker of a poor COVID-19
prognosis), further decreasing the pH, and further compromising innate defenses. Thus, the
increased glucose levels in the ASL observed in high-risk patients, not only favors viral
access to the cells, receptor binding, cellular entry, and the delivery of its genetic material, but
also a vicious cycle of exponential viral replication depicted in Figure 20. This causes
significant damage to the local alveolar epithelium and reduced capacity for gaseous
exchange, likely correlating with the appearance of respiratory distress symptoms in the
patient such as shortness of breath, dyspnea and fatigue.
2.5.3

Modeling of the impact of glucose concentration on the different steps of
SARS-CoV-2 primary infection

To better understand the interplay between the key variables of the numerous glucosemediated actions implicated in the SARS-CoV-2 primary infection and to attempt to
quantitatively evaluate the impact of elevations in blood glucose levels on COVID-19
severity, we built a computational model to simulate numerous glucose-mediated actions and
predict the severity of the infection with different viral loads (see Methods).
2.5.3.1

Modeling of SARS-CoV-2 binding with its receptor ACE2

A schematic of the model is presented in Figure 21A. Briefly, lectin traps a fraction of the
virus in the ASL before it reaches the receptors. Higher glucose concentrations act
competitively for binding to lectin, leaving less lectin available for trapping the virus and
allowing more viruses the chance to reach the receptor. In the presence of a constant
concentration of lectin, binding of the virus to the receptor depends on both the viral load and
glucose concentration in the ASL. After endocytosis, the virus uses epithelial glucose to
replicate, leading to the production of lactate, which when released in the ASL, further lowers
the pH of the ASL.
We first simulated the binding of SARS-CoV-2 to the receptor ACE2 as a function of three
different viral loads at the time of infection in a normoglycemic or hyperglycemic condition
(See Methods). The model illustrates the extent to which SARS-CoV-2 may bind to ACE2
depending on both the viral load (see methods for description of viral loads) and the glucose
concentration in ASL. Increased glucose in the ASL due to hyperglycemia increases receptor
binding for all viral loads (Figure 21B). In the hyperglycemic case, binding to the receptor is
nearly doubled for all viral loads, suggesting that the receptor binding at any viral load is
amplified under hyperglycemic conditions. Additionally, a high viral load results in near
maximal receptor binding if patients are hyperglycemic.
2.5.3.2

Simulating SARS-CoV-2 cell entry

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We next explored the efficiency of SARS-CoV-2 endocytosis after a simulated “sneeze” that
delivers virions in a pulse-like manner with a time course of concentration decay (see
Methods). We used three “sneezes” of varying viral content and explored cell-entry after
receptor binding; again, in a normoglycemic or hyperglycemic condition. The rise time is a
function of inhaling the virus and the decay time represents clearance from the lung (Figure
22A).
The model suggests that SARS-CoV-2 endocytosis in epithelial cells is substantially
increased by high glucose in the ASL in all cases, but with the greatest effect seen for low
viral loads (Figure 22B, blue lines). The decreasing effect of elevated glucose concentration
as the viral load increases (left vs right panels) is due to saturation of the endocytic process.
2.5.3.3

Modeling of SARS-CoV-2 replication rate

In the next step, we examined the viral replication rate which takes into account receptor
binding, endocytosis and subsequent intracellular viral load, which depends on glucose
concentration and the viral load in the ASL (Figures 23 A,B and Methods). The model
suggests that the viral replication rate for low viral loads in the hyperglycemic case is
equivalent to the rate of replication induced by high viral loads in the normoglycemic
condition. It also suggests that the hyperglycemic condition can further amplify the
replication rates induced by any viral load by three to four times compare to normal condition
(Figure 23B).
2.5.3.4

Modeling SARS-CoV-2 viral numbers

Finally, we simulated the hypothetical viral number produced in epithelial cells after a
“sneeze” stimulus which takes into account receptor binding, endocytosis and viral replication
rate, again as a function of both glycemic conditions and viral loads (Figure 24A). We then
used the resulting value as a biomarker of primary infection severity (Figures 24B and
Methods). We took the number of virions in the epithelium for each viral load in a
normoglycemic (0.4 mM ASL glucose) and a hyperglycemic condition (1.2 mM ASL
glucose), and set a hypothetical threshold for primary infection severity (number of virions
generated per epithelial cell that would induce severe epithelial damage) at around 1x104
virions (Figure 24B). While the hypothetical severity threshold was slightly crossed in the
normoglycemic condition at the intermediate viral load, condition it was already reached at
the low viral load in the hyperglycemic condition. Furthermore, the degree of the effect of
hyperglycemia on severity of outcome depends on the viral load, as the severity threshold is
only slightly cross in the normoglycemic condition in case of high viral load, whereas it is
dramatically exceeded in the hyperglycemic condition already in case of intermediate viral
load (Figure 24B).
To summarize, we modeled the various interactions of glucose in the lung reported in the
literature to test the feasibility of the effects of a range of glucose concentration in the ASL on
viral receptor binding, endocytosis and replication in lung epithelial cells. The model suggests
that while under normal conditions, a high viral load is required to cause severe epithelial
damage, under hyperglycemic conditions, even low viral loads could start causing damage.
This emphasizes both the importance of the viral load in the infection process and the
susceptibility conferred by elevated glucose levels. Consequent viral binding, endocytosis and
replication is predicted in hyperglycemic conditions already with intermediate viral loads, and
becoming even extreme with high viral loads. While these results could vary somewhat
quantitatively due to limitations in the model resulting from simplification steps or unknown

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mechanisms and parameters, the direction of the results is unlikely to change since all
reported effects of glucose only facilitate the infection process.
These first steps of the infection are defining moments for how the disease progresses further.
In the next chapter, we show how, if the escalation is not controlled at this stage, high blood
glucose also facilitates the subsequent development of the disease and its complications.
2.5.4

Elevated glucose contributes to severe complications of COVID-19

Patients with DM, obesity, hypertension or the elderly are generally more sensitive to
respiratory viruses such as influenza or respiratory syncytial viruses (RSV) (291, 292). The
common impairment of non-specific innate immune defenses of the lung due to high glucose
in ASL that we have previously described, could explain the general susceptibility of these
patients to respiratory viruses. However, the reason why SARS-CoV-2 infection leads to a
worsening of the disease with severe symptoms, such as ARDS, multi-organ failures, or
pulmonary embolism in some cases is still elusive. Specificity of viruses resides, among
others, in their binding receptor, i.e. ACE2 in the case of SARS-CoV viruses. ACE2 is an
effector of the RAAS system that converts angiotensin II (Ang II) to angiotensin 1-7 (293).
Following the binding of SARS-CoV-2 to its receptor, the virus-receptor complex is
internalized, leading to the inactivation of ACE2, and consequently to an extracellular
increase of Ang II concentration (188, 294, 295) ― first locally then systemically. Ang II
accumulation has numerous physiological consequences such as an increase in endothelial
permeability, vasoconstriction, inflammation and thrombosis (188, 296–298), and further
causes glycemic dysregulation and increased insulin resistance (299, 300). Indeed, plasma
levels of Ang II are increased in SARS-CoV-2 infected patients compared to healthy
individuals, which has been associated with the viral load and lung injury (301), suggesting
that inactivation of ACE2 is specifically implicated in the disease severity.
2.5.4.1

Elevated glucose drives the immune response into a cytokine storm and
ARDS

As mentioned above, high glucose in the ASL is mainly responsible for a weak migration
capacity and activation of the innate immune cells at the site of infection, delaying the
secretion of the pro-inflammatory mediators, necessary for a well-timed effective immune
response. Indeed, previous studies have shown that hyperglycemia impairs the diapedesis
capacity (recruitment from the blood) of immune cells (236, 238, 240, 302) delaying the
immune response. This is also in agreement with the delayed recruitment of monocytes and
secretion of type 1 IFNs observed in severe cases of SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2
infections (303–305). Moreover, it was shown that SARS coronaviruses have evolved an
elegant way when infecting host cells, to inhibit their production of type 1 IFNs (306, 307)
which are key mediators of the antiviral response, an effect that itself could be explained by
high glucose and related increased glycolysis and lactate production by infected cells (308).
This overall lag in the pro-inflammatory signal, that could be attributed to elevated glucose
consequences, favors viral propagation, leading to greater epithelial damage associated with
an increased level of DAMPs, ROS and pro-inflammatory cytokines secretion by the many
infected cells. These effects, combined with a late and excessive infiltration of M1
monocytes, M1 macrophages and T cells at the site of infection, cause an exaggerated local
inflammation. Indeed, late but excessive infiltration of macrophages, monocytes and
neutrophils has been observed in COVID-19 patients (68). Moreover, the subsequent antiinflammatory signal (M1 to M2 shift) necessary to resolve the inflammation is not triggered
on time leaving the immune cells in a pro-inflammatory state. Impaired apoptosis and

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

clearance of infected cells by macrophages also adds to a prolonged secretion of
inflammatory cytokines by infected cells— an effect that could be further aggravated by the
inhibition of the SP-D and SP-A in elevated glucose conditions and a failure to trigger the
clearance of apoptotic cells to resolve the inflammation (219, 224).
According to this cascade, a growing body of evidence suggests an overactivation of many
immune cells in hyperglycemic conditions. In high glucose conditions, DC cells, monocytes,
M1 macrophages, effector CD4+ and CD8+ T lymphocytes, once recruited, show a hyperresponsiveness with an exaggerated expression of cytokines, mainly IL-6 and IL-1 (145, 236,
238, 240, 302). This exaggerated response is amplified by the SARS-CoV-2 specific
inactivation of ACE2 with the resulting local increase in Ang II levels that further aggravates
the pro-inflammatory phenotype (IL-6 and ROS (309, 310)).
To recap our analysis, we propose that in hyperglycemic conditions, the local overproduction
of ROS and cytokines by infected epithelial cells, combined with the hyperactivation of the
immune cells and the general imbalance of the pro- and anti-inflammatory signals, and
aggravated by the inactivation of ACE2, most likely lays the foundations for the cytokine
storm syndrome (CSS) observed upon SARS-CoV-2 infection in severe cases (68).
Importantly, the immune cells themselves express ACE2 and are therefore also targeted by
the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Infected circulating immune cells and increased apoptosis of Tlymphocytes can lead to lymphopenia, adding to the overall dysfunction of the immune
response (68, 311). To model these conditions, we represented the main events involved in
the course of the immune response upon SARS-COV-2 infection in a healthy patient (Figure
25A), and the main impact due to high glucose in high-risk patients (Figure 25B), a
representation that is in perfect alignment with other reports (62, 313).
With uncontrolled viral propagation and cell damage, the overproduction of cytokines
aggravates the damage of the alveolar epithelium and the thin pulmonary vascular
endothelium. Excessive fluid accumulates in the alveolar spaces causing pulmonary edema,
impairment of gaseous exchange, spiraling into the acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) that is characteristic of the severe forms of COVID-19 (68, 313, 314). At this stage,
oxygenation or mechanical ventilation is necessary. ARDS often leads to hypoxemia,
respiratory failure and in critical cases, the death of the patient.
ARDS is a severe complication observed also in other respiratory viral infections such as
influenza (315). However, the overall incidence of ARDS caused by the seasonal IAV is only
around 2.7 cases per 100,000 person-years (316), whereas it is 15%-30% in COVID-19 (317).
This huge difference is likely due to the specificity of SARS-CoV-2 for its receptor ACE2
and the consequent higher levels of Ang II. First, as previously described, the Ang II
accumulation adds to the uncontrolled pro-inflammatory status, aggravating the cytokine
overproduction (IL-6, ROS) characteristic of the cytokine storm. Second, Ang II was shown
to inhibit alveolar fluid clearance, to dysregulate ENaC expression that worsens alveolar
edema (318). Third, it was shown that Ang II leads to the overexpression of RAGE (319), the
pro-inflammatory receptor of AGEs. The higher level of AGEs due to high glucose present in
DM, aging or hyperglycemic patients, combined with the Ang II-dependent overexpression of
RAGE will lead to a subsequent hyperactivation of the AGEs-RAGE signaling pathway with
overproduction of ROS and IL-6 (251, 320), that may add to the sustained pro-inflammation
of the lung, responsible for the ARDS.
To summarize thus far, in addition to all the glucose-mediated effects, the specific
inactivation of ACE2 may contribute to the higher proportion and more severe form of ARDS
upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, compared to other respiratory viral infections, in this group of
patients.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.5.4.2

Elevated glucose contributes to the development of multi-organ failure

ARDS is one of the leading causes of death upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. However, SARSCoV-2 shows the peculiarity to degenerate into other deadly complications such as multiorgan failures, which has been observed in 47% of the severe cases (35, 39, 40, 321). As
mentioned before, the local cytokine storm is responsible for the destruction of both the
alveolar and vascular epithelia. Consequently, the inflammatory components present at the
infection site (i.e. cytokines, oxidative species, antimicrobials peptides, as well as the virions
particles) diffuse and circulate in the bloodstream damaging the vasculature itself and the
peripheral organs. Importantly, hyperglycemia, aging and hypertension are all conditions
associated with pre-existing endothelium impairments, such as a generalized increase in
endothelial permeability (79), further facilitating the transport of these cytotoxic agents from
the blood to the peripheral organs. The excessive amount of circulating antimicrobial
components, pro-inflammatory cytokines and ROS can cause damage and inflammation to
many organs. Additionally, all organs expressing ACE2 become potential additional targets
for the circulating SARS-CoV-2 virions such as the heart, kidneys, the gastrointestinal tract,
the brain or the vasculature (41, 322). As previously detailed for AECII cells, the binding,
replication and dissemination of SARS-CoV-2 may also be facilitated in the peripheral organs
in hyperglycemic patients. Indeed, SP-D is expressed and is part of the innate immune
defense of other organs such as the gastrointestinal tract and kidneys (172, 226, 323, 324). For
this reason, the innate defense of these organs could also be directly impaired by high
glucose, consistent with the gastrointestinal symptoms and high rate of kidney failure reported
(325, 326).
More importantly, the pancreatic β−cells express significant levels of ACE2 (200) and may
become damaged and inflamed upon SARS-CoV-2 infection (327). The dysfunction of the
β−cells may cause a reduction in insulin release and secondary acute hyperglycemia, as it was
observed in the preceding 2003 SARS-CoV-1 outbreak (328), and more recently also
proposed for SARS-CoV-2 (329, 330), aggravating the hyperglycemia and enabling the
multiple damaging effects of high blood glucose. Accumulation of Ang II itself can also lead
to β−cells apoptosis (331), further amplifying the glycemic dysregulation, insulin resistance,
driving a positive feedback paracrine loop and vicious cycle of adverse effects in the disease’s
progression.
2.5.4.3

Elevated glucose favors thrombotic events

In addition to pneumonia, ARDS and multi-organs failures, a high proportion of COVID-19
patients were diagnosed with thrombotic events at a much higher rate than in other types of
lung infection (332). Indeed, alveolar capillary microthrombi are nine times more frequent in
COVID-19 patients than in people with influenza (333), and occur in 80% to 100% of severe
cases (334, 335). These patients present blood clots disseminated throughout the lungs
associated with elevated levels of thrombotic markers such as fibrinogen, thrombin, plasmin
and D-dimer (47, 334). The blood clots are responsible for pulmonary embolism, heart attack
and stroke (336), and could also contribute to a dramatic drop in blood oxygen levels in
severe cases of COVID-19.
It is reported that this coagulopathy arises from a thrombo-inflammation mechanism (337,
338); the infection and destruction of endothelial cells (ECs) expressing the receptor ACE2
(339, 340) trigger an intricate cascade of inflammatory and pro-coagulant events. Under
normal physiological conditions, quiescent endothelial cells (ECs) preserve vascular
homeostasis, ensure barrier integrity and function, prevent inflammation, and inhibit
coagulation by expressing blood clot-lysing enzymes and producing the glycocalyx, a

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

protective layer of glycoproteins and glycolipids with anticoagulant properties. The infection
of the ECs by SARS-CoV-2 is responsible for a massive endothelial pyroptosis, a highly
inflammatory form of cell apoptosis (334, 341), associated with the disruption of the
glycocalyx, the exposure of the basement membrane and activation of pro-coagulant factors
(e.g. P-selectin, von Willebrand factor, leukocyte adhesion molecules and fibrinogen) (342).
Additionally, pulmonary ECs are antigen presenting cells and assumed to play a role in the
immune surveillance against respiratory pathogens. Consequently, infected ECs also release
ROS, proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines such as IL-6 (343). The resulting
pulmonary endotheliitis contributes to the innate immune hyperactivation, promotes
inflammatory cell infiltration (such as by neutrophils) and exacerbates the cytokine storm
(334, 340). Importantly, as previously mentioned, the SARS-CoV-2 invasion also especially
provokes the internalization of ACE2. The resulting accumulation of Ang II in the
endothelium amplifies the pro-inflammatory status and induces a local pulmonary
vasoconstriction that, combined with the pro-coagulant and pro-inflammatory effects of the
virus, degenerates to a severe thrombotic phenotype (Figure 26). The alveolar
microcirculatory thrombosis may degenerate to a systemic disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy, associated with a pro-hemorrhagic pattern that exacerbates organ injury and
increases the risk of mortality (333, 338, 339).
Patients presenting with glucose metabolism dysregulation may particularly be at risk for
these thrombotic complications. First, we have highlighted that hyperglycemia or IGT favors
a higher viral replication rate, which we assume would also occur in ECs. Second, chronic or
acute hyperglycemia is itself a risk factor for coagulation, (344) with increased level of
prothrombotic factors and endothelial dysfunctions (e.g. blood viscosity, coagulation and
vascular construction) (345–347). Hyperglycemia-induced increase of AGEs, as well as
glycation of fibrinogen and collagen, are largely involved in the multiple mechanisms of
hyperglycemia-dependent endothelial dysfunction (348–350). Third, increased levels of
plasmin fibrinogen or prothrombin was demonstrated in all subsets of patients at risk (347,
351-354). Fourth, aging, hyperglycemia, DM, obesity and especially hypertension, are all
conditions associated with a pre-existing increased level of Ang II (299, 355–359). Hence,
these patients in particular, may present an excessive concentration of Ang II upon SARSCoV infection, and then are susceptible to exaggerated vascular vasoconstriction. In addition,
the overexpression of Ang II amplifies the glucose dysregulation in these patients, leading to
an unstoppable vicious cycle where symptoms become ever more severe.
In summary, patients presenting with a pre-existing procoagulant condition and increased
Ang II levels, are more prone to develop severe coagulation disorders and thrombotic events
upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, especially if accompanied with hyperglycemia as summarized
in Figure 26.
2.5.4.4

Elevated glucose increases the risk of secondary pulmonary infection

Glucose in the ASL is an important and direct nutrient for bacteria or others pathogens (208)
and therefore supports secondary bacterial infections, as established in DM (119, 270), cystic
fibrosis (360), COPD (361) or patients in the ICU (see Discussion). Secondary bacterial
infection during pulmonary disease management is an important cause of mortality, especially
in ICUs in European countries (362)). Even if apparently less frequent than in case of IAV
infections, bacterial infection is one of the complications in patients critically ill with
COVID-19 (363, 364), that could also be linked to elevated blood glucose or IGT in patients
at risk.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.6

Therapeutic approaches and research strategies

The evidence that patients with elevated blood glucose or IGT are more prone to severe
primary infection and COVID-19 complications and death in the literature is overwhelming.
Elevated glucose can not only explain much of the variance in COVID-19 severity as a
correlative biomarker, but because virtually every action of glucose in biochemical, metabolic
and homeostatic pathways seems to serve only to facilitate the infection, it could also be a
primary determining factor in the severity of the disease. Controlling glucose levels could
therefore reduce the severity of the disease and consequently also the mortality rate.
Obtaining an unbiased representation of the findings in such a vast database of relevant
literature was only possible with the aid of text mining, machine learning and knowledge
engineering approaches. The knowledge graph provided an overview of the contents of the
dataset, revealed the high-level structure of the information it contains, and helped guide us
through and down to the deepest levels of knowledge, where accessing the specific papers
referenced allowed human verification of the findings. The hypothesis that arose called for
supplementing the review by analyzing data found across different papers, performing
computational modeling to test the feasibility of some of the actions of glucose, and
producing atomistic reconstructions to better appreciate some of the physical and biophysical
parameters involved. This supplemental analysis further supported the hypothesis that
elevated glucose is a primary risk factor for the severity of COVID-19.
Interventions that reduce the availability of glucose would allow tackling multiple facets of
the primary viral infection: improving the innate defense of the ASL, decreasing the viral
replication capacity inside the cells, impairing N-glycosylation process that would
compromise the immune evasion facet of the virus and possibly increase the immune
recognition, improving timely orchestration of the immune system. Improving glucose
metabolism would also diminish the risk of developing secondary SARS-CoV-2 specific
complications such as coagulopathy. The literature actually already contains tests of this
hypothesis. In fact, the mortality rate is lower among diabetic patients where glycemia is well
controlled (82) and recent studies show that patients with uncontrolled hyperglycemia or
newly diagnosed DM (i.e. untreated) are even more at risk than those with known DM (i.e.
treated) (54, 83). The hypothesis can be refuted, in part or in full, by finding severe COVID19 cases where comprehensive measurements fail to detect even normally sub-clinical
glucose dysregulation.
2.6.1

Glucose lowering drugs

According to the hypothesis that well-controlled glycemia is critical for determining the
outcome of COVID-19, the most standard strategy is to use glucose lowering drugs, widely
available and low cost. A wide variety of these drugs is available, with different mechanisms
of actions that could all present pros and cons for management of COVID-19
(comprehensively reviewed in (86, 365)). For example, ACE agonists would be contraindicated because they would further increase the inhibition of the ACE pathway and increase
expression of ACE2 (366). Also, most of the glucose lowering drugs risk inducing
hypoglycemia, which is not recommended. Insulin is widely used for managing glucose levels
during hospitalization in ICU, but typically only for diabetic patients (367, 368) where it does
seem to reduce mortality, length of stay in ICU, and ventilator dependence with COVID-19
(369). However, its correct adjustment in ICU is extremely challenging (370, 371). Insulin
protocols for any COVID-19 patient would therefore have to be explored, developed and
clinically tested.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

According to the data we gathered for this review, metformin may be an effective glucoselowering drug for COVID-19. Metformin is an old drug and the first line therapy for diabetes
management. Apart from its safer glucose-lowering effect (i.e. reducing glucose without
provoking hypoglycemia) metformin has several other interesting effects that may be
advantageous for the management of COVID-19. Firstly, metformin is known to restore the
permeability function of tight junctions by increasing the transepithelial electrical resistance
as well as the expression of the tight junction proteins claudin 1 and occludin (210, 212).
Indeed, it has been shown that metformin reduces the airway glucose permeability and the
hyperglycemia-induced Staphylococcus aureus load, independently of its effect on blood
glucose (372). Secondly, this drug has some anti-inflammatory effects, reducing plasma CRP
levels, a biomarker for the poor prognosis for the disease (373). Importantly, this antiinflammatory effect was also observed in the airway epithelium (374). Thirdly, metformin
decreases expression of HbA1c and presents cardiovascular protective, vasodilative and antithrombotic effects (375–378). Finally, metformin inhibits formation of AGEs ((379, 380) as
well as cytosolic and mitochondrial ROS production induced by AGEs in endothelial and
smooth muscle cells (381). The combination of these various actions may be protective
against the SARS-CoV-2 infection, especially in patients at risk. It is important to mention
that metformin is contra-indicated in case of respiratory failure or severe hypoxemia because
a side effect, even if rarely reported, is lactic acidosis. Concerning indication of metformin,
two studies showed beneficial effects in diabetic users compare to non-users with a reduction
in COVID-19 mortality (382) or in heart failure and inflammation (383), which was
confirmed by a further meta-analysis (384). However, Cheng et al, 2020 (383) showed that
metformin was associated with an increased acidosis. However, they showed that it occurred
only in severe cases treated with high dose metformin and in patients that presented with preexisting renal dysfunction. We found one study where metformin usage seemed to be
associated with higher risk of severe COVID-19 in diabetic patients (385), emphasizing that
even strong cases for repurposing a drug, such as is the case for metformin, should be
performed with great caution and only after extensive randomized clinical trials. More
importantly, clinical trials should be also performed on healthy people and non-diabetic cases.
2.6.2

Lowering carbohydrates in diet

The strong link between COVID-19 severity and diabetes and obesity has led to consideration
of nutritional interventions in the treatment of the disease (386), as for example the use of
low-carbohydrate diets or ketogenic diet (low-carb, high fat diet) The basic principle is to
diminish the intake of carbohydrates, providing fat instead of carbohydrates for the body to
switch on ketosis and produce ketones as the primary energy source (387, 388). Indeed, there
is growing evidence of therapeutic benefits of a ketogenic diet for severe pathologies (389)
such as cancer (390, 391), diabetes (392, 393), and pharmaco-resistant epilepsy (394, 395),
and for the prevention of Alzheimer disease (396, 397) and other neurodegenerative disorders
(398). It is also the first line therapy for the management of the Glut1DS (Glut1 deficiency
syndrome) rare disease (399) and there is evidence that a ketogenic diet decreases
comorbidities linked to hyperglycemia (400, 401). Since viruses are high glucose consumers,
just like cancers (140, 402, 403), diminishing the indispensable primary source of energy for
the virus may be an effective intervention. Importantly, it was recently shown to be a safe
intervention for patients even in ICU (404, 405).
One study recently showed that the ketogenic diet (KD) activates protective gamma delta T
(δT) cell responses against influenza virus infection (406). These δT cells are IL-17producing T cells that play an important antiviral protection in the lung (see Figure 13),
maintaining epithelial integrity, regulating homeostasis and providing a first line of defense

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

against pathogens and injury (407). Importantly, δT cells were shown to be reduced in
COVID-19 patients (408). Goldberg et al showed a significant increase in the frequency and
absolute number of δT cells in the lungs of KD-fed mice; this increase was required for the
KD-mediated protection against influenza disease, resulting in lower viral titers and overall
better preservation of airway tissue integrity. Interestingly, in 2010, Taylor et al (407)
reported that δT cells were reduced and impaired by hyperglycemia in a mouse model of
obesity. In a similar way, KD could also have the potential to help the immune defense
against pulmonary viral infection, but this has to be confirmed for SARS-CoV infection.
Supporting this hypothesis, a clinical trial on KD for intubated critical care COVID-19 was
initiated (https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04358835). The aim of the study was to
measure the benefit of KD on gas exchange, inflammation, and duration of mechanical
ventilation in intubated patients with COVID-19 infection (on 15 patients at start).
Additionally, two recent reports advised on the use of a carbohydrate-restricted diet for the
management of the disease (409, 410) and a randomized controlled trial on KD has been
developed (see (409)). Cooper et al., claim that the ketogenic diet would be more beneficial
than insulin therapy because large fluctuations in blood glucose concentrations are primarily
driven by dietary sources, and it would also avoid the adverse effects of hyperinsulinemia.
Lowering carbohydrate consumption could therefore manage both hyperglycemia,
hyperinsulinemia and may additionally help manage hypertension (411).
2.6.3

Guidelines for COVID-19 biomarkers at admission

2.6.3.1

Importance of systematic glucose metabolism measurement (FPG, PPG,
HbA1c, insulin)

The numerous lines of evidence in the literature for elevated blood glucose as a correlative
risk factor is overwhelming and makes a strong case for far more thorough monitoring during
the management of COVID-19. As previously mentioned, increased FPG becomes an
important marker of mortality and morbidity and should be systematically measured.
Importantly, a single normal FPG value is not sufficient to exclude acute hyperglycemia or
IGT. For this reason, regular FPG and PPG measurements should be systematically obtained.
We emphasize that the 2h OGTT test is not recommended as it requires the ingestion of a
high amount of glucose, that could be detrimental and escalate the disease progression. We
propose that measuring HbA1c and insulin should also be included to detect any glucose
metabolism dysregulation (e.g. diabetes, prediabetes, hyperglycemia, IGT, IFG,
hyperinsulinemia). Indeed, it appears that the proportion of undiagnosed prediabetic patients
is high in severe cases (329). On this line, HbA1c was recently found as a predictor of
COVID-19 severity (412). Finally, even moderate dysregulation, and not only severe
hyperglycemia, should be taken into consideration as it could be the starting point for an
unstoppable viral infection.
2.6.3.2

Alternative biomarkers

2.6.3.2.1 Ang II plasma level
Ang II is strongly associated with dysglycemia, and patients who are at risk for severe
COVID-19 disease (e.g. diabetic, obese, elderly or hypertensive) present with an increased
basal plasma level of Ang II, that is further amplified by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Ang II
possesses inflammatory and vasoconstrictive effects that appear to play a critical role in the
COVID-19 disease severity. Hence, measuring Ang II at admission or/and during the course

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of the disease, could be an additional biomarker for risk stratification or as a prognostic
indicator.
2.6.3.2.2 SP-D plasma level
SP-D is a key player in the development and regulation of the innate immune defense of the
lung against SARS infection (219, 225). Serum levels of SP-D are elevated in patients with
SARS related pneumonia and has been suggested as a marker of alveolar damage in this
condition (413). SP-D is mainly synthetized by AECII cells of the lung and is released into
the blood during certain types of lung injury. Furthermore SP-D plasma level is considered to
be a putative biomarker for pulmonary disease (324, 414), such as acute airway inflammation
(415), or exacerbation of COPD (416). Importantly, it was also described as a biomarker of
cardiovascular diseases (417, 418) or atherosclerosis (324). Hence, comparing SP-D plasma
level in non-critical versus critical patients could indicate if SP-D could be an additional
biomarker of COVID-19 disease severity.

2.6.3.3

Glucose management in ICU

The high glucose content in parenteral feeding used in some ICU cases could be more
detrimental than beneficial for COVID-19 patients since high glucose favors all stages of the
infection. The accepted range of FPG in ICU is (1.45-2g/L; (73)) which is much higher than
the normal range. In fact, the common thinking is that “high blood glucose concentrations are
believed to be a normal physiologic reaction in stressed patients and that excess glucose is
necessary to support the energy needs of glucose-dependent organs.” This strategy may be
indicated for some other diseases, but is not supported for SARS-CoV and other viral
infections.
The exact target of blood glucose concentration in ICU remains a matter of debate as reports
yield contradictory conclusions (419), mostly due to the heterogeneity of the studies, but the
beneficial effects of lower glucose in parenteral feeding is consistently supported by multiple
studies. For example, Patino et al, (420) have demonstrated that patients receiving
hypoenergetic–hyperproteic total parenteral nutrition regimens on a surgical ICU have a more
physiological clinical course, with less metabolic stress than those receiving high-energy
loads. Later in 2001, (368) Van den Berghe et al, reported that intensive insulin therapy, to
maintain blood glucose at or below 110 mg per deciliter, reduces morbidity and mortality
among critically ill patients in the surgical intensive care unit. Hypoglycemia has to be
avoided, however, in the case of SARS-CoV-2 infection, a tight control of glucose
metabolism should be mandatory for ICU patients, as recently proposed (369, 370). Although
it is challenging to manage glucose levels in ICU patients, some effective protocols for tight
glucose control in these conditions are emerging (88).

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3 DISCUSSION
CORD-19, a valuable literature dataset, was made open-access to stimulate collaboration and
accelerate solutions in the global crisis caused by the SARS-CoV-2 virus. While there are
numerous questions one could ask using such a large dataset, we chose to ask why some
people get more affected than others. It is difficult, if not impossible, for any expert to
synthesize the multifaceted expertise across numerous disciplines contained in hundreds of
thousands of scientific studies. We therefore developed machine-learning models to mine the
dataset and constructed knowledge graphs to help navigate this literature resource. A simple
analysis of the entities mentioned in the papers revealed glucose as one of the biological
variables that was most frequently mentioned. We then constructed specific knowledge
graphs to focus on all findings that consider glucose in the context of respiratory diseases,
coronaviruses, and COVID-19. This allowed us to explore the potential role of glucose across
many levels, from the most superficial symptomatic associations to the deepest biochemical
mechanisms implicated in the disease. We chose not to construct knowledge graphs to
directly reveal any specific type of association(s) between entities to avoid biasing our search.
Navigating through all known stages of the disease and biological levels where some
association glucose was detected allowed identifying and retrieving the papers and
construction of this review. While we cannot completely exclude that some studies have been
overlooked, findings from most of the relevant studies are represented in this review.
We also used the knowledge graphs to find the stronger and more consistent claims, tested the
feasibility of the parameters reported in multiple papers using computational modeling, and
attempted to obtain an atom-level realistic view of the virus and some of the compounds it
interacts with. We conclude that the literature strongly supports a case for compromised
glucose metabolism that causes elevation of glucose levels in tissue, blood and extracellular
fluids as a single pathology that can facilitate virtually every step in the life-cycle of SARSCoV-2, and that induced elevations of glucose by stress during hospitalization, treatment
drugs, and in intravenous infusions can contribute to disease severity. Reduced glucose
metabolic capacity could be a common pathology that can contribute to age-dependency of
the disease and explain why the specific comorbidities render these groups more vulnerable to
the infection. Subclinical pathology of glucose metabolism may also be one of the reasons
why some young and apparently healthy people can contract a more severe form of the
disease. On the other hand, high glucose metabolic capacity can explain, at least in part, why
the youth are less affected and why some elderly can experience a milder form of the disease.
Elevated glucose naturally does not act alone. It acts in concert with numerous other
pathophysiological pathways to facilitate the primary infection and replication of SARS-CoV2. For example, the effects of elevated glucose can act synergistically with the virus’s
inactivation of the ACE2 receptor to drive a more severe form of COVID-19. Indeed,
hyperglycemia or impaired glucose tolerance can cause multiple physiological disturbances
that are all linked to the severity of the disease such as an impaired innate immune system,
impaired lung epithelial resistance, subsequent hyperactivation and dysregulation of the
immune system, increased vascular permeability, and a procoagulant state. Patients presenting
with compromised glucose metabolic capacity struggle to contain and eliminate the virus and
to prevent the progression of the infection and the occurrence of complications. Patients with
high glucose metabolic capacity such as healthy people at any age and in particular young
people, have primary lung defenses that are sufficient to contain and expel the virus before
significant infection, slow the infection of and replication in cells, and lower the risk of fatal
complications. The effects of elevated blood glucose can also act synergistically if lung
epithelial tight junctions are compromised causing a positive feedback in the increase of

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

glucose in the ASL, a disruption of glucose homeostasis and a subsequent breakdown of the
lung primary defenses.
While there is some evidence for lower expression levels of ACE2 and TMPRSS2 in the
lower airways of young people (421), it is not yet clear whether the level of ACE2 receptors
can explain all the differences in the severity of COVID-19 (see ref). The results may
however be confounded by the integrity of the primary lung defenses which determines
access to most of the ACE2 receptors.
The importance of elevated glucose levels compromising the very first defense of the lung as
the key barrier to contain the virus and prevent an avalanche of infection and complications is
underappreciated in the CORD-19 database. Similarly, the potential importance of elevated
glucose levels acting to provide the virus ideal conditions to coat the spike protein with
glycans that can confer its pathogenicity and immune evasion is not clearly recognized, and it
required piecing together numerous lines of evidence across multiple sources to reveal how
elevated glucose could be involved in the complications of the disease, such as driving the
immune response into a cytokine storm and participating in the dysregulation of coagulation
and thrombotic features. Management of COVID-19 to some extent considers management of
glucose as an important component, but if this hypothesis is correct, glucose management
may need to become a core strategy.
Tight control and management of glycemia in COVID-19 patients may be critical in order to
lower the first phase of infection and decrease the escalation of the disease. Managing
glycemia in ICUs, where more than 80% of the patients were reported to present with
hyperglycemia, also seems critically important. Even if glycemia is checked during hospital
admission, only FPG of more than 7 mmol/L is considered serious, while even a moderate
increase in FPG could be a risk factor. Furthermore, FPG reflects mostly the resting glucose
levels and may not reveal sufficiently abnormal glucose metabolic capacity to clear glucose.
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) should therefore be specifically tested, but the 2h-OGGT,
the usual gold standard test for IGT involves ingestion of a large bolus of glucose could drive
the progression of the disease. HbA1c measurements may serve as an alternative biomarker
for IGT. Insulin levels should be systematically measured to detect undiagnosed diabetes, prediabetes or insulin resistance. In addition, the monitoring of glycemia during the course of the
disease should at least be as important as the monitoring of the more common biomarkers
such as IL-6, CRP, D-dimer or ferritin. Interventions to control glycemia should seriously be
considered. Ang II and serum SP-D could be additional biomarkers to assess the risk of
complications such as the cytokine storm and disseminated intravascular coagulation, and
could also help in estimating the time course of the disease.
Even at a late stage of the pandemic, approaches to detect and manage abnormal glucose
metabolism and administer appropriate glucose-lowering drugs or diets, are indicated to help
weaken the infection. Metformin, an old, safe and FDA approved drug, is an interesting
glucose management drug that also has multiple other effects that could be beneficial in the
management of COVID-19. Metformin not only reduces blood glucose levels and clearance
following a bolus of glucose, but also has anti-inflammatory properties as well as cardiovascular protective effects (i.e. anti-thrombotic). Diabetics on metformin seem to be at lower
risk of severe disease, but studies on the potential beneficial effects in healthy and diverse
groups and in groups presenting with the other comorbidities of COVID-19 are lacking.
The literature makes a strong case for using a ketogenic diet (KD) in the management of
COVID-19, but there are challenges to any clinical implementation. It is contra-indicated for
some groups such as those with type 1 DM (409, 410). The diet is difficult to set-up properly
to ensure nutritional requirements. Beneficial effects of this diet, that has been found in the
management of other diseases, are also usually expected over the long-term (389). The time
needed for the body to enter ketosis also varies for different groups and the reasons are

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

unclear. In addition, a transition to ketosis is often associated with flu-like symptoms (keto
flu) (422), which may interfere with the innate immune response to the virus.
In summary, evidence that elevated blood glucose, arising from clinically or subclinical
pathology in glucose metabolism or from induced hyperglycemia due to hospitalization, drug
treatments and intravenous infusions in ICU should be considered as a biomarker that
correlates with and hence is predictive of severity of COVID-19, as well as evidence that
elevated glucose can cause an acceleration of virtually every step of the SARS-CoV2
infection, is overwhelming. Rigorous clinical studies are called for to determine whether
elevated glucose is in fact the predominant driver of disease severity.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

METHODS
All references are cited in the text or listed in Supplementary materials.
A) KNOWLEDGE GRAPH DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
1) Entities Extraction
Literature Database: The CORD-19 database (COVID-19 Open Research Dataset) is a freely
available dataset of full text articles on COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, and related coronaviruses,
launched in March 2020 by the White House (https://www.kaggle.com/allen-institute-forai/CORD-19-research-challenge) and regularly updated (Wang et al, 2020). For our analysis, we
used the CORD-19v47 including over 240,000 articles, with over 100,000 being full-text.
Named Entity Recognition (NER): Our text mining pipeline for extracting information from the
CORD-19 database starts by using machine learning models for named entity recognition (NER).
These models are based on scispaCy models [Neumann, 2019] that we fine-tuned on a manually
annotated subset of sentences from the CORD-19 dataset in order to recognize nine custom
entity types of interest: "cell compartment", "cell type", "chemical", "symptom / disease", "drug",
"organ / system", "organism", "biological process / pathway", and "protein".
Entity linking: Extracted words in papers do not necessarily correspond to unique entities. In
standard text search, this leads to ambiguity because an entity may be spelled differently in
different papers or even within the same paper. Entity linking addresses this problem by
resolving extracted entities to unique identifiers taken from a knowledge base while taking into
account lexical variations as well as synonyms, aliases and acronyms. The resolved identifier can
therefore be used to unambiguously reference an entity on subsequent text mining and
knowledge graph tasks.
In this study, the National Cancer Institute Thesaurus (NCIt) ontology [Fragoso G, 2004] was
used as the knowledge base to which extracted entities were linked. Such linking also gave us
access to the semantics of the entities with their human-readable definitions and hierarchically
structured semantic types (e.g, the entity angiotensin-1 is a AGT gene product, which is a
subtype of peptide hormone’, which is a protein). The entity types obtained during the extraction
phase were therefore enriched with ontology types which allowed labeling of the resulting
concepts into nine unique entity types summarized in the table below.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

KG Entity type

NCIT Classes

Cell compartment

Cell part

Cell type
Microanatomic structure, cell count, abnormal cell, blood cell Count
Chemical

Chemical modifier, drug or chemical by structure, food or food
product, physiology-regulatory factor

Symptom / disease

Disease, disorder or finding

Drug

Substance of abuse, dietary supplement, drug class measurement,
pharmacologic substance

Organ / system

Tissue, organ, body region, body cavity, organ system, body fluid or
substance, body part (excluding cell part)

Organism

Organism

Biological process
/pathway

Biochemical pathway, biological process

Protein

Protein or riboprotein complex, gene product, protein or enzyme
type measurement, protein, blood protein measurement, hemoglobin
measurement, vitamin measurement, cytokine measurement
2) Query-based literature search

Amongst the hundreds of thousands of articles contained in the CORD-19 database, we wanted
to be able to focus our analysis on subsets of publications. An information retrieval tool for
literature search was therefore implemented, allowing users to query the CORD-19 database both
for various simple filtering criteria (e.g. "publication date" or "journal") and for relevance with
respect to a given query. We used a machine learning model based on BioBERT [Lee, 2020] and
fine-tuned it on the CORD-19 dataset in order to produce sentence embeddings vectors. For any
given sentence, its embedding vector encodes its semantic information, so that semantically
similar sentences are mathematically represented by similar vectors. Then, we use the cosine
distance to compute similarity between pairs of sentences embedding vectors, which enables us
to rank the content of the CORD-19 with respect to the query and retrieve the most relevant
articles. The criteria set for the search in the current study are the following:
- Query: “Glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19”
- Granularity: “Articles”
- Number of top articles: “3,000”
- Date range: “2000-2020”
- Journal Type: “All

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3) Knowledge graph construction method
We examined co-mentions of entity pairs on a paper- and paragraph-level, adding an edge
between a pair of entities if they co-occur in at least one paper. We then assigned several weight
metrics to each co-mention edge including raw co-mention frequency, positive pointwise mutual
information (PPMI) and normalized pointwise mutual information (NPMI) [Bouma, G. (2009)]
calculated based on the co-occurrence in the same papers and the same paragraphs. In this
context, the presence of an edge between a pair of entities can be interpreted as the presence of
some association between the pair of concepts they represent, and the corresponding edge
weights quantify the strength of such association. To assign weights on the nodes of the
constructed graph that would reflect the importance of entities in the extracted dataset, we have
computed nodes’ weighted degree centrality using the previously described edge weights (given
by raw frequency, PPMI and NMPI).
-

CORD-19 knowledge graphs

Following the methods described above, we constructed two knowledge graphs. The first
knowledge graph is based on the entire CORD-19 dataset. Out of more than 400,000 entities
extracted and linked during data preparation, the 10,000 most frequently mentioned entities were
selected and used as nodes of the knowledge graph. The constructed graph is very dense
containing over 44 million edges (resulting in a density of 0.87, i.e. 87% of all possible pairs of
co-mentions) out of which 12 million edges have non-zero paragraph-level co-occurrence
(making the density of the paragraph-based co-mention network 0.25).
The second knowledge graph was built using the results of the query-based literature search (see
section 2). Out of more than 20,000 extracted entities, the 1,500 most frequently mentioned
entities were selected and used as nodes of the knowledge graph. Only the edges that correspond
to the non-zero paragraph-level co-occurrence were considered. As a result, we generated
approximately 700,000 edges, giving a total density of 0.62.
4) Community detection
To partition the knowledge graph constructed based on the entire CORD-19 dataset into clusters
of strongly associated entities, we performed node community detection using the Louvain
algorithm [Danon, 2005] on paragraph-level co-occurrences. A community represents a cluster
of nodes whose connections are stronger within the community than with the rest of the network.
The algorithm detected five different communities of entities. Having examined the most
frequent entities in each community, we have mapped the communities to the following five
topics: biology of viruses, diseases and symptoms, immune response, infectious disorders,
chemical compounds (Supplementary Figure 3). Note that despite the fact that our network is
given by a highly dense graph, such community detection is still possible when taking into
account edge weights (in our case, the NPMI values of the co-occurrence edges). The resulting
partition gives us a modularity value of 0.21.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5) Minimum spanning tree analysis
To sparsify our knowledge graph and gain insight into the most important and relevant
associations between entities, we computed the minimum weight spanning tree with the weight
being assigned to the inverse of the edge NPMI based on paragraph-level co-occurrence
(therefore, a higher pointwise mutual information between entities implies a smaller distance).
The minimum spanning trees on Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure 4 were generated from the
knowledge graph built using the results of the query-based literature search.
6) Best mutual information pathways (BMPIs) search
To gain insight on the most important and informative sets of entities relating ‘glucose’ and
‘COVID-19’ or ‘SARS-COV-2’ in the literature, we have used the approach called “best mutual
information pathways” (BMIPs). Such pathways are constructed using the shortest weighted
paths from the source to the target entity (e.g. from ‘glucose’ to ‘COVID-19’ or ‘SARS-COV2’), where the weight corresponds to the paper-level NPMI (i.e. the higher NPMI associated with
an edge, the smaller the ‘distance’ between the corresponding source and target entities).
To be able to navigate and explore the literature, we aimed to identify concepts that relate a
source to a target entity. Therefore, we focused on finding a set of such shortest paths, rather than
a single shortest path. Classical algorithms exist to find the N shortest paths between two nodes
in a weighted graph (such as [Yen, Jin Y (1971)]). However, due to the density of our graph,
such algorithms perform poorly in terms of execution time. For the same reason it is extremely
rare that one of the shortest paths between two nodes consists of more than two hops. We
therefore adopted a naïve strategy that exploits this property. We first find all the indirect
shortest paths (discarding the direct edge from the source to the target) in terms of number of
hops ignoring the edge weight (usually such paths consist of two hops, which greatly reduces the
space of all possible paths). Then, the algorithm ranks these paths by computing the cumulative
distance score and chooses the ones with the largest score. Such distance scores are simply given
by the sum of the inverse of the NPMI associated with the path’s edges. Finally, to further
explore the space of co-mentioned entities in depth, we can run the path search procedure in a
nested manner. For each edge encountered on a path e1, e2, …, en from e1 to en, we further
expanded it into n shortest paths between each pair of successive entities (i.e. paths between e1
and e2, e2 and e3, etc.). For example, the graph in Figure 3 is obtained by aggregating the nodes
and the edges encountered by, first, searching for the 20 BMIPs and, second, by further
expanding each of the encountered edges into their five BMIPs.
7) Knowledge graphs visualization
We have developed graphical interfaces that allow performing interactive entity curation,
exploration and analysis of co-occurrence graphs, that were used to produce graphs and BMPIs
in the figures. Semantic issues that were not identified by the ontology linking process were
fixed during this manual curation process. Then, all knowledge graphs-related figures were
produced using the Gephi software ( https://gephi.org/).
The sizes of the nodes are proportional to their weighted degree centralities. The color of the
nodes corresponds to different entity types (except for Supplementary Figure 3 where colors

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

correspond to different communities). The thickness values of the edges correspond to NPMI
values, while their length is arbitrary.
8) Source code
The source code for the pipeline stages relative to Semantic Literature Search and Named Entity
Recognition can be found here: https://github.com/BlueBrain/Search/tree/v0.1.0
The ML models, and the data used to train them, can be found here:
https://zenodo.org/record/4589007
The code, data and instructions to reproduce the entity linking, knowledge graphs generation and
analysis can be accessed from:
https://github.com/BlueBrain/BlueBrainGraph/tree/master/cord19kg.

B) GLUCOSE-DEPENDANT
MODELS

SARS-CoV-2

INFECTION

COMPUTATIONAL

The computational model of the glucose dependents of SARS-CoV-2 infectivity in
alveolar epithelial cells was written and implemented in the MATLAB simulation language
(https://www.mathworks.com/).
The parameters and governing equations are provided below.
1) Parameters
Name
Glucose, blood, normoglycemia
(gluc_b)
Glucose, blood, hyperglycemia
(gluc_b_hyp)
Glucose, epithelium, initial
(gluc_epi_init)
Glucose, ASL, initial normal
(gluc_asl_init)
Glucose, ASL, initial hyper
(gluc_asl_h_init)
Lactate, epithelial, initial
(lac_epi_init)
Lactate, ASL, initial (lac_asl_init)
Paracellular resistance, normal (Rt_n)
Paracellular resistance, hyper (Rt_h)
pH, ASL, initial (pH_asl_init)
pH, epithelium, initial (pH_epi_init)
Km, SARS-CoV-2 - ACE2 receptor
(KmACE2)
Km, Na-coupled glucose transporter
(KmSglt1)

Value

Source

5 mM

-

10 mM

-

2 mM

Bearham et al, 2019
Garnett et al, 2012
Pezzulo et al, 2011
Garnett et al, 2012
Baker et al, 2007
Fisher and Dodia, 1984

0.4 mM
1.2 mM
1 mM
1 mM
453 Ω·cm2
225 Ω·cm2
7.0
7.2
1.6 x 10-5 mM
0.3 mM

Fisher and Dodia, 1984
Garnett et al, 2012b
Garnett et al, 2012b
Amirkhanian and Merritt, 1995
Boron, 2004
Bar-On et al, 2020; Wrapp et
al, 2020
Baker and Baines, 2018

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Km, lectin - glucose (KmLectg)
Km, lectin – SARS (KmLectv)
Km, MCT4 apical lactate transporter
(KmMCTapi)
Lactate dehydrogenase, forward
(kLDHeplus)
Lactate dehydrogenase, reverse
(kLDHeminus)
Glucose, diffusion constant (difuseK)
Lectin, ASL (lectin)

1.8 mM
0.45 mM
1.7 mM

Schwartz et al, 1993
Kussrow et al, 2009
Contreras-Baeza et al, 2019

0.071

Jolivet et al, 2015

1.59

Jolivet et al, 2015

5.65 x 103 m2/sec
5.8 mM

Gaunsbaeket al, 2013

2) Definition of viral loads
The total range between low and high viral loads was 10x according to clinical findings [Anand
and Mayya, 2020]. The intermediate load was chosen to be closer to the higher viral load in
order to simulate a non-specific saturating effect, as if close to the top of a dose-response binding
curve; then the intermediate load is 5x the low load, whereas the high load is 2x the intermediate
load. This saturating effect would emerge from multiple interacting factors for which there is no
clear data, but mostly from the principle of ACE2 receptor availability, which is assumed to
be finite in this simulation and does not grow with larger viral loads. As control, simulations
were also run with the intermediate viral load being equidistant between low and high (data not
shown), that did not affect the qualitative outcome of the models
3) Other Abbreviations
asl
sc2
sc2_asl_effect_n
sc2_asl_effect_h
sc2_asl
sc2_aslb
sc2_aslc
ACE2V_n
ACE2V_h
ACE2V_nb
ACE2V_hc
ACE2V_nb
ACE2V_hc
ACE2V_r
ACE2V_rb
ACE2V_rc
MCTapifrac
MCTbasfrac
lacepi

Airway surface liquid
SARS-CoV-2 time-course in ASL (model “sneeze” stimulus)
Effective available sc2 in normoglycemic ASL
Effective available sc2 in glycemic ASL
viral load in ASL 1
viral load in ASL 2
viral load in ASL 3
sc2-ACE2 binding during low load stimulus, normoglycemic
sc2-ACE2 binding during low load stimulus, hyperglycemic
sc2-ACE2 binding during intermediate load stimulus,
normoglycemic
sc2-ACE2 binding during intermediate load stimulus,
hyperglycemic
sc2-ACE2 binding during high load stimulus, normoglycemic
sc2-ACE2 binding during high load stimulus, hyperglycemic
Glucose-dependent sc2 endocytosis, low viral load
Glucose-dependent sc2 endocytosis, intermediate viral load
Glucose-dependent sc2 endocytosis, high viral load
Activity of apical endothelial lactate transporter
Activity of basal endothelial lactate transporter
Epithelial lactate concentration

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

glucaslr
glucbrange
Jgluc_nr
Jgluc_hr
Rt_x ; x =n, h or range
junctionconduct
Sglt1
vireprate_epi
vireprate_epib
vireprate_epic
vinumber_epi
vinumber_epib
vinumber_epic

ASL glucose concentration range
Blood glucose concentration range
Paracellular glucose flux, normoglycemic
Paracellular glucose flux, hyperglycemic
Paracellular resistance, n=normoglycemia, h= hyperglycemia
Paracellular conductance (= 1/Rt)
Sodium-dependent glucose transporter
virus replication rate in epithelial cell, low load
virus replication rate in epithelial cell, intermediate load
virus replication rate in epithelial cell, high load
Number of virion units in epithelial cell, low load
Number of virion units in epithelial cell, intermediate load
Number of virion units in epithelial cell, high load

4) Governing Equations

2 





   

Eq. 1

0.4  
2_

 _

 _



2_




 

1.2  
2_

 _

 _ 

2_




  

2_
2

_


 

Eq. 4

 _


 _

 _

Eq. 5

 _

_  2 
2  2_


 _

 _

0.4  
2_

 _

 _

! 

2_

 !
  

 _

 _! 

2_

 

 !
  

2_
2

_

2_
2

 _

!  2 
2  2_

 _

_!  2 
2  2_

 _

Eq. 6




1.2  
2_

Eq. 3



 _

 2 
2  2_

2_
2

 _

Eq. 2




  

Eq. 7



 

Eq. 8

!


 _

 _

!

Eq. 9

 _!

 _

 _!

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.4  
2_

 _

 _

 

2_

 
  

 _

 _ 

2_

 
  

2_
2

_

 _

2_
2

 _

  2 
2  2_

 _

 _

Eq.
10



Eq.
11



Eq.
12



Eq.
13

 

1.2  
2_






 


 _



 _

_  2 
2  2_

 _

 _



Eq.
14


"#

$

%

  "#

$
"#

$ 









Eq.
15


"#!

& '_



%

  "#!

೔೙೔೟

೔೙೔೟


 _

2





ೝೌ೙೒೐

  '

(

ೝೌ೙೒೐

' 
) _

(



' 

) _

1
 
;, 
) _,

  '

 _ 

2

  '



 '

 '





1



 +

 



1



%   '

& '_%   '

*'


"#!



  '

, , +% %

 & '_

೔೙೔೟

೔೙೔೟

%

 & '_%



 2

_

 '

 2

_

! '

ೝ



Eq.
17
Eq.
18
Eq.
19
Eq.
20
Eq.
21



ೝ



Eq.
16



Eq.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

22



2

 2



2

_



 '



 2

_ '



 2

_! '

2



 2

_ '



2



_

 '

 2

_

! '



1 
/



 _



 ೔೙೔೟  /

  '

Eq.
27

ೝ

 "#



$2



 $2

$

೔೙೔೟

%

ೝ



Eq.
29



1 '



1 '



 

 

Eq.
28



 ೝ 4  012



Eq.
26





 2012$ ' 3 '



Eq.
25



ೝ



  '

 '

ೝ

1   '

 ೔೙೔೟  /

 '





Eq.
24



ೝ

ೝ

Eq.
23







 2

 '
/



ೝ

2

2

ೝ











Eq.
30



ೝ

Eq.
31



'

 ೔೙೔೟ 



Eq.
32
Eq.
33
Eq.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

34



$2

5%$%

5

5

5



  '

ೝ

Eq.
36



Eq.
38

_



!  '

ೝ

Eq.
39



 ೐೛೔್  ೌೞ೗ೝ  

_%!2



_



  '

Eq.
40
Eq.
41

'!%_$!

ೝ

Eq.
42



 ೐೛೔೎  ೌೞ೗ೝ  

_%2

'!%_ +  5

Eq.
37



'!%_$

_$  2

'!%_$  2

Eq.
35



 ೐೛೔  ೌೞ೗ೝ  

'!%_ +!  5

5%$%

_





_%2

_$!  2

'!%_$!  2

5

 

'!%_ +  5

5%$%

5

೔೙೔೟

_$  2

'!%_$  2

5



 $2

'!%_$



Eq.
43
Eq.
44

C) BIOEXPLORER DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
The Blue Brain BioExplorer (BBBE) application is built on top of Brayns
(https://github.com/BlueBrain/Brayns), the BBP rendering platform. The role of the application

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

is to use the underlying technical capabilities of the rendering platform to create large scale and
accurate 3D scenes from Jupyter notebooks. The code for the model will be open sourced upon
publication.

1) Source code
The complete documentation is available here : https://bluebrain.github.io/BioExplorer/
The source code is available here: here: https://github.com/BlueBrain/BioExplorer

2) Components ID and dimension:
Macrophage and membranes:
The 3D model of the macrophage represented in Figure 16 was obtained from
https://www.turbosquid.com/3d-models/3d-lymphocytes-neutrophil-basophil-1168937
The viral and host cell membranes were generated from phospholipids structures created
following the process described in the VMD (https://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Research/vmd/)
Membrane Proteins Tutorial (http://www.ks.uiuc.edu/Training/Tutorials/). Then, an assembly of
phospholipids elements is generated by the BioExplorer, with a given shape, and a given number
of instances of phospholipids.
Molecular components:
Dimension and PDB-ID of each molecular component represented in Figures 11, 12, 16, 19 and
in the Movie are described in the panel below:

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The spike in closed conformation was self-generated using “I-Tasser Protein structure
prediction” and “Modeller” from Uniprot ID P0DTC2. The model for ACE2 corresponds to
ACE2/B°AT1 complex (Yan et al, 2020). The same models were used to generate surfactant
protein-D and surfactant protein-A, only the conformation was different. Dimension and
conformation of SP-D and SP-A were obtained from literature (Watson et al, 2018; Hsieh et al,
2018).

3) Component numbers and concentrations (Related to Figures 16, 19 and Movie):
-

Each viral particle is 90 nm diameter with 62 spikes, 42 “E proteins” and 50 “M proteins”
per particle (Neuman et al, 2006; Bar-On et al, 2020).
The images represent a cube with 800 nm side, i.e. a volume of 0.512 um3.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

-

The number of each component in the 0.512 um3 volume, in the two different conditions
(0.4 or 1.2 mM glucose), is indicated in the following table:
0.4 mM Glucose
(Figure 15 and Movie )
5
20
120,000
4
1
150
300
1

Virion
ACE2
Glucose
SP-D
SP-A
Lactoferrin
Beta-defensin
macrophage

1.2 mM Glucose
(Figure 18 and Movie )
6
20
360,000
3
1
50
100
0

4) Glycans
a. Formula
Glycan trees are retrieved from Glycam Builder (http://glycam.org/Pre-builtLibraries.jsp) with
the corresponding formula for each of the four types of N-glycans (No diversity was included in
the present model).
Nam
e
HM

Glycan-type
High-mannose /
oligomannose

Formula
(Man9): DManpa1-2DManpa1-6[DManpa1-2DManpa1-3]DManpa1-6[DManpa12DManpa1-2DManpa1-3]DManpb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-OH

Hy

Hybrid

DManpa1-6[DManpa1-3]DManpa1-6[DNeu5Aca2-6DGalpb1-4DGlcpNAcb12DManpa1-3]DManpb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-OH

C

Complex

O

O-type

(FA2G2S2): DNeup5Aca2-6DGalpb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-2DManpa1-6[DNeup5Aca26DGalpb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-2DManpa1-3]DManpb1-4DGlcpNAcb1-4DGlcpNAcb1OME
DNeup5Aca2-6[DNeup5Aca2-3DGalpb1-3]DGalpNAca1-OME

b. Types and positions
The glycan-type (HM, complex or hybrid) with the highest representation reported for each
specific site was considered, hence no microheterogeneity is included in our representation.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

- Viral Spike* (From Watanabe et al, 2020
and Uniprot ID P0DTC2):

- Human ACE2 (From Shajahan et al, 2020
and Uniprot ID Q9BYF1):

N-site (aa position)
17
61
74
122
149
165
234
282
331
343
603
616
657
709
717
801
1074
1098
1134
1158
1173
1194
T-site (aa position)
323
325

N-site (aa position)
53
90
103
322
432
546
690
T/S-site (aa position)
155
730

Tree Type
C
HM
C
HM
C
C
HM
C
C
C
HM
C
C
HM
HM
HM
HM
C
C
C
C
C

Tree Type
C
C
C
C
C
Hy
C
O
O

- Viral M protein (From Fung et al, 2018
and Uniprot ID P0DTC5):
N-site (aa position)
5

Tree Type
HM

- Viral E protein (From Fung et al, 2018 and
Uniprot ID P0DTC4):
N-site (aa position)
66

Tree Type
C

O
O

*The above-mentioned glycans are all present
on the spike in closed conformation. However,
glycans at positions 17, 74, 149, 165, 1158,
1173 and 1194 are missing in the representation
of the spike in its open conformation, that is
inherent to the model provided by PDB
(ID:6VYB).

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abbreviations: ACE2, angiotensin-converting enzyme 2; AGEs, advanced glycation end
products; Ang II, angiotensin II; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; ASL, airway
surface liquid; BMI, body mass index; CFR, case fatality rate, CRD, carbohydrate recognition
domain; FPG, fasting plasma glucose; GLUT, glucose transporter; ICU, intensive care unit;
IFG, impaired fasting glucose; IGT, impaired glucose tolerance; KD, ketogenic diet; OGTT,
oral glucose tolerance test; PPG, postprandial glucose; ROS, reactive oxygen species.
Authors contributions: Investigations, E.L., C.L. and H.M.; Data collection and
literature review, E.L., C.L. and M.B.; Blue Brain BioExplorer design and implementation,
C.F. and E.L.; Computational infection models, J.S.C. and D.K.; Design and implementation
of Machine Learning models, F.C., S.S., E.D., J.K. and P.A.F. Design and implementation of
a Knowledge Graph building process, F.S., E.O., A.K.K., P.A.F., S.K. and E.S.; Figures
design, C.M.; Writing, E.L., C.L. and H.M.; Supervision, E.L. and H.M. All authors
contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Conflict of interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

Funding: This study was supported by funding to the Blue Brain Project, a research center
of the École polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), from the Swiss government’s ETH
Board of the Swiss Federal Institutes of Technology.
Acknowledgments: We thank Polina Shichkova for technical support on protein
modeling for Blue Brain BioExplorer, the BBP infrastructure team for providing help to host
web server and storage and Karin Holm for editing of the manuscript and support for the
submission process.

Data Availability Statement: The links to access the simulation codes used to generate
the datasets presented in this study are provided in the related section of methods, and can be
run using the instructions in the "README.md" files.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References:
1. C Huang; Y Wang; X Li; L Ren; J Zhao; Y Hu; L Zhang; G Fan; J Xu; X Gu; Z Cheng; T
Yu; J Xia; Y Wei; W Wu; X Xie; W Yin; H Li; M Liu; Y Xiao; H Gao; L Guo; J Xie; G
Wang; R Jiang; Z Gao; Q Jin; J Wang; B Cao. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. The Lancet 395, 497–506 (2020)
2. N Zhu; D Zhang; W Wang; X Li; B Yang; J Song; X Zhao; B Huang; W Shi; R Lu; P Niu;
F Zhan; X Ma; D Wang; W Xu; G Wu; GF Gao; W Tan; China Novel Coronavirus
Investigating and Research Team. A Novel Coronavirus from Patients with Pneumonia in
China, 2019. N Engl J Med 382, 727–733 (2020)
3. O Byambasuren; M Cardona; K Bell; J Clark; M-L McLaws; P Glasziou. Estimating the
extent of asymptomatic COVID-19 and its potential for community transmission: Systematic
review and meta-analysis. Official Journal of the Association of Medical Microbiology and
Infectious Disease Canada 5, 223–234 (2020)
4. R Subramanian; Q He; M Pascual. Quantifying asymptomatic infection and transmission of
COVID-19 in New York City using observed cases, serology, and testing capacity. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 118, e2019716118 (2021)
5. A Dennis; M Wamil; J Alberts; J Oben; DJ Cuthbertson; D Wootton; M Crooks; M
Gabbay; M Brady; L Hishmeh; E Attree; M Heightman; R Banerjee; A Banerjee;
COVERSCAN study investigators. Multiorgan impairment in low-risk individuals with postCOVID-19 syndrome: a prospective, community-based study. BMJ Open 11, e048391 (2021)
6. Q Cheng; Y Yang; J Gao. Infectivity of human coronavirus in the brain. EBioMedicine 56,
102799 (2020)
7. A Carfì; R Bernabei; F Landi; Gemelli Against COVID-19 Post-Acute Care Study Group.
Persistent Symptoms in Patients After Acute COVID-19. JAMA 324, 603–605 (2020)
8. C Huang; L Huang; Y Wang; X Li; L Ren; X Gu; L Kang; L Guo; M Liu; X Zhou; J Luo;
Z Huang; S Tu; Y Zhao; L Chen; D Xu; Y Li; C Li; L Peng; Y Li; W Xie; D Cui; L Shang; G
Fan; J Xu; G Wang; Y Wang; J Zhong; C Wang; J Wang; D Zhang; B Cao. 6-month
consequences of COVID-19 in patients discharged from hospital: a cohort study. The Lancet
397, 220–232 (2021)
9. W Guan; Z Ni; Y Hu; W Liang; C Ou; J He; L Liu; H Shan; C Lei; DSC Hui; B Du; L Li;
G Zeng; K-Y Yuen; R Chen; C Tang; T Wang; P Chen; J Xiang; S Li; J Wang; Z Liang; Y
Peng; L Wei; Y Liu; Y Hu; P Peng; J Wang; J Liu; Z Chen; G Li; Z Zheng; S Qiu; J Luo; C
Ye; S Zhu; N Zhong. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. n engl j
med 13 (2020)
10. D Wang; B Hu; C Hu; F Zhu; X Liu; J Zhang; B Wang; H Xiang; Z Cheng; Y Xiong; Y
Zhao; Y Li; X Wang; Z Peng. Clinical Characteristics of 138 Hospitalized Patients With 2019
Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia in Wuhan, China. 9 (2020)
11. H Ge; X Wang; X Yuan; G Xiao; C Wang; T Deng; Q Yuan; X Xiao. The epidemiology
and clinical information about COVID-19. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1–9 (2020)
12. N Chen; M Zhou; X Dong; J Qu; F Gong; Y Han; Y Qiu; J Wang; Y Liu; Y Wei; J Xia; T
Yu; X Zhang; L Zhang. Epidemiological and clinical characteristics of 99 cases of 2019 novel
coronavirus pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a descriptive study. The Lancet 395, 507–513
(2020)
13. TM Abd El-Aziz; JD Stockand. Recent progress and challenges in drug development
against COVID-19 coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) - an update on the status. Infection, Genetics
and Evolution 83, 104327 (2020)
14. CH Yan; F Faraji; DP Prajapati; CE Boone; AS DeConde. Association of chemosensory
dysfunction and COVID-19 in patients presenting with influenza-like symptoms.
International Forum of Allergy & Rhinology 10, 806–813 (2020)

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15. X Meng; Y Deng; Z Dai; Z Meng. COVID-19 and anosmia: A review based on up-to-date
knowledge. American Journal of Otolaryngology 41, 102581 (2020)
16. E Ortiz-Prado; K Simbaña-Rivera; LG- Barreno; M Rubio-Neira; LP Guaman; NC
Kyriakidis; C Muslin; AMG Jaramillo; C Barba-Ostria; D Cevallos-Robalino; H SanchesSanMiguel; L Unigarro; R Zalakeviciute; N Gadian; A López-Cortés. Clinical, molecular, and
epidemiological characterization of the SARS-CoV-2 virus and the Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19), a comprehensive literature review. Diagnostic Microbiology and Infectious
Disease 32 (2020)
17. B Hu; H Guo; P Zhou; Z-L Shi. Characteristics of SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19. Nat Rev
Microbiol 19, 141–154 (2021)
18. R Verity; LC Okell; I Dorigatti; P Winskill; C Whittaker; N Imai; G Cuomo-Dannenburg;
H Thompson; PGT Walker; H Fu; A Dighe; JT Griffin; M Baguelin; S Bhatia; A Boonyasiri;
A Cori; Z Cucunubá; R FitzJohn; K Gaythorpe; W Green; A Hamlet; W Hinsley; D Laydon;
G Nedjati-Gilani; S Riley; S van Elsland; E Volz; H Wang; Y Wang; X Xi; CA Donnelly; AC
Ghani; NM Ferguson. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis. The Lancet Infectious Diseases S1473309920302437 (2020)
19. A Emami; F Javanmardi; N Pirbonyeh; A Akbari. Prevalence of Underlying Diseases in
Hospitalized Patients with COVID-19: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Arch Acad
Emerg Med 8 (2020)
20. J Yang; Y Zheng; X Gou; K Pu; Z Chen; Q Guo; R Ji; H Wang; Y Wang; Y Zhou.
Prevalence of comorbidities and its effects in coronavirus disease 2019 patients: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 94, 91–95 (2020)
21. J Lighter; M Phillips; S Hochman; S Sterling; D Johnson; F Francois; A Stachel. Obesity
in patients younger than 60 years is a risk factor for Covid-19 hospital admission. Clinical
Infectious Diseases ciaa415 (2020)
22. A Simonnet; M Chetboun; J Poissy; V Raverdy; J Noulette; A Duhamel; J Labreuche; D
Mathieu; F Pattou; M Jourdain; The Lille Intensive Care COVID-19 and Obesity study group.
High prevalence of obesity in severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV2) requiring invasive mechanical ventilation. Obesity (2020)
23. K Brurberg; A Fretheim; C Stoltenberg. COVID-19: The relationship between age,
comorbidity and disease severity – a rapid review, (2020)
24. S Richardson; JS Hirsch; M Narasimhan; JM Crawford; T McGinn; KW Davidson; DP
Barnaby; LB Becker; JD Chelico; SL Cohen; J Cookingham; K Coppa; MA Diefenbach; AJ
Dominello; J Duer-Hefele; L Falzon; J Gitlin; N Hajizadeh; TG Harvin; DA Hirschwerk; EJ
Kim; ZM Kozel; LM Marrast; JN Mogavero; GA Osorio; M Qiu; TP Zanos. Presenting
Characteristics, Comorbidities, and Outcomes Among 5700 Patients Hospitalized With
COVID-19 in the New York City Area. JAMA 323, 2052–2059 (2020)
25. AK Singh; A Misra. Impact of COVID-19 and comorbidities on health and economics:
Focus on developing countries and India. Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical Research
& Reviews 14, 1625–1630 (2020)
26. K Chan; J Zheng; Y Mok; Y Li; Y Liu; C Chu; M Ip. SARS: prognosis, outcome and
sequelae. Respirology 8, S36–S40 (2003)
27. JK Yang; Y Feng; MY Yuan; SY Yuan; HJ Fu; BY Wu; GZ Sun; GR Yang; XL Zhang; L
Wang; X Xu; XP Xu; JCN Chan. Plasma glucose levels and diabetes are independent
predictors for mortality and morbidity in patients with SARS. Diabet Med 23, 623–628
(2006)
28. E de Wit; N van Doremalen; D Falzarano; VJ Munster. SARS and MERS: recent insights
into emerging coronaviruses. Nature Reviews Microbiology 14, 523–534 (2016)
29. E Rapsomaniki; A Timmis; J George; M Pujades-Rodriguez; AD Shah; S Denaxas; IR
White; MJ Caulfield; JE Deanfield; L Smeeth; B Williams; A Hingorani; H Hemingway.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Blood pressure and incidence of twelve cardiovascular diseases: lifetime risks, healthy lifeyears lost, and age-specific associations in 1·25 million people. 383, 13 (2014)
30. JL Harding; ME Pavkov; DJ Magliano; JE Shaw; EW Gregg. Global trends in diabetes
complications: a review of current evidence. Diabetologia 62, 3–16 (2019)
31. R Allard; P Leclerc; C Tremblay; T-N Tannenbaum. Diabetes and the Severity of
Pandemic Influenza A (H1N1) Infection. Diabetes Care 33, 1491–1493 (2010)
32. M Barrau; S Larrieu; S Cassadou; P Dussart; F Najioullah; G C; R J; J-L Chappert; V
Ardillon; A Blateau; C Flamand; J Rosine; P Quénel; M Ledrans. Hospitalized cases of
influenza A(H1N1)pdm09 in the French territories of the Americas, July 2009–March 2010.
Revista Panamericana de Salud Pública 32, 124–130 (2012)
33. P Mehta; DF McAuley; M Brown; E Sanchez; RS Tattersall; JJ Manson. COVID-19:
consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. Lancet 395, 1033–1034 (2020)
34. Y Shi; Y Wang; C Shao; J Huang; J Gan; X Huang; E Bucci; M Piacentini; G Ippolito; G
Melino. COVID-19 infection: the perspectives on immune responses. Cell Death &
Differentiation 27, 1451–1454 (2020)
35. Q Ruan; K Yang; W Wang; L Jiang; J Song. Clinical predictors of mortality due to
COVID-19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. Intensive Care
Med 46, 846–848 (2020)
36. CA Pfortmueller; T Spinetti; RD Urman; MM Luedi; JC Schefold. COVID-19-associated
acute respiratory distress syndrome (CARDS): Current knowledge on pathophysiology and
ICU treatment – A narrative review. Best Practice & Research Clinical Anaesthesiology
(2020)
37. P Ramírez; M Gordón; M Martín-Cerezuela; E Villarreal; E Sancho; M Padrós; J
Frasquet; G Leyva; I Molina; M Barrios; S Gimeno; Á Castellanos. Acute respiratory distress
syndrome due to COVID-19. Clinical and prognostic features from a medical Critical Care
Unit in Valencia, Spain. Medicina Intensiva 45, 27–34 (2021)
38. PG Gibson; L Qin; SH Puah. COVID-19 acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS):
clinical features and differences from typical pre-COVID-19 ARDS. Med J Aust 213, 5456.e1 (2020)
39. J Phua; L Weng; L Ling; M Egi; C-M Lim; JV Divatia; BR Shrestha; YM Arabi; J Ng;
CD Gomersall; M Nishimura; Y Koh; B Du. Intensive care management of coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19): challenges and recommendations. The Lancet Respiratory
Medicine S2213260020301612 (2020)
40. PG Gibson; JH Hospital; L Qin. The Medical Journal of Australia – Preprint – 24 April
2020. The Medical Journal of Australia 7 (2020)
41. S Zaim; JH Chong; V Sankaranarayanan; A Harky. COVID-19 and Multiorgan Response.
Curr Probl Cardiol (2020)
42. C Magro; JJ Mulvey; D Berlin; G Nuovo; S Salvatore; J Harp; A Baxter-Stoltzfus; J
Laurence. Complement associated microvascular injury and thrombosis in the pathogenesis of
severe COVID-19 infection: a report of five cases. Translational Research
S1931524420300700 (2020)
43. DC Rotzinger; C Beigelman-Aubry; C von Garnier; SD Qanadli. Pulmonary embolism in
patients with COVID-19: Time to change the paradigm of computed tomography. Thrombosis
Research 190, 58–59 (2020)
44. F Grillet; J Behr; P Calame; S Aubry; E Delabrousse. Acute Pulmonary Embolism
Associated with COVID-19 Pneumonia Detected
with Pulmonary CT
Angiography. Radiology 296, E186–E188 (2020)
45. H Han; L Yang; R Liu; F Liu; K-L Wu; J Li; X-H Liu; C-L Zhu. Prominent changes in
blood coagulation of patients with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Clin Chem Lab Med 58, 1116–
1120 (2020)

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

46. C Robba; D Battaglini; P Pelosi; PRM Rocco. Multiple organ dysfunction in SARS-CoV2: MODS-CoV-2. Expert Review of Respiratory Medicine 14, 865–868 (2020)
47. N Tang; D Li; X Wang; Z Sun. Abnormal coagulation parameters are associated with
poor prognosis in patients with novel coronavirus pneumonia. Journal of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis 18, 844–847 (2020)
48. W-J Tu; J Cao; L Yu; X Hu; Q Liu. Clinicolaboratory study of 25 fatal cases of COVID19 in Wuhan. Intensive Care Med (2020)
49. P Malik; U Patel; D Mehta; N Patel; R Kelkar; M Akrmah; JL Gabrilove; H Sacks.
Biomarkers and outcomes of COVID-19 hospitalisations: systematic review and metaanalysis. BMJ Evidence-Based Medicine (2020)
50. M Lagadinou; EE Salomou; N Zareifopoulos; M Marangos; C Gogos; D Velissaris.
Prognosis of COVID-19: Changes in laboratory parameters. Infez Med 28, 89–95 (2020)
51. I Huang; R Pranata. Lymphopenia in severe coronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19):
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Intensive Care 8, 36 (2020)
52. B Zhang; S Liu; L Zhang; Y Dong; S Zhang. Admission fasting blood glucose predicts
30-day poor outcome in patients hospitalized for COVID-19 pneumonia. Diabetes, Obesity
and Metabolism 22, 1955–1957 (2020)
53. J Zhang; W Kong; P Xia; Y Xu; L Li; Q Li; L Yang; Q Wei; H Wang; H Li; J Zheng; H
Sun; W Xia; G Liu; X Zhong; K Qiu; Y Li; H Wang; Y Wang; X Song; H Liu; S Xiong; Y
Liu; Z Cui; Y Hu; L Chen; A Pan; T Zeng. Impaired Fasting Glucose and Diabetes Are
Related to Higher Risks of Complications and Mortality Among Patients With Coronavirus
Disease 2019. Front Endocrinol 11 (2020)
54. H Li; S Tian; T Chen; Z Cui; N Shi; X Zhong; K Qiu; J Zhang; T Zeng; L Chen; J Zheng.
Newly diagnosed diabetes is associated with a higher risk of mortality than known diabetes in
hospitalized patients with COVID 19. Diabetes Obes Metab (2020)
55. S Wang; P Ma; S Zhang; S Song; Z Wang; Y Ma; J Xu; F Wu; L Duan; Z Yin; H Luo; N
Xiong; M Xu; T Zeng; Y Jin. Fasting blood glucose at admission is an independent predictor
for 28-day mortality in patients with COVID-19 without previous diagnosis of diabetes: a
multi-centre retrospective study. Diabetologia 63, 2102–2111 (2020)
56. J Wu; J Huang; G Zhu; Q Wang; Q Lv; Y Huang; Y Yu; X Si; H Yi; C Wang; Y Liu; H
Xiao; Q Zhou; X Liu; D Yang; X Guan; Y Li; S Peng; J Sung; H Xiao. Elevation of blood
glucose level predicts worse outcomes in hospitalized patients with COVID-19: a
retrospective cohort study. BMJ Open Diab Res Care 8, e001476 (2020)
57. S Zhand; M Saghaeian Jazi; S Mohammadi; R Tarighati Rasekhi; G Rostamian; MR
Kalani; A Rostamian; J George; MW Douglas. COVID-19: The Immune Responses and
Clinical Therapy Candidates. IJMS 21, 5559 (2020)
58. TCP de Azevedo; PCP de Azevedo; RN Silveira Filho; ARVS de Carvalho; ML Cezarotti
Filho; FT Barbosa; CF de Sousa-Rodrigues; TJ Matos-Rocha; FW da S Ramos. Use of
remdesivir for patients with Covid-19: a review article. Rev Assoc Med Bras 66, 838–841
(2020)
59. A Al-Romaima; Y Liao; J Feng; X Qin; G Qin. Advances in the treatment of novel
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) with Western medicine and traditional Chinese medicine: a
narrative review. J Thorac Dis 12, 6054–6069 (2020)
60. P Luo; Y Liu; L Qiu; X Liu; D Liu; J Li. Tocilizumab treatment in COVID-19: A single
center experience. Journal of Medical Virology 92, 814–818 (2020)
61. G Cavalli; GD Luca; C Campochiaro; E Della-Torre; M Ripa; D Canetti; C Oltolini; B
Castiglioni; CT Din; N Boffini; A Tomelleri; N Farina; A Ruggeri; P Rovere-Querini; GD
Lucca; S Martinenghi; R Scotti; M Tresoldi; F Ciceri; G Landoni; A Zangrillo; P Scarpellini;
L Dagna. Interleukin-1 blockade with high-dose anakinra in patients with COVID-19, acute

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respiratory distress syndrome, and hyperinflammation: a retrospective cohort study. The
Lancet Rheumatology 2, e325–e331 (2020)
62. Y Jamilloux; T Henry; A Belot; S Viel; M Fauter; T El Jammal; T Walzer; B François; P
Sève. Should we stimulate or suppress immune responses in COVID-19? Cytokine and anticytokine interventions. Autoimmun Rev 19, 102567 (2020)
63. G Iannaccone; R Scacciavillani; MG Del Buono; M Camilli; C Ronco; CJ Lavie; A
Abbate; F Crea; M Massetti; N Aspromonte. Weathering the Cytokine Storm in COVID-19:
Therapeutic Implications. Cardiorenal Med 10, 277–287 (2020)
64. Q Ye; B Wang; J Mao. The pathogenesis and treatment of the `Cytokine Storm’ in
COVID-19. Journal of Infection 80, 607–613 (2020)
65. N Tang; H Bai; X Chen; J Gong; D Li; Z Sun. Anticoagulant treatment is associated with
decreased mortality in severe coronavirus disease 2019 patients with coagulopathy. Journal of
Thrombosis and Haemostasis 18, 1094–1099 (2020)
66. V Carfora; G Spiniello; R Ricciolino; M Di Mauro; MG Migliaccio; FF Mottola; N
Verde; N Coppola. Anticoagulant treatment in COVID-19: a narrative review. Journal of
Thrombosis and Thrombolysis (2020)
67. KS Corbett; B Flynn; KE Foulds; JR Francica; S Boyoglu-Barnum; AP Werner; B Flach;
S O’Connell; KW Bock; M Minai; BM Nagata; H Andersen; DR Martinez; AT Noe; N
Douek; MM Donaldson; NN Nji; GS Alvarado; DK Edwards; DR Flebbe; E Lamb; NA
Doria-Rose; BC Lin; MK Louder; S O’Dell; SD Schmidt; E Phung; LA Chang; C Yap; J-PM
Todd; L Pessaint; A Van Ry; S Browne; J Greenhouse; T Putman-Taylor; A Strasbaugh; T-A
Campbell; A Cook; A Dodson; K Steingrebe; W Shi; Y Zhang; OM Abiona; L Wang; A
Pegu; ES Yang; K Leung; T Zhou; I-T Teng; A Widge; I Gordon; L Novik; RA Gillespie; RJ
Loomis; JI Moliva; G Stewart-Jones; S Himansu; W-P Kong; MC Nason; KM Morabito; TJ
Ruckwardt; JE Ledgerwood; MR Gaudinski; PD Kwong; JR Mascola; A Carfi; MG Lewis;
RS Baric; A McDermott; IN Moore; NJ Sullivan; M Roederer; RA Seder; BS Graham.
Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates. N Engl
J Med 383, 1544–1555 (2020)
68. MZ Tay; CM Poh; L Rénia; PA MacAry; LFP Ng. The trinity of COVID-19: immunity,
inflammation and intervention. Nat Rev Immunol 20, 363–374 (2020)
69. F Krammer. SARS-CoV-2 vaccines in development. Nature 586, 516–527 (2020)
70. M Voysey; SAC Clemens; SA Madhi; LY Weckx; …….; P Zuidewind. Safety and
efficacy of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (AZD1222) against SARS-CoV-2: an interim
analysis of four randomised controlled trials in Brazil, South Africa, and the UK. The Lancet
397, 99–111 (2021)
71. Y Zhang; G Zeng; H Pan; C Li; Y Hu; K Chu; W Han; Z Chen; R Tang; W Yin; X Chen;
Y Hu; X Liu; C Jiang; J Li; M Yang; Y Song; X Wang; Q Gao; F Zhu. Safety, tolerability,
and immunogenicity of an inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccine in healthy adults aged 18–59
years: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 1/2 clinical trial. The Lancet
Infectious Diseases 21, 181–192 (2021)
72. FP Polack; SJ Thomas; N Kitchin; J Absalon; A Gurtman; S Lockhart; JL Perez; G Pérez
Marc; ED Moreira; C Zerbini; R Bailey; KA Swanson; S Roychoudhury; K Koury; P Li; WV
Kalina; D Cooper; RW Frenck; LL Hammitt; Ö Türeci; H Nell; A Schaefer; S Ünal; DB
Tresnan; S Mather; PR Dormitzer; U Şahin; KU Jansen; WC Gruber; C4591001 Clinical Trial
Group. Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19 Vaccine. N Engl J Med 383,
2603–2615 (2020)
73. LR Baden; HM El Sahly; B Essink; K Kotloff; S Frey; R Novak; D Diemert; SA Spector;
N Rouphael; CB Creech; J McGettigan; S Khetan; N Segall; J Solis; A Brosz; C Fierro; H
Schwartz; K Neuzil; L Corey; P Gilbert; H Janes; D Follmann; M Marovich; J Mascola; L
Polakowski; J Ledgerwood; BS Graham; H Bennett; R Pajon; C Knightly; B Leav; W Deng;

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

H Zhou; S Han; M Ivarsson; J Miller; T Zaks; COVE Study Group. Efficacy and Safety of the
mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine. N Engl J Med 384, 403–416 (2021)
74. DY Logunov; IV Dolzhikova; DV Shcheblyakov; AI Tukhvatulin; OV Zubkova; AS
Dzharullaeva; AV Kovyrshina; NL Lubenets; DM Grousova; AS Erokhova; AG Botikov; FM
Izhaeva; O Popova; TA Ozharovskaya; IB Esmagambetov; IA Favorskaya; DI Zrelkin; DV
Voronina; DN Shcherbinin; AS Semikhin; YV Simakova; EA Tokarskaya; DA Egorova; MM
Shmarov; NA Nikitenko; VA Gushchin; EA Smolyarchuk; SK Zyryanov; SV Borisevich; BS
Naroditsky; AL Gintsburg. Safety and efficacy of an rAd26 and rAd5 vector-based
heterologous prime-boost COVID-19 vaccine: an interim analysis of a randomised controlled
phase 3 trial in Russia. The Lancet 0 (2021)
75. JH Kim; F Marks; JD Clemens. Looking beyond COVID-19 vaccine phase 3 trials.
Nature Medicine 1–7 (2021)
76. E Callaway; H Ledford; S Mallapaty. Six months of coronavirus: the mysteries scientists
are still racing to solve. Nature 583, 178–179 (2020)
77. KE Wellen. Inflammation, stress, and diabetes. Journal of Clinical Investigation 115,
1111–1119 (2005)
78. SC Castle; K Uyemura; A Rafi; O Akande; T Makinodan. Comorbidity Is a Better
Predictor of Impaired Immunity than Chronological Age in Older Adults: COMORBIDITY
IMPAIRS IMMUNITY MORE THAN AGE. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society 53,
1565–1569 (2005)
79. N Jafar; H Edriss; K Nugent. The Effect of Short-Term Hyperglycemia on the Innate
Immune System. The American Journal of the Medical Sciences 351, 201–211 (2016)
80. JN Mälzer; AR Schulz; A Thiel. Environmental Influences on the Immune System: The
Aging Immune System. In: Environmental Influences on the Immune System. C Esser, ed. ,
Springer Vienna, Vienna (2016)
81. KA Kulcsar; CM Coleman; SE Beck; MB Frieman. Comorbid diabetes results in immune
dysregulation and enhanced disease severity following MERS-CoV infection. JCI Insight 4
82. L Zhu; Z-G She; X Cheng; J-J Qin; X-J Zhang; J Cai; F Lei; H Wang; J Xie; W Wang; H
Li; P Zhang; X Song; X Chen; M Xiang; C Zhang; L Bai; D Xiang; M-M Chen; Y Liu; Y
Yan; M Liu; W Mao; J Zou; L Liu; G Chen; P Luo; B Xiao; C Zhang; Z Zhang; Z Lu; J
Wang; H Lu; X Xia; D Wang; X Liao; G Peng; P Ye; J Yang; Y Yuan; X Huang; J Guo; B-H
Zhang; H Li. Association of Blood Glucose Control and Outcomes in Patients with COVID19 and Pre-existing Type 2 Diabetes. Cell Metabolism 31, 1068-1077.e3 (2020)
83. B Bode; V Garrett; J Messler; R McFarland; J Crowe; R Booth; DC Klonoff. Glycemic
Characteristics and Clinical Outcomes of COVID-19 Patients Hospitalized in the United
States. J Diabetes Sci Technol 14, 813–821 (2020)
84. MA Hill; C Mantzoros; JR Sowers. Commentary: COVID-19 in patients with diabetes.
Metabolism 107, 154217 (2020)
85. I Ilias; L Zabuliene. Hyperglycemia and the novel Covid-19 infection: Possible
pathophysiologic mechanisms. Medical Hypotheses 139, 109699 (2020)
86. AK Singh; K Khunti. Assessment of risk, severity, mortality, glycemic control and
antidiabetic agents in patients with diabetes and COVID-19: A narrative review. Diabetes
Research and Clinical Practice 165, 108266 (2020)
87. A Wang; W Zhao; Z Xu; J Gu. Timely blood glucose management for the outbreak of
2019 novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) is urgently needed. Diabetes Research and
Clinical Practice 162, 108118 (2020)
88. K Zhou; MJ Al-Jaghbeer; MC Lansang. Hyperglycemia management in hospitalized
patients with COVID-19. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine (2020)
89. A Ceriello. Hyperglycemia and the worse prognosis of COVID-19. Why a fast blood
glucose control should be mandatory. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 163, 108186 (2020)

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

90. LL Wang; K Lo; Y Chandrasekhar; R Reas; J Yang; D Burdick; D Eide; K Funk; Y
Katsis; R Kinney; Y Li; Z Liu; W Merrill; P Mooney; D Murdick; D Rishi; J Sheehan; Z
Shen; B Stilson; A Wade; K Wang; NXR Wang; C Wilhelm; B Xie; D Raymond; DS Weld;
O Etzioni; S Kohlmeier. CORD-19: The COVID-19 Open Research Dataset.
arXiv:200410706 [cs] (2020)
91. E Bonora; M Muggeo. Postprandial blood glucose as a risk factor for cardiovascular
disease in Type II diabetes: the epidemiological evidence. Diabetologia 44, 2107–2114
(2001)
92. GT Ko; HP Wai; JS Tang. Effects of Age on Plasma Glucose Levels in Non-diabetic
Hong Kong Chinese. Croat Med J 5
93. H Shimokata; DC Muller; JL Fleg; J Sorkin; AW Ziemba; R Andres. Age as independent
determinant of glucose tolerance. Diabetes 40, 44–51 (1991)
94. RR Kalyani; JM Egan. Diabetes and Altered Glucose Metabolism with Aging.
Endocrinology and Metabolism Clinics of North America 42, 333–347 (2013)
95. SO Butler; IF Btaiche; C Alaniz. Relationship Between Hyperglycemia and Infection in
Critically Ill Patients. Pharmacotherapy 25, 963–976 (2005)
96. CW Chia; JM Egan; L Ferrucci. Age-Related Changes in Glucose Metabolism,
Hyperglycemia, and Cardiovascular Risk. Circ Res 123, 886–904 (2018)
97. C Florkowski. HbA1c as a Diagnostic Test for Diabetes Mellitus - Reviewing the
Evidence. Clin Biochem Rev 34, 75–83 (2013)
98. KT Mills; A Stefanescu; J He. The global epidemiology of hypertension. Nat Rev Nephrol
16, 223–237 (2020)
99. BJ North; DA Sinclair. The Intersection Between Aging and Cardiovascular Disease. 22
(2012)
100. P Henry; F Thomas; A Benetos; L Guize. Impaired fasting glucose, blood pressure and
cardiovascular disease mortality. Hypertension 40, 458–463 (2002)
101. JAJ Martyn; M Kaneki; S Yasuhara. Obesity-induced Insulin Resistance and
Hyperglycemia: Etiologic Factors and Molecular Mechanisms. Anesthesiology 109, 137–148
(2008)
102. WY Lee; CH Kwon; EJ Rhee; JB Park; YK Kim; SY Woo; S Kim; KC Sung. The effect
of body mass index and fasting glucose on the relationship between blood pressure and
incident diabetes mellitus: a 5-year follow-up study. Hypertens Res 34, 1093–1097 (2011)
103. JR Petrie; TJ Guzik; RM Touyz. Diabetes, Hypertension, and Cardiovascular Disease:
Clinical Insights and Vascular Mechanisms. Canadian Journal of Cardiology 34, 575–584
(2018)
104. S Shibata; H Arima; K Asayama; S Hoshide; A Ichihara; T Ishimitsu; K Kario; T Kishi;
M Mogi; A Nishiyama; M Ohishi; T Ohkubo; K Tamura; M Tanaka; E Yamamoto; K
Yamamoto; H Itoh. Hypertension and related diseases in the era of COVID-19: a report from
the Japanese Society of Hypertension Task Force on COVID-19. Hypertension Research 43,
1028–1046 (2020)
105. EJ Williamson; AJ Walker; K Bhaskaran; S Bacon; C Bates; CE Morton; HJ Curtis; A
Mehrkar; D Evans; P Inglesby; J Cockburn; HI McDonald; B MacKenna; L Tomlinson; IJ
Douglas; CT Rentsch; R Mathur; AYS Wong; R Grieve; D Harrison; H Forbes; A Schultze; R
Croker; J Parry; F Hester; S Harper; R Perera; SJW Evans; L Smeeth; B Goldacre. Factors
associated with COVID-19-related death using OpenSAFELY. Nature 584, 430–436 (2020)
106. Y Heianza; Y Arase; S Kodama; SD Hsieh; H Tsuji; K Saito; S Hara; H Sone. Fasting
glucose and HbA1c levels as risk factors for the development of hypertension in Japanese
individuals: Toranomon hospital health management center study 16 (TOPICS 16). J Hum
Hypertens 29, 254–259 (2015)

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

107. J García-Puig; LM Ruilope; M Luque; J Fernández; R Ortega; R Dal-Ré; AVANT Study
Group Investigators. Glucose metabolism in patients with essential hypertension. Am J Med
119, 318–326 (2006)
108. GP Carnevale Schianca; GP Fra; M Steffanini; G Pogliani; C Marconi; M Bigliocca; M
Pirisi. Impaired glucose metabolism in hypertensive patients with/without the metabolic
syndrome. European Journal of Internal Medicine 25, 477–481 (2014)
109. HOL Lithell. Effect of Antihypertensive Drugs on Insulin, Glucose, and Lipid
Metabolism. Diabetes Care 14, 203–209 (1991)
110. JA Hirst; AJ Farmer; BG Feakins; JK Aronson; RJ Stevens. Quantifying the effects of
diuretics and β-adrenoceptor blockers on glycaemic control in diabetes mellitus - a systematic
review and meta-analysis: Diuretics and β-blockers on glycaemic control in diabetes. Br J
Clin Pharmacol 79, 733–743 (2015)
111. L Palaiodimos; DG Kokkinidis; W Li; D Karamanis; J Ognibene; S Arora; WN
Southern; CS Mantzoros. Severe obesity, increasing age and male sex are independently
associated with worse in-hospital outcomes, and higher in-hospital mortality, in a cohort of
patients with COVID-19 in the Bronx, New York. Metabolism 108, 154262 (2020)
112. F Gao; KI Zheng; X-B Wang; Q-F Sun; K-H Pan; T-Y Wang; Y-P Chen; G Targher; CD
Byrne; J George; M-H Zheng. Obesity Is a Risk Factor for Greater COVID-19 Severity. Dia
Care 43, e72–e74 (2020)
113. E Sepp; H Kolk; K Lõivukene; M Mikelsaar. Higher blood glucose level associated with
body mass index and gut microbiota in elderly people. Microbial Ecology in Health &
Disease 25 (2014)
114. N Agrawal; MK Agrawal; T Kumari; S Kumar. Correlation between Body Mass Index
and Blood Glucose Levels in Jharkhand Population. 4, 4 (2017)
115. EI Walsh; J Shaw; N Cherbuin. Trajectories of BMI change impact glucose and insulin
metabolism. Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases 28, 243–251 (2018)
116. MS Ahmad; S Iqtadar; SU Mumtaz; Z Niaz; I Waheed; S Abaidullah. Frequency of
Impaired Glucose Tolerance in Obese Patients. AKEMU 23 (2017)
117. A Rosiek; N Maciejewska; K Leksowski; A Rosiek-Kryszewska; Ł Leksowski. Effect of
Television on Obesity and Excess of Weight and Consequences of Health. IJERPH 12, 9408–
9426 (2015)
118. S Clement; SS Braithwaite; MF Magee; A Ahmann; EP Smith; RG Schafer; IB Hirsch.
Management of Diabetes and Hyperglycemia in Hospitals. DIABETES CARE 27, 39 (2004)
119. EH Baker; DM Wood; AL Brennan; N Clark; DL Baines; BJ Philips. Hyperglycaemia
and pulmonary infection. Proc Nutr Soc 65, 227–235 (2006)
120. F Farrokhi; D Smiley; GE Umpierrez. Glycemic control in non-diabetic critically ill
patients. Best Practice & Research Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 25, 813–824
(2011)
121. AR Gosmanov; GE Umpierrez. Management of hyperglycemia during enteral and
parenteral nutrition therapy. Curr Diab Rep 13, 155–162 (2013)
122. L Zhao; L Wang; M Lu; W Hu; S Xiu. Hyperglycemia is associated with poor inhospital outcome in elderly patients with acute ischemic stroke. 5 (2019)
123. A Godinjak; A Iglica; A Burekovic; S Jusufovic; A Ajanovic; I Tancica; A Kukuljac.
Hyperglycemia in Critically Ill Patients: Management and Prognosis. Med Arch 69, 157–160
(2015)
124. AM Corstjens; ICC van der Horst; JG Zijlstra; ABJ Groeneveld; F Zijlstra; JE Tulleken;
JJM Ligtenberg. Hyperglycaemia in critically ill patients: marker or mediator of mortality?
Crit Care 10, 216 (2006)

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

125. J-W Yang; L-C Fan; X-Y Miao; B Mao; M-H Li; H-W Lu; S Liang; J-F Xu.
Corticosteroids for the treatment of human infection with influenza virus: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Clinical Microbiology and Infection 21, 956–963 (2015)
126. B Luna; MN Feinglos. Drug-induced hyperglycemia. JAMA 286, 1945–1948 (2001)
127. HE Tamez-Pérez; DL Quintanilla-Flores; R Rodríguez-Gutiérrez; JG GonzálezGonzález; AL Tamez-Peña. Steroid hyperglycemia: Prevalence, early detection and
therapeutic recommendations: A narrative review. World J Diabetes 6, 1073–1081 (2015)
128. CD Russell; JE Millar; JK Baillie. Clinical evidence does not support corticosteroid
treatment for 2019-nCoV lung injury. The Lancet 395, 473–475 (2020)
129. H Yao; Y Song; Y Chen; N Wu; J Xu; C Sun; J Zhang; T Weng; Z Zhang; Z Wu; L
Cheng; D Shi; X Lu; J Lei; M Crispin; Y Shi; L Li; S Li. Molecular Architecture of the
SARS-CoV-2 Virus. Cell 183, 730-738.e13 (2020)
130. F Li. Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Annu Rev Virol
3, 237–261 (2016)
131. J Lan; J Ge; J Yu; S Shan; H Zhou; S Fan; Q Zhang; X Shi; Q Wang; L Zhang; X Wang.
Structure of the SARS-CoV-2 spike receptor-binding domain bound to the ACE2 receptor.
Nature 581, 215–220 (2020)
132. D Wrapp; N Wang; KS Corbett; JA Goldsmith; C-L Hsieh; O Abiona; BS Graham; JS
McLellan. Cryo-EM structure of the 2019-nCoV spike in the prefusion conformation. Science
367, 1260–1263 (2020)
133. AC Walls; Y-J Park; MA Tortorici; A Wall; AT McGuire; D Veesler. Structure,
Function, and Antigenicity of the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein. Cell 181, 281-292.e6
(2020)
134. M Hoffmann; H Kleine-Weber; S Schroeder; N Krüger; T Herrler; S Erichsen; TS
Schiergens; G Herrler; N-H Wu; A Nitsche; MA Müller; C Drosten; S Pöhlmann. SARSCoV-2 Cell Entry Depends on ACE2 and TMPRSS2 and Is Blocked by a Clinically Proven
Protease Inhibitor. Cell 181, 271-280.e8 (2020)
135. A Hasan; BA Paray; A Hussain; FA Qadir; F Attar; FM Aziz; M Sharifi; H
Derakhshankhah; B Rasti; M Mehrabi; K Shahpasand; AA Saboury; M Falahati. A review on
the cleavage priming of the spike protein on coronavirus by angiotensin-converting enzyme-2
and furin. Journal of Biomolecular Structure and Dynamics 1–13 (2020)
136. J Shang; Y Wan; C Luo; G Ye; Q Geng; A Auerbach; F Li. Cell entry mechanisms of
SARS-CoV-2. PNAS 117, 11727–11734 (2020)
137. SK Thaker; J Ch’ng; HR Christofk. Viral hijacking of cellular metabolism. BMC Biol 17,
59 (2019)
138. KA Fontaine; EL Sanchez; R Camarda; M Lagunoff. Dengue Virus Induces and
Requires Glycolysis for Optimal Replication. J Virol 89, 2358–2366 (2015)
139. JB Ritter; AS Wahl; S Freund; Y Genzel; U Reichl. Metabolic effects of influenza virus
infection in cultured animal cells: Intra- and extracellular metabolite profiling. BMC Syst Biol
4, 61 (2010)
140. EL Sanchez; M Lagunoff. Viral activation of cellular metabolism. Virology 479–480,
609–618 (2015)
141. M Keshavarz; F Solaymani-Mohammadi; H Namdari; Y Arjeini; MJ Mousavi; F Rezaei.
Metabolic host response and therapeutic approaches to influenza infection. Cell Mol Biol Lett
25, 15 (2020)
142. PC Reading; J Allison; EC Crouch; EM Anders. Increased Susceptibility of Diabetic
Mice to Influenza Virus Infection: Compromise of Collectin-Mediated Host Defense of the
Lung by Glucose? J Virol 72, 6884–6887 (1998)
143. HP Kohio; AL Adamson. Glycolytic control of vacuolar-type ATPase activity: A
mechanism to regulate influenza viral infection. Virology 444, 301–309 (2013)

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

144. GA Gualdoni; KA Mayer; A-M Kapsch; K Kreuzberg; A Puck; P Kienzl; F Oberndorfer;
K Frühwirth; S Winkler; D Blaas; GJ Zlabinger; J Stöckl. Rhinovirus induces an anabolic
reprogramming in host cell metabolism essential for viral replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
115, E7158–E7165 (2018)
145. AC Codo; GG Davanzo; L de B Monteiro; GF de Souza; SP Muraro; JV Virgilio-daSilva; JS Prodonoff; VC Carregari; CAO de Biagi Junior; F Crunfli; JL Jimenez Restrepo; PH
Vendramini; G Reis-de-Oliveira; K Bispo dos Santos; DA Toledo-Teixeira; PL Parise; MC
Martini; RE Marques; HR Carmo; A Borin; LD Coimbra; VO Boldrini; NS Brunetti; AS
Vieira; E Mansour; RG Ulaf; AF Bernardes; TA Nunes; LC Ribeiro; AC Palma; MV Agrela;
ML Moretti; AC Sposito; FB Pereira; LA Velloso; MAR Vinolo; A Damasio; JL ProençaMódena; RF Carvalho; MA Mori; D Martins-de-Souza; HI Nakaya; AS Farias; PM MoraesVieira. Elevated Glucose Levels Favor SARS-CoV-2 Infection and Monocyte Response
through a HIF-1α/Glycolysis-Dependent Axis. Cell Metabolism 32, 437-446.e5 (2020)
146. R Apweiler; H Hermjakob; N Sharon. On the frequency of protein glycosylation, as
deduced from analysis of the SWISS-PROT database. Biochim Biophys Acta 1473, 4–8
(1999)
147. KW Moremen; M Tiemeyer; AV Nairn. Vertebrate protein glycosylation: diversity,
synthesis and function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 13, 448–462 (2012)
148. A Helenius; M Aebi. Intracellular functions of N-linked glycans. Science 291, 2364–
2369 (2001)
149. P Stanley; N Taniguchi; M Aebi. N-Glycans. In: Essentials of Glycobiology. A Varki,
RD Cummings, JD Esko, P Stanley, GW Hart, M Aebi, AG Darvill, T Kinoshita, NH Packer,
JH Prestegard, RL Schnaar, PH Seeberger, eds. , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold
Spring Harbor (NY) (2015)
150. AJ Fairbanks. The ENGases: versatile biocatalysts for the production of homogeneous
N-linked glycopeptides and glycoproteins. Chem Soc Rev 46, 5128–5146 (2017)
151. DJ Vigerust; VL Shepherd. Virus glycosylation: role in virulence and immune
interactions. Trends in Microbiology 15, 211–218 (2007)
152. Y Watanabe; TA Bowden; IA Wilson; M Crispin. Exploitation of glycosylation in
enveloped virus pathobiology. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA) - General Subjects 1863,
1480–1497 (2019)
153. YP Lin; X Xiong; SA Wharton; SR Martin; PJ Coombs; SG Vachieri; E Christodoulou;
PA Walker; J Liu; JJ Skehel; SJ Gamblin; AJ Hay; RS Daniels; JW McCauley. Evolution of
the receptor binding properties of the influenza A(H3N2) hemagglutinin. PNAS 109, 21474–
21479 (2012)
154. V Ortega; JA Stone; EM Contreras; RM Iorio; HC Aguilar. Addicted to sugar: roles of
glycans in the order Mononegavirales. Glycobiology 29, 2–21 (2019)
155. TS Fung; DX Liu. Post-translational modifications of coronavirus proteins: roles and
function. Future Virology 13, 405–430 (2018)
156. L Parsons; KM Bouwman; HF Azurmendi; RP de Vries; JF Cipollo; MH Verheije.
Glycosylation of the viral attachment protein of avian coronavirus is essential for host cell and
receptor binding. J Biol Chem jbc.RA119.007532 (2019)
157. Y Watanabe; ZT Berndsen; J Raghwani; GE Seabright; JD Allen; JS McLellan; IA
Wilson; TA Bowden; AB Ward; M Crispin. Vulnerabilities in coronavirus glycan shields
despite extensive glycosylation. Microbiology (2020)
158. I Bagdonaite; HH Wandall. Global aspects of viral glycosylation. Glycobiology 28, 443–
467 (2018)
159. OC Grant; D Montgomery; K Ito; RJ Woods. Analysis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
glycan shield reveals implications for immune recognition. Scientific Reports 10, 14991
(2020)

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

160. GBE Stewart-Jones; C Soto; T Lemmin; G-Y Chuang; A Druz; R Kong; PV Thomas; K
Wagh; T Zhou; A-J Behrens; T Bylund; CW Choi; JR Davison; IS Georgiev; MG Joyce; YD
Kwon; M Pancera; J Taft; Y Yang; B Zhang; SS Shivatare; VS Shivatare; C-CD Lee; C-Y
Wu; CA Bewley; DR Burton; WC Koff; M Connors; M Crispin; U Baxa; BT Korber; C-H
Wong; JR Mascola; PD Kwong. Trimeric HIV-1-Env Structures Define Glycan Shields from
Clades A, B, and G. Cell 165, 813–826 (2016)
161. LK Pritchard. Glycan clustering stabilizes the mannose patch of HIV-1 and preserves
vulnerability to broadly neutralizing antibodies. NATURE COMMUNICATIONS 11 (2015)
162. Y Watanabe; JD Allen; D Wrapp; JS McLellan; M Crispin. Site-specific glycan analysis
of the SARS-CoV-2 spike. Science 369, 330–333 (2020)
163. Y Zhang; W Zhao; Y Mao; Y Chen; S Wang; Y Zhong; T Su; M Gong; D Du; X Lu; J
Cheng; H Yang. Site-specific N-glycosylation Characterization of Recombinant SARS-CoV2 Spike Proteins. bioRxiv 2020.03.28.013276 (2020)
164. A Shajahan; NT Supekar; AS Gleinich; P Azadi. Deducing the N- and O-glycosylation
profile of the spike protein of novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2. Glycobiology 30, 981–988
(2020)
165. D Wu; WB Struwe; DJ Harvey; MAJ Ferguson; CV Robinson. N-glycan
microheterogeneity regulates interactions of plasma proteins. PNAS 115, 8763–8768 (2018)
166. L Wang; L Wang; H Zhuang. Profiling and characterization of SARS-CoV-2 mutants’
infectivity and antigenicity. Sig Transduct Target Ther 5, 185 (2020)
167. L Casalino; Z Gaieb; JA Goldsmith; CK Hjorth; AC Dommer; AM Harbison; CA
Fogarty; EP Barros; BC Taylor; JS McLellan; E Fadda; RE Amaro. Beyond Shielding: The
Roles of Glycans in the SARS-CoV-2 Spike Protein. ACS Cent Sci 6, 1722–1734 (2020)
168. A Shajahan; S Archer-Hartmann; NT Supekar; AS Gleinich; C Heiss; P Azadi.
Comprehensive characterization of N- and O- glycosylation of SARS-CoV-2 human receptor
angiotensin converting enzyme 2. Biochemistry (2020)
169. AR Mehdipour; G Hummer. Dual nature of human ACE2 glycosylation in binding to
SARS-CoV-2 spike. bioRxiv 2020.07.09.193680 (2020)
170. P Zhao; JL Praissman; OC Grant; Y Cai; T Xiao; KE Rosenbalm; K Aoki; BP Kellman;
R Bridger; DH Barouch; MA Brindley; NE Lewis; M Tiemeyer; B Chen; RJ Woods; L Wells.
Virus-Receptor Interactions of Glycosylated SARS-CoV-2 Spike and Human ACE2
Receptor. Cell Host & Microbe 28, 586-601.e6 (2020)
171. Q Li; J Wu; J Nie; L Zhang; H Hao; S Liu; C Zhao; Q Zhang; H Liu; L Nie; H Qin; M
Wang; Q Lu; X Li; Q Sun; J Liu; L Zhang; X Li; W Huang; Y Wang. The Impact of
Mutations in SARS-CoV-2 Spike on Viral Infectivity and Antigenicity. Cell 182, 12841294.e9 (2020)
172. J Du; O Abdel-Razek; Q Shi; F Hu; G Ding; RN Cooney; G Wang. Surfactant protein D
attenuates acute lung and kidney injuries in pneumonia-induced sepsis through modulating
apoptosis, inflammation and NF-κB signaling. Sci Rep 8, 15393 (2018)
173. Y He. Immunogenicity of SARS-CoV: the Receptor-Binding Domain of S Protein is a
Major Target of Neutralizing Antibodies. In: The Nidoviruses. S Perlman, KV Holmes, eds. ,
Springer US, Boston, MA (2006)
174. F Li. Structure, Function, and Evolution of Coronavirus Spike Proteins. Annu Rev Virol
3, 237–261 (2016)
175. AC Papageorgiou; I Mohsin. The SARS-CoV-2 Spike Glycoprotein as a Drug and
Vaccine Target: Structural Insights into Its Complexes with ACE2 and Antibodies. Cells 9,
2343 (2020)
176. AS Lauring; EB Hodcroft. Genetic Variants of SARS-CoV-2—What Do They Mean?
JAMA 325, 529 (2021)

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

177. V Padilla-Sanchez. SARS-CoV-2 Structural Analysis of Receptor Binding Domain New
Variants from United Kingdom and South Africa. RIO 7, e62936 (2021)
178. Y Weisblum; F Schmidt; F Zhang; J DaSilva; D Poston; JC Lorenzi; F Muecksch; M
Rutkowska; H-H Hoffmann; E Michailidis; C Gaebler; M Agudelo; A Cho; Z Wang; A
Gazumyan; M Cipolla; L Luchsinger; CD Hillyer; M Caskey; DF Robbiani; CM Rice; MC
Nussenzweig; T Hatziioannou; PD Bieniasz. Escape from neutralizing antibodies by SARSCoV-2 spike protein variants. eLife 9, e61312 (2020)
179. C Gaebler; Z Wang; JCC Lorenzi; F Muecksch; S Finkin; M Tokuyama; A Cho; M
Jankovic; D Schaefer-Babajew; TY Oliveira; M Cipolla; C Viant; CO Barnes; Y Bram; G
Breton; T Hägglöf; P Mendoza; A Hurley; M Turroja; K Gordon; KG Millard; V Ramos; F
Schmidt; Y Weisblum; D Jha; M Tankelevich; G Martinez-Delgado; J Yee; R Patel; J Dizon;
C Unson-O’Brien; I Shimeliovich; DF Robbiani; Z Zhao; A Gazumyan; RE Schwartz; T
Hatziioannou; PJ Bjorkman; S Mehandru; PD Bieniasz; M Caskey; MC Nussenzweig.
Evolution of antibody immunity to SARS-CoV-2. Nature 591, 639–644 (2021)
180. PH Khedkar; A Patzak. SARS-CoV-2: What do we know so far? Acta Physiol e13470
(2020)
181. Y Zhao; Z Zhao; Y Wang; Y Zhou; Y Ma; W Zuo. Single-Cell RNA Expression
Profiling of ACE2, the Receptor of SARS-CoV-2. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 202, 756–759
(2020)
182. I Hamming; W Timens; MLC Bulthuis; AT Lely; GJ Navis; H van Goor. Tissue
distribution of ACE2 protein, the functional receptor for SARS coronavirus. A first step in
understanding SARS pathogenesis. J Pathol 203, 631–637 (2004)
183. M-Y Li; L Li; Y Zhang; X-S Wang. Expression of the SARS-CoV-2 cell receptor gene
ACE2 in a wide variety of human tissues. Infectious Diseases of Poverty 9, 45 (2020)
184. F Hikmet; L Méar; Å Edvinsson; P Micke; M Uhlén; C Lindskog. The protein
expression profile of ACE2 in human tissues. Mol Syst Biol 16 (2020)
185. SJ Brake; K Barnsley; W Lu; KD McAlinden; MS Eapen; SS Sohal. Smoking
Upregulates Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme-2 Receptor: A Potential Adhesion Site for
Novel Coronavirus SARS-CoV-2 (Covid-19). JCM 9, 841 (2020)
186. R Dalan; SR Bornstein; A El-Armouche; RN Rodionov; A Markov; B Wielockx; F
Beuschlein; BO Boehm. The ACE-2 in COVID-19: Foe or Friend? Horm Metab Res 52, 257–
263 (2020)
187. J Klhůfek. The role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 in the pathogenesis of COVID19: the villain or the hero? Acta Clin Belg 1–8 (2020)
188. P Verdecchia; C Cavallini; A Spanevello; F Angeli. The pivotal link between ACE2
deficiency and SARS-CoV-2 infection. Eur J Intern Med 76, 14–20 (2020)
189. R Rodríguez Puertas. ACE2 activators for the treatment of COVID 19 patients. J Med
Virol (2020)
190. S Ganesan; AT Comstock; US Sajjan. Barrier function of airway tract epithelium. Tissue
Barriers 1, e24997 (2013)
191. JM Nicholls. The Battle Between Influenza and the Innate Immune Response in the
Human Respiratory Tract. Infect Chemother 45, 11 (2013)
192. L Denney; L-P Ho. The role of respiratory epithelium in host defence against influenza
virus infection. Biomedical Journal 41, 218–233 (2018)
193. W Rokicki; M Rokicki; J Wojtacha; A Dżeljijli. The role and importance of club cells
(Clara cells) in the pathogenesis of some respiratory diseases. kitp 1, 26–30 (2016)
194. MB Antunes; NA Cohen. Mucociliary clearance – a critical upper airway host defense
mechanism and methods of assessment. Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology
7, 5–10 (2007)

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

195. XM Bustamante-Marin; LE Ostrowski. Cilia and Mucociliary Clearance. Cold Spring
Harb Perspect Biol 9, a028241 (2017)
196. JN Maina; JB West. Thin and Strong! The Bioengineering Dilemma in the Structural and
Functional Design of the Blood-Gas Barrier. Physiological Reviews 85, 811–844 (2005)
197. CE Barkauskas; MJ Cronce; CR Rackley; EJ Bowie; DR Keene; BR Stripp; SH Randell;
PW Noble; BLM Hogan. Type 2 alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung. J Clin Invest 123,
3025–3036 (2013)
198. L Guillot; N Nathan; O Tabary; G Thouvenin; P Le Rouzic; H Corvol; S Amselem; A
Clement. Alveolar epithelial cells: Master regulators of lung homeostasis. The International
Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 45, 2568–2573 (2013)
199. L Knudsen; M Ochs. The micromechanics of lung alveoli: structure and function of
surfactant and tissue components. Histochem Cell Biol 150, 661–676 (2018)
200. A Venkatakrishnan; A Puranik; A Anand; D Zemmour; X Yao; X Wu; R Chilaka; DK
Murakowski; K Standish; B Raghunathan; T Wagner; E Garcia-Rivera; H Solomon; A Garg;
R Barve; A Anyanwu-Ofili; N Khan; V Soundararajan. Knowledge synthesis from 100
million biomedical documents augments the deep expression profiling of coronavirus
receptors. Genomics (2020)
201. DA Groneberg; PR Eynott; T Oates; S Lim; R Wu; I Carlstedt; AG Nicholson; KF
Chung. Expression of MUC5AC and MUC5B mucins in normal and cystic fibrosis lung.
Respiratory Medicine 96, 81–86 (2002)
202. MJ Webster; R Tarran. Slippery When Wet. In: Current Topics in Membranes. Elsevier
(2018)
203. Y Song; J Thiagarajah; AS Verkman. Sodium and Chloride Concentrations, pH, and
Depth of Airway Surface Liquid in Distal Airways. Journal of General Physiology 122, 511–
519 (2003)
204. R Tarran. Regulation of Airway Surface Liquid Volume and Mucus Transport by Active
Ion Transport. Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society 1, 42–46 (2004)
205. S Mager; J Sloan. Possible role of amino acids, peptides, and sugar transporter in protein
removal and innate lung defense. European Journal of Pharmacology 479, 263–267 (2003)
206. BJ Philips; J-X Meguer; J Redman; EH Baker. Factors determining the appearance of
glucose in upper and lower respiratory tract secretions. Intensive Care Med 29, 2204–2210
(2003)
207. JP Garnett; EH Baker; DL Baines. Sweet talk: insights into the nature and importance of
glucose transport in lung epithelium. Eur Respir J 40, 1269–1276 (2012)
208. AA Pezzulo; J Gutiérrez; KS Duschner; KS McConnell; PJ Taft; SE Ernst; TL Yahr; K
Rahmouni; J Klesney-Tait; DA Stoltz; J Zabner. Glucose Depletion in the Airway Surface
Liquid Is Essential for Sterility of the Airways. PLoS ONE 6, e16166 (2011)
209. J Bearham; JP Garnett; V Schroeder; MGS Biggart; DL Baines. Effective glucose
metabolism maintains low intracellular glucose in airway epithelial cells after exposure to
hyperglycemia. American Journal of Physiology-Cell Physiology 317, C983–C992 (2019)
210. DL Baines; EH Baker. Glucose Transport and Homeostasis in Lung Epithelia. In: Lung
Epithelial Biology in the Pathogenesis of Pulmonary Disease. Elsevier (2017)
211. EH Baker; DL Baines. Airway Glucose Homeostasis. Chest 153, 507–514 (2018)
212. KK Kalsi; EH Baker; O Fraser; Y-L Chung; OJ Mace; E Tarelli; BJ Philips; DL Baines.
Glucose homeostasis across human airway epithelial cell monolayers: role of diffusion,
transport and metabolism. Pflugers Arch - Eur J Physiol 457, 1061–1070 (2009)
213. PT Salotra; VN Singh. Regulation of glucose metabolism in rat lung: Subcellular
distribution, isozyme pattern, and kinetic properties of hexokinase. Archives of Biochemistry
and Biophysics 216, 758–764 (1982)

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

214. JA Bartlett; AJ Fischer; PBJr McCray. Innate Immune Functions of the Airway
Epithelium. In: Contributions to Microbiology. A Egesten, A Schmidt, H Herwald, eds. ,
KARGER, Basel (2008)
215. B Grubor; DK Meyerholz; MR Ackermann. Collectins and Cationic Antimicrobial
Peptides of the Respiratory Epithelia. Vet Pathol 43, 595–612 (2006)
216. FX McCormack; JA Whitsett. The pulmonary collectins, SP-A and SP-D, orchestrate
innate immunity in the lung. J Clin Invest 109, 707–712 (2002)
217. KL Hartshorn; EC Crouch; MR White; P Eggleton; AI Tauber; D Chang; K Sastry.
Evidence for a protective role of pulmonary surfactant protein D (SP-D) against influenza A
viruses. J Clin Invest 94, 311–319 (1994)
218. KL Hartshorn. Role of surfactant protein A and D (SP-A and SP-D) in human antiviral
host defense. Front Biosci (Schol Ed) 2, 527–546 (2010)
219. JR Wright. Immunoregulatory functions of surfactant proteins. Nat Rev Immunol 5, 58–
68 (2005)
220. A Watson; MJS Phipps; HW Clark; C-K Skylaris; J Madsen. Surfactant Proteins A and
D: Trimerized Innate Immunity Proteins with an Affinity for Viral Fusion Proteins. J Innate
Immun 11, 13–28 (2019)
221. A Varki; ME Etzler; RD Cummings; JD Esko. Discovery and Classification of GlycanBinding Proteins. In: Essentials of Glycobiology. A Varki, RD Cummings, JD Esko, HH
Freeze, P Stanley, CR Bertozzi, GW Hart, ME Etzler, eds. , Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
Press, Cold Spring Harbor (NY) (2009)
222. K Håkansson; NK Lim; H-J Hoppe; KB Reid. Crystal structure of the trimeric α-helical
coiled-coil and the three lectin domains of human lung surfactant protein D. Structure 7, 255–
264 (1999)
223. W Van Breedam; S Pöhlmann; HW Favoreel; RJ de Groot; HJ Nauwynck. Bitter-sweet
symphony: glycan–lectin interactions in virus biology. FEMS Microbiol Rev 38, 598–632
(2014)
224. C Casals; MA Campanero-Rhodes; B García-Fojeda; D Solís. The Role of Collectins
and Galectins in Lung Innate Immune Defense. Front Immunol 9, 1998 (2018)
225. R Leth-Larsen; F Zhong; VTK Chow; U Holmskov; J Lu. The SARS coronavirus spike
glycoprotein is selectively recognized by lung surfactant protein D and activates
macrophages. Immunobiology 212, 201–211 (2007)
226. EC Crouch. Surfactant protein-D and pulmonary host defense. Respir Res 1, 6 (2000)
227. RT Lee; T-L Hsu; SK Huang; S-L Hsieh; C-H Wong; YC Lee. Survey of immunerelated, mannose/fucose-binding C-type lectin receptors reveals widely divergent sugarbinding specificities. Glycobiology 21, 512–520 (2011)
228. R Ilyas; R Wallis; EJ Soilleux; P Townsend; D Zehnder; BK Tan; RB Sim; H Lehnert;
HS Randeva; DA Mitchell. High glucose disrupts oligosaccharide recognition function via
competitive inhibition: a potential mechanism for immune dysregulation in diabetes mellitus.
Immunobiology 216, 126–131 (2011)
229. Z Vuk-Pavlovic; JE Standing; EC Crouch; AH Limper. Carbohydrate recognition
domain of surfactant protein D mediates interactions with Pneumocystis carinii glycoprotein
A. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 24, 475–484 (2001)
230. M Mulcahy; R Mcloughlin. Staphylococcus aureus and Influenza A Virus: Partners in
Coinfection. mBio 7, e02068-16 (2016)
231. VI Patel; JP Metcalf. Airway Macrophage and Dendritic Cell Subsets in the Resting
Human Lung. Crit Rev Immunol 38, 303–331 (2018)
232. K Lundberg; F Rydnert; L Greiff; M Lindstedt. Human blood dendritic cell subsets
exhibit discriminative pattern recognition receptor profiles. Immunology 142, 279–288 (2014)

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

233. E Guirado; LS Schlesinger; G Kaplan. Macrophages in tuberculosis: friend or foe. Semin
Immunopathol 35, 563–583 (2013)
234. AM Pastva; JR Wright; KL Williams. Immunomodulatory Roles of Surfactant Proteins
A and D: Implications in Lung Disease. Proceedings of the American Thoracic Society 4,
252–257 (2007)
235. L Parisi; E Gini; D Baci; M Tremolati; M Fanuli; B Bassani; G Farronato; A Bruno; L
Mortara. Macrophage Polarization in Chronic Inflammatory Diseases: Killers or Builders?
Journal of Immunology Research 25 (2018)
236. KD Hulme; LA Gallo; KR Short. Influenza Virus and Glycemic Variability in Diabetes:
A Killer Combination? Front Microbiol 8, 861 (2017)
237. CT Mauriello; PS Hair; RD Rohn; NS Rister; NK Krishna; KM Cunnion.
Hyperglycemia inhibits complement-mediated immunological control of S. aureus in a rat
model of peritonitis. J Diabetes Res 2014, 762051 (2014)
238. R Honce; S Schultz-Cherry. Impact of Obesity on Influenza A Virus Pathogenesis,
Immune Response, and Evolution. Front Immunol 10, 1071 (2019)
239. CK Wong; CA Smith; K Sakamoto; N Kaminski; JL Koff; DR Goldstein. Aging Impairs
Alveolar Macrophage Phagocytosis and Increases Influenza-Induced Mortality in Mice. The
Journal of Immunology (2017)
240. A Grohová; K Dáňová; R Špíšek; L Palová-Jelínková. Cell Based Therapy for Type 1
Diabetes: Should We Take Hyperglycemia Into Account? Front Immunol 10 (2019)
241. JP Garnett; KK Kalsi; M Sobotta; J Bearham; G Carr; J Powell; M Brodlie; C Ward; R
Tarran; DL Baines. Hyperglycaemia and Pseudomonas aeruginosa acidify cystic fibrosis
airway surface liquid by elevating epithelial monocarboxylate transporter 2 dependent lactateH + secretion. Scientific Reports 6, 1–13 (2016)
242. MH Abou Alaiwa; LR Reznikov; ND Gansemer; KA Sheets; AR Horswill; DA Stoltz; J
Zabner; MJ Welsh. pH modulates the activity and synergism of the airway surface liquid
antimicrobials β-defensin-3 and LL-37. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 111, 18703–18708 (2014)
243. AA Pezzulo; XX Tang; MJ Hoegger; MH Abou Alaiwa; S Ramachandran; TO
Moninger; PH Karp; CL Wohlford-Lenane; HP Haagsman; M van Eijk; B Bánfi; AR
Horswill; DA Stoltz; PB McCray; MJ Welsh; J Zabner. Reduced Airway Surface pH Impairs
Bacterial Killing in the Porcine Cystic Fibrosis Lung. Nature 487, 109–113 (2012)
244. R Tarran; BR Grubb; JT Gatzy; CW Davis; RC Boucher. The Relative Roles of Passive
Surface Forces and Active Ion Transport in the Modulation of Airway Surface Liquid Volume
and Composition. The Journal of General Physiology 118, 223–236 (2001)
245. C Clary-Meinesz; J Mouroux; J Cosson; P Huitorel; B Blaive. Influence of external pH
on ciliary beat frequency in human bronchi and bronchioles. Eur Respir J 11, 330–333 (1998)
246. AR Berkebile; PB McCray. Effects of airway surface liquid pH on host defense in cystic
fibrosis. Int J Biochem Cell Biol 52, 124–129 (2014)
247. S Kolahian. Diabetic lung disease: fact or fiction? Rev Endocr Metab Disord 17 (2019)
248. J Proença de Oliveira-Maul; H Barbosa de Carvalho; DM Goto; RM Maia; C Fló; V
Barnabé; DR Franco; S Benabou; MR Perracini; W Jacob-Filho; PHN Saldiva; G LorenziFilho; BK Rubin; NK Nakagawa. Aging, Diabetes, and Hypertension Are Associated With
Decreased Nasal Mucociliary Clearance. Chest 143, 1091–1097 (2013)
249. A Lardner. The effects of extracellular pH on immune function. Journal of Leukocyte
Biology 69, 522–530 (2001)
250. G Vistoli; D De Maddis; A Cipak; N Zarkovic; M Carini; G Aldini. Advanced
glycoxidation and lipoxidation end products (AGEs and ALEs): an overview of their
mechanisms of formation. Free Radical Research 47, 3–27 (2013)
251. A Al-Dalaeen; HA Al-Domi. Advanced Glycation End Products: Mechanisms in the
Pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes and its Complications, (2018)

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

252. O Chappey; C Dosquet; M-P Wautier; J-L Wautier. Advanced glycation end products,
oxidant stress and vascular lesions. European Journal of Clinical Investigation 27, 97–108
(1997)
253. R Singh; A Barden; T Mori; L Beilin. Advanced glycation end-products: a review.
Diabetologia 44, 129–146 (2001)
254. ID Nicholl; R Bucala. Advanced glycation endproducts and cigarette smoking. Cell Mol
Biol (Noisy-le-grand) 44, 1025–1033 (1998)
255. TH Fleming; PM Humpert; PP Nawroth; A Bierhaus. Reactive metabolites and
AGE/RAGE-mediated cellular dysfunction affect the aging process: a mini-review.
Gerontology 57, 435–443 (2011)
256. C Cerami; H Founds; I Nicholl; T Mitsuhashi; D Giordano; S Vanpatten; A Lee; Y AlAbed; H Vlassara; R Bucala; A Cerami. Tobacco smoke is a source of toxic reactive
glycation products. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94, 13915–13920 (1997)
257. J-H Chen; X Lin; C Bu; X Zhang. Role of advanced glycation end products in mobility
and considerations in possible dietary and nutritional intervention strategies. Nutr Metab
(Lond) 15, 72 (2018)
258. YM Li; AX Tan; H Vlassara. Antibacterial activity of lysozyme and lactoferrin is
inhibited by binding of advanced glycation–modified proteins to a conserved motif. Nat Med
1, 1057–1061 (1995)
259. EA Oczypok; TN Perkins; TD Oury. All the “RAGE” in lung disease: The receptor for
advanced glycation endproducts (RAGE) is a major mediator of pulmonary inflammatory
responses. Paediatric Respiratory Reviews 23, 40–49 (2017)
260. MA (M. AD) van Zoelen; M Schouten; A Vos; S Florquin; J Meijers; P Nawroth; A
Bierhaus; T Poll. The Receptor for Advanced Glycation End Products Impairs Host Defense
in Pneumococcal Pneumonia. Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md: 1950) 182, 4349–56
(2009)
261. T Crouzier; K Boettcher; AR Geonnotti; NL Kavanaugh; JB Hirsch; K Ribbeck; O
Lieleg. Modulating Mucin Hydration and Lubrication by Deglycosylation and Polyethylene
Glycol Binding. Advanced Materials Interfaces 2, 1500308 (2015)
262. BJ Philips; J-X Meguer; J Redman; EH Baker. Factors determining the appearance of
glucose in upper and lower respiratory tract secretions. Intensive Care Med 29, 2204–2210
(2003)
263. EH Baker; N Clark; AL Brennan; DA Fisher; KM Gyi; ME Hodson; BJ Philips; DL
Baines; DM Wood. Hyperglycemia and cystic fibrosis alter respiratory fluid glucose
concentrations estimated by breath condensate analysis. J Appl Physiol (1985) 102, 1969–
1975 (2007)
264. OH Wittekindt. Tight junctions in pulmonary epithelia during lung inflammation.
Pflugers Arch 469, 135–147 (2017)
265. JP Garnett; TT Nguyen; JD Moffatt; ER Pelham; KK Kalsi; EH Baker; DL Baines.
Proinflammatory Mediators Disrupt Glucose Homeostasis in Airway Surface Liquid. JI 189,
373–380 (2012)
266. AL Brennan; KM Gyi; DM Wood; J Johnson; R Holliman; DL Baines; BJ Philips; DM
Geddes; ME Hodson; EH Baker. Airway glucose concentrations and effect on growth of
respiratory pathogens in cystic fibrosis. Journal of Cystic Fibrosis 6, 101–109 (2007)
267. I Caruso; F Giorgino. The diabetic lung: An easy target for SARS COV 2? Diabetes
Metab Res Rev 36 (2020)
268. AR Parrish. The impact of aging on epithelial barriers. Tissue Barriers 5, e1343172
(2017)

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

269. QN Dinh; GR Drummond; CG Sobey; S Chrissobolis. Roles of Inflammation, Oxidative
Stress, and Vascular Dysfunction in Hypertension. BioMed Research International 2014, 1–
11 (2014)
270. BJ Philips. Glucose in bronchial aspirates increases the risk of respiratory MRSA in
intubated patients. Thorax 60, 761–764 (2005)
271. KS Tan; RL Lim; J Liu; HH Ong; VJ Tan; HF Lim; KF Chung; IM Adcock; VT Chow;
DY Wang. Respiratory Viral Infections in Exacerbation of Chronic Airway Inflammatory
Diseases: Novel Mechanisms and Insights From the Upper Airway Epithelium. Front Cell
Dev Biol 8, 99 (2020)
272. M Goritzka; S Makris; F Kausar; LR Durant; C Pereira; Y Kumagai; FJ Culley; M
Mack; S Akira; C Johansson. Alveolar macrophage-derived type I interferons orchestrate
innate immunity to RSV through recruitment of antiviral monocytes. J Exp Med 212, 699–
714 (2015)
273. BT Thompson; RC Chambers; KD Liu. Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. N Engl J
Med 377, 562–572 (2017)
274. X Huang; H Xiu; S Zhang; G Zhang. The Role of Macrophages in the Pathogenesis of
ALI/ARDS. Mediators of Inflammation 2018, 1–8 (2018)
275. T Zhou; Y Tsybovsky; AS Olia; J Gorman; MA Rapp; G Cerutti; G-Y Chuang; PS
Katsamba; A Nazzari; JM Sampson; A Schon; PD Wang; J Bimela; W Shi; I-T Teng; B
Zhang; JC Boyington; M Sastry; T Stephens; J Stuckey; S Wang; RA Friesner; DD Ho; JR
Mascola; L Shapiro; PD Kwong. Cryo-EM Structures Delineate a pH-Dependent Switch that
Mediates Endosomal Positioning of SARS-CoV-2 Spike Receptor-Binding Domains. bioRxiv
(2020)
276. A Helenius. Virus entry: What has pH got to do with it? Nat Cell Biol 15, 125–125
(2013)
277. TM Gallagher; MJ Buchmeier. Coronavirus spike proteins in viral entry and
pathogenesis. Virology 279, 371–374 (2001)
278. VC Chu; LJ McElroy; V Chu; BE Bauman; GR Whittaker. The Avian Coronavirus
Infectious Bronchitis Virus Undergoes Direct Low-pH-Dependent Fusion Activation during
Entry into Host Cells. J Virol 80, 3180–3188 (2006)
279. C Burkard; MH Verheije; O Wicht; SI van Kasteren; FJ van Kuppeveld; BL Haagmans;
L Pelkmans; PJM Rottier; BJ Bosch; CAM de Haan. Coronavirus Cell Entry Occurs through
the Endo-/Lysosomal Pathway in a Proteolysis-Dependent Manner. PLoS Pathog 10 (2014)
280. D Bojkova; K Klann; B Koch; M Widera; D Krause; S Ciesek; J Cinatl; C Münch.
Proteomics of SARS-CoV-2-infected host cells reveals therapy targets. Nature 583, 469–472
(2020)
281. M Essaidi-Laziosi; F Brito; S Benaoudia; L Royston; V Cagno; M Fernandes-Rocha; I
Piuz; E Zdobnov; S Huang; S Constant; M-O Boldi; L Kaiser; C Tapparel. Propagation of
respiratory viruses in human airway epithelia reveals persistent virus-specific signatures.
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 141, 2074–2084 (2018)
282. N Zhu; W Wang; Z Liu; C Liang; W Wang; F Ye; B Huang; L Zhao; H Wang; W Zhou;
Y Deng; L Mao; C Su; G Qiang; T Jiang; J Zhao; G Wu; J Song; W Tan. Morphogenesis and
cytopathic effect of SARS-CoV-2 infection in human airway epithelial cells. Nature
Communications 11, 3910 (2020)
283. KD Hulme; L Yan; RJ Marshall; CJ Bloxham; KR Upton; SZ Hasnain; H BielefeldtOhmann; Z Loh; K Ronacher; KY Chew; LA Gallo; KR Short. High glucose levels increase
influenza-associated damage to the pulmonary epithelial-endothelial barrier. eLife 9 (2020)
284. GA Gualdoni; KA Mayer; A-M Kapsch; K Kreuzberg; A Puck; P Kienzl; F Oberndorfer;
K Frühwirth; S Winkler; D Blaas; GJ Zlabinger; J Stöckl. Rhinovirus induces an anabolic

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reprogramming in host cell metabolism essential for viral replication. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
A 115, E7158–E7165 (2018)
285. S Bernardi; C Tikellis; R Candido; D Tsorotes; RJ Pickering; F Bossi; R Carretta; B
Fabris; ME Cooper; MC Thomas. ACE2 deficiency shifts energy metabolism towards glucose
utilization. Metabolism 64, 406–415 (2015)
286. JW Lee; J Ko; C Ju; HK Eltzschig. Hypoxia signaling in human diseases and therapeutic
targets. Exp Mol Med 51, 1–13 (2019)
287. A Sturrock; D Woller; A Freeman; K Sanders; R Paine. Consequences of Hypoxia for
the Pulmonary Alveolar Epithelial Cell Innate Immune Response. JI 201, 3411–3420 (2018)
288. A Ouiddir; C Planès; I Fernandes; A VanHesse; C Clerici. Hypoxia Upregulates Activity
and Expression of the Glucose Transporter GLUT1 in Alveolar Epithelial Cells. 21, 9 (1999)
289. M Jain. Effects of Hypoxia on the Alveolar Epithelium. Proceedings of the American
Thoracic Society 2, 202–205 (2005)
290. JW Lee; J Ko; C Ju; HK Eltzschig. Hypoxia signaling in human diseases and therapeutic
targets. Exp Mol Med 51, 1–13 (2019)
291. RJ Marshall; P Armart; KD Hulme; KY Chew; AC Brown; PM Hansbro; CJ Bloxham;
M Flint; K Ronacher; H Bielefeldt-Ohmann; LA Gallo; KR Short. Glycemic Variability in
Diabetes Increases the Severity of Influenza. 11, 15 (2020)
292. E Walsh; AR Falsey. Humoral and Mucosal Immunity in Protection from Natural
Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection in Adults. J Infect Dis 190, 373–378 (2004)
293. W Ni; X Yang; D Yang; J Bao; R Li; Y Xiao; C Hou; H Wang; J Liu; D Yang; Y Xu; Z
Cao; Z Gao. Role of angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) in COVID-19. Crit Care 24,
422 (2020)
294. K Kuba; Y Imai; S Rao; H Gao; F Guo; B Guan; Y Huan; P Yang; Y Zhang; W Deng; L
Bao; B Zhang; G Liu; Z Wang; M Chappell; Y Liu; D Zheng; A Leibbrandt; T Wada; AS
Slutsky; D Liu; C Qin; C Jiang; JM Penninger. A crucial role of angiotensin converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) in SARS coronavirus–induced lung injury. Nat Med 11, 875–879 (2005)
295. M Vaduganathan; O Vardeny; T Michel; JJV McMurray; MA Pfeffer; SD Solomon.
Renin–Angiotensin–Aldosterone System Inhibitors in Patients with Covid-19. The New
England Journal of Medicine 7 (2020)
296. C Bodor; JP Nagy; B Végh; A Németh; A Jenei; S MirzaHosseini; A Sebe; L Rosivall.
Angiotensin II increases the permeability and PV-1 expression of endothelial cells. American
Journal of Physiology-Cell Physiology 302, C267–C276 (2012)
297. A Benigni; P Cassis; G Remuzzi. Angiotensin II revisited: new roles in inflammation,
immunology and aging. EMBO Mol Med 2, 247–257 (2010)
298. EY Senchenkova; J Russell; LD Almeida-Paula; JW Harding; DN Granger. Angiotensin
II–Mediated Microvascular Thrombosis. Hypertension 56, 1089–1095 (2010)
299. JM Luther; NJ Brown. The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and glucose
homeostasis. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 32, 734–739 (2011)
300. GA Favre; VLM Esnault; E Van Obberghen. Modulation of glucose metabolism by the
renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 308, E435-449 (2015)
301. Y Liu; Y Yang; C Zhang; F Huang; F Wang; J Yuan; Z Wang; J Li; J Li; C Feng; Z
Zhang; L Wang; L Peng; L Chen; Y Qin; D Zhao; S Tan; L Yin; J Xu; C Zhou; C Jiang; L
Liu. Clinical and biochemical indexes from 2019-nCoV infected patients linked to viral loads
and lung injury. Science China Life Sciences 63, 364–374 (2020)
302. B Ayelign; M Negash; M Genetu; T Wondmagegn; T Shibabaw. Immunological Impacts
of Diabetes on the Susceptibility of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Journal of Immunology
Research 2019, 1–8 (2019)
303. C Scagnolari; S Trombetti; S Cicetti; S Antonelli; C Selvaggi; L Perrone; M Visca; S
Romano; G Antonelli. Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Elicits a Weak

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Interferon Response Compared to Traditional Interferon-Inducing Viruses. Intervirology 51,
217–223 (2008)
304. J Hadjadj; N Yatim; L Barnabei; A Corneau; J Boussier; N Smith; H Péré; B Charbit; V
Bondet; C Chenevier-Gobeaux; P Breillat; N Carlier; R Gauzit; C Morbieu; F Pène; N Marin;
N Roche; T-A Szwebel; SH Merkling; J-M Treluyer; D Veyer; L Mouthon; C Blanc; P-L
Tharaux; F Rozenberg; A Fischer; D Duffy; F Rieux-Laucat; S Kernéis; B Terrier. Impaired
type I interferon activity and inflammatory responses in severe COVID-19 patients. Science
369, 718–724 (2020)
305. S Trouillet-Assant; S Viel; A Gaymard; S Pons; J-C Richard; M Perret; M Villard; K
Brengel-Pesce; B Lina; M Mezidi; L Bitker; A Belot. Type I IFN immunoprofiling in
COVID-19 patients. J Allergy Clin Immunol 146, 206-208.e2 (2020)
306. D Blanco-Melo; BE Nilsson-Payant; W-C Liu; S Uhl; D Hoagland; R Møller; TX
Jordan; K Oishi; M Panis; D Sachs; TT Wang; RE Schwartz; JK Lim; RA Albrecht; BR
tenOever. Imbalanced Host Response to SARS-CoV-2 Drives Development of COVID-19.
Cell 181, 1036-1045.e9 (2020)
307. R Channappanavar; AR Fehr; R Vijay; M Mack; J Zhao; DK Meyerholz; S Perlman.
Dysregulated Type I Interferon and Inflammatory Monocyte-Macrophage Responses Cause
Lethal Pneumonia in SARS-CoV-Infected Mice. Cell Host Microbe 19, 181–193 (2016)
308. W Zhang; G Wang; Z-G Xu; H Tu; F Hu; J Dai; Y Chang; Y Chen; Y Lu; H Zeng; Z
Cai; F Han; C Xu; G Jin; L Sun; B-S Pan; S-W Lai; C-C Hsu; J Xu; Z-Z Chen; H-Y Li; P
Seth; J Hu; X Zhang; H Li; H-K Lin. Lactate Is a Natural Suppressor of RLR Signaling by
Targeting MAVS. Cell 178, 176-189.e15 (2019)
309. SI Dikalov; RR Nazarewicz. Angiotensin II-Induced Production of Mitochondrial
Reactive Oxygen Species: Potential Mechanisms and Relevance for Cardiovascular Disease.
Antioxid Redox Signal 19, 1085–1094 (2013)
310. Y Suzuki; M Ruiz-Ortega; O Lorenzo; M Ruperez; V Esteban; J Egido. Inflammation
and angiotensin II. The International Journal of Biochemistry & Cell Biology 35, 881–900
(2003)
311. R Muniyappa; S Gubbi. COVID-19 Pandemic, Corona Viruses, and Diabetes Mellitus.
American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism ajpendo.00124.2020 (2020)
312. R Bansal; S Gubbi; R Muniyappa. Metabolic Syndrome and COVID 19: EndocrineImmune-Vascular Interactions Shapes Clinical Course. Endocrinology 161, bqaa112 (2020)
313. MAT Acosta; BD Singer. Pathogenesis of COVID-19-induced ARDS: implications for
an aging population. European Respiratory Journal (2020)
314. BT Thompson; RC Chambers; KD Liu. Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome. N Engl J
Med 377, 562–572 (2017)
315. S Herold; C Becker; KM Ridge; GRS Budinger. Influenza virus-induced lung injury:
pathogenesis and implications for treatment. Eur Respir J 45, 1463–1478 (2015)
316. JR Ortiz; KM Neuzil; TC Rue; H Zhou; DK Shay; P-Y Cheng; CR Cooke; CH Goss.
Population-based incidence estimates of influenza-associated respiratory failure
hospitalizations, 2003 to 2009. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 188, 710–715 (2013)
317. X Li; X Ma. Acute respiratory failure in COVID-19: is it “typical” ARDS? Critical Care
24, 198 (2020)
318. J Deng; D-X Wang; W Deng; C-Y Li; J Tong; H Ma. Regulation of alveolar fluid
clearance and ENaC expression in lung by exogenous angiotensin II. Respir Physiol
Neurobiol 181, 53–61 (2012)
319. A Rojas; I Gonzalez; MA Morales. SARS-CoV-2-mediated inflammatory response in
lungs: should we look at RAGE? Inflamm Res 69, 641–643 (2020)
320. M Kerkeni; J Gharbi. RAGE receptor: May be a potential inflammatory mediator for
SARS-COV-2 infection? Med Hypotheses 144, 109950 (2020)

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

321. M Prasad. Single Virus Targeting Multiple Organs: What We Know and Where We Are
Heading? Frontiers in Medicine 7, 6 (2020)
322. AM Baig; A Khaleeq; U Ali; H Syeda. Evidence of the COVID-19 Virus Targeting the
CNS: Tissue Distribution, Host–Virus Interaction, and Proposed Neurotropic Mechanisms.
ACS Chem Neurosci 11, 995–998 (2020)
323. B Rozendaal; LMG Golde; H Haagsman. Localization and Functions of SP-A and SP-D
at Mucosal Surfaces. Pediatric pathology & molecular medicine 20, 319–39 (2001)
324. GL Sorensen. Surfactant Protein D in Respiratory and Non-Respiratory Diseases. Front
Med 5 (2018)
325. JS Hirsch; JH Ng; DW Ross; P Sharma; HH Shah; RL Barnett; AD Hazzan; S Fishbane;
KD Jhaveri; Northwell COVID-19 Research Consortium; Northwell Nephrology COVID-19
Research Consortium. Acute kidney injury in patients hospitalized with COVID-19. Kidney
Int 98, 209–218 (2020)
326. C Ma; Y Cong; H Zhang. COVID-19 and the Digestive System. Official journal of the
American College of Gastroenterology | ACG 115, 1003–1006 (2020)
327. F Liu; X Long; W Zou; M Fang; W Wu; W Li; B Zhang; W Zhang; X Chen; Z Zhang.
Highly ACE2 Expression in Pancreas May Cause Pancreas Damage After SARS-CoV-2
Infection. medRxiv 2020.02.28.20029181 (2020)
328. J-K Yang; S-S Lin; X-J Ji; L-M Guo. Binding of SARS coronavirus to its receptor
damages islets and causes acute diabetes. Acta Diabetol 47, 193–199 (2010)
329. SM Smith; A Boppana; JA Traupman; E Unson; DA Maddock; K Chao; DP Dobesh; A
Brufsky; RI Connor. Impaired glucose metabolism in patients with diabetes, prediabetes, and
obesity is associated with severe COVID 19. Journal of Medical Virology (2020)
330. A Ceriello. Hyperglycemia and the worse prognosis of COVID-19. Why a fast blood
glucose control should be mandatory. Diabetes Res Clin Pract 163, 108186 (2020)
331. SM Bindom; E Lazartigues. The sweeter side of ACE2: Physiological evidence for a role
in diabetes. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology 302, 193–202 (2008)
332. J Poissy; J Goutay; M Caplan; E Parmentier; T Duburcq; F Lassalle; E Jeanpierre; A
Rauch; J Labreuche; S Susen; N Cousin; A Durand; A El Kalioubie; R Favory; P Girardie; M
Houard; E Jaillette; M Jourdain; G Ledoux; D Mathieu; A-S Moreau; C Niles; S Nseir; T
Onimus; S Préau; L Robriquet; A Rouzé; A Simonnet; S Six; A Toussaint; A Dupont; A
Bauters; C Zawadzki; C Paris; N Trillot; B Wibaut; A Hochart; C Marichez; V Dalibard; S
Vanderziepe; L Bourgeois; A Gaul; A Jospin; N Stepina; B Pradines; A Tournoys; T
Brousseau; M Rémy; A Hutt. Pulmonary Embolism in Patients With COVID-19: Awareness
of an Increased Prevalence. Circulation 142, 184–186 (2020)
333. M Ackermann; SE Verleden; M Kuehnel; A Haverich; T Welte; F Laenger; A
Vanstapel; C Werlein; H Stark; A Tzankov; WW Li; VW Li; SJ Mentzer; D Jonigk.
Pulmonary Vascular Endothelialitis, Thrombosis, and Angiogenesis in Covid-19. The New
England Journal of Medicine 9 (2020)
334. JD McFadyen; H Stevens; K Peter. The Emerging Threat of (Micro)Thrombosis in
COVID-19 and Its Therapeutic Implications. Circ Res 127, 571–587 (2020)
335. L Carsana; A Sonzogni; A Nasr; R Rossi; A Pellegrinelli; P Zerbi; R Rech; R Colombo;
S Antinori; M Corbellino; M Galli; E Catena; A Tosoni; A Gianatti; M Nebuloni. Pulmonary
post-mortem findings in a series of COVID-19 cases from northern Italy: a two-centre
descriptive study. 20, 6 (2020)
336. FA Klok; MJHA Kruip; NJM van der Meer; MS Arbous; DAMPJ Gommers; KM Kant;
FHJ Kaptein; J van Paassen; MAM Stals; MV Huisman; H Endeman. Incidence of thrombotic
complications in critically ill ICU patients with COVID-19. Thromb Res 191, 145–147 (2020)
337. JM Connors; JH Levy. COVID-19 and its implications for thrombosis and
anticoagulation. Blood 135, 2033–2040 (2020)

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

338. M Ranucci; A Ballotta; UD Dedda; E Bayshnikova; MD Poli; M Resta; M Falco; G
Albano; L Menicanti. The procoagulant pattern of patients with COVID 19 acute respiratory
distress syndrome. 5 (2020)
339. SD Turco. COVID-19 and cardiovascular consequences_ Is the endothelial dysfunction
the hardest challenge? Thrombosis Research 9 (2020)
340. Z Varga; AJ Flammer; P Steiger; M Haberecker; R Andermatt; AS Zinkernagel; MR
Mehra; RA Schuepbach; F Ruschitzka; H Moch. Endothelial cell infection and endotheliitis in
COVID-19. The Lancet 395, 1417–1418 (2020)
341. LC Price; C McCabe; B Garfield; SJ Wort. Thrombosis and COVID-19 pneumonia: the
clot thickens! Eur Respir J 56, 2001608 (2020)
342. S Pons; S Fodil; E Azoulay; L Zafrani. The vascular endothelium: the cornerstone of
organ dysfunction in severe SARS-CoV-2 infection. Crit Care 24, 353 (2020)
343. L-A Teuwen; V Geldhof; A Pasut; P Carmeliet. COVID-19: the vasculature unleashed.
Nature Reviews Immunology 20, 389–391 (2020)
344. ML Sheu; FM Ho; RS Yang; KF Chao; WW Lin; SY Lin-Shiau; S-H Liu. High Glucose
Induces Human Endothelial Cell Apoptosis Through a Phosphoinositide 3-Kinase–Regulated
Cyclooxygenase-2 Pathway. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology 25, 539–545
(2005)
345. ME Stegenga; SN van der Crabben; M Levi; AF de Vos; MW Tanck; HP Sauerwein; T
van der Poll. Hyperglycemia Stimulates Coagulation, Whereas Hyperinsulinemia Impairs
Fibrinolysis in Healthy Humans. Diabetes 55, 1807–1812 (2006)
346. FA van der Toorn; R de Mutsert; WM Lijfering; FR Rosendaal; A van H Vlieg. Glucose
metabolism affects coagulation factors: The NEO study. Journal of Thrombosis and
Haemostasis 17, 1886–1897 (2019)
347. BA Lemkes; J Hermanides; JH Devries; F Holleman; JCM Meijers; JBL Hoekstra.
Hyperglycemia: a prothrombotic factor? Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis 8, 1663–
1669 (2010)
348. M Brownlee. Biochemistry and molecular cell biology of diabetic complications. Nature
414, 813–820 (2001)
349. SD Funk; A Yurdagul; AW Orr. Hyperglycemia and Endothelial Dysfunction in
Atherosclerosis: Lessons from Type 1 Diabetes. International Journal of Vascular Medicine
2012, 1–19 (2012)
350. VP Singh; A Bali; N Singh; AS Jaggi. Advanced Glycation End Products and Diabetic
Complications. Korean J Physiol Pharmacol 18, 1–14 (2014)
351. RKD Ephraim; YA Awuku; P Adu; LTW Ampomah; P Adoba; S Panford; JPK Ninnoni;
H Agbodzakey. High risk of coagulopathy among Type-2 Diabetes Mellitus clients at a
municipal hospital in Ghana. Ghana Medical Journal 51, 101 (2017)
352. LZ Kornblith; B Howard; R Kunitake; B Redick; M Nelson; MJ Cohen; R Callcut.
Obesity and clotting: Body mass index independently contributes to hypercoagulability after
injury. Journal of Trauma and Acute Care Surgery 78, 30–38 (2015)
353. G Lip. Hypertension and the prothrombotic state. Journal of Human Hypertension 4
(2000)
354. D Mari; G Ogliari; D Castaldi; G Vitale; EM Bollini; D Lio. Hemostasis and ageing.
Immun Ageing 5, 12 (2008)
355. MM Thompson; TT Oyama; FJ Kelly; TM Kennefick; S Anderson. Activity and
responsiveness of the renin-angiotensin system in the aging rat. American Journal of
Physiology-Regulatory, Integrative and Comparative Physiology 279, R1787–R1794 (2000)
356. AM South; PA Nixon; MC Chappell; DI Diz; GB Russell; HA Shaltout; TM O’Shea;
LK Washburn. Obesity is Associated with Higher Blood Pressure and Higher Levels of

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Angiotensin II but Lower Angiotensin-(1-7) in Adolescents Born Preterm. The Journal of
Pediatrics 205, 55-60.e1 (2019)
357. MC Zimmerman; E Lazartigues; RV Sharma; RL Davisson. Hypertension Caused by
Angiotensin II Infusion Involves Increased Superoxide Production in the Central Nervous
System. Circulation Research 95, 210–216 (2004)
358. D Batlle; M Jose Soler; M Ye. ACE2 and Diabetes: ACE of ACEs? Diabetes 59, 2994–
2996 (2010)
359. C Härdtner; C Mörke; R Walther; C Wolke; U Lendeckel. High glucose activates the
alternative ACE2/Ang-(1-7)/Mas and APN/Ang IV/IRAP RAS axes in pancreatic β-cells. Int
J Mol Med 32, 795–804 (2013)
360. JP Garnett; MA Gray; R Tarran; M Brodlie; C Ward; EH Baker; DL Baines. Elevated
Paracellular Glucose Flux across Cystic Fibrosis Airway Epithelial Monolayers Is an
Important Factor for Pseudomonas aeruginosa Growth. PLoS ONE 8, e76283 (2013)
361. S Sethi. Infection as a comorbidity of COPD. EUROPEAN RESPIRATORY JOURNAL
35, 7 (2010)
362. AC Morris. Management of pneumonia in intensive care. Journal of Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine 2 (2018)
363. BJ Langford; M So; S Raybardhan; V Leung; D Westwood; DR MacFadden; J-PR
Soucy; N Daneman. Bacterial co-infection and secondary infection in patients with COVID19: a living rapid review and meta-analysis. Clinical Microbiology and Infection 0 (2020)
364. E Sharifipour. Evaluation of bacterial co-infections of the respiratory tract in COVID-19
patients admitted to ICU. 7 (2020)
365. H Kai; M Kai. Interactions of coronaviruses with ACE2, angiotensin II, and RAS
inhibitors-lessons from available evidence and insights into COVID-19. Hypertens Res 43,
648–654 (2020)
366. K Sriram; PA Insel. A hypothesis for pathobiology and treatment of COVID-19: The
centrality of ACE1/ACE2 imbalance. British Journal of Pharmacology 177, 4825–4844
(2020)
367. G Van den Berghe; A Wilmer; G Hermans; W Meersseman; PJ Wouters; I Milants; E
Van Wijngaerden; H Bobbaers; R Bouillon. Intensive Insulin Therapy in the Medical ICU.
New England Journal of Medicine 354, 449–461 (2006)
368. G Van den Berghe; P Wouters; F Weekers; C Verwaest; F Bruyninckx; M Schetz; D
Vlasselaers; P Ferdinande; P Lauwers; R Bouillon. Intensive Insulin Therapy in Critically Ill
Patients. New England Journal of Medicine 345, 1359–1367 (2001)
369. R Gianchandani; NH Esfandiari; L Ang; J Iyengar; S Knotts; P Choksi; R Pop-Busui.
Managing Hyperglycemia in the COVID-19 Inflammatory Storm. Diabetes 69, 2048–2053
(2020)
370. O Hamdy; RA Gabbay. Early Observation and Mitigation of Challenges in Diabetes
Management of COVID-19 Patients in Critical Care Units. Diabetes Care 43, e81–e82 (2020)
371. T Valk; C McMorrow. Managing hyperglycemia during the COVID-19 pandemic:
Improving outcomes using new technologies in intensive care. SAGE Open Med 8 (2020)
372. JP Garnett; EH Baker; S Naik; JA Lindsay; GM Knight; S Gill; JS Tregoning; DL
Baines. Metformin reduces airway glucose permeability and hyperglycaemia-induced
Staphylococcus aureus load independently of effects on blood glucose. Thorax 68, 835–845
(2013)
373. AH Dehkordi; A Abbaszadeh; S Mir; A Hasanvand. Metformin and its antiinflammatory and anti-oxidative effects; new concepts. Journal of Renal Injury Prevention 8,
54–61 (2018)
374. MM Myerburg; JD King; NM Oyster; AC Fitch; A Magill; CJ Baty; SC Watkins; JK
Kolls; JM Pilewski; KR Hallows. AMPK Agonists Ameliorate Sodium and Fluid Transport

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and Inflammation in Cystic Fibrosis Airway Epithelial Cells. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 42,
676–684 (2009)
375. F Luo; A Das; J Chen; P Wu; X Li; Z Fang. Metformin in patients with and without
diabetes: a paradigm shift in cardiovascular disease management. Cardiovasc Diabetol 18
(2019)
376. G Xin; Z Wei; C Ji; H Zheng; J Gu; L Ma; W Huang; SL Morris-Natschke; J-L Yeh; R
Zhang; C Qin; L Wen; Z Xing; Y Cao; Q Xia; Y Lu; K Li; H Niu; K-H Lee; W Huang.
Metformin Uniquely Prevents Thrombosis by Inhibiting Platelet Activation and mtDNA
Release. Sci Rep 6, 36222 (2016)
377. M Kinaan; H Ding; CR Triggle. Metformin: An Old Drug for the Treatment of Diabetes
but a New Drug for the Protection of the Endothelium. Med Princ Pract 24, 401–415 (2015)
378. M Foretz; B Guigas; L Bertrand; M Pollak; B Viollet. Metformin: from mechanisms of
action to therapies. Cell Metab 20, 953–966 (2014)
379. Y Tanaka; H Iwamoto; T Onuma; R Kawamori. Inhibitory effect of metformin on
formation of advanced glycation end products. Current Therapeutic Research 58, 693–697
(1997)
380. P Beisswenger; D Ruggiero-Lopez. Metformin inhibition of glycation processes.
Diabetes & metabolism 29, 6S95-6S103 (2003)
381. C Bellin; DH de Wiza; NF Wiernsperger; P Rosen. Generation of Reactive Oxygen
Species by Endothelial and Smooth Muscle Cells: Influence of Hyperglycemia and
Metformin. 8 (2006)
382. AJ Scheen. Metformin and COVID-19: From cellular mechanisms to reduced mortality.
Diabetes & Metabolism 46, 423–426 (2020)
383. X Cheng; Y-M Liu; H Li; X Zhang; F Lei; J-J Qin; Z Chen; K-Q Deng; L Lin; M-M
Chen; X Song; M Xia; X Huang; W Liu; J Cai; X-J Zhang; F Zhou; P Zhang; Y Wang; X Ma;
Q Xu; J Yang; P Ye; W Mao; X Huang; J Xia; B-H Zhang; J Guo; L Zhu; Z Lu; Y Yuan; X
Wei; Z-G She; Y-X Ji; H Li. Metformin Is Associated with Higher Incidence of Acidosis, but
Not Mortality, in Individuals with COVID-19 and Pre-existing Type 2 Diabetes. Cell Metab
32, 537-547.e3 (2020)
384. TI Hariyanto; A Kurniawan. Metformin use is associated with reduced mortality rate
from coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) infection. Obes Med 19, 100290 (2020)
385. Y Gao; T Liu; W Zhong; R Liu; H Zhou; W Huang; W Zhang. Risk of Metformin in
Patients With Type 2 Diabetes With COVID 19: A Preliminary Retrospective Report.
Clinical and Translational Science (2020)
386. N Stefan; AL Birkenfeld; MB Schulze. Global pandemics interconnected — obesity,
impaired metabolic health and COVID-19. Nat Rev Endocrinol 17, 135–149 (2021)
387. SA Masino; JM Rho. Mechanisms of Ketogenic Diet Action. In: Jasper’s Basic
Mechanisms of the Epilepsies. JL Noebels, M Avoli, MA Rogawski, RW Olsen, AV
Delgado-Escueta, eds. , National Center for Biotechnology Information (US), Bethesda (MD)
(2012)
388. EC Westman; J Mavropoulos; WS Yancy; JS Volek. A review of low-carbohydrate
ketogenic diets. Curr Atheroscler Rep 5, 476–483 (2003)
389. D Krishnan; C Mehndiratta; T Agrawal. Ketogenic Diet as Medical Nutrition Therapy.
Journal of Social Health and Diabetes 7, 4 (2019)
390. D Tan; J Zhao; X Liu; W Yang; F Yuan. Significance of calorie-restricted ketogenic diet
for lung cancer with brain metastases and hepatoma with pulmonary metastases: report of two
cases. In Review (2020)
391. TN Seyfried; L Shelton; G Arismendi-Morillo; M Kalamian; A Elsakka; J Maroon; P
Mukherjee. Provocative Question: Should Ketogenic Metabolic Therapy Become the
Standard of Care for Glioblastoma? Neurochem Res 44, 2392–2404 (2019)

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

392. A Goday; D Bellido; I Sajoux; AB Crujeiras; B Burguera; PP García-Luna; A Oleaga; B
Moreno; FF Casanueva. Short-term safety, tolerability and efficacy of a very low-calorieketogenic diet interventional weight loss program versus hypocaloric diet in patients with type
2 diabetes mellitus. Nutr & Diabetes 6, e230–e230 (2016)
393. Bolla; Caretto; Laurenzi; Scavini; Piemonti. Low-Carb and Ketogenic Diets in Type 1
and Type 2 Diabetes. Nutrients 11, 962 (2019)
394. I D’Andrea Meira; TT Romão; HJ Pires do Prado; LT Krüger; MEP Pires; PO da
Conceição. Ketogenic Diet and Epilepsy: What We Know So Far. Front Neurosci 13, 5
(2019)
395. H Liu; Y Yang; Y Wang; H Tang; F Zhang; Y Zhang; Y Zhao. Ketogenic diet for
treatment of intractable epilepsy in adults: A meta-analysis of observational studies. Epilepsia
Open 3, 9–17 (2018)
396. GM Broom; IC Shaw; JJ Rucklidge. The ketogenic diet as a potential treatment and
prevention strategy for Alzheimer’s disease. Nutrition 60, 118–121 (2019)
397. M Rusek; R Pluta; M Ułamek-Kozioł; SJ Czuczwar. Ketogenic Diet in Alzheimer’s
Disease. IJMS 20, 3892 (2019)
398. G Morris; M Maes; M Berk; AF Carvalho; BK Puri. Nutritional ketosis as an
intervention to relieve astrogliosis: Possible therapeutic applications in the treatment of
neurodegenerative and neuroprogressive disorders. Eur Psychiatr 63, e8 (2019)
399. M Tang; SH Park; DC De Vivo; UR Monani. Therapeutic strategies for glucose
transporter 1 deficiency syndrome. Ann Clin Transl Neurol 6, 1923–1932 (2019)
400. N Cox; S Gibas; M Salisbury; J Gomer; K Gibas. Ketogenic diets potentially reverse
Type II diabetes and ameliorate clinical depression: A case study. Diabetes & Metabolic
Syndrome: Clinical Research & Reviews 13, 1475–1479 (2019)
401. DS Ludwig. The Ketogenic Diet: Evidence for Optimism but High-Quality Research
Needed. The Journal of Nutrition nxz308 (2019)
402. MV Liberti; JW Locasale. The Warburg Effect: How Does it Benefit Cancer Cells?
Trends in Biochemical Sciences 41, 211–218 (2016)
403. RA Gatenby; RJ Gillies. Why do cancers have high aerobic glycolysis? Nat Rev Cancer
4, 891–899 (2004)
404. BA Francis; J Fillenworth; P Gorelick; K Karanec; A Tanner. The Feasibility, Safety and
Effectiveness of a Ketogenic Diet for Refractory Status Epilepticus in Adults in the Intensive
Care Unit. Neurocrit Care 30, 652–657 (2019)
405. EG Park; J Lee; J Lee. The ketogenic diet for super-refractory status epilepticus patients
in intensive care units. Brain and Development 41, 420–427 (2019)
406. EL Goldberg; RD Molony; E Kudo; S Sidorov; Y Kong; VD Dixit; A Iwasaki.
Ketogenic diet activates protective γδ T cell responses against influenza virus infection. Sci
Immunol 4 (2019)
407. KR Taylor; RE Mills; AE Costanzo; JM Jameson. γδ T Cells Are Reduced and Rendered
Unresponsive by Hyperglycemia and Chronic TNFα in Mouse Models of Obesity and
Metabolic Disease. PLoS ONE 5, e11422 (2010)
408. L Lei; H Qian; X Yang; X Zhang; D Zhang; T Dai; R Guo; L Shi; Y Cheng; B Zhang; X
Zhou; J Hu; Y Guo. The phenotypic changes of γδ T cells in COVID-19 patients. J Cell Mol
Med 24, 11603–11606 (2020)
409. SG Sukkar; M Bassetti. Induction of ketosis as a potential therapeutic option to limit
hyperglycemia and prevent cytokine storm in COVID-19. Nutrition 79–80, 110967 (2020)
410. ID Cooper; CAP Crofts; JJ DiNicolantonio; A Malhotra; B Elliott; Y Kyriakidou; KH
Brookler. Relationships between hyperinsulinaemia, magnesium, vitamin D, thrombosis and
COVID-19: rationale for clinical management. Open Heart 7, e001356 (2020)

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

411. N Stefan; AL Birkenfeld; MB Schulze; DS Ludwig. Obesity and impaired metabolic
health in patients with COVID-19. Nat Rev Endocrinol 1–2 (2020)
412. E Merzon; I Green; M Shpigelman; S Vinker; I Raz; A Golan Cohen; R Eldor.
Haemoglobin A1c is a predictor of COVID 19 severity in patients with diabetes. Diabetes
Metab Res Rev (2020)
413. YP Wu; ZH Liu; R Wei; SD Pan; NY Mao; B Chen; JJ Han; FS Zhang; U Holmskov;
ZL Xia; PG de Groot; KBM Reid; WB Xu; GL Sorensen. Elevated Plasma Surfactant Protein
D (SP-D) Levels and a Direct Correlation with Anti-severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus-specific IgG Antibody in SARS Patients. Scandinavian Journal of Immunology
69, 508–515 (2009)
414. GL Sorensen; S Husby; U Holmskov. Surfactant protein A and surfactant protein D
variation in pulmonary disease. Immunobiology 212, 381–416 (2007)
415. MQ Gaunsbaek; KJ Rasmussen; MF Beers; EN Atochina-Vasserman; S Hansen. Lung
surfactant protein D (SP-D) response and regulation during acute and chronic lung injury.
Lung 191, 295–303 (2013)
416. A Zien Alaabden; Y Mohammad; S Fahoum. The role of serum surfactant protein D as a
biomarker of exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Qatar Medical Journal
2015, 18 (2015)
417. KB Colmorten; AB Nexoe; GL Sorensen. The Dual Role of Surfactant Protein-D in
Vascular Inflammation and Development of Cardiovascular Disease. Front Immunol 10
(2019)
418. J Hill; C Heslop; SFP Man; J Frohlich; JE Connett; NR Anthonisen; RA Wise; DP
Tashkin; DD Sin. Circulating surfactant protein-D and the risk of cardiovascular morbidity
and mortality. Eur Heart J 32, 1918–1925 (2011)
419. J Gunst; GV den Berghe. Blood glucose control in the ICU: how tight? Annals of
Translational Medicine 5, 10–10 (2017)
420. JF Patiño; SE de Pimiento; A Vergara; P Savino; M Rodríguez; J Escallón. Hypocaloric
support in the critically ill. World J Surg 23, 553–559 (1999)
421. NS Sharif-Askari. Airways Expression of SARS-CoV-2 Receptor, ACE2, and
TMPRSS2 Is Lower in Children Than Adults and Increases with Smoking and COPD.
Molecular Therapy 6
422. ECS Bostock; KC Kirkby; BV Taylor; JA Hawrelak. Consumer Reports of “Keto Flu”
Associated With the Ketogenic Diet. Front Nutr 7, 20 (2020)

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE LEGENDS:
Figure 1: Knowledge graph construction and analysis pipeline. Entities of interest are
extracted using the named entities recognition (NER) techniques on the entire CORD-19 dataset,
or on a subset of papers selected for matching user-specified query (Search). The extracted
entities are then linked to the NCIT ontology terms and passed to the knowledge graph
construction stage. On this stage we build a knowledge graph using extracted and linked terms as
nodes and their co-occurrences as edges. Finally, we perform graph analytics that allows us to
navigate the knowledge graph and reveal connectivity patterns and subgraphs carrying the most
important term relations (Minimum spanning trees, BMIPs, communities). Data from the graphs
are then used to guide further literature review (see Methods for details).
Figure 2: Overview of co-mention graph of high-level entities. (A) Sample of a knowledge
graph containing ~1,000 nodes representing the most frequent high-level entities and those
with edges with the highest mutual information (see Methods). (B) Distribution of the entity
types detected. Different entity types are colored according to the legend. A zoom into the comention subgraphs of each entity type is available in Supplementary Figure 2.
Figure 3: Subgraph obtained by aggregating the 20 Best Mutual Information Pathways
from “glucose” to “SARS-CoV-2”. Node sizes are proportional to the weighted degree of
nodes and node colors represent different entity types. Analysis of entities encountered during
the mutual information guided shortest path search (see Methods) from ‘glucose’ to ‘SARSCOV-2’ allows us to identify five groups of entities, each related to a specific field in
coronavirus infection: (A) comorbidities in high-risk group, (B) SARS-related symptoms and
complications, (C) SARS-related drugs, (D) SARS biomarkers and inflammation, (E)
coronavirus receptors and RAAS system. No entities from cell compartment or organ/system
entity types were detected in this analysis.
Figure 4: Minimum spanning-tree constructed from the knowledge subgraph containing
the 150 most frequently mentioned entities. The knowledge graph is built from the 3,000
most relevant papers related to the query "glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19". The
spanning tree is obtained by minimizing an edge distance score based on mutual information
(see Methods). The entity types are color-coded as presented in Figure 2.
Figure 5: Top 25 BMIPs from glucose to COVID-19 in the 1,500 most frequent entities
extracted from the query “glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19”. The size of a node
indicates the frequency of the corresponding entity in the COVID-19 literature (measured by
the weighted degree centrality of the node), whereas the thickness of the edge indicates the
strength of association between a given pair of entities (corresponding to the non-negative
pointwise mutual information, see Methods for more details). Their position and distance
have no significance.
Figure 6: BMIPs subgraphs from glucose to COVID-19 in each entity type, such as
presented in figure 5.
Figure 7: Minimum spanning-tree and zoom-in. Minimum spanning-tree is constructed
from the 1,500 most frequent entities extracted from the 3,000 most relevant papers in the
CORD-19 database, according to the query “Glucose as a risk factor for COVID-19” (see also
supplementary Figure 4). Selected zoom-in for “glucose” (A), “alveolus” (B), “lung” (C) and

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

“viral entry” (D) are shown. A high-resolution pdf version of the spanning-tree is available
(Figure S4 high res).
Figures 8: Blood glucose concentrations according to age and gender and correlation
with COVID-19 fatality. (A) Average FPG values per age range and (B) according to
gender. (C) Average 2h-PPG values after an OGTT test per age range. Data sources are
available in Supplementary Tables 5. (D) Overlay of COVID-19 CFR and FPG in function of
age ranges (from data reported in panel 8A and Supplementary Figures 1B). (E) Overlay of
COVID-19 CFR and 2h-PPG in function of age ranges (from data reported in panel 8C and
Supplementary Figures 1B). In (D) and (E), the correlation coefficient “R” is calculated
between the two respective series of values for the same age range, then R2 = R^2.
Figure 9: Blood glucose in diabetes and hypertension. (A) Average values of FPG, 2h-PPG
and HbA1c in diabetic people compared to controls (See detailed references in Supplementary
Table 4A). (B) Average values of FPG in hypertensive patients compared to controls. (See
detailed references in Supplementary Table 4B).
Figure 10 : Interconnection of groups at-risk and their link with dysregulation of blood
glucose metabolism
Figure 11: Atomistic reconstruction of the glycosylated SARS-CoV-2 spike. (A)
Schematic of the primary structure of the SARS-CoV-2 S protein with the different types of
glycan-tree positioned on the different domains. (B), (C) Side and top view of the SARSCoV-2 glycosylated spike in closed conformation. The different types of glycan trees are
colored according to the legend. (D), (E) Side and top view of the SARS-CoV-2 glycosylated
spike in closed conformation, with the different domains colored according to the legend used
in panel A. (F), (G) Side and top view of the modeled glycosylated spike from the Brazilian
P.1 variant in closed conformation. The potential additional glycan-tree in position N20 is
colored in red and indicated with arrows.
Generation of the spike, positions and sources of the glycans are detailed in methods.
Figure 12: Atomistic reconstruction of the glycosylated spike of SARS-CoV-2 interacting
with its glycosylated receptor ACE2. The interaction between a spike in open conformation
and ACE2 is represented. The binding domains in the spike and ACE2 involved in the
interaction are colored in green and blue respectively. Note that not all glycans are present on
the open spike (see Methods for details).
Figure 13: Overview of cell types and innate immunity in the epithelium of the lung. DC
= dendritic cell, NKT = natural killer T cell, γδ T = gamma delta T cell, AEC I and AEC II =
alveolar epithelial cells, SP-A, SP-D = surfactant protein A and D.
Figure 14: Overview of glucose transport in the lung epithelial cells
Figure 15: Schematic of the impacts of increase in ASL glucose on ASL functions.
AGEs = Advanced glycation end products, MCC = mucociliary clearance. MCT =
monocarboxylate transporter.
Figure 16: Atomistic reconstruction of SARS-CoV-2 virions in alveolar ASL with
normal glucose concentration (0.4mM). In normal conditions, SARS-CoV-2 virions
entering in the lung are fought by antimicrobial factors such as β-defensin (1), lactoferrin (2)

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

or trapped by the cruciform shape SP-D collectin (3). The CRD domain of SP-D binds to
high-mannose glycans of the spikes (4), trapping viruses in a mesh for alveolar macrophage
phagocytosis ((5); receptors expressed on the macrophage surface for collectin recognition is
not represented here). Some particles evade the defense system and reach the epithelial
surface for ACE2 receptor binding. The fan shape of SP-A collectin (6) is probably not
adapted for efficient virus recognition but may participate in apoptotic cell uptake and
inflammation resolution (see methods for detailed ID of the components presented).
Figure 17: Simplified model of the combined effect of blood glucose concentration and
tight junction permeability (normal or impaired Rt) on ASL glucose concentration. The
model predicts the trajectory of glucose in the ASL in function of the concentration of glucose
in the blood, in case of normal (dashed line), or impaired (blue line) epithelial resistance (Rt),
such as reported in diabetic patients (see method). A = hypoglycemia, B = normal FPG, C =
IFG, D = acute hyperglycemia or diabetes. star = predicted value of ASL glucose for a control
subject, triangle = predicted value of ASL glucose for a diabetic subject.
Figure 18: Mechanisms involved in increased ASL glucose concentration in the groups
at risk for COVID-19.
Figure 19: Atomistic reconstruction of SARS-CoV-2 virions in ASL with high glucose
concentration (1.2 mM). In patients with high glucose in the ASL, the concentration of
antibacterial agents (lactoferrin, β-defensin) is decreased. Glucose molecules (1) in excess
bind to the CRD domain of the SP-D heads, ((2) two glucose molecules may bind each head
of the trimer), competing for virus recognition. More virions reach the surface of the epithelial
cells to bind their receptor ACE2 (3) for further endocytosis (see Methods for detailed ID of
the components presented). As the number and migration capacity of alveolar macrophages
are decreased in high glucose, we did not include the macrophage in the reconstruction.
Figure 20: Graphical representation of the effects of high glucose in ASL on SARS-CoV2 primary infection and viral replication. AGEs = Advanced glycation end products, Rt =
epithelial resistance, GLUT = Glucose transporters.
Figure 21: Computational modeling of glucose-dependent SARS-CoV-2 infection. (A)
Schematic representation of the parameters used in the different SARS-CoV-2 primary
infection computational models. GLUT = Glucose transporters (1, 2, 10); Rt = paracellular
resistivity (1/Rt = paracellular conductivity in model) (see methods for details). (B)
Simplified modeling of SARS-CoV-2 - ACE2 binding in a normoglycemic or hyperglycemic
patient, as a function of the viral load (represented by three different viral contents at the time
of infection, see Definition of viral loads in methods). Normoglycemic = 0.4 mM ASL
glucose, hyperglycemic = 1.2 mM ASL glucose.
Figure 22: Simplified computational model of SARS-CoV-2 endocytosis as a function of
glucose concentration in ASL and viral load at time of a sneeze stimulus. (A) Theoretical
model of the time course of an arbitrary viral load of SARS-CoV-2 (sneeze stimulus) in the
lung epithelial cells. The rise time is a function of inhaling the virus and the decay time
represents clearance from the lung (B) Simplified model of SARS-CoV-2 endocytosis in
function of glucose concentration in the ASL (dashed line = control = 0.4mM, solid blue line
= hyperglycemic = 1.2 mM), after infection with a low, intermediate or high viral load of
SARS-CoV-2 at time of infection.

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 23: Simplified computational model of SARS-CoV-2 replication rate as a
function of glucose concentration in ASL and viral load at time of a sneeze stimulus. (A)
Dynamic of the viral replication as a function of a sweep over a range of glucose
concentrations in ASL. (B) Values of viral replication rate in a normoglycemic (0.4 mM ASL
glucose) or hyperglycemic case (1.2 mM ASL glucose) after a low, intermediate or high viral
load at time of infection (normo- and hyperglycemic values are indicated by the dashed lines
in panel A).
Figure 24: Simplified computational model of the number of virions in the epithelium as
a function of glucose concentration in the ASL and viral load at time a sneeze stimulus.
(A) Dynamic of the viral propagation as a function of a sweep of a range of glucose
concentrations in the ASL. (B) Number of virions in a normoglycemic (0.4 mM ASL glucose)
or hyperglycemic (1.2 mM ASL glucose) case after a low, intermediate or high viral load at
time of infection (normo- and hyperglycemic values are indicated by the dashed lines in panel
A). We set a hypothetical “severity threshold” for an absolute value >1x104 virions.
Figure 25. Schematic of the immune response in a patient with normal glycemia or with
hyperglycemia or IGT. (A) The efficient humoral and cellular innate defense of the lung
(antimicrobial agents, phagocytes, DC cells and NK cells) leads to a high phagocytotic rate of
the viruses, resulting in a low primary viral replication rate and limiting epithelial damage.
The pro-inflammatory signal targeted by the innate immune cells and the infected epithelial
cells allows the recruitment of the adaptive immune system (T-cells and B-cells) for further
viral clearance. The pro-inflammatory cytokines production is well balanced by the antiinflammatory secondary response to resolve inflammation. Viruses are finally cleared, and
epithelial damages are limited. (B) In case of high glucose in ASL due to high blood glucose
and/or increased epithelial permeability, the humoral and cellular innate defenses of the lung
are strongly impaired, reducing the primary viral clearance and delaying the pro-inflammatory
signal. The inefficient primary viral elimination response leads to a rapid increase in viral
replication as well as important epithelial cellular damage, combined with a delay in the
signal for the adaptive response. Additionally, high blood glucose is linked to exaggerated
pro-inflammatory cytokine production as well as an impaired anti-inflammatory secondary
response, together responsible for the cytokine storm. The cytokine overproduction and the
important cellular damages are leading to development of ARDS and eventually respiratory
failure.
Figure 26. Schematic of SARS-CoV-2 infection in endothelial cells in patients at risk,
and the subsequent mechanisms leading to the thrombotic events.

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Search

NER

Entity linking

The rapid spread of the coronavirus
ORGANISM

disease

2019

Type

Coronavirus

ORGANISM

(NCIT_C26431)

zoonotic beta-coronavirus entitled

Covid-19 infection

SARS-CoV2

(NCIT_C171133)

a

ORGANISM,
global

has

threat...

the

SARS-CoV2

prevalence of diabetes DISEASE

NCIT_C169070)

among people who were infected

Diabetes Mellitus

with SARS-CoV2 ORGANISM...

Selected
articles

NCIT entry ID

(Covid-19 DISEASE), caused by a

become

CORD-19
dataset

Knowledge graph
construction

Extracted
entities

Graph analysis

Min. spanning trees

DISEASE

ORGANISM

Shortest paths

DISEASE

(NCIT_C2985)

Linked
entities

Knowledge
graph
Communities

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 1

Literature
review

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A)

(B)
Organ/System

11%
8%

21%
2%

Symptom/Disease

Organism

27%

9%

Biological process
/Pathway

6%
9%

7%

Cell compartment

Cell type

Entity types

Protein

Drug

Chemical

Symptom/Disease

Biological process/Pathway

Organism

Cell type

Organ/System

Drug

Protein

Cell compartment

Chemical

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(B)

Entity types

nausea

abdominal pain

shortness of breath

nasopharyngeal carcinoma

fever

liver failure

renal failure
vomiting
multiple organ failure
seizure
organ failure

(A)
atherosclerosis

hypoglycemia

hypertension

acidosis

Cell type

blood urea

tissue factor

(C)

lactic acid

insulin

AST

lactate dehydrogenase

creatine kinase

albumin

platelet

d-dimer

c-reactive protein

leukocyte

creatinine

diuretic
recombinant glucagon

Cell compartment

hemoglobin

prothrombin

partial thromboplastin time
creatine

WBC

hydroxychloroquine

viral

triglycerides

inflammation

sulfonylurea

ferritin

SARS coronavirus

iron

tocilizumab

oxidative stress

streptozocin

HCoV-229E

interleukin-6

TNF

angiotensin ii receptor antagonist

HCoV-OC43

c-c motif chemokine 1

TNF-alpha

(E)

beta cell
cd44 antigen
caax prenyl protease 2

renin

ACE

angiotensin converting enzyme measurement
dipeptidyl peptidase 4

SARS-CoV-2 RNA measurement

RBD

ACE2 receptor

glucagon-like peptide-1 measurement

angiotensin-1

MERS coronavirus

betacoronavirus

MERS

ACE2

aldosterone

SARS-CoV-2

bilirubin

lopinavir/ritonavir

glyburide

Biological process/Pathway

pneumonia

blood clot

fibrinogen

metformin

Chemical

electrolytes

(D)

glucose uptake

Organ/System

ARDS

hyperglycemia

glucose transport

Protein

Drug

hypoxia oxygen

diabetes mellitus

glucose

cough

lymphopenia

glucose metabolism disorder
hypertriglyceridemia
insulin resistance dyslipidemia

glucose tolerance test

distress cough

metabolic acidosis

cardiovascular disorder
obesity

Symptom/Disease
Organism

m protein
angiotensin-2

TMPRSS2

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tissue

survival

cancer
insulin

plasma

apoptosis

blood
glucose
glyburide

obesity

corticosteroid

heart failure

acute renal failure
chronic kidney disease
COPD

airway

virus
DNA replication

SARS-CoV-2

pneumonia

sars coronavirus

MERS coronavirus

thrombosis

fever
cough

septicemia

muscle

diarrhea

gastrointestinal system

respiratory failure

death

oxygen

vascular system

fatigue

dyspnea

organ

influenza

antibiotic

ARDS

multiple organ failure

host

vaccine

platelet

acute lung injury

ACE2

leukocyte

liver
enzyme

HIV

lymphopenia

serum

lung

covid-19

bacteria

lactic acid

T-lymphocyte

macrophage

lymphocyte

kidney

pulmonary

viral infection

creatinine

antibody

neutrophil

lactate dehydrogenase

hypertension

heart

pathogen

interleukin-6
CRP

renal

chronic disease

comorbidity

cytokine

steroid compound

cardiovascular disorder

coronary artery disease

immune response

TNF
D-Dimer

cerebrovascular system

membrane

CCL1

skin

cardiovascular system

diabetes mellitus

lipid

inflammation

stroke

infectious disorder

oxidative stress

oral cavity

hyperglycemia

brain

human

stress

respiratory system

hypoxia

coronavirus

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 4

endothelial cell

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hypertension
hyperglycemia
metabolic disorder

ketone

angiotensin converting enzyme measurement

dipeptidyl peptidase 4

glucocorticoid

diabetic ketoacidosis

metformin

blood inflammatory marker

glucose

comorbidity

creatine kinase

cardiovascular complication

ferritin

obesity

diabetes mellitus

adipose tissue

covid-19

interleukin-6

glyburide

CRP

lactate dehydrogenase

cardiovascular disorder
CCL1
cerebrovascular disorder

inflammation

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A)

(B)

Symptom/Disease
insulin resistance

Drug

cerebrovascular disorder

cardiovascular disorder

hyperglycemia

diabetes mellitus
inflammation

metabolic disorder

covid-19

glucose

ACE inhibitor

covid-19

dexamethasone

corticosteroid

chloroquine

thrombolytic agent

obesity

methylprednisolone

hydroxychloroquine

(D)

Biological process/Pathway
phosphorylation

lopinavir/ritonavir

coronary artery disease

dyslipidemia

(C)

HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor

acidosis

hypertension

glucose metabolism disorder

monoclonal antibody

glyburide

cardiovascular complication

glucose

NSAI drug

metformin

hypoglycemia

Chemical

innate immunity
aspartic acid

glycosylation

defense

glycolysis

electrolytes

alanine

humoral immunity

homeostasis

glucose

infectious disease pathway

creatinine

oxygen

ketone

covid-19

immunity

glucose

creatine

lactic acid

covid-19

dehydration

phagocytosis

calcium

viral entry

renal clearance
DNA replication

hydration

pyruvate

vitamin

prostaglandin

lipid

vitamin c

(E)

Organ/System

(F)

myocardium

Cell type
macrophage

microcirculatory system

coronary artery

respiratory system

vascular system
endothelium

alveolar epithelium

ventricle

glucose
adipose tissue

glucose

cytoplasm
axon

covid-19

lymphocyte

epithelial cell
γδ T cell

nervous system

immune cell

(H)

endosome

cardiomyocyte

T-lymphocyte

Protein
CCL1

cellular vesicle

glucose

leukocyte

β cell

platelet

Cell compartment

cytosol

monocyte

target cell

covid-19

endocrine system cerebrovascular system
islet of langerhans

testis

(G)

cardiovascular system

alveolar cell type ii

kidney

gastrointestinal system

neutrophil

endothelial cell

heart

lactate dehydrogenase
nucleus
plasma membrane

insulin

mitochondrion
endoplasmic reticulum
cytoskeleton

alanine aminotransferase 1

TNF

covid-19

glucose

procalcitonin

interleukin

ACE2

interleukin-6

chromatin

CRP
creatine kinase

ACE

ferritin
D-dimer

fibrinogen

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 6

DPP4

angiotensin-2

covid-19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mucosa

proteasome

foot

degradation
ulcer

ubiquitination

peritoneal

crohn disease
ppar

(D)

liver dysfunction

liver

t1d

adenoviridae

rhinovirus

herpes simplex virus

adenosine

nucleoside

mcv regimen

stenotrophomonas maltophilia

trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole

ntm

medicine

virus DNA replication
renal clearance

mic

enterococcus

ca-mrsa

methicillin

vre

staphylococcus aureus

staphylococcus

compact disc-interactive

e faecalis

pneumococcal pneumonia

toxin

streptococcus
e faecium

viral load
ACE inhibitor

viral

recombinant adenovirus-hifn-beta

cellular vesicle

anal membrane

stress
anxiety

depression
cytoplasmic organelle

monoclonal antibody

vaccine

dengue fever

psychiatry

lysosome assembly pathway

epitope

viremia

anemia due to chronic disorder

depressed mood

chronic disease

cytosol

measles

glycosylation

lectin

teprotumumab

endoplasmic reticulum

apical

basal

blocking antibody

polysaccharide-k

pneumonia
haemophilus influenzae

plasma membrane
endosome

entry

polysaccharide

sugar

community-acquired pneumonia
genus
nanoparticle

internalization

endocytosis pathway

fusion
host cell

vaccine-sensitized draining lymph node cells

M protein

carbohydrate

streptococcus pneumoniae

enterococcus faecalis

assembly
structural proteinreovirus RNA

cell envelope
S protein

protein subunit rbd

glycoprotein

peptidase

aldosterone

generalized

malaria

measles virus nucleoprotein

membrane protein

target cell

transmembrane protein
serine protease
trypsin measurement
soluble

angiotensin-2

renin

complex chloroquine

viral protein

cellularity

transmembrane protease serine 2

caax prenyl protease 2

angiotensin-1

infected cells

membrane
viral entry

ACE measurement

ACE2
sars-cov-2

covid-19

apelin receptor

parasite

viral infection

ACE

angiotensin ii receptor antagonist

sars coronavirus

at1r

proteus mirabilis

methicillin resistant staphylococcus aureus

anaerobic bacteria

clostridium difficile

medication

fatal

RAAS

pump device

glycopeptide

vancomycin

MERS

MERS coronavirus

coronaviridae

enterobacteriaceae

klebsiella pneumoniae
daptomycin

teicoplanin
clindamycin

metronidazole

macrolide

pseudomonas

enterobacter

linezolid
erythromycin

penicillin g sodium

clarithromycin

macrolide antibiotic

acinetobacter

escherichia coli
multidrug resistance process

extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma

amoxicillin

azithromycin

lopinavir/ritonavir

klebsiella

colistin
tigecycline

helicobacter pylori
antiviral response

recombinant interferon gamma

anesthetic agent

hydroxychloroquine

SARS

microorganism
organism

gram negative bacillus
acinetobacter anitratus
a baumannii

pulmonary tuberculosis

tetracycline

jc virus infection
ribavirin

pharmacokinetics

propofol

tuberculosis

bacillus

ofloxacin

interferon alpha
ritonavir

cytochrome p450
midazolam
morphine

opioid

analgesic agent

pseudomonas aeruginosa

mycobacterium tuberculosis

gastric carcinoma

hepatitis c infection

lopinavir

pain

agitation

coronavirus

pathogen

mycobacterium

streptomycin rifampin

pharmacologic substance

hepatitis c virus

oseltamivir

chronic pain

benzodiazepine

p aeruginosa

burkholderia cepacia

moxifloxacin
m tuberculosis

doxycycline
chloramphenicol

influenza
h1n1

have chronic infection

levofloxacin

ampicillin
brucellosis

h1n1 influenza

material break

biofilm

ciprofloxacin

amoxicillin-clavulanic acid

stomach

gastric

delirium

confusion

drug test

virulence

intra-abdominal

gentamicin

salmonella

esophagus

dysphagia

drug resistance process

influenza a virus

(C)

piperacillin-tazobactam
aztreonam

meropenem
ertapenem

tobramycin

esophageal

lamivudine

ebv infection

hemophilus influenza infection

cefepime

ceftazidime

imipenem
amikacin

hepatitis b virus

epstein-barr virus

human respiratory syncytial virus
viral respiratory tract infection

nucleotide

hepatitis b virus surface antigen measurement

cytomegalovirus

adenovirus infection

respiratory system
respiratory failure

oxacillin

cefoxitin

cefotaxime

quinolones

gastroenteritis

duodenum

endoscopic procedure

cytomegaloviral infection

enterovirus

upper respiratory infection, ctcae
respiratory system disorder
upper respiratory tract infection

agar
ceftriaxone

quinolone
carbapenems

duodenal carcinoma

gastrointestinal hemorrhage

chronic hepatitis

human herpesvirus 1

lower respiratory tract infection

brother

cephalosporin antibiotic

fluoroquinolone antibiotic

hemorrhage

hepatitis

herpesvirus

aminoglycoside antibiotic

ileum

gastrointestinal tract
viral hepatitis

portal

mycoplasma

autoimmune status human herpesvirus 6

antibiotic

rectal dosage form
hepatocellular

chronic liver disease

encephalitis

carbapenem

rectum

hepatocellular carcinoma

cirrhosis

autoimmune

autoantibody

gutka

colon

hepatobiliary disorder

end stage liver disease

ascites

beta-lactamase

colorectal carcinoma
colon carcinoma

liver fibrosis
jaundice

decompensation

small intestine

transaminase

acute liver failure

meningitis

autoimmune disease

intestine

crc

liver injury

fibrosis

cerebrospinal fluid

obstruction

colorectal

nonalcoholic steatohepatitis

vasculitis

intestinal

bowel obstruction

inflammatory bowel disease

damage

liver failure

steatosis

systemic lupus erythematosus

probiotic

energy absorption
colitis

hepatocyte

nonalcoholic fatty liver disease

rheumatoid arthritis

peritonitis

perforation

ibd

liver and intrahepatic bile duct disorder

rheumatologic disorder

arthritis

childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus

abscess

ulcerative colitis

ffas algorithm

fatty acid

connective tissue

inflammatory disorder

osteoarthritis
psoriasis

autophagy

whooping cough

lower

ebola hemorrhagic fever
mannose-binding lectin

edetic acid

infectious disease pathway

fungal infection

serine/threonine-protein kinase mtor

stat3 measurement

amphiphysin

immunocompromised

kinase

glycine

serine

akt

neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin

phosphorylation process
mitogen-activated protein kinase

phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate 3-kinase

jnk

fungus

l-tyrosine
mammalian cell

protein kinase c beta type

yeast

phenylalanine

calcineurin

ototoxicity

methotrexate

digestive system disorder

lymphoma
leukemia

hematopoietic stem cell complication

all

toxicity

mds

radiation therapy

infliximab

parenteral

dexamethasone

pneumothorax

therapeutic glucocorticoid

glucocorticoid

granuloma

adrenal gland

hypothalamus

demyelination

nmr

acid labile subunit measurement

pct

creatine kinase

accumulation respiration

oxidative stress

oxidation

hmg-coa reductase inhibitor

phenol

cholesterol

wine

acute myocardial infarction pathway

myocardium

myocardial

pancreas

diastolic dysfunction

systole

myocardial infarction by ecg finding

systolic blood pressure

cardiomyopathy

duct

coronary
cardiogenic shock

triglycerides
other toxicity studies: metabolites

high density lipoprotein

low density lipoprotein

acute coronary syndrome

coronary artery disease

root

biliary

lipase
acute pancreatitis

ketone

furosemide

urine

renal failure

arterial blood

osteoporosis

nutritional supplementation

acute respiratory failure

toll-like receptor family

tlr

toll-like receptor 1

defense
tlrs

receptor

innate immune

ccl5

recognition

adaptive immune

innate immunity

adaptation

host defense mechanism

ccr5

airway obstruction

early repolarization

CFTR

lumen

collagen

fibroblast

adaptive immunity

acetylcysteine
cyclic amp

Na+

lung surfactant

immune response process

host

infectious disorder

intracellular

cerebral blood flow

chloride ion

immune
high mobility group protein b2

ca 2

matrix metalloproteinase
icp

g protein-coupled receptor

ion

extracellular protein

transfer
intracranial hypertension

tbi

advanced glycation end product

mannitol

metallopeptidase

cerebral edema
osteomyelitis

chronic kidney disease

c1q deficiency

vertebral column
abdominal

male sex

hernia

hypertonia

72kda type iv collagenase

matrix metallopeptidase

sodium chloride

copper

endocarditis

salt

matrix metalloproteinase-9

midline

saline

cerebral hemisphere

brain

metal

spinal

bacteremia

(A)

endotoxin

cytokine

chemokine

airway

migrating partial seizures in infancy
respiratory failure, ctcae

interleukin-8

c-c motif chemokine 2

mucus

airway surface liquid

alveolus

gas exchanger device

arf

critically ill

kidney

zinc

interleukin-18 receptor 1

mouse

interleukin-1

chemokine (c-x-c motif) ligand

mucin

cellular secretion

interstitial pneumonia

wbc

hypoxemia
soft tissue

injury
burn

bacterial toxemia

tumor angiogenesis

acute lung injury

acute respiratory distress syndrome

lobe

parenchyma
SP-D

alveolar

fibronectin

extracellular matrix

matrix

nutrient

fracture

injuries
status epilepticus

anticonvulsant agent

lipopolysaccharide

chronic active inflammation

cystic fibrosis

right

alveolar macrophage

alveolar cell type ii

alveolar epithelium

elongin

acute renal failure

skeletal system

femur
ma

lung

lipomatosis
bronchiectasis

nlrp3

caspase-1

interleukin-6

vascular endothelial growth factor a

growth factor

chronic lung disorder

immune cell
phagocytosis

neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio measurement

leukocyte

febrile

chief complaint

malaise

tumor necrosis factor

mucociliary clearance

intercellular adhesion molecule 1

molecule

integrin

malnutrition

selenium

venous blood

alkylphosphocholine compound

macrophage

lymphocyte

p-selectin

vascular endothelium
hypoalbuminemia

child
idiopathic

nephron

bone
resuscitation

hypothermia

seizure

seizure disorder

monocyte

neutrophil

endothelin-1

e-selectin

adhesion

tubular
nephrotic syndrome

steroid compound

electronic source report form

edodekin alfa

inflammation

vascular endothelial growth factorundifferentiated
family
pleomorphic sarcoma, inflammatory variant

fimaporfin a

cell adhesion molecule

glomerulus

bladder
urethral dosage form

chronic kidney disease, stage 5

dyspnea

fever

chills

c-c motif chemokine 1

beagle

epidermal growth factor

lung carcinoma

antigen
antigen presenting cell

hemoptysis

ear

eye

interleukin

interleukin 1 beta measurement

decisional conflict scale

granulocyte
pmn

il-2 plasmid dna/lipid complex

mesenteric

podocyte

hematuria

renal

chronic renal failure

renal impairment
corticoliberin

ulinastatin

vascular disorder

endothelial cell
smooth muscle cell

arteries
ammonia

renal dysfunction

urinary tract infection, ctcae

mineral

bone mineral content

dendritic cell
maturation

proteinuria

urinary system

vitamin
cobalamin

homocysteine

cd8-positive t-lymphocyte
cd4 positive naive t-lymphocyte

nose
throat

anti-inflammatory

interleukin-19

transforming growth factor-beta superfamily

neck

vascular

capillaria

urea

kidney disorder

d vitamin

vitamin c

urinary tract infection

co 2

respiratory distress

dyspnoea

cough

fatigue

how much distress cough

endothelium

blood vessel

sputum

sore throat

dizziness

inflammatory

iboctadekin

epidermal growth factor receptor

malignancies

headache
myalgia

usual severity diarrhea

dog
head

weight loss

lethargy

cat

transforming growth factor beta measurement

t-lymphocyte

chest pain

shortness of breath visual analogue scale

anorexia
diarrhea, ctcae

iodine

lung non-small cell carcinoma

ovary

b-lymphocyte
natural killer cell

vessel dosing unit

vasodilating agent

creatinine

urinary

vitamin d deficiency

folate

antacid preparation

oxygen

hypoxia

cardiac arrest

electroencephalography

encephalopathy

pth

organic phosphate

bronchoalveolar lavage

bronchoalveolar lavage fluid

acid
carbon dioxide

co2
o2

microcirculatory bed

coma

diuretic

fluid
bal

hydration

ph

anion gap measurement

dermis

cardiac disease screening

feces

immunotherapeutic agent

interleukin-2

hyperthyroidism

ovarian carcinoma

leridistim

tumor-associated vasculature

capillary

ca

dehydration
acidosis

metabolic acidosis

stone

comorbidity

cerebrovascular

ischemic heart disease

heart

heart disorder

serum

interleukin-13

interleukin-4

hypothyroidism

excision

myeloperoxidase

appetite

how often nausea

pbmc

interferon

cbc
thyrotropin measurement

adenocarcinoma

squamous cell carcinoma

fluorine f 18 nos

endothelial dysfunction

artery

blood urea

resistance process

htn

cerebrovascular disorder

ventricular

ventricular
atrial fibrillation by ecg
finding dysfunction

chf

nitric oxide synthase, endothelial

vomiting

interleukin-5

thyroid gland

ovarian

macroscopic findings anatomical region of specimen

cd4+ cd25+ regulatory t cells

ecs

eosinophil

granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor

carcinoma
embryo

cell-mediated immunity

diarrhoea

constipation

interleukin-17
filgrastim
papillary

oocyte

foxp3 gene
foxp3

humoral immunity

pericyte

t helper 17 cell

peripheral blood mononuclear cell

follicle

hla-dr antigen
cd25

inducible cd4+cd25+ regulatory t cells

messenger RNA
protein

abdominal pain

acetate

t-cell surface glycoprotein cd4

g-cell

stimulation

immunity

ribonucleic acid

organic oxide
nitric oxide

electrolytes

t-cell surface glycoprotein cd8

human immunodeficiency virus
antiretroviral therapy

cd40 ligand

phospholipid

horse

right ventricle

pulmonary arterial hypertension

hyponatremia

metformin

illness

bicarbonate ion

atrial fibrillation

heart failure

congestive heart failure

diabetes mellitus
glyburide

cad

arrhythmia

cardiac failure

cardiovascular disorder

soil

hypertension
cyst

pulmonary artery

lymphoid

kit

sma

wheezing

chicken

polyunsaturated fatty acid

microRNA

water

pulmonary vascular resistance

dietary sodium

leptin
diabetic ketoacidosis

pancreatitis

bile acid measurement
gallbladder

coronary artery
chd

cardiovascular system

plant

hyperlipidemia

calcification

salivary

bile

cardiovascular complication

compound
lipoprotein

plaque

myocarditis

extracorporeal membrane oxygenation

dietary flavonoid

hypercholesterolemia

atherosclerosis
stenosis

carotid artery

lymph

asthma pathway

doconexent

prostaglandin

prostaglandin g/h synthase 2

nitric oxide synthetase

calcium

adiponectin

sodium/glucose cotransporter 2

acute myocardial ischemia by ecg assessment

abdomen

pbmcs
eosinophilia

actin
cd3 complex
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
cytoskeleton
human immunodeficiency virus 1
cell motility

arachidonic acid
ibuprofen

acetaminophen

intravascular

right ventricular wall

phosphorus

pancreatic

alcohol

potassium

person

pancreatic insufficiency

lipid

adipocyte

endocrine dipeptidyl peptidase 4

cardiomyocyte

radical

hypertrophy

saliva

pulmonary hypertension

lymph node

pelvis

neoplastic cell

cd34

cd56

hiv infection

fish flavor

aspirin

sterile

hypokalemia

obesity

vegetables
fruit flavor

warfarin

international normalized ratio

septicemia
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug
systemic inflammatory response syndrome

foals

dietary magnesium

pancreatic carcinoma

septin-4

hemodynamic instability

tachycardia

chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
pulmonary edema
pulmonary infarction

blood circulation

adipose tissue

islet of langerhans
glucagon-like peptide-1

troponin i, cardiac muscle

troponin measurement

antioxidant

bradycardia

lung disorder

pulmonary

boundary shift integral
cystic fibrosis pulmonary exacerbation

vte

peripheral

spleen

thorax

stroma

vimentin

skin necrosis
neuroendocrine system
rhinitis

asthma

pcp

septic shock

syncope

pulmonary fibrosis

cvc venous thrombosis

venous thromboembolism

mg

leishmania

fat

prostate-specific antigen

thoracic

endometriosis

cytoplasm

gland

eczema

tablet dosage form

infoods

anticoagulant agent
clopidogrel bisulfate

hg

hypotension

thromboembolism

pulmonary embolism

vein

thymus gland

na

metabolic syndrome

insulin resistance
beta cell

visceral

arginine

uric acid

deep vein thrombosis

dvt

man leg
acetylcholine

dyslipidemia

metabolic disorder

insulin

hyperglycemia
hypoglycemia

nucleus

carcinogenesis
allergic diseases
allergic rhinitis

cytokeratin

myasthenia gravis

glucose

homeostatic process

n-terminal fragment brain natriuretic protein

cardiac valve injury

electron

endometrial

epithelial

ki67 measurement

tumor cell

neoplasm

nasal
allergen

food

antiplatelet agent

confounding factors

body fluid or substance
mean arterial pressure
vasopressor

lower extremity

limb

alpha-amylase

glucose uptake

glucose metabolism disorder

anticholinergic agent

metabolic process
nadh dehydrogenase (ubiquinone)

oxygen radical

neuromuscular

glucose tolerance test

blood

cholecystokinin

troponin i

glycerin

atp

mitochondrion
glutathione

brain natriuretic peptide measurement

histidine

cfrd

HbA1c
creatine

lactic acid

pyruvate

glycolysis
catalase
superoxide dismutase

endometrium

epithelium
glioblastoma

metastasis

melanoma
bronchial asthma

sinus

prostate carcinoma

infertility

epithelial cell

glioma

bronchial

chemotherapy response score

ige

nuclear

tumour

primary neoplasm

immunoglobulinoropharyngeal route of administration

food allergy

shock

citrate

breast

prostate gland
genitourinary system

igg

allergic reaction

allergic

noradrenaline measurement

multiple organ failure

heparin

liposome

cisplatin

estrogen receptor

estrogen

uterus

spermatozoon

permeability

translocation

death

organ failure

thrombosis
thrombolytic agent

proximal weakness

skeletal muscle tissue

dobutamine

organ
thrombophilia

muscle weakness

muscle

prediabetes

procalcitonin measurement

formation

superoxide

cysteine

reagent

tryptophan

ataxia

paralysis

neurologic

myopathy

hydrogen peroxide

lysine

histamine-1 receptor antagonist

urticaria

anaphylaxis

norepinephrine, dl-

dysfunction
catecholamine

atrophy

emg

rhabdomyolysis

residue

amino acid

hypersensitivity

dopamine

cerebellum

intercostal muscle

alanine

aspartate aminotransferase measurement

ferritin

c-reactive protein lactate dehydrogenase

cell

doxorubicin
breast cancer cell

breast carcinoma

progesterone
myometrial

myometrium

testis

renal epithelial cells measurement

nf-kb
tp53 wt allele bcl-x(s)

ciliated bronchial epithelial cell

epinephrine
supine position

vaginal diaphragm

bilirubin
aspartate transaminase

aspartic acid

blood inflammatory marker

disulfide linkage
conjugation

amino acid sequence

carboxy-terminal amino acid

brain stem
peripheral neuropathy

alp

high sensitivity c-reactive protein measurementalanine aminotransferase

d-dimer measurement
aggregation

caspofungin

cancer
malignant cell

estradiol

cervical carcinoma

cervix uteri

p53

tumours

iga

basal ganglia

ggt

fibrinogen

platelet

bacterial infection

serotonin

hippocampus

diabetic nephropathy

nephropathy

albumin

neuropathy

tissue factor

iron

recombinant protein

bark

nerve

parkinson's disease

serum albumin

base
alkaline phosphatase

anemia

thrombin

bacteria

stein-leventhal syndrome

testosterone

genital

contractual agreement

transcription factor

i kappa b

caspase
childhood neoplasm

bronchus

nasopharyngeal carcinoma

immunodeficiency

antibody

mature

hpv

vaginal

cell death process
malignant

laryngeal

trachea

igm
histamine

cell line

congenital abnormality
ptb

apoptosis
endotracheal

oral endotracheal tube

autosomal recessive inheritance
immunodeficiency syndrome

degenerative disorder
nervous system disorder

amniotic fluid

cyclin

apoptotic

caspase-3

intubation procedure

tidal volume

nucleic acids
mast cell

synaptic junction pathway

anaemia

hemoglobin

prothrombin

blood clot

thrombocytopenia

bacterial pneumonia

derivation

tube device

mutation abnormality

autosome

3q abnormality
erythema

tissue degeneration

alzheimer's disease

dacarbazine

partial thromboplastin time

fibrin

leukopenia

leukocytosis

chemical

genetic disorder

edema

dementia

glial cell

neuron

pruritus

plasminogen activator inhibitor 1

lymphopenia

solvent
hydrophobicity

disease or disorder

swelling

cognitive impairment

astrocyte

glutamine

glutamate measurement

ventilator-associated pneumonia

tongue

skin rash

disability
neurotoxicity syndrome

insulin-like growth factor i

pituitary gland

cell growth

hormone

oral cavity

skin

microglia

spinal cord

gbs
cidp

myelin sheath

voriconazole

abnormality

multiple sclerosis

erythrocyte
axon

fluconazole

itraconazole

postnatal

lymphadenopathy

hair

cord

rituximab

ivig given for kawasaki disease

autoimmune encephalitis

antifungal agent

sheep

fetus

cell cycle process

nosocomial infection

failure

central nervous system

disseminated intravascular coagulation

goat

placenta

cell proliferation

sarcoidosis

domestic

nervous system

coagulation disorder

candida glabrata

rabbit

preeclampsia

smc

senescence

pleural effusion

blood-brain barrier

nervous

cellular migration process

migration

proliferation

DNA repair

atelectasis

therapeutic hydrocortisone
corticotropin

preventive intervention

inner

opacity

mononuclear cell
umbilical cord blood

cyclophosphamide

hemolysis
vwf

cell differentiation process

DNA recombination process

DNA

pleural

aorta

bone marrow

acute myeloid leukemia
luciferase

cow

repair

hematology

allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation

diffusion

tetradecanoylphorbol acetate

chromosome
DNA methylation

pulmonary emphysema

immunosuppressive therapy

eclampsia

cellular differentiation

neutropenia

narrow

aml

candida albicans

camels

candidemia

tissue

methylation

hematopoietic and lymphoid cell neoplasm

graft versus host disease

chemotherapy

ciclesonide

gestational diabetes

histone
deny

chronic graft versus host disease

dye

candida tropicalis

exogenous factors
graft

tacrolimus

monkey

pet regimen

neural

dofetilide

cyclosporine

stem cell

pathologic

candida

candida parapsilosis

serum protein

gdm

chromatin

graft rejection

csa

mesenchymal stem cell
serum amyloid a

overall survival

rhesus monkey

candidiasis

yeast cell measurement

mycophenolate

survival

prognostic factor

digestion

proline

nephrotoxic

azathioprine

mathematical factor

plasma cell myeloma

aspergillus

plasma

prednisolone

prednisone

plasma cell

aspergillosis

eukaryota

sirolimus

mammalia

methylprednisolone

risk factor

opportunistic infection

enzyme

aves
insect

corticosteroid

therapeutic corticosteroid

hydrocephalus

shunt device
cerebral infarction

bacteraemia

valve device

wistar rats

carbon

brain injury

coronary vasospasm

aneurysm

rodentia
histone deacetylase 9

rupture

nitrogen

sah

rat
subarachnoid hemorrhage

valvular

liquid
mitral valve

human

animal

asah

cerebral hemorrhage

(B)

intracranial hemorrhage

caspase-5

ischemic cerebrovascular accident

hemostatic agent stroke

infarction

ischemia

chemotherapeutic perfusion

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 7

hematoma

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5.55
5.35
5.23
5.09
4.9 5.0
4.91

8.24

8.5

7.77

8.0
7.5
7.0

6.98

Age range (years)

Age range (years)

(E)
20

R2 = 0,75

15
10
5

<1
9
20
-2
30 9
-3
40 9
-4
50 9
-5
60 9
-6
70 9
-7
9
>8
0

0

9.0

2h PPG
COVID-19 CFR (%)

8.5

R2 = 0,90

8.0

25
20
15
10

7.5

5

7.0

0

6.5

20
-2
9
30
-3
9
40
-4
9
50
-5
9
60
-6
9
70
-7
9
>8
0

25

2h PPG (mM)

FPG mM
COVID-19 CFR (%)

Age range (years)

6.91

7.22 6.77

Age range (years)

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 8

COVID-19 CFR (%)

FPG (mM)

9.0

6.0

COVID-19 CFR (%)

5.8
5.7
5.6
5.5
5.4
5.3
5.2
5.1
5.0
4.9
4.8

9.22

6.5

Age range (years)

(D)

Average trajectories
of 2h PPG according to age

9.5

Male
Female

2h PPG (mM)

5.72

6.5
6.3
6.1
5.9
5.7
5.5
5.3
5.1
4.9
4.7
4.5

(C)

<1
9
20
-2
9
30
-3
9
40
-4
9
50
-5
9
60
-6
9
70
-7
9
80
-8
9
>9
0

5.89

FPG (mM)

6.1
5.9
5.7
5.5
5.3
5.1
4.9
4.7
4.5

Average trajectories
of FPG according to age and gender

20
-2
9
30
-3
9
40
-4
9
50
-5
9
60
-6
9
70
-7
9
80
-8
9

(B)

Average trajectories
of FPG according to age

<1
9
20
-2
30 9
-3
40 9
-4
50 9
-5
60 9
-6
70 9
-7
80 9
-8
9
>9
0

FPG (mM)

(A)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0

Control
T2DM

13.8
9.4

8.3
5.4

4.8

FPG (mM)

FPG (mM)

(B)

5.50
5.40
5.30
5.20
5.10
5.00
4.90
4.80
4.70
4.60

4.9

2h-PPG (mM) HbA1c (%)
5.41

4.91

Control

Hypertensive

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 9

16.0
14.0
12.0
10.0
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
0.0

%

mM

(A)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Catecholamine
Vasopressors
Corticosteroids
Immunosupressants

Obesity

Diabetes mellitus

Hypertension

Aging

Beta-blockers

ICU

Hyperglycemia

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 10

↑ FPG, IGT

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A)

NTD: N-terminal domain
RBD: Receptor binding domain
RBM: Receptor binding motif
FP: Fusion Peptide
HR1: Heptad repeat 1
CD: Connector domain
TM: Transmembrane domain
N-glycan types:

(B)

Original

(D)

Original

(F)

P.1 variant
HM
O-glycan

Complex

(C)

Side view

Top view

(E)

Side view

(G)

Top view

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 11

Side view

Top view

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Spike
protein

ACE2

Spike

RBM (aa438-506)

ACE2

Spike interacting domains (aa30-41; aa82-84, aa353-357)

N-glycan types:
HM

Hybrid

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 12

Complex

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Airway

Alveolus

Mucociliary clearance
ASL

Antimicrobial products

Mucosal layer
Periciliary layer
Epithelium
AEC II
AEC I

Resident
DC

Goblet cell

Basal cell

Clara cell

γδ T cell Ciliated
cell
Serous cell

NKT cell

Resident T cell

Surfactant Capillaries

Resident
alveolar macrophage

Mucin, β-defensin, Lactoferrin
SP-A, SP-D

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Normal state

Hyperglycemia

Apical
transporters

Apical
transporters

GLUT

Hexokinase
activity

Transcellular
transport

GLUT

SGLT

Hexokinase
activity

Epithelium

Blood/
interstitium

Paracellular Basolateral
passive
transporters
diffusion

SGLT

↑
↑ Paracellular Basolateral
Transcellular
passive
transporters
transport
diffusion

Na+
Glucose

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 14

Na+
Glucose

↑ Glucose concentration

Glucose concentration

ASL

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

↑ Bacterial proliferation
Lectin activity

↑ Glucose

Macrophage phagocytosis
↑ AGEs
ASL
Acidic pH

MCC

↓ Antimicrobial
factors

GLUT

MCT

↑ Hexokinase
activity

Lactate

Epithelium

Blood/
interstitium
Glucose

Antimicrobial factors

Lactate

H+

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Normal Rt
Impaired Rt
Predicted ASL concentration for a control subject
Predicted ASL concentration for a diabetic subject

3.5

ASL glucose (mM)

3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

A
4

B

C D
6

8
10
Blood glucose (mM)

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 17

12

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ICU

Hyperglycemia

Diabetes
Obesity

Aging

Hypertension

Chronic
inflammation

↑ FPG, IGT

↑ ASL glucose

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 18

COPD

Decreased epithelial
resistance

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

↑ ASL glucose concentration
↑ AGEs

↓ Lectin-based innate immunity

↓ Mucociliary clearance

↓ pH

ASL

↓ Macrophage phagocytosis

Lactate release
↑ Virus-ACE2 binding

↓Rt

↑ Viral entry
↑ Viral replication

GLUT

↑ N-glycosylation

↑ Glucose uptake
↑ Glycolysis

↑ Inflammation/hypoxia
Severe cellular damages

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 20

Epithelium

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A)

Lectin SARS-CoV-2

(B)

Lectin - glucose

0.6

ASL

Free SARS-CoV-2

ASL lactate

Rt

GLUT

Epithelial glucose

SARS-CoV-2 ACE2
ACE2

Viral
replication
Epithelium

Epithelial virus
Hexokinase activity

Epithelial lactate
Blood/
interstitium

Blood glucose
Glucose

Lectin

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 21

SARS-CoV-2-ACE2 receptor binding

pH

ASL glucose

Low viral load
Intermediate viral load
High viral load

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Normoglycemic Hyperglycemic

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0 0

Normal ASL glucose
Hyper ASL glucose

(B)
SARS-CoV-2 “sneeze”
stimulus and clearance

50

100 150
Hours

200

Normalized ASL viral content

Normalized ASL viral content

(A)

Low viral load

Intermediate viral load

High viral load

0.7

0.7

0.7

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0

0.1
0.0

0

50 100 150 200
Hours

0

50 100 150 200
Hours

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 22

0

50 100 150 200
Hours

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Virus replication rate
(numbers/sec)

(A)

Virus replication rate
(numbers/sec)

(B)

0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

0.30
0.25

Low viral load
Intermediate viral load
High viral load

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
ASL glucose (mM)
Low viral load
Intermediate viral load
High viral load

0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00

Normoglycemic

Hyperglycemic

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Epithelial virus number

(A)

x104
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

(B)

0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2.0
ASL glucose (mM)

x104
7

Epithelial virus number

Low viral load
Intermediate viral load
High viral load

6

Low viral load
Intermediate viral load
High viral load

5
4
3
2

Hypothetical
severity
threshold

1
0

Normoglycemic

Hyperglycemic

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Primary infection

Disease progression

Outcome

Normal FPG
or OGTT
ASL glucose
= 0.4 mM

Disease progression

Outcome

Cytokine storm

y

Ant

i-inf

lam

• Coordinated cytokine
release
• Efficient adaptive
response
• Moderate viral
replication
• Low epithelial damage

Pro

nfla

i
ro-

P

a
mm

-inf

lam

IFG or IGT
ASL glucose
>1 mM

tor

Efficient
humoral and
cellular innate
response

Primary infection

Severe disease

tory

(B)

Mild to moderate disease

ma

(A)

ma

tory

• Epithelial repair
• Recovery

Innate defense system
Viral replication

• Low and
delayed innate
defense
• Rapid increase
in viral
replication

Adaptive immune system
Cytokine release

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 25

• Lymphopenia
• Cytokine
overproduction
• Delayed and
exaggerated
adaptive response

Epithelial damage

• Severe • Respiratory
epithelial failure
damage
• ARDS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.04.29.21256294; this version posted May 1, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AGEs

Hyperglycemia, IGT
+
SARS-CoV-2 infection rate

Endothelium damage
and dysfunction

Aging, DM, obesity,
hypertension

Endotheliitis
(IL-6, ROS)

↑ Ang II level

Pro-coagulant
(D-Dimer, Fibrinogen)

Vasoconsctriction

Severe micro- and macro-vascular thrombosis,
Pulmonary embolism, cardiac injury

Logette et al, 2021. Figure 26

Aging, DM, obesity,
hypertension

