medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Building an International Consortium for Tracking Coronavirus Health Status
Eran Segal*1, Feng Zhang*2, Xihong Lin*3, Gary King*4, Ophir Shalem5, Smadar Shilo1, William E. Allen6, Yonatan H.
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Grad , Casey S. Greene , Faisal Alquaddoomi , Simon Anders , Ran Balicer , Tal Bauman , Ximena Bonilla ,
14
15
16
13
17
15
Gisel Booman , Andrew T. Chan , Ori Cohen, Silvano Coletti , Natalie Davidson , Yuval Dor , David A. Drew ,
Olivier Elemento18,19 Georgina Evans20, Phil Ewels21, Joshua Gale22, Amir Gavrieli1, Benjamin Geiger23, Iman
Hajirasouliha18,19 Roman Jerala24,Andre Kahles13, Olli Kallioniemi25 Ayya Keshet1, Gregory Landua26, Tomer Meir1,
Aline Muller27, Long H. Nguyen15, Matej Oresic28, Svetlana Ovchinnikova10, Hedi Peterson29, Jay Rajagopal30,
31
1
32
18 33
18 19
34
Gunnar Rätsch , Hagai Rossman , Johan Rung , Andrea Sboner , , Alexandros Sigaras , , Tim Spector , Ron
26
35
29
36
37
Steinherz , Irene Stevens , Jaak Vilo , Paul Wilmes , CCC (Coronavirus Census Collective)
The CCC is a non-profit consortium open to anyone who shares the same vision of making data available to help the
public good and fight COVID-19. There are no membership fees. Please contact us at
info@coronaviruscensuscollective.org if you are interested in joining.
*Correspondence should be addressed to Eran Segal (eran.segal@weizmann.ac.il), Feng
(zhang@broadinstitute.org), Xihong Lin (xlin@hsph.harvard.edu) and Gary King (king@harvard.edu).

Zhang

1 Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, and Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Israel
2 Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Core Member, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, United States
3 Departments of Biostatistics and Statistics, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
4 Albert J. Weatherhead III University, Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University
5 Department of Genetics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, United States
6 Society of Fellows, Harvard University, United States
7 Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health, United States
8 Department of Systems Pharmacology and Translational Therapeutics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, United
States
9 ETH Zurich, NEXUS Personalized Health Technologies, Zurich, Switzerland
10 Center for Molecular Biology (ZMBH), University of Heidelberg, Germany
11 Clalit Research Institute, Clalit Health Services, Israel
12 Mapping and Geo-Information Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering Faculty, The Technion, Israel
13 ETH Zurich, Department for Computer Science, Zurich, University Hospital Zurich, Medical Informatics, Zurich and SIB Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Zurich, Switzerland
14 Regen Network, Argentina
15 Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH), United States
16 Chelonia Applied Science, Switzerland
17 School of Medicine-IMRIC-Developmental Biology and Cancer Research, The Hebrew University
18 Englander Institute for Precision Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
19 Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
20 Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University
21 Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm University, Sweden
22 symptometrics.org
23 Department of immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel
24 Department of Synthetic biology and Immunology, National Institute of Chemistry, Slovenia
25 Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
26 Regen Network, United States
27 Luxembourg Institute of Socio-Economic Research and University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
28 School of Medical Sciences, Örebro University, Örebro, Sweden, and Turku Bioscience Centre, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland
29 Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Estonia, Estonia
30 Internal Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Department of Pulmonary Medicine and Critical Care, Massachusetts General Hospital
(MGH), United States
31 ETH Zurich, Department for Computer Science, Zurich, University Hospital Zurich, Medical Informatics, Zurich and SIB Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, Zurich and ELLIS Unit, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
32 Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala university, Sweden
33 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, USA
34 King’s College, United Kingdom
35 Science for Life Laboratory (SciLifeLab), Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
36 Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Luxembourg
37 Participating countries: Argentina, Canada, Estonia, Germany, Israel, Luxembourg, Slovenia, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom,
United States

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Information is the most potent protective weapon we have to combat a pandemic, at both the
individual and global level. For individuals, information can help us make personal decisions and
provide a sense of security. For the global community, information can inform policy decisions
and offer critical insights into the epidemic of COVID-19 disease. Fully leveraging the power of
information, however, requires large amounts of data and access to it. To achieve this, we are
making steps to form an international consortium, Coronavirus Census Collective (CCC,
coronaviruscensuscollective.org), that will serve as a hub for integrating information from
multiple data sources that can be utilized to understand, monitor, predict, and combat global
pandemics. These sources may include self-reported health status through surveys (including
mobile apps), results of diagnostic laboratory tests, and other static and real-time geospatial
data. This collective effort to track and share information will be invaluable in predicting hotspots
of disease outbreak, identifying which factors control the rate of spreading, informing immediate
policy decisions, evaluating the effectiveness of measures taken by health organizations on
pandemic control, and providing critical insight on the etiology of COVID-19. It will also help
individuals stay informed on this rapidly evolving situation and contribute to other global efforts
to slow the spread of disease.
In the past few weeks, several initiatives across the globe have surfaced to use daily selfreported symptoms as a means to track disease spread, predict outbreak locations, guide
population measures and help in the allocation of healthcare resources. The aim of this paper is
to put out a call to standardize these efforts and spark a collaborative effort to maximize the
global gain while protecting participant privacy.
***
Introduction
The rapid and global spread of COVID-19 led the World Health Organization (WHO) to declare
a pandemic on March 11, 2020. One contributing factor to the explosion in cases is the lack of
information about who is infected, in large part because not enough people are being tested.
This is further compounded in many countries, such as the United States, by health privacy
laws. In countries that have tested more aggressively and transparently shared this data, such
as South Korea and Singapore, the spread of disease has been greatly slowed 1. Although
efforts are underway around the world to substantially ramp up testing capacity, technologydriven approaches to collect self-reported information can fill an immediate need and
complement official diagnostic results. This type of approach has been used for tracking other
diseases, notably flu (see flunearyou.org/covidnearyou.org) 2. The voluntary collection of
privacy-protected information about individuals’ health status over time will enable researchers
to leverage this data to predict, respond to, and learn about the spread of COVID-19. Given the
global nature of the disease and our society, we aim to form an international consortium,
tentatively named Coronavirus Census Collective, to serve as a hub for amassing this type of
data and create a unified platform for global epidemiological data collection and analysis.
The Mission of the CCC

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

The CCC is committed to a mission of saving lives through the open sharing of information to
the greatest extent possible while simultaneously ensuring privacy. This infrastructure can
immediately help in the current COVID-19 pandemic and will also be useful for other diseases
that may emerge in the future, or are currently present. Although we are optimistic that capacity
for diagnostic testing will rapidly increase, testing will likely never provide global population-wide
coverage and there is thus a critical and immediate need for collecting additional data on selfreported symptoms and health status at a population level. Moreover, we plan to integrate the
growing official diagnostic testing data along with other real-time informative data to better
estimate the symptoms that characterize patients who are diagnosed with COVID-19 and to
improve our computational models . In the long term, a broad surveying of individual health
status will serve as a rich source of information for understanding disease outbreaks that can
guide policy decisions and ensure that the world is better positioned to respond to future
pandemics. Nature has presented us with a problem of unprecedented scale that knows no
borders. Now is the time to respond with our own global solution: information. Working together,
we can act decisively to maximize human health, both now and in the future.

The Need for Information
Early epidemiological studies of the COVID-19 outbreak in Hubei Province, China, where
COVID-19 is thought to have originated from, demonstrated the overwhelming importance of
slowing the rate of transmission to reduce the spread of COVID-19. Slowing the rate of
transmission, requires information about who is infected and where they are located. China
achieved this through testing large numbers of individuals suspected of being infected and
moving individuals who tested positive to isolation. In South Korea, which saw the second large
spike in COVID-19, government officials have taken an approach of combining large-scale
testing with transparent data sharing on where affected individuals are located. Although the
success of this approach is clear, it has not been universally implemented. For example, Italy
has not adopted this approach, and their rates of infection have steeply risen in recent days,
with lack of universal testing potentially playing a role in this unfortunate development. While
China’s and South Korea’s approach has been successful, it has two major limitations that
prevent its application in the vast majority of other countries: diagnostic testing capacity is
limited and personal and health privacy laws are more restrictive. For example, in the United
States, an emerging world epicenter, large-scale testing is still not available in the vast majority
of US states. For several weeks after community spreads have been documented in multiple US
states, the tests were still limited to people with severe symptoms and with international travel
history to places with early outbreak (e.g. China, South Korea, Japan, Iran). With limited
capacity in testing, the numbers reported as “confirmed cases” in our communities (e.g.
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/) do not reflect the true numbers or the actual rate of COVID-19
spread. The fact that many carrier individuals only show mild symptoms and not seeking tests
also contributes to our lack of understanding of the impact.
Technology-driven approaches to collect voluntarily self-reported data on health status can
overcome these limitations. These can be further integrated with other relevant real-time data
resources such as meteorological data, population density at a given time and place, as well as

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

other dynamic data sources. Together these can provide crucial information that can be
immediately leveraged for early identification of disease clusters, with the goal of slowing the
spread of disease.
We started several such efforts in the U.S. and one in Israel. In the U.S., we have developed an
app, HowWeFeel (http://www.howwefeel.org), that administers a 30-second survey of the
person's well-being to collect epidemiological data (Figure 1). Independently, CovidNearYou
was started (https://covidnearyou.org/) as well as covid19-EIPM, a web-application with openaccess visualization tools collecting the same information in a fully anonymized way
(https://covid19.eipm-research.org) (Figures 3 and 4). In Israel, we developed Predict-Corona
(https://coronaisrael.org/), a daily one-minute online survey in which respondents are asked to
measure body temperature and report whether they experience any of the symptoms that were
found to be common in patients with COVID-19 infection according to the existing literature.
Within approximately 10 days of its launch, there have been over 300,000 responses, and we
are already seeing the potential of this approach for detecting future outbreak regions (Figure 2)
3
.
This work parallels efforts in other countries to develop similar surveys, such as the Covid
Symptom Tracker in the UK (https://covid.joinzoe.com/) , the COVID-19: CH Survey Project in
Switzerland (https://covid19survey.ethz.ch/) and Covid-19 self-reporting in Slovenia
(https://covid-19-stats.si/). In the U.S. and UK., we have established the COronovirus Pandemic
(COPE) Consortium (https://www.monganinstitute.org/cope-consortium) to use the Covid
Symptom Tracker (https://covid.joinzoe.com) to join the efforts of international prospective and
observational cohorts (e.g. population based, clinical, etc.) and clinical trials/studies.
To increase the statistical power of these data, we call for the formation of an international
consortium, the Coronavirus Census Collective (CCC), to integrate these data streams and
provide a single, central data bank that researchers from around the world can query securely.
In addition to ensuring comparability in the data, the CCC will serve as a resource for entities in
other countries that are developing such surveys with the goal of facilitating its rapid deployment
around the world. As many countries are now struggling to find the best strategy to handle the
pandemic, we believe that a global collaborative effort to obtain data that can be used to predict
outbursts of COVID-19 infection is urgently needed.
In carrying out this global endeavor, we acknowledge the importance of catering both to
underdeveloped countries and to populations that are underrepresented or of lower socioeconomic status. For example, in Israel we distributed our survey in several languages,
engaged leaders in local religious communities, and promoted the survey through both Hebrew
and Arabic-speaking media channels to increase compliance across all sectors of the Israeli
population. Similarly, HowWeFeel has been translated into 20 languages and covid19-EIPM
currently supports 10 different languages.
A Framework for Collecting and Sharing Data

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

We will collect survey responses containing symptomatic information relevant to COVID-19
along with geospatial location, time, and demographic information on age and pre-existing and
comorbid medical conditions. The data will be collected, de-identified, and further made
differentially private before analysis to enable researchers to share and analyze the data while
maintaining individual level privacy Because the privacy of our participants is essential to our
mission, we will remain at the cutting edge of privacy protective technologies, develop novel
methods where needed, and implement improvements over time wherever possible. Our
technologies and the code for our app will be open source, so others adapt for their particular
situations, find bugs, or help us improve it. We envision that all members will use surveys with a
common set of “core” questions, but additional region-specific questions may be added within
the extent of the local regulations, researcher interest, and community need. This set of core
questions may grow over time as more is learned about COVID-19.
A federated common data model will be built to facilitate data sharing while ensuring data
security and privacy across different countries. To achieve that goal, we will define guidelines to
ensure that the underlying data model collected from all contributors can easily be amalgamated
and harmonized, and the consortium data sharing policy will be developed. We will also apply
different methods such as differential privacy 4 which will enable researchers to share and
analyze the data while preserving the confidentiality of the participants. Given differences in
privacy regulations from region to region, individual level data from the surveys from some
countries may not be accessible, but the results of differentially private statistical analyses will
be available to all.
These data will allow researchers to perform several immediately useful analyses. For example,
statistics can be computed of how many individuals exhibit symptoms, or self-report official
COVID-19 test results within particular geographic regions. Statistics can be computed both in
aggregate and conditional on comorbidities and demographic information such as age when
available. This will enable monitoring of the health status of the respondent population, either in
aggregate or stratified by region or demography, at any given time. Regression analysis will be
performed to investigate the epidemiological factors associated with symptoms and testing
results. Spatial analysis will be performed and geostatistical maps on the prevalence of
symptoms and positive test probability will be constructed. In addition, clustering models can be
used to identify which areas likely have COVID-19 outbreaks already ongoing based on cooccurrence of many individuals reporting similar patterns of symptoms at the same time. This
will enable estimates of the population of individuals who have COVID-19 symptoms in spite of
inadequate viral testing. With participants who have tested positive and those who tested
negative, we will be able to use methods of “quantification” (as distinct from “classification”) to
produce accurate estimates of population prevalence of COVID-19 even when individuals
cannot be reliably classified from their symptoms alone 5. Another possible application is
evaluating the effectiveness of the various social distancing measures taken, and their
contribution to reduction of the number of symptomatic people. Finally, lagged prediction models
can be used to identify increasing trends in the incidence of self-reported COVID-19 related
symptoms within specific geographic locales. These predictions will be potentially useful for
identifying areas where additional testing or medical resources should be allocated. To

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

maximize the impact of the data collected, we will provide an Application Programming Interface
(API) to allow accredited researchers to access the data to perform additional statistical
analyses.
The CCC aims to further leverage the impact of voluntary self-reported health information by
actively seeking collaboration from others around the world that are similarly committed to
maximizing the potential benefits of this approach while maintaining individual’s privacy. We
envision that the CCC will be coordinated by a Board of Directors, who will vet new members,
maintain a secured centralized data repository, or federated multi-site data repositories, and
develop mechanisms to enable researchers from around the world to query the data. Individual
members will be responsible for ensuring adherence to local regulations.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figures:

Figure 1: HowWeFeel: a 30-second survey of the person's well-being to collect epidemiological data.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Average COVID-19 associated symptoms region map in Israel. City municipal regions with at least 50
responders and neighborhoods with at least 15 responders are shown. Each region is colored by a category defined
by the average symptoms ratio, calculated by averaging the reported symptoms rate by responders in that city or
neighborhood. Green - low symptoms rate, Purple - high symptoms rate. A: Area of Haifa with city regions. B: Area of
Haifa with neighborhood regions. For updated maps see https://coronaisrael.weizmann.ac.il/

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3:

The screenshot of EIPM Coronavirus Survey Dashboard taken on 30/3/2020 is shown in this figure. The
e

dashboard shows collected results at the time a user accesses our website and several visualization tools enable online
e
analysis. Statistics on reported symptoms at the state and county level can be obtained from the dashboard. Users can
n
participate using the “Add survey” button. Currently, this allows choosing between 10 different languages to reflect the
e
diversity of our users.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: The English version of the EIPM daily questionnaire. Required questions are marked with (*). In particular, thee
user is required to enter the first three digits of their US zip code. This allows tracking of symptoms in different
t
geographical locations in the entire country. In order to retain HIPAA Privacy Rule compliance, zip codes with less than
n
20,000 individuals were excluded.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.02.20051284; this version posted April 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1. Tariq, A. et al. Real-time monitoring the transmission potential of COVID-19 in Singapore,
February 2020. medRxiv (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.02.21.20026435
2. Smolinski, M. S. et al. Flu near you: crowdsourced symptom reporting spanning 2 influenza
seasons. Am. J. Public Health 105, 2124–2130 (2015).
3. Rossman, H. et al. A framework for identifying regional outbreak and spread of COVID-19
from
one-minute
population-wide
surveys.
medRxiv
(2020).
doi:10.1101/2020.03.19.20038844
4. Dankar, F. K. & Emam, K. E. Practicing differential privacy in health care: A review. Trans.
Data Privacy 6, (2013).
5. King, G. & Lu, Y. Verbal Autopsy Methods with Multiple Causes of Death. Stat. Sci. 23, 78–
91 (2008).

