medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059881; this version posted April 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Next weeks of SARS-CoV-2: Projection model to predict time evolution scenarios of accumulated
cases in Spain
Antonio Monleon-Getino1, 3, 4, Jaume Canela-Soler2
1.Section of Statistics, Departament of Genetics, Microbiology and Statistics, Faculty of Biology, Univeristy of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
2.Section of Biostatistics. Clinical Foundations Department, School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Univeristy of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
3.Group of Researh in Bioestatistics and Bioinformatics (GRBIO) , Barcelona, Spain
4.BIOST3. Group of Researh in Clinical Bioestatistics, Bioinformatics and Data Science, Barcelona, Spain
Email address: amonleong@ub.edu

Abstract. Background and objectives: SARS-CoV-2 is a new type of coronavirus that can affect people and causes
respiratory disease, COVID-19. It is affecting the entire planet and we focus in Spain, where the first case was detected at
the end of January 2020 and in recent weeks it has increased in many cases. We need predictive models in order to be
efficient and take actions. The general goal of this work is present a new model of SARS-CoV-2 to predict different
scenarios of accumulated cases in Spain. Material and methods: In this short report is used a model proposed previously,
based on a parametric model Weibull and in a the library BDSbiost3 developed in R to infer and predict different scenarios
of the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 for the accumulated cases in Spain after the spread that affects Spain detected at the end
of January of this year. Results: In the analyses presented, projective curves have been generated for the evolution of
accumulated cases in which they reach about 4,000 cases or about 15,000 cases, for which the lines of the day in which
the value for 90 will be reached can be seen vertically 90, 95 and 99% of the asymptote (maximum number of cases, from
that day they will begin to descend or remain the same), that is why the vertical lines would indicate the brake of the
disease. For the worst-case scenario, it takes 118, 126 or 142 days to reach the maximum number of cases (n = 15,000) to
reach 90, 95 and 99% of the asymptote (maximum number of cases), respectively. This means translated in a time scale
that in the worst case the virus will not stop its progress, in Spain, until summer 2020, hopefully before. Comments and
conclusions: This model could be used to plan the resources and see if the policies or means dedicated to the virus are
slowing the progress of the virus or it is necessary to implement others that are more effective, and can also validate a
method for future outbreaks of diseases such as these.

1. Background
SARS-CoV-2 is a new type of coronavirus, a broad
family of viruses that normally affect only animals,
that can affect people and causes COVID-19. It has
been detected for the first time in 2019/12 in the city
of Wuhan (China). They produce clinical conditions
ranging from the common cold to more serious
diseases, such as the coronavirus that caused severe
acute respiratory syndrome (SARS-CoV) a few
years ago and the coronavirus that causes the
Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS-CoV) [1].
It seems that the transmission would be through
contact with infected animals or by close contact
with the respiratory secretions that are generated
with the cough or sneeze of a sick person.

close contact with a patient diagnosed with infection
by Coronavirus in Germany. These cases have been
increasing exponentially, until reaching 999
confirmed cases today [2].
The Spanish Ministry of Health has activated a
permanent monitoring commission where the
evolution of the coronavirus situation is evaluated.
It is in contact with scientific societies for the
development of specific protocols in relation to the
clinical management of cases. Update daily the
report about the outbreak, accessible to the general
public [2]. The rate of growth of cases in each
country is different. Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore
have seen infections grow gradually since January.
In other countries such as Spain, France or Germany,
cases shot up very quickly following the wake of
Italy, which gave the alarm in Europe.

On January 31, the first confirmed case of SARSCoV-2 was detected in Spain corresponding to a
German citizen who was under observation by the The development of the epidemic follows an
exponential
model
This preprint
reports
new research
that has
beenhad
certified by
peer review andgrowth
should not be
used to in
guideaccumulated
clinical practice. cases
health NOTE:
authorities
after
learning
that
he not
had

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059881; this version posted April 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

until reaching a maximum point. In China seems
that a decline in the most recent days is likely to be
due to underascertainment of cases with recent
onset and delayed identification and reporting rather
than a true turning point in incidence [3]. But can
we predict when the maximum number of cases will
arrive? Some statements by the Chinese health
authorities indicate that the infections will last until
summer, but can we apply any model or project
these expectations over time?
2. Objectives

4. Results
In the analyzes presented, projective curves (see
Figure 1) have been generated for the evolution of
accumulated cases in which they reach about 4,000
cases or about 15,000 cases, for which the lines of
the day in which the value for 90 will be reached
can be seen vertically 90, 95 and 99% of the
asymptote (maximum number of cases, from that
day they will begin to descend or remain the same),
that is why the vertical lines would indicate the slow
down of the disease.

The general goal of this work is present a new model
of SARS-CoV-2 to predict different time scenarios
of accumulated cases in Spain.
3. Material and methods
In this short report is used a model proposed
previously, based on a parametric model Weibull [4,
5,
6]
computed
with
the
function
Weibull4p.monle1() of the library BDSbiost3[6].
This mathematical function was developed in R to
infer and predict different scenarios of the evolution
of SARS-CoV-2 for the accumulated cases in Spain
after the spread that affects Spain detected at the end
of January of this year until last date with
information.
This projection offered by function is based on a
consistent statistical growth model, used previously
in biology [4, 5,6] and can allow authorities and
epidemiologists to predict cases and take measures
of them, as well as to know the approximate dates
for the best and worst scenarios. This method is
based on the extrapolation rarefaction curve using a
Weibull growth model [4, 5] to estimate the
maximum number of accumulated cases of
coronavirus as a function of time (days) using
numerical methods for non linear models. This
approach allows us to compute the effort at different
confidence intervals and to obtain an approximate
time interval of when the disease will slow its speed
in terms of the number of cases accumulated.
This would also be possible for the number of new
affected and for cases in which patients recover.

Figure 1: Prediction of accumulated cases of
SARS-CoV-2 for the next 300 days based on the use
of Weibull model computed with the function
Weibull4p.monle1() of the library BDSbiost3 for R.
Red dots: real cases. Blue lines: simulation for two
scenarios (worst scenario with 15,000 cases, and
best scenario for 4,000 cases approx.). Vertical lines
indicate the day to reach 90, 95 or 99% asymptote
(maximum number of cases). Green vertical line for
the best scenario. Red vertical line for the worst
scenario.
Thus, for the first scenario (Figure 1), to reach
approximately 4,000 cases, the projective model
indicates that it will take 78, 84 and 93 days to reach
90, 95 or 99% of the asymptote that in this case
would be about 5 times the maximum number of
cases (n = 4,000). For the worst-case scenario, it
takes 118, 126 or 142 days to reach the maximum
number of cases (n = 15,000). This means translated
in a time scale that in the worst case the virus will
not stop its progress until summer 2020, hopefully
before.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.09.20059881; this version posted April 14, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

3

5. Conclusions and comments

6. References

This predictive function could be used to plan the
resources and see if the policies or means dedicated
to the virus are slowing the progress of the virus or
it is necessary to implement others that are more
effective, and can also validate a method for future
outbreaks of diseases such as these.

[1]

Center for Coordination of Health Alerts and
Emergencies. Ministry of Health, Spain. Document
about COVID-19. 2020. Electronic document:
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/c
cayes/alertasActual/nCovChina/documentos/20200224.Preguntas_respuestas_CO
VID-19.pdf

[2]

Ministry of Health, Spain. 2020. Coronavirus data for
Spain
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/c
cayes/alertasActual/nCov-China/situacionActual.htm .
EPDATA. Interactive maps of coronavirus for Spain
https://www.epdata.es/datos/coronavirus-china-datosgraficos/498

[3]

Qun Li, M.Med., Xuhua Guan, Ph.D., Peng Wu, Ph.D.,
Xiaoye Wang, M.P.H., Lei Zhou, M.Med., Yeqing Tong,
Ph.D., Ruiqi Ren, M.Med., Kathy S.M. Leung, Ph.D.,
Eric H.Y. Lau, Ph.D., Jessica Y. Wong, Ph.D., Xuesen
Xing, Ph.D., Nijuan Xiang, M.Med., et al. 2020. Early
Transmission Dynamics in Wuhan, China, of Novel
Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia. The New England
Journal of Medicine. January 29,2020

[4]

J Mendez, A Monleon-Getino, J Jofre, F Lucena. 2017.
Use of non-linear mixed-effects modelling and
regression analysis to predict the number of somatic
coliphages by plaque enumeration after 3 hours of
incubation. Journal of water and health 15 (5), 706-717.

[5]

Toni Monleon-Getino, Jorge Frias-Lopez. 2020. A priori
estimation of sequencing effort in complex microbial
metatranscriptomes (Pending of publication, Methods in
Ecology, sent 2020)

[6]

T. Monleón-Getino. Clara Rodríguez. 2020. BDSbiost3:
Machine learning and advanced statistical methods for
omic,categorical analysis and others. Library for R
published
in
github.
Download
in:
https://github.com/amonleong/BDSbiost3

The method can easily be validated with the daily
updated data for Spain, which can be found at:
https://www.epdata.es/datos/coronavirus-chinadatos-graficos/498
This method proposed to predict time scenarios and
projection could also be used for other countries.
The function is freely available to those scientists
who want to use it to make their own predictions
based on the available data.

