medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

The current COVID-19 wave will likely be mitigated
in the second-line European countries
S. Soubeyrand∗1 , M. Ribaud1 , V. Baudrot1 , D. Allard1 , D. Pommeret2 , and L. Roques1
1

2

INRAE, BioSP, 84914 Avignon, France
Univ Lyon, UCBL, ISFA LSAF EA2429, F-69007, Lyon, France
April 17, 2020

Abstract
Objective. Countries presently apply different strategies to control the COVID-19 outbreak. Differences in population
structures, decision making, health systems and numerous other factors result in various trajectories in terms of
mortality at country scale. Our objective in this manuscript is to disentangle the future of second-line European
countries (i.e. countries that present, today, a moderate death rate) with respect to the current COVID-19 wave.
Method. We propose a data-driven approach, grounded on a mixture model, to forecast the dynamics of the number of
deaths from COVID-19 in a given focal country using data from countries that are ahead in time in terms of COVID19-induced mortality. In this approach, the mortality curves of ahead-in-time countries are used to build predictors,
which are then used as the components of the mixture model. This approach was applied to eight second-line European
countries (Austria, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Poland, Portugal, Romania and Sweden), using Belgium, France, Italy,
Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, United Kingdom as well as the Hubei province in China to build predictors. For this
analysis, we used data pooled by the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering.
Results. In general, the second-line European countries tend to follow relatively mild mortality curves (typically, those
of Switzerland and Hubei) rather than fast and severe ones (typically, those of Spain, Italy, Belgium, France and the
United Kingdom). From a methodological viewpoint, the performance of our forecasting approach is about 80% up to
8 days in the future, as soon as the focal country has accumulated at least two hundreds of deaths.
Discussion. Our results suggest that the continuation of the current COVID-19 wave across Europe will likely be
mitigated, and not as strong as it was in most of the front-line countries first impacted by the wave.
Keywords. COVID-19; Forecast; Mixture model; Mortality curve.

1

Introduction

COVID-19 currently generates a major pandemic that has caused about 125 000 registered deaths across the world by
April 14, 2020. From reported mortality data at the scale of countries (Dong et al., 2020), one observes a large diversity of
temporal dynamics in terms of, for instance, outbreak start, acceleration, epidemic peak and plateau. This diversity can
be reproduced, at least partially, by epidemiological models. Either parsimonious (Roques et al., 2020) or more complex
(Liu et al., 2020; Prem et al., 2020), such models have already been run to describe, infer and forecast the epidemics and
estimate epidemiological parameters (e.g., the basic reproduction number R0 and the death rate). These epidemiological
models, based on SIR (Susceptible–Infected–Removed) architectures or their extensions, generally include compartments
corresponding to the dead fraction of the population and can hence be used to model and predict the temporal evolution
of mortality due to COVID-19, in which we are interested in here. Data-driven approaches have also been proposed,
grounded for instance on simple regressions (Zhao et al., 2020), artificial intelligence-inspired methods (Hu et al., 2020)
as well as coupled SIR-neural network approaches (Zeng et al., 2020). However, in all these cases, the training data
correspond to the past dynamics in the country of interest and therefore cannot take into account processes that only
arise when a certain number of deaths is reached (e.g., saturation of medical structures or lockdown).
For countries where the outbreak started later than for the first impacted countries, a complementary approach to
forecast the mortality dynamics can be adopted: it consists in comparing the dynamics of interest to those of countries
∗ Corresponding

author – Email: samuel.soubeyrand@inrae.fr

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

that are ahead in time. Typically, media commonly use visualization and data science tools that jointly show curves
of mortality for several countries and allow the analyst to guess which trajectory is followed by the country of interest.
Thus, heuristically, the countries ahead in time with respect to COVID-19 mortality are used as predictors. One of the
advantages of this intuitive approach is that the real dynamics used as predictors intrinsically include the processes and
structures underlying the host population, the pathogen evolution, the health system, the control measures, the decision
making and even the data collection. One of the drawbacks, for example in the case of COVID-19 at present, is that there
may be a low number of countries ahead in time compared to the country of interest and therefore no adequate predictor
among the reduced list of predictors.
Here, we propose a probabilistic and statistical framework implementing the intuitive approach described above. To
partly avoid the drawback of the potential reduced number of predictors (i.e., countries ahead in time), we propose to
model the mortality curve of the country of interest as a mixture of predictors, instead of selecting a single predictor. This
mixture-model approach is applied to a set of European countries that have, today, intermediate cumulative numbers of
deaths due to COVID-19. Our aim is to assess whether these countries (in the second line with respect to the COVID-19
wave) will follow the trajectories of countries in the front line, with either fast-and-severe epidemics or relatively mild
epidemics. The second scenario would be favorable for limiting the mortality due to COVID-19 in Europe.

2

COVID-19 mortality data

Mortality data were obtained from the Johns Hopkins University Center for Systems Science and Engineering (https:
//github.com/CSSEGISandData/COVID-19/; Dong et al., 2020). JHU CSSE provides, in particular, daily mortality at the
scale of countries or provinces, grounded on diverse data sources including the World Health Organization and national
government health departments. We selected the 15 European countries having at least 200 registered deaths by April
14, 2020. The eight countries with the lowest death rate (cumulative number of deaths divided by population size) up
to April 14 were chosen as countries whose mortality dynamics have to be forecast. The seven other countries as well as
the province of Hubei in China were used to build predictors. Hubei was the first COVID-19 hotspot and its number of
registered deaths has clearly reached a plateau, whereas the European countries are still in the increasing stage (Figure
1; see also Suppl. Figure S1 where mortality is scaled by the population size).

3

Sketch of the method

First, we model the daily temporal evolution of the cumulative number of deaths (Y0 (t), t being the date) in a focal
country labelled by 0. The daily increments, say N (t), of the process Y0 are, conditionally on a set of competing
predictors, independently drawn from mixtures of negative-binomial distributions whose means are the increments of the
predictors:
Y0 (t) = Y0 (t − 1) + N (t)
n


X
pi N B Zi (t) − Zi (t − 1), ηi ,
N (t) ∼
indep.

i=1

where pi are the mixture probabilities, ηi are the dispersion parameters of the negative-binomial distributions and Zi are
the competing predictors obtained from mortality curves in ahead-in-time countries i = 1, . . . , n. Predictor Zi is built
from a smoothed, scaled and delayed version of the process Yi , which is the analogue of Y0 for country i. The smoothing
aims at mitigating events that are specific to country i. The scaling aims at homogenizing population sizes with the focal
country 0. The delay, denoted by δi , accounts for temporal lag in the start and progression of the epidemics between
country 0 and i. This delay is calculated as the duration between the date τ of the last observation used in the analysis
and the (anterior) date at which the smoothed version of Yi reached the value Y0 (τ ).
Second, we apply an estimation approach grounded on a weighted penalized likelihood to estimate pi , ηi and δi . Thus,
we obtain a probabilistic assessment of which predicting trajectory is followed by the mortality curve of the focal country.
In addition, we evaluate with the dispersion parameter ηi how much the trajectory of the focal country is apart from
the trajectory of the predicting country i. We also evaluate with the delay parameter δi how much the focal country
is late with respect to country i. This analysis can be applied on mortality curves observed up to the last observation
date available in the data set. It can also be applied by ignoring, voluntarily, a part of the time series, to measure the
stability of mortality progression in comparison with available predictors or, in the opposite way, to demonstrate changes
in the epidemic regime. Applying the analysis back in the past also allows assessing forecast accuracy (like hindcasting in
model-based climate-change studies).
A detailed presentation of the method is provided in Appendix A.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Raw mortality data for 15 European countries and the Hubei province in China. Curves in the top panel were
used to build predictors, whereas we forecast the future of curves in the bottom panel. The areas of disks in the legend
are proportional to the population sizes.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

4

Results

Consider the particular cases of Austria and Sweden, which are typical but contrasted examples. Figure 2 provides the
estimated mixture probabilities and the forecast when the last observation τ is March 30, April 6 or April 14 (voluntarily
ignoring posterior data, if any). In the first two cases, the short-term future of the dynamics is known and can be compared
to the forecast. We observe a change in regime for both countries: Austria follows a balanced mixture of the trajectories
of Switzerland and the UK when τ = March 30, and tends to the trajectory of Hubei afterwards. Sweden remains within
the group of European countries, but tends to follow the relatively mild trajectory of Switzerland when τ = April 14.
Supplementary Figure S2 provides analogue plots for the eight focal countries and all the dates τ between March 30 and
April 14.
The changes in estimated mixture probabilities are displayed in Figure 3 for each of the eight focal countries. We
observe for each country a variability across time in the most likely predicting trajectories (as shown above for Austria
and Sweden). Figure 3 and Figure 4 (where the mixture probabilities are averaged over countries) suggest that the
second-line countries considered in our analysis generally tend to follow, as time goes on, the relatively mild trajectories
of Hubei and Switzerland. The situation in this respect is not clear for Poland, but Poland accumulates a low number of
deaths compared to the other focal countries, namely 263 deaths by April 14 (Denmark: 299, Romania: 351, Austria: 384,
Ireland: 406, Portugal: 567, Sweden: 1033, Germany: 3294) and the analysis is therefore grounded on limited information.
Forecast performance is measured as the proportion of true values Y0 (τ + ∆), ∆ days after τ , that are in the corresponding forecast confidence intervals. The performance decreases with ∆ (Figure 5). It must be noted however that
when the cumulative number of deaths at τ in the focal country is relatively large (typically several hundreds), then about
80% of values Y0 (τ + ∆) are within their confidence intervals up to 8 days after τ .

5

Discussion

The second-line European countries considered in our study tend in general to follow relatively mild mortality curves
(typically, those of Switzerland and Hubei) rather than faster and more severe trajectories. Thus, our results suggest that
the continuation of the current COVID-19 wave across Europe will likely be mitigated, and not as strong as it was in
most of the front-line countries first impacted by the wave. However, we have seen that changes in the epidemic regime
for a given country can arise. Therefore, we cannot exclude modifications of the epidemic situation for the second-line
European countries. To monitor such eventual changes on a daily basis, a Webapp implementing our approach will be
soon made accessible to the public.
The way we clustered the European countries in two groups, those in the front line and those in the second line based
on the death rate (cumulative number of deaths divided by the population size), can be seen at first sight as a reason why
the second-line countries generally tend to follow relatively mild mortality trajectories. However, Belgium and the UK
for instance, could have been considered as second-line countries on March 15 (based on their death rates at that date).
Unfortunately, one month later, they clearly experience relatively fast and severe mortality dynamics; see Supplementary
Figure S1. Apparently, up to now, the second-line countries as defined in our study will not follow the trajectories of
Belgium and the UK.
In our approach, the quality of data is paramount, like in most approaches strongly relying on data. However, some
technical choices underlying our method (in particular the smoothing of predictors and the over-dispersed distribution for
the daily increments in the number of deaths) make our approach robust to some extent. For instance, Swedish data show
a decrease in the number of recorded daily deaths each week-end, but its mortality trajectory is nonetheless relatively
adequately forecast. Despite the relative robustness of our approach, its performance would be improved by grounded
it on corrected data (e.g., we could re-allocate some deaths recorded on weekdays in Sweden to the preceding weekend,
and we could correct French data anterior to April 1st, date before which deaths in nursing homes were not recorded).
Correcting data would be particularly crucial for countries that may underestimate COVID-19-induced deaths. It must be
however noted that our simple approach applied to raw data can be exploited to detect countries with extreme trajectories
(i.e., very mild mortality dynamics), resulting either from bias in data or from particularly efficient ways of mitigating
the COVID-19 wave. Identifying the former case can be beneficial to obtain a better assessment of COVID-19 sanitary
impact in the country of interest. Identifying the latter case can be beneficial for other countries to improve their control
strategies by taking as a model the strategy of the country with extreme trajectory.
In our analysis, we incorporated eight predictors in the mixture model (seven front-line European countries plus Hubei).
Having at our disposal more predictors would be obviously beneficial for our analyses, in particular intermediate predictors
between those built from Switzerland and Hubei data, and even flatter predictors than the one built from Hubei data
(e.g. for handling the apparently very mild mortality curve of Poland; see Supplementary Figure S2). The incorporation
in the mixture model of mortality curves corresponding to other well-known diseases would deserve to be investigated.
These additional curves could be viewed as benchmarks complementing the available predictors for COVID-19. From a
technical viewpoint, multiplying the number of mixture components could result in estimation difficulties if one only relies

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Austria

Sweden

Figure 2: Forecast of the cumulative mortality based on the fitted mixture model for Austria and Sweden when the last
observation τ (indicated by the vertical dotted line) is made on March 30 (row 1), April 6 (row 2) or April 14 (row 3).
The number of deaths at τ in the focal country is indicated by the horizontal dotted line. The part of the solid red line
on the left of τ is obtained by smoothing mortality data for the focal country (red dots); the part on the right of τ is the
median forecast. Two types of 95% confidence envelopes are drawn (grey areas); see Section A.3 in the Appendix.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Estimated mixture probabilities for the eight focal countries when the date τ of the last observation ranges from
March 30 to April 14.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4: Estimated mixture probabilities averaged over the eight focal countries and for a date τ of the last observation
ranging from March 30 to April 14.

Figure 5: Left: proportion of true values Y0 (τ + ∆), ∆ days after τ , that are in the corresponding forecast confidence
intervals –CI– (all focal countries were merged to assess these statistics). Green solid curve: CI built under the fitted
mixture model; Red solid curve: CI built with the alternative approach presented in Appendix A.3. Dotted curves are
analogous to solid curves when one considers situations with at least 250 cumulative deaths at τ . Right: distribution of
the cumulative number of deaths at τ ; the vertical line indicates the threshold value used for drawing the dotted curves
on the left panel.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

on the quasi-Newton algorithm that we used for maximizing the penalized weighted likelihood. Alternatively, parameter
estimation could be carried out using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm (McLachlan and Peel, 2000) or
adopting a Bayesian framework, with Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques (Robert and Casella, 2013).
Additional technical issues are discussed in Appendix A.4.

Author contributions statement
SS conceived the initial statistical approach that was then improved from the input of all authors. SS, MR and VB
implemented the approach in the R statistical Software. SS and LR wrote the first version of the manuscript that was
then complemented by MR, VB, DA, DP and LR. All authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

References
Byrd, R. H., P. Lu, J. Nocedal, and C. Zhu (1995). A limited memory algorithm for bound constrained optimization.
SIAM Journal on scientific computing 16, 1190–1208.
Dong, E., H. Du, and L. Gardner (2020). An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in real time. The
Lancet infectious diseases.
Hu, Z., Q. Ge, L. Jin, and M. Xiong (2020). Artificial intelligence forecasting of COVID-19 in China. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2002.07112 .
Liu, Z., P. Magal, O. Seydi, and G. Webb (2020). Understanding unreported cases in the 2019-nCov epidemic outbreak
in Wuhan, China, and the importance of major public health interventions. MPDI Biology 9 (3), 50.
McLachlan, G. and D. Peel (2000). Finite mixture models.
Prem, K., Y. Liu, T. W. Russell, A. J. Kucharski, R. M. Eggo, N. Davies, S. Flasche, S. Clifford, C. A. Pearson, J. D.
Munday, et al. (2020). The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of the COVID-19 epidemic
in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. The Lancet Public Health.
Robert, C. and G. Casella (2013). Monte Carlo statistical methods. Springer Science & Business Media.
Roques, L., E. Klein, J. Papaix, A. Sar, and S. Soubeyrand (2020). Using early data to estimate the actual infection
fatality ratio from COVID-19 in france. medRxiv 2020.03.22.20040915 .
Zeng, T., Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Liu, and B. Qiu (2020). Predictions of 2019-ncov transmission ending via comprehensive
methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04945 .
Zhao, S., Q. Lin, J. Ran, S. S. Musa, G. Yang, W. Wang, Y. Lou, D. Gao, L. Yang, D. He, et al. (2020). Preliminary
estimation of the basic reproduction number of novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in China, from 2019 to 2020: A datadriven analysis in the early phase of the outbreak. International Journal of Infectious Diseases 92, 214–217.

A
A.1

Method
Mixture model

Let Yi (i = 0, . . . , n) denote non-decreasing temporal counting processes over Z observed up to time τ corresponding
to different observation units with varying sizes. The sizes of the observation units are known scalar values denoted by
si > 0. Typically, Yi (t) denote the cumulative number of deaths due to a disease in population i at time t, and si is the
population size. Y0 is a process to be forecast beyond τ . Yi (i > 0), which are supposed to be ahead in time with respect
to Y0 , will be used to build putative predictors for Y0 .

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6: Schematic representation of the delaying processing applied to predictors. Circles: counting process Y0 ; Continuous line: non-delayed predictor Ȳ0i ; Dashed line: delayed predictor Zi (i.e. δ-translation of Ȳ0i along the time-axis,
where δ = δi in Equation (2)).
The increments of the process Y0 are independently drawn from mixtures of negative-binomial distributions whose
means are the increments of competing predictors:
Y0 (t) = Y0 (t − 1) + N (t)
n


X
pi N B Zi (t) − Zi (t − 1), ηi ,
N (t) ∼
indep.

(1)

i=1

where pi are the mixture probabilities, ηi are the dispersion parameters of the negative-binomial distributions, and Zi are
the predictors built from smoothed, scaled and delayed versions of Yi (i = 1, . . . , n); note that the model for Y0 is defined
conditionally on the set of predictors Zi . Namely, Zi satisfies, for all t ∈ R:
Zi (t) = Ȳ0i (t − δi )
s0
Ȳ0i (t) = (LȲi )(t)
si
u+k
Xu
1
Yi (t0 ),
Ȳi (u) =
2ku + 1 0

(2)
∀u ∈ Z,

t =u−ku

δi = τ − min{t ∈ R : Ȳ0i (t) = Y0 (τ )},
where L is the linear-interpolation operator, ku = min{k, τ − u} is the local smoothing bandwidth, and k ∈ N is the
smoothing parameter (if k = 0, there is no smoothing: Ȳi ≡ Yi ). The process Ȳi defined over Z is obtained by smoothing
Yi with a symmetric local mean based on the varying temporal bandwidth kt , which ensures that Ȳi (τ ) = Yi (τ ), i.e.
the last observed value of Yi . Thus, Ȳi is a moving average operator applied to Yi . The process Ȳ0i defined over R is
obtained by linearly interpolating Ȳi and by scaling it with the factor s0 /si to delete the heterogeneity in the sizes of the
observation units. Note that if Ȳ0i is defined over R, it can be only computed up to time τ from observed data. The
predictor Zi is built from a smoothed version of Yi to mitigate events that are specific to observation unit i (and that
are not expected to be representative of what is going on in observation unit 0). The delay δi is introduced to measure
how much the observation unit i is ahead in time with respect to the observation unit 0, and to correct the non-delayed
predictor Ȳ0i accordingly; see Figure 6. Thus, in practice, the predictor Zi can be computed up to the temporal horizon
τ + δi , which depends on the calculated advance of Yi over Y0 .
The condition Yi (τ )/si > Y0 (τ )/s0 (which can be easily checked in practice directly from raw data) ensures that Yi is
ahead in time with respect to Y0 and can be used to build a predictor.
Note that Zi (and Ȳ0i ) are non-decreasing temporal processes over R and, therefore, the means of the negative-binomial
distributions in Equation (1) are non-negative.

A.2

Weighted penalized likelihood

Suppose that the discrete time processes Yi (i = 0, . . . , n) are observed between time τ0 and τ . Our aim is to infer
the mixture probabilities p = (p1 , . . . , pn ) and the dispersion parameters η = (η1 , . . . , ηn ) based on Y = {Yi (t) : i =
9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

0, . . . , n, t = τ0 , . . . , τ }. Using Equations (1) and (2), the likelihood satisfies:
τ
n
Y
X

L(p | Y) =

pi f0it ,

(3)

t=τ0 +1 i=1

where f0it is the probability that a variable following the negative-binomial distribution with mean Zi (t) − Zi (t − 1) and
dispersion parameter ηi equals Y0 (t) − Y0 (t − 1) (the variance of this variable is (Zi (t) − Zi (t − 1)) + (Zi (t) − Zi (t − 1))2 /ηi ;
the lower the value of ηi , the larger the dispersion).
The likelihood is not directly used to estimate p and η, but is first weighted and penalized. The weighting allows the
estimation to depend more on the last states of the response process Y0 and the predictors than on their initial states
(e.g., to avoid an irrelevant dependence of the estimation on relatively ancient fluctuations that are likely poorly related to
the current variations). The penalization is introduced to improve the prediction accuracy and interpretability of mixture
probabilities by penalizing predictors that are unlikely at least on some fragments of the observation window. Thus, we
propose the following weighted penalized log-likelihood for estimating p:
!
!
τ
n
τ
n
X
X
X
X
˜lλ (p, η | Y) =
wτ −t log
pi f0it − λ
pi 1(f0it = 0)
t=τ0 +1


wτ −t =

t − τ0
τ − τ0

t=τ0 +1 i=1

i=1

2

(4)

,

where λ ≥ 0 and 1 is the indicator function. The squared shape of wτ −t can obviously be substituted, depending on the
context, for instance by a linear shape.

A.3

Estimation and forecast

For fixed τ0 , k and λ, the parameter vectors p and η can be estimated by maximizing ˜lλ (p, η, | Y) given by Equation (4)
with a constrained BFGS P
quasi-Newton method (Byrd et al., 1995). This algorithm easily handles positiveness
of paPn
n
rameters. The constraint i=1 pi = 1 was handled by introducing qi ∈ [0, ∞), i = 1, . . . , n, such that qi / i=1 qi = pi ,
fixing one of the qi s to the value 1 and maximizing ˜lλ (p, η, | Y) with respect to the other qi s and η. Let us now describe
how τ0 , k and λ are specified. The first observation time τ0 and the maximal bandwidth k are considered as given for
the analysis of COVID-19 data: we use τ0 = τ − 30 days allowing our analysis to handle the inertia of the epidemics at
country level and k = 3 days resulting in rather smooth predictors. The penalization parameter λ, whose value cannot be
intuitively fixed unlike τ0 and k, is calibrated by minimizing the mean squared error between (Y0 (τ − 2), Y0 (τ − 1), Y0 (τ ))
and its mixture-based prediction obtained by using only data up to time τ − 3. The mixture-based prediction of Y0 (t) for
t beyond the last observation date τ is simply its expectation satisfying:

E(Y0 (t)) = Y0 (τ ) +

n
t
X
X

pi (Zi (t0 ) − Zi (t0 − 1)).

(5)

t0 =τ +1 i=1

Thus, λ is fixed at the value λ̂ satisfying:
λ̂ = argmin
λ≥0

τ
2
1 X 
Ê1:(τ −3),λ (Y0 (t0 )) − Y0 (t0 )
3 0
t =τ −2

where Ê1:(τ −3),λ (Y0 (t0 )) is derived from Equation (5), in which τ is replaced by τ − 3 and pi are replaced by their estimates
p̂i (λ) maximizing ˜lλ (p, η | Y1:(τ −3) ), itself derived from Equation 4 where Y1:(τ −3) gathers data up to time τ − 3 and
replaces Y.
Then, estimates p̂ and η̂ of p and η are estimated by maximizing ˜lλ̂ (p, η | Y) and the dynamics of Y0 beyond τ is
forecast by simulating Model (1) where one plugs in p̂ and η̂ and by drawing, for instance, 95%-confidence envelopes.
The forecast horizon of Y0 depends on how much each predicting countries is ahead in time. E.g., for a predicting country
that is m days ahead in time, the forecast horizon is m days. Thus, when time goes on beyond τ , there are less and
less available predictors. In our analyses, we stop the forecast at the date when available predictors correspond to a sum
of probabilities p̂i less than 0.5. An alternative of the forecast can be drawn by assuming that, for each simulation, the
trajectory of the epidemic follows a single predictor sampled with respect to the mixture probabilities. This approach
generally leads to wider 95%-confidence envelopes.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

A.4

Technical discussion

Our exploratory approach for comparing mortality curves and forecasting mortality based on data from abroad relies on
several technical choices. Many alternatives for these choices exist and we discuss some of them in what follows.
We used the negative-binomial distribution because the increments in mortality are counting variables and because
we observed a relatively large dispersion with respect to the predictors. The Poisson distribution could not cope with
this over-dispersion and led therefore to poor results in terms of forecast performance as measured in Figure 5. Thus,
the negative binomial distribution embedded in the mixture model offer larger flexibility. It must be however noted
that in an hypothetical case without overdispersion, the estimation of dispersal parameters η in the negative-binomial
distributions would lead to identifiability issues. Other distributional hypotheses could be made, e.g. discrete versions
of the exponential and gamma distributions defined over N, for which EM algorithms are well suited in a mixture-model
context.
We used a linear interpolation in Equation (2) because of its simplicity. The use of splines could be investigated to
evaluate whether this refinement improves forecast performance. Forecast performance could also be improved by: 1.
optimizing the smoothing parameter or even by changing the form of the smoother that we used (e.g. local polynomial
smoother, kernel smoother with a continuous kernel, etc.); 2. refining the penalization and the weighting introduced
in Equation (4); 3. transforming the mixture model into a regression model and applying, for example, an elastic net
penalization to reduce the number of likely predictors; 4. incorporating multiple-orders auto-regressive terms in the model
of Y0 to better account for temporal dependencies, but the auto-regressive terms should certainly be modified depending
on the stage of the epidemics (increase stage, decrease stage and plateau); 5. incorporating additional covariates to
account for temporal characteristics that are specific to the focal country (e.g., a change in the national control strategy).

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.17.20069179; this version posted April 22, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S1: Mortality data scaled by population size (i.e. death rate) for 15 European countries and the Hubei province
in China. The areas of disks in the legend are proportional to the population sizes.

12

