The hummingbird tongue is a fluid trap,
not a capillary tube
Alejandro Rico-Guevara1 and Margaret A. Rubega
Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269
Edited* by David B. Wake, University of California, Berkeley, CA, and approved April 8, 2011 (received for review November 18, 2010)

Hummingbird tongues pick up a liquid, calorie-dense food that cannot be grasped, a physical challenge that has long inspired the
study of nectar-transport mechanics. Existing biophysical models
predict optimal hummingbird foraging on the basis of equations
that assume that fluid rises through the tongue in the same
way as through capillary tubes. We demonstrate that the hummingbird tongue does not function like a pair of tiny, static tubes
drawing up floral nectar via capillary action. Instead, we show that
the tongue tip is a dynamic liquid-trapping device that changes
configuration and shape dramatically as it moves in and out of
fluids. We also show that the tongue–fluid interactions are identical in both living and dead birds, demonstrating that this mechanism is a function of the tongue structure itself, and therefore highly
efficient because no energy expenditure by the bird is required
to drive the opening and closing of the trap. Our results rule
out previous conclusions from capillarity-based models of nectar
feeding and highlight the necessity of developing a new biophysical model for nectar intake in hummingbirds. Our findings have
ramifications for the study of feeding mechanics in other nectarivorous birds, and for the understanding of the evolution of nectarivory in general. We propose a conceptual mechanical explanation
for this unique fluid-trapping capacity, with far-reaching practical
applications (e.g., biomimetics).
biomechanics ∣ fluid dynamics ∣ nectar trapping ∣ surface tension

Downloaded by guest on May 22, 2021

P

henomena driven by surface tension are important in a variety
of biological systems (1, 2), and in recent years the importance
of working with living organisms to test theoretical biophysical
models [e.g., trees (3, 4), arthropods (5–8), and birds (9, 10)]
has become evident. Exploration of natural solutions to specific
fluid dynamics challenges has provided conceptual tools fostering
practical advances in a wide array of fields (11, 12). Discovery of
new biophysical mechanisms opens doors to new applied research
lines [e.g., biomimicry (13, 14)]. We report here on a previously
undescribed mechanism of fluid capture and transport in nature,
performed by the tongue of hummingbirds.
The tetrapod tongue evolved to facilitate feeding on land, and
in many taxa its primary function is to transport captured food
to where it can be swallowed (15). Nectarivores, however, have
evolved specialized tongues that function as their primary foodcapturing device (Fig. 1A). Hummingbirds are the most specialized nectar-feeding vertebrates (16, 17); thus, we would expect
them to possess a highly efficient liquid extraction system.
Since first proposed in 1833, it has been believed that the
tongue tips of hummingbirds are loaded with nectar by means
of capillary rise (18). Detailed biophysical models of nectar-feeding strategies developed almost 30 y ago were based on this idea
(19, 20). Since then, all models of foraging strategy (including
those predicting concentration preferences) and energy balance
in hummingbirds have calculated calorie intake rate under the
assumption that the tongue tip is in the form of a pair of semicylindrical grooves that fill passively via capillarity when in contact with the nectar (21–26). The notion that fluid is drawn
toward the mouth from the tongue tip and along the lingual
grooves through the action of capillarity is currently widely
accepted (19–28). However, if capillarity were responsible for

9356–9360 ∣ PNAS ∣ June 7, 2011 ∣ vol. 108 ∣ no. 23

Fig. 1. Hummingbird tongues. (A) Nectarivores use their tongue (yellow)
as their primary food-gathering tool. (B) Lateral picture of a post mortem
Ruby-throated Hummingbird (Archilochus colubris) tongue tip protruding
from the bill tip. (C) Dorsal view of the morphology of a hummingbird tongue
(approximate dimensions for A. colubris) showing length of the entire
tongue, open-sided grooves, and the fringed (lamellar) region of the tip (distal approximately 6 mm). Base of the tongue is on the left; tip on the right.
(D) Cross-sectioning shows the structural arrangement along the distal region
of the tongue; green arrows identify the placement of the cross-sections.
Black lines indicate the same structures in dorsal and cross-sectional views.
Note the change in position of supporting rods from the base of the grooves
to the tongue tip. Unlabeled scale bars, 0.5 mm.

tongue loading, the aid of gravity should increase nectar-uptake
rates at pendulous (downward facing) flowers, yet empirical work
in recent years has failed to demonstrate any consistent correlation between nectar extraction rates and flower position (26, 29).
Similarly, according to the parameters of the capillarity models
(19, 20), maximum energy intake is predicted to occur with nectar
at low sugar concentrations [20–40% (mass/mass)]. Nonetheless,
in experimental studies, hummingbirds offered a range of nectar
concentrations (spanning those found in wild flowers) preferred
higher values [45–65% (21, 24, 30–32)]. Such inconsistencies suggest that a mechanism other than capillarity is involved during
tongue loading.
Here, we provide evidence for a different nectar-uptake mechanism and offer a biophysical hypothesis for our observations
of tongue–nectar interactions. We found that, contrary to the
capillarity models, hummingbird tongue tips dynamically trap
nectar by rapidly changing their shape during feeding (Fig. 2
and Movies S1 and S2). High-speed video observations show that
an entire tongue transformation cycle occurs in as little as 1∕20th
of a second (cf. ref. 33). This oscillating transformation is driven
by fluid and atmospheric forces acting directly on morphological
Author contributions: A.R.-G. and M.A.R. designed research; A.R.-G. performed research;
A.R.-G. and M.A.R. analyzed video; and A.R.-G. and M.A.R. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
*This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor.
See Commentary on page 9321.
1

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: a.rico@uconn.edu.

This article contains supporting information online at www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1073/pnas.1016944108/-/DCSupplemental.

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1016944108

elements of the tongue tips. This description of a (highly efficient) dynamic liquid collecting mechanism has implications for
the development of capillary-driven self-assembly of flexible
structures (34, 35), and may be useful in microfluidic (36, 37) and
microelectromechanical (34, 38) systems with a broad range of
applications [e.g., micropliers (39)].

Downloaded by guest on May 22, 2021

Results
Hummingbird Tongue Morphology. Earlier studies have shown that
the distal portion of a hummingbird tongue is bifurcated, with
each side forming a groove (by the sides furling inward) when
the structures are wet, and that the tongue tips have membranous
edges that are fringed with lamellae (18, 40–42). We provide here
previously uncharacterized morphological details. We examined
the fringed (lamellar) region of the tongue tip of 120 specimens
in 20 species of hummingbirds (Table S1). We found that the
last approximately 6 mm of the tongue (regardless of its total
length) is structured in a previously undocumented arrangement
(Fig. 1 B–D). The lamellae are supported longitudinally by rods
(cf. ref. 40), and we found that these structures change their
relative position both anatomically (along the tongue’s length;
Fig. 1 C and D) and dynamically (during the process of feeding;
Fig. 2). The change in orientation of the supporting rods in
resting position, from the dorsal (proximally) to the ventral side
(distally, at the tips) of the tongue (Fig. 1 C and D), allows the
rotation of the tongue tips when they are withdrawn from the nectar (Fig. 2B and Movie S3), which in turn could improve liquid
collection in shallow nectar layers (a common condition in horizontal flowers).
Rico-Guevara and Rubega

Discussion
Our observation of rapid lamellar unfurling rules out the idea
that the hummingbird tongue tip acts as a set of static capillary
tubes during nectar feeding (18–28, 41). The tongue does not
passively draw floral nectar up into the grooves via capillarity
when its tips contact the liquid; rather, it is dynamically trapping
nectar within the lamellae while the tips leave the fluid. Our work
with dead specimens demonstrates that neither the unfurling
nor the furling of the lamellae requires any muscular work; the
process of nectar trapping results purely from the structural configuration of the tongue tips. We are unaware of any other biological mechanism for fluid trapping that is similarly dynamic, yet
PNAS ∣

June 7, 2011 ∣

vol. 108 ∣

no. 23 ∣

9357

SEE COMMENTARY
APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES

Fig. 2. Hummingbird tongue trapping nectar. (A) Dorsal view of a post
mortem tongue tip (A. colubris) leaving nectar, from totally immersed
(Top photograph) at 0 milliseconds (ms), to outside the liquid (Bottom photograph). Green arrows mark the same reference point on the tongue in each
image. (B) Cross-sectional diagrams (right margin) indicate the changes in
position of lamellae at the reference point over time. From top to bottom:
inside rotation of the entire structure (blue and red colors represent portions
of visible lamellae along each side of the rod), tongue tips joining, and
lamellae closing. In the first two diagrams, lamellae are inside the nectar;
in the last two, lamellae have been withdrawn but contain nectar trapped
inside the grooves. Scale bars, 0.5 mm.

Mechanics. We used high-speed video, at rates up to
2;400 frames∕s, to document the mechanics of whole, unaltered
hummingbird tongues moving in and out of nectar. We filmed
30 free-living birds (10 species; Table S1) attracted to a modified
feeder; hereafter, we refer to these results as in vivo observations.
To improve visualization of the mechanics, and to assess the
degree of control of the mechanism that birds might exert via
tongue muscles, we also used 20 tongues removed from salvaged
carcasses of dead hummingbirds (4 species; Table S1). We emulated position and movements of the tongue and air–nectar interface under controlled laboratory conditions. The results from
these salvaged specimens are hereafter referred to as post mortem observations.
Both the in vivo and post mortem observations reveal that before entering the fluid the tongue is wet (with some nectar inside)
and the lamellae are tightly furled in a flattened tube-like conformation, with the tongue tips adhering to each other, forming a
pointed, unitary structure (Fig. 1 B and C). Upon contact with
fluid, the lamellae immediately unfurl and the tips separate
(shown in vivo in Movies S1 and S2). At full immersion, the
tongue tips are completely bifurcated and the lamellae entirely
extended (Fig. 2, 0 ms). As the tongue is withdrawn from the
fluid, the lamellae roll inward, trapping the nectar (shown post
mortem in Movie S3). In vivo observations were wholly consistent
with the higher-resolution visualization provided by manipulated
post mortem tongues.
Post mortem observations were particularly useful in observing
the details of the tongue furling process because they could be
made under the highest magnification and the highest filming
rate. As the tongue is withdrawn from the nectar, each lamella
begins closing just before it passes the air–nectar interface,
and is fully closed by the interface itself (shown post mortem
in Movie S4). This implies that physical forces at the nectar
surface are involved in the liquid collection (Fig. 3). We also
noted that the progressively smaller lamellae toward the tongue
tip (Figs. 1D and 2A) impart a conical shape, distally closed, at
the furled tip when the tongue is withdrawn from the nectar
(shown post mortem in Movie S3). We surmise that this creates
a “lingual seal,” preventing fluid from dripping out of the tongue
during the transit from the nectar chamber to the interior of
the beak; avoiding nectar leakages could be especially important
at high licking rates [approximately 17 Hz (33)] when inertial
forces would tend to dislodge fluid from the tongue tip.
Our in vivo videos show that hummingbirds maintain a wider
opening between the bill tips while retracting their nectar-loaded
tongues than during protrusion (compare Fig. 4A vs. Fig. 4E; cf.
ref. 33). We have observed in live birds that during tongue
protrusion the bill is opened only at the tip, and apparently only
enough to allow the tongue to squeeze past the upper and lower
bill tips (cf. ref. 33 and Movie S1). These observations confirm
that the distal portion of the tongue is furled, and compressed
dorsoventrally during tongue protrusion, and that the compression is caused by the bill tips that are held closer together at
this time (Fig. 4 A and B, frames in first column) than during retraction (Fig. 4 D and E).

Downloaded by guest on May 22, 2021

Fig. 3. Conceptual hypothesis of the forces involved in lamellar closing. Blue
arrows indicate the force exerted by surface tension (γ). Black arrows represent the Laplace pressure (p). (A) Dorsal view of a post mortem tongue
(A. colubris) interacting with the air–nectar interface, showing the change
in lamellar position with respect to the change in meniscal width (sagittally
inclined yellow arrows). (B) Cross-section diagrams indicating the surface
energy gradient on the internal menisci outside the nectar (Left) and at
the beginning of the interface (Right). Yellow arrows depict meniscal width
matching the points in the Upper panel. (C) Conceptual representation of
the main forces acting on each lamella. Note that the minimum surface area
state is achieved outside the nectar (Left) and the maximum surface area
state is reached at the beginning of the interface (Right). When the tongue
is leaving the nectar and the fluid no longer covers the outer wall of the lamella, the external component of the surface tension (γ e ) stops operating on
the structure, Laplace pressure (p) begins to act and the surface area tends to
be reduced by the internal component of surface tension (γ i ). The net result is
the bending of the flexible lamella over the stiffer rod. Scale bar, 0.5 mm.

requires no energy expenditure to drive the opening and closing
of the fluid trap.
Discovery of this dynamic nectar-trapping mechanism defies a
consensus almost two centuries old, and has broad implications
for our understanding of the evolution (16, 23, 43), energy
budgets (24, 29, 44), foraging behavior (25, 26, 45), feeding mechanics (33, 41, 42), and morphology of the feeding apparatus
(18, 46, 47) of hummingbirds. Our morphological survey documented the existence of the structures necessary for dynamic
nectar trapping in species of hummingbirds representing all nine
main clades in the family (cf. ref. 48). Thus, it is reasonable to
assume, on the basis of the anatomical evidence, that the dynamic
nectar-trapping mechanism documented here is present in every
species of hummingbird. We suggest that dynamic nectar trapping
is likely to be a component of the feeding mechanics of other
nectarivorous birds with convergent tongue morphologies (26,
28, 41, 49, 50). Mechanistically, dynamic trapping appears likely
to be functionally superior to simple capillarity in two ways: (I) the
9358 ∣

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1016944108

Fig. 4. Conceptual hypothesis for lamellar movements during the licking
(tongue) cycle. (Left column) Frames from the high-speed videos showing
a lateral view of the bill tip and the tongue of a living Indigo-capped Hummingbird (Amazilia cyanifrons). Green arrows identify the cross-sections denoted in the middle column. (Center column) Cross-sections of the tongue tip
showing the shape of the lamellae on each frame in the Left column. (Right
columns) Conceptual depiction of the hypothesized relative contributions of
the most important contributors to lamellar movements on each shape of the
lamellae. Red stands for elastic potential energy (Ue ), blue for surface energy
(γA), and black for Laplace pressure (p). (A) The cycle begins when the tongue
is protruded through a narrow space left when the bill tips are separating
from each other. (B) Tongue penetrating the nectar located in the artificial
feeder on the Left. (C) Maximum protrusion distance of the tongue in this
licking cycle. (D) Tongue leaving the fluid while being retracted inside the
bill. (E) Tongue almost fully retracted inside the bill; when the bill closes
the cycle starts again. Scale bars, 1 mm.

tongue-loading rate is not limited by the nectar displacement inside the tongue grooves (which makes it potentially faster) and,
perhaps more importantly, (ii) the tongue tip can capture fluid
successfully (filling its entire capacity) even in thin layers of nectar.
This should allow hummingbirds to take full advantage of even the
smallest quantity of resource offered in the shortest amount of
time, which also has implications for the minimum volume of nectar a flower must offer in order to attract pollination services.
From a practical point of view, further understanding of this
highly efficient liquid collecting mechanism may be useful in bionics (or biomimicry); for instance, in the development of lowenergy mechanisms for trapping, transporting, and depleting
fluids at high production rates, including surface interactions
at the microscale (e.g., refs. 34–39) with industrial (e.g.. refs. 36
and 37) and biomedical (e.g., ref. 51) applications. But for these
practical applications to be realized, it will be important to answer
the question: How does it work? We offer below, as a hypothesis
to be tested, an initial biophysical explanation of the nectar-trapping mechanism. This conceptual model can serve to generate
testable predictions. Some qualitative predictions can be addressed with observations from this study, but most will require
a deeper mathematical treatment to generate quantitative predictions that are testable with measurements of the tongue action
under a variety of conditions.
Biophysical Hypothesis. We hypothesize that the dynamic nectartrapping process we have observed results from the interplay
among surface tension, Laplace pressure, and the elastic properties
of the keratinous materials making up the tongue tip (Figs. 3 and 4).
Rico-Guevara and Rubega

Future Directions. Now that we have shown how nectar is captured
at the tongue tip, the next step is to document the mechanics and
path of nectar transport along the portions of the tongue that remain outside the nectar and inside the beak. In order to complete
the cycle and initiate the nectar-ingestion process, the bird must
retract the tongue within the bill and offload the trapped nectar,
using an as-yet undocumented process; thereafter the cycle can
start again.
Our videos showing that the tongue is dorsoventrally compressed during protraction (cf. ref. 33, Movie S1), suggest that
nectar offloading might be accomplished during the tongue protrusion phase by the beak tips “squeezing” nectar off the tongue
and into the interior of the bill. It is worth noting that we expect
this nectar offloading to clear fluid only from the distal-most portion of the tongue at the start of every tongue cycle. However,
the portion of the tongue (and attendant grooves) that remains
Rico-Guevara and Rubega

Methods
Morphological Survey of the Tongue Tips. We examined the tongues of 20 species (three adults/sex/species, for a total of 120 specimens) representing the
nine major clades of hummingbirds (Table S1) at magnifications up to 90×.
We scrutinized the hummingbird tongues, focusing on their distal region and
characterizing the three-dimensional arrangement of their different structures (grooves, supporting rods, lamellae). In our survey, we included
morphologically extreme species (e.g., White-tipped Sicklebill Eutoxeres
PNAS ∣

June 7, 2011 ∣

vol. 108 ∣

no. 23 ∣

9359

SEE COMMENTARY

inside the bill would still be filled with nectar and would also need
somehow to be offloaded. Furthermore, after the final lick and
tongue retraction at a given flower, the whole tongue would still
be loaded with nectar. This hypothesis, that hummingbirds are
squeezing nectar from the tongue by protracting it through narrowly opened bill tips, is consistent with the common observation
that wild hummingbirds continue cycling their tongues, with a
much greater protraction distance than would be necessary inside
a flower, even after the tongue has been withdrawn from it.
To actually consume the nectar, the bird must transport the
offloaded nectar into the pharynx, where it can be swallowed.
The mechanics of this crucial last step of nectar feeding is completely unknown, and the understanding of this process requires
further study. Capillary transport of nectar in tongue grooves
alone cannot account for transport of nectar from the tongue into
the pharynx. In the absence of any additional forces, once the
tongue grooves are fully loaded the system should reach equilibrium, and the nectar should cease to move any further. We suspect that a variety of mechanisms (such as suction, surface tension
transport, and hydraulic pressure) are mediated by bill–tongue
interactions actively controlled by the bird in order to move nectar to the pharynx and thence into the esophagus. Achieving an
understanding of this intraoral transport system is likely to be
challenging, because the process cannot be observed directly
through the bill.
The conceptual hypothesis we offer here for the observed
dynamic nectar trapping is in agreement with the empirical data
available on hummingbird foraging preferences (21, 24, 26, 29–
32). Because the force of gravity should be negligible in comparison to other forces during the lamellar closing process (Figs. 3
and 4), no variation in the extraction rate is expected when varying flower position [in contrast to the capillarity models in which
gravity is a determinant (19, 20)] and in fact, none is consistently
seen in experiments with living birds (21, 26). Similarly, given the
Reynolds number (approximately 1–10) for the different interactions at the tongue–fluid boundary, any drag due to viscosity [also
a determinant in the capillarity models (19, 20)] should be overcome by Laplace pressure and surface tension (Figs. 3 and 4).
Higher nectar concentrations are not, therefore, expected to limit
fluid intake rate [nectar volume uptake (μL∕s)]. Hence, the optimal sugar concentration for a foraging hummingbird should not
be limited by the loading portion of the lingual cycle. In contrast,
the capillarity models predict that optimal sugar concentrations
should be in the range of 20–40% (mass/mass) because those
models assume that tongue loading is the rate-limiting step of
uptake (19, 20). Instead, concentrations preferred by living birds
[45–65% (21, 24, 30–32)] are more likely to be determined by
mechanisms of intraoral transport yet to be investigated, or by
physiological constraints on uptake and metabolism of the sugars
in the nectar (52, 53).
Our work raises anew the question: How do hummingbirds
feed? Much work remains before we can explain the whole nectar-feeding process in hummingbirds and other nectarivores.
Achieving a fuller understanding of the mechanics of the nectarfeeding process may help eliminate the disparity between the
theoretical predictions of how birds should act and empirical observations of what they actually do. We believe that investigations
of the physical basis of dynamic nectar trapping can also lead to
new tools for the development of engineering applications in
microfluidics.

APPLIED BIOLOGICAL
SCIENCES

Downloaded by guest on May 22, 2021

We define the start of nectar feeding as the point at which the
bird first approaches and inserts its beak into a flower, with the
tongue inside the closed bill. The bird protrudes its tongue
through a small aperture of the bill tips (cf. ref. 33), and past this
point the tongue continues to be flattened (Fig. 4 A and B, frames
on first column). We posit that at this point (past the compression
point of the bill tips) the cohesive and adhesive forces of liquid
previously trapped inside the tongue and Laplace pressure keep
the lamellae, and hence the grooves, at the tongue tip furled and
in a dorsoventrally flattened configuration (Fig. 4A, cross-section
diagram).
In further support of the idea that physical forces (acting on
the fluid trapped inside the tongue) are responsible for keeping
the lamellae furled, we have observed in post mortem specimens
that when the tongue is completely dry the lamellae open and the
grooves lose their cylindrical shape. Thus lamellar furling stores
potential energy by bending the flexible lamellae. We suggest that
this elastic potential energy is then transformed into kinetic energy when the lamellae unfurl as the tongue enters the nectar.
This occurs because as the lamellae are immersed (with liquid
on both the outside and the inside of the tongue), opposing surface tension forces at the air–nectar interface cancel each other
out (Fig. 3C), allowing the lamellae to open. Thus, inside the liquid, the tongue structures should be released from the forces
acting on them outside the nectar pool (Fig. 4C). Two of our observations are consistent with our hypothesis of the forces acting
on the lamellae. First, as each lamella crosses the air–nectar interface, it unfurls (Fig. 4B); second, as the tongue penetrates further,
the tongue tips separate (Movie S2).
We have also observed (both in vivo and post mortem) that
when the tongue is withdrawn from the liquid, each lamella refurls
as it reaches the air–nectar interface, thereby trapping nectar. We
hypothesize that surface tension at the tongue–fluid interface and
Laplace pressure combine to refurl the structure using the supporting rod as a closing and rotational axis (Fig. 3 B and C and
Movies S3 and S4). In this model, the surface energy acting on
each lamella is expected to build up when the structure approaches the air–nectar interface and should decrease with the
subsequent lamellar furling (Fig. 4 D and E). The combination
of surface tension along the contact line (the change in meniscal
width represented by the three-dimensionally inclined yellow arrows in Fig. 3A) and Laplace pressure should be sufficient to overcome the bending force opposing the lamellar closing (Figs. 3 B
and C and 4E). The magnitude of the bending force involved will
be quantifiable only through an understanding we currently lack
of the physical properties of the keratinized tongue tissue.
Finally, we have observed that when the tongue is entirely free
from the nectar pool, the forked tongue tips stick together again;
we hypothesize that this results from the cohesive and adhesive
forces of the liquid layer between them (Fig. 2A, 25 ms, and
Fig. 4D, cross-section diagram).

Downloaded by guest on May 22, 2021

aquila, with a strongly decurved bill) as well as the species with the longest
and shortest tongues (Sword-billed Hummingbird Ensifera ensifera, and
Purple-backed Thornbill Ramphomicron microrhynchum, respectively). We
used whole, alcohol-preserved specimens from: the Instituto de Ciencias
Naturales, Universidad Nacional de Colombia; the Vertebrate Research
Collection, University of Connecticut; the National Bird Collection, Smithsonian Institution; and the Department of Ornithology, American Museum of
Natural History.

onto and off of the tongue tip (Figs. 2A and 3A and Movies S3 and S4).
We filmed the tongue–fluid interaction by coupling high-speed cameras
(TroubleShooter HR and Phantom Miro eX4) running up to 2;400 frames∕s
to a dissecting microscope (Olympus SZX-12) at magnifications up to 50×
(Movie S4). We also coupled a digital camera (Casio EX-FH20) to the dissecting
microscope to take high-resolution (7 Megapixels) still pictures at
40 frames∕s (Fig. 2A).

In Vivo Filming of the Tongue–Nectar Interactions. We worked at three different elevations (1700, 2400, 2800 m above sea level) in the Andes mountains in
Colombia, South America. We filmed free-living hummingbirds of 10 species
(three individuals per species; Table S1) feeding at flat-sided (as opposed to
tubular, to minimize image distortion) transparent feeders filled with artificial nectar (18.6% mass/mass sucrose concentration). We filmed the tongue–
fluid interactions with high-speed cameras (Phantom Miro eX4, monochrome
and color) with macro lenses (Nikon 105 mm f∕2.8) running at 1;260 frames∕s
(Fig. 4 and Movies S1 and S2).

Animal Welfare Statement. All hummingbird filming activities in this study
were reviewed and authorized by the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee at the University of Connecticut; Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee Exemption Number E09-010.

Laboratory (Post Mortem) Filming of the Tongue–Nectar Interactions. We used
whole tongues of five recently deceased individuals (salvaged specimens) of
four species (Archilochus colubris, Colibri coruscans, Eriocnemis vestita, and
Metallura tyrianthina). We fixed each tongue in place and then slid a drop of
artificial nectar (18.6% sucrose concentration) on a glass microscope slide

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We thank D. Sustaita for extensive feedback, R. Colwell,
K. Schwenk, C. Elphick, T. Fan, and two anonymous reviewers for critical
reading, K. Hurme for substantial comments, C. Clark and R. Prum for the
loan of high-speed cameras, and T. Landberg and B. Ryerson for discussion.
Many thanks to G. Stiles, and the staff of the ornithological collections at the
Universidad Nacional de Colombia, the University of Connecticut, the Smithsonian Institution, and the American Museum of Natural History. This work
was supported by a Multidisciplinary Environmental Research Award from
the Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering of the University
of Connecticut to A.R.-G.

1. Vogel S (1988) Life’s Devices (Princeton Univ Press, Princeton, NJ), pp 82–129.
2. Denny MW (1993) Air and Water (Princeton Univ Press, Princeton, NJ).
3. Tributsch H, Nadeždina N, Čermák J (2006) Infrared images of heat fields around a
linear heater in tree trunks: What can be learned about sap flow measurement?
Ann For Sci 63:1–8.
4. Tyree MT (2003) Plant hydraulics: The ascent of water. Nature 423:923.
5. Suter RB, Rosenberg RB, Loeb S, Wildman H, Long JH (1997) Locomotion on the water
surface: Propulsive mechanisms of the fisher spider Dolomedes triton. J Exp Biol
200:2523–2538.
6. Suter RB, Gruenwald J (2000) Predator avoidance on the water surface? Kinematics
and efficacy of vertical jumping by Dolomedes (Araneae: Pisauridae). J Arachnol
28:201–210.
7. Hu DL, Bush JWM (2005) Meniscus-climbing insects. Nature 437:733–736.
8. Hu DL, Bush JWM (2010) The hydrodynamics of water-walking arthropods. J Fluid
Mech 644:5–33.
9. Rubega MA, Obst BS (1993) Surface-tension feeding in phalaropes: Discovery of a
novel feeding mechanism. Auk 110:169–178.
10. Rubega MA (1997) Surface tension prey transport in shorebirds: How widespread is it?
Ibis 139:488–493.
11. Blossey R (2003) Self-cleaning surfaces: Virtual realities. Nat Mater 2:301–306.
12. Song W, Veiga DD, Custódio CA, Mano JF (2009) Bioinspired degradable substrates
with extreme wettability properties. Adv Mater 21:1830–1834.
13. Parker AR, Lawrence CR (2001) Water capture by a desert beetle. Nature 414:33–34.
14. Zheng Y, et al. (2010) Directional water collection on wetted spider silk. Nature
463:640–643.
15. Schwenk K, Rubega MA (2005) Diversity of vertebrate feeding systems. Physiological
and Ecological Adaptations to Feeding in Vertebrates, eds JM Starck and T Wang
(Science Publishers, Enfield, NH), pp 1–41.
16. Stiles FG (1981) Geographical aspects of bird-flower coevolution, with particular
reference to Central America. Ann Mo Bot Gard 68:323–351.
17. Fleming TH, Muchhala N (2008) Nectar-feeding bird and bat niches in two worlds:
Pantropical comparisons of vertebrate pollination systems. J Biogeogr 35:764–780.
18. Martin WCL (1833) The Naturalist’s Library: A General History of Humming-Birds or the
Trochilidae, ed W Jardine (H.G. Bohn, London), Vol 41, pp 65–68.
19. Kingsolver JG, Daniel TL (1983) Mechanical determinants of nectar feeding strategy
in hummingbirds: Energetics, tongue morphology, and licking behavior. Oecologia
60:214–226.
20. Heyneman AJ (1983) Optimal sugar concentrations of floral nectars: Dependence on
sugar intake efficiency and foraging costs. Oecologia 60:198–213.
21. Tamm S, Gass CL (1986) Energy intake rates and nectar concentration preferences by
hummingbirds. Oecologia 70:20–23.
22. Stromberg MR, Johnsen PB (1990) Hummingbird sweetness preferences: Taste or
viscosity? Condor 92:606–612.
23. Gass CL, Roberts WM (1992) The problem of temporal scale in optimization: Three
contrasting views of hummingbird visits to flowers. Am Nat 140:829–853.
24. Roberts WM (1996) Hummingbirds’ nectar concentration preferences at low volume:
The importance of time scale. Anim Behav 52:361–370.
25. Bateson M, Healy SD, Hurly TA (2003) Context-dependent foraging decisions in rufous
hummingbirds. Proc Biol Sci 270:1271–1276.
26. Collins BG (2008) Nectar intake and foraging efficiency: Responses of honeyeaters and
hummingbirds to variations in floral environments. Auk 125:574–587.
27. Renvoisé P, Bush JWM, Prakash M, Quéré D (2009) Drop propulsion in tapered tubes.
Europhys Lett 86:64003.
28. Köhler A, Leseigneur CDC, Verburgt L, Nicolson SW (2010) Dilute bird nectars: Viscosity
constrains food intake by licking in a sunbird. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol
299:1068–1074.

29. Montgomerie RD (1984) Nectar extraction by hummingbirds: Response to different
floral characters. Oecologia 63:229–236.
30. Stiles FG (1976) Taste preferences, color preferences, and flower choice in hummingbirds. Condor 78:10–26.
31. Van Riper W (1958) Hummingbird feeding preferences. Auk 75:100–101.
32. Pyke GH, Waser NM (1981) The production of dilute nectars by hummingbird and
honeyeater flowers. Biotropica 13:260–270.
33. Ewald PW, Williams WA (1982) Function of the bill and tongue in nectar uptake by
hummingbirds. Auk 99:573–576.
34. Guo X, et al. (2009) Two- and three-dimensional folding of thin film single-crystalline
silicon for photovoltaic power applications. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106:20149–20154.
35. Liu JL, Nie ZX, Jiang WG (2009) Deformation field of the soft substrate induced by
capillary force. Phys B Condensed Matter 404:1195–1199.
36. Vestad T, Marr DWM, Oakey J (2004) Flow control for capillary-pumped microfluidic
systems. J Micromech Microeng 14:1503–1506.
37. Luo JK, et al. (2009) Moving-part-free microfluidic systems for lab-on-a-chip. J Micromech Microeng 19:054001.
38. Bico J, Roman B, Moulin L, Boudaoud A (2004) Elastocapillary coalescence in wet hair.
Nature 432:690.
39. Py C, et al. (2007) Capillary origami: Spontaneous wrapping of a droplet with an elastic
sheet. Phys Rev Lett 98:156103.
40. Weymouth RD, Lasiewski RC, Berger AJ (1964) The tongue apparatus in hummingbirds. Acta Anat 58:252–270.
41. Scharncke H (1931) Contribution to the morphology and developmental evolution of
the tongue of the Trochilidae, Meliphagidae and Picidae (Beiträge zur Morphologie
und Entwicklungsgeschichte der Zunge der Trochilidae, Meliphagidae und Picidae).
J Ornithol 79:425–491 (in German).
42. Hainsworth FR (1973) On the tongue of a hummingbird: Its role in the rate and
energetics of feeding. Comp Biochem Physiol 46:64–78.
43. Stiles FG (1985) Seasonal patterns and coevolution in the hummingbird-flower
community of a Costa Rican subtropical forest. Ornithol Monogr 36:757–787.
44. Weathers WW, Stiles FG (1989) Energetics and water balance in free-living tropical
hummingbirds. Condor 91:324–331.
45. Baum KA, Grant WE (2001) Hummingbird foraging behavior in different patch types:
Simulation of alternative strategies. Ecol Modell 137:201–209.
46. Berns CM, Adams DC (2010) Bill shape and sexual shape dimorphism between
two species of temperate hummingbirds: Black-Chinned hummingbird (Archilochus
alexandri) and Ruby-Throated hummingbird (A. colubris). Auk 127:626–635.
47. Temeles EJ, Roberts WM (1993) Effect of sexual dimorphism in bill length on foraging
behavior: An experimental analysis of hummingbirds. Oecologia 94:87–94.
48. McGuire JA, Witt CC, Remsen JV, Jr, Dudley R, Altshuler DL (2009) A higher-level
taxonomy for hummingbirds. J Ornithol 150:155–165.
49. Paton DC, Collins BG (1989) Bills and tongues of nectar-feeding birds: A review of
morphology, function and performance, with intercontinental comparisons. Austral
Ecol 14:473–506.
50. Downs CT (2004) Some preliminary results of studies on the bill and tongue morphology of Gurney’s Sugarbird and some southern African sunbirds. Ostrich 75:169–175.
51. Sohn YS, et al. (2005) A microbead array chemical sensor using capillary-based sample
introduction: Toward the development of an “electronic tongue”. Biosens Bioelectron
21:303–312.
52. Diamond JM, Karasov WH, Phan D, Carpenter FL (1986) Digestive physiology is a
determinant of foraging bout frequency in hummingbirds. Nature 320:62–63.
53. McWhorter TJ, Martínez del Rio C (2000) Does gut function limit hummingbird food
intake? Physiol Biochem Zool 73:313–324.

9360 ∣

www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1016944108

Rico-Guevara and Rubega

