medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.02.20086231; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

Trends in excess cancer and cardiovascular deaths in Scotland during the COVID-19 pandemic 30
December – 20 April suggest underestimation of COVID-19 related deaths
Jonine D. Figueroa1,2, Paul Brennan2,3, Evropi Theodoratou1,2, Michael Poon1,3, Karin Purshouse4,
Farhat Din5, Kai Jin1, Ines Mesa-Eguiagaray1, Malcolm Dunlop5, Peter Hall2, David Cameron2, Sarah
Wild1, Cathie Sudlow1,3
1
2

Usher Institute, University of Edinburgh, UK

CRUK Edinburgh Cancer Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh,

UK

3
4
5

CRUK Brain Tumour Centre of Excellence, University of Edinburgh, UK

MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, UK

MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Edinburgh, UK

Abstract:

Understanding the trends in causes of death for different diseases during the current COVID-19
pandemic is important to determine whether there are excess deaths beyond what is normally
expected. Using the most recent report from National Records Scotland (NRS) on 29 April 2020, we
examined the percentage difference in crude numbers of deaths in 2020 compared to the average for
2015-2019 by week of death within calendar year. To determine if trends were similar, suggesting
underreporting/underdiagnosed COVID-19 related deaths, we also looked at the trends in % differences
for cardiovascular disease deaths. From the first 17 weeks' of data, we found a peak in excess deaths at
week 14 of 2020, about four weeks after the first case in Scotland was detected on 1 March 2020-- but
by week 17 these excesses had returned to normal levels, 4 weeks after lockdown in the UK began.
Similar observations were seen for cardiovascular disease-related deaths. These observations suggest
that the short-term increase in excess cancer and cardiovascular deaths might be associated with
undetected/unconfirmed deaths related to COVID-19. Both of these conditions make patients more
susceptible to infection and lack of widespread access to testing for COVID-19 are likely to have resulted
in under-estimation of COVID-19 mortality. These data further suggest that the cumulative toll of
COVID-19 on mortality is likely undercounted. More detailed analysis is needed to determine if these
excesses were directly or indirectly related to COVID-19. Disease specific mortality will need constant
monitoring for the foreseeable future as changes occur in increasing capacity and access to testing,
reporting criteria, changes to health services and different measures are implemented to control the
spread of the COVID-19. Multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, national and international collaborations
for complementary and population specific data analysis is required to respond and mitigate adverse
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and to inform planning for future pandemics.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.02.20086231; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

We read with great interest the pre-print article by Lai et al

1

which estimated that the direct and indirect

effects of the COVID-19 emergency could lead to a 20% rise in cancer deaths in the UK and the US. Most
people around the world are affected in some way by the COVID-19 pandemic, but the stresses are
particularly heightened for people with, or being treated for, cancer. Recent data from the ISARIC
project in the UK

2

showed that individuals with any malignancy are at increased risk of death following

COVID-19 infection requiring hospital admission. In addition to being directly susceptible to COVID-19,
there is growing concern that the lockdown in the UK, aimed at reducing virus transmission and allowing
the NHS to cope with the number of patients with severe COVID-19 disease, may be having an
unintentional adverse impact on patients with chronic illnesses, including cancer. The impact of
reticence to attend primary care with symptoms of cancer, deferred referral from primary care,
decreased capacity for optimal investigations to identify new cancers, and deferral of definitive cancer
treatment, such as surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy, may all adversely impact on mode of
presentation and cancer stage in the longer term. In the short term, management of late presentation
of cancer with complications (e.g. bowel obstruction) is also associated with a higher morbidity and
mortality. For instance, there is an approximately 10-fold greater 90 day-mortality for patients
undergoing emergency colorectal cancer resections compared to those undergoing elective surgery

3

(11.5% versus 1.7%) . Furthermore, we have previously shown that elderly patients are the most likely

4

to be disadvantaged by any measures constraining early diagnosis .

Studying the trends in incidence and deaths for different diseases during the current COVID-19
pandemic is important to help policymakers, public health officials, clinicians and the wider public
understand the intended and unintended effects of lockdown. Lai et al call for weekly data on causespecific mortality, which has been noted to have delays in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, where
in 2018 a review of cause of death showed increasing trends in the frequency of reporting delays for all
causes, including neoplasms, with 23% of deaths due to neoplasms are often delayed beyond the 7-day

5

reporting period . By contrast, legislation in Scotland means that it has high-quality and timely

6

registration of deaths, including cause of death, reported weekly . Using the most recent report from
National Records Scotland (NRS)

7

on 29 April 2020, we examined the percentage difference in crude

numbers of deaths in 2020 compared to the average for 2015-2019 by week of death within calendar
year. We also examined the trends in reported cardiovascular disease deaths, another chronic disease
for which there is great concern that there may be direct and indirect adverse effects of the COVID-19
emergency on mortality.

The left panel in the figure shows weekly cancer deaths registered in Scotland from 30 December 2019
to 20 April 2020 compared to the weekly average for the same week over the 5 previous years. During
this time, we note a peak in excess deaths at week 14, about four weeks after the first case in Scotland
was detected on 1 March 2020. The right panel shows a similar trend in the four-week moving average
for both cancer and cardiovascular disease deaths after the first COVID-19 case was registered in
Scotland at week 10, increasing to week 14, when the lockdown began, and declining thereafter. The
observed short-term increase in cancer and cardiovascular deaths might be associated with
undetected/unconfirmed deaths related to COVID-19, given the known issues of lack of widespread
testing for infection and that both conditions increase susceptibility to the disease. These data are

2

consistent with the increase in risk of death noted in the ISARIC UK report , and reaffirm the importance
of dynamic tracking of mortality data during the pandemic. The reduction in cardiovascular related
deaths earlier in the year prior to week 10, compared with previous years, is likely due to a milder

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.02.20086231; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

7-8

influenza season

. Whether trends in excess deaths stabilize beyond 20 April 2020 remains to be

determined as new excesses might occur due to changes in health services and health seeking
behaviors.

There are some important caveats to these data. The number of deaths where the cause has been
reported as “other” deaths by NRS is currently higher for recent past weeks compared to the average for
2015-2019 by week of death within calendar year. Some deaths need an autopsy to determine their
cause (for which results are available relatively quickly), while others need an inquest (which can take
much longer). Some of “other” deaths reported by NRS will change and be redistributed to specific
causes, some of which may be cancer deaths, although this is unlikely to change the general trend of
excess cancer deaths. We examined crude numbers of deaths; more sophisticated age-adjusted and
standardisation could provide more detailed insights. These data need ongoing monitoring for changes
in the trends observed so far, especially if/when lockdown ends.

Incidence of cancer during the COVID-19 pandemic will undoubtedly be affected, especially in the shortterm, with cancer screening services halted and a general hesitancy in seeking medical advice for
problems perceived to be non-urgent. Whether this causes an excess in deaths will require long-term
and detailed linkage studies. Cancer is a heterogeneous condition, with many different subtypes,
different treatment regimens for molecularly distinct cancers at the same anatomical site (e.g.
oestrogen receptor positive versus negative breast cancers), different referral patterns (e.g. breast,
cervix and colorectal have screening programmes to detect cancer at earlier stages) and different
survival patterns.

Understanding the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, the changes to cancer services and cancer
mortality require ongoing monitoring for the foreseeable future as different measures to address the
COVID-19 pandemic are implemented. Multidisciplinary, multi-institutional, national and international
collaborations for complementary and population specific data are needed to plan, respond and
mitigate adverse effects to our populations.

Cancer diagnostic services are frequently over-stretched during normal times and ramping up both
diagnostic and treatment services to cope with the backlog and concurrent new cases will require
substantial resources. The current COVID-19 constraints on investigations and cancer treatment
diagnosis will affect current incident cancers, but it will also affect patients yet to develop cancer, by
creating future bottlenecks on stretched and imperfect diagnostic pathways. If the NHS is not
adequately resourced, we could see new patients continue to be disadvantaged during the post-COVID
catch up and plans to tackle this challenge are desperately needed. Continued monitoring of trends in
incidence and mortality are required.

For now, it is important for cancer patients and all the public to know that while COVID-19 is a public
health crisis, if they feel unwell or need advice the NHS is still open for normal business.

References:

1.

Preprint-Lai A, Pasea L, Banerjee A, et al. Estimating excess mortality in people with cancer and
multimorbidity in the COVID-19 emergency. Apr 2020.
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340984562_Estimating_excess_mortality_in_people_wit
h_cancer_and_multimorbidity_in_the_COVID-19_emergency.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.02.20086231; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder has placed this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) in the Public Domain. It is no longer restricted by copyright. Anyone can legally share, reuse,
remix, or adapt this material for any purpose without crediting the original authors.

2.

Preprint-Docherty AB , Harrison E, Green CA, et al. Features of 16,749 hospitalised UK patients with
COVID-19 using the ISARIC WHO Clinical Characterisation Protocol’.
https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.04.23.20076042v1

3. National Bowel Cancer Audit v2.0 2019 https://www.nboca.org.uk/content/uploads/2020/01/NBOCA2019-V2.0.pdf

4. Clark AJ, Stockton D, Elder A, Wilson RG, Dunlop MG. Assessment of outcomes after colorectal cancer
resection in the elderly as a rationale for screening and early detection. Br J Surg. 2004
Oct;91(10):1345-51. DOI:10.1002/bjs.4601

5. Impact of registration delays on mortality statistics in England and Wales: 2018.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/articles/i
mpactofregistrationdelaysonmortalitystatisticsinenglandandwales/latest

6.

National Records Scotland Weekly deaths statistics https://www.nrscotland.gov.uk/covid19stats

7. UK government Weekly national flu reports: 2019 to 2020 season
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/weekly-national-flu-reports-2019-to-2020-season

8. Stewart, S., Keates, A., Redfern, A. et al. Seasonal variations in cardiovascular disease. Nat Rev Cardiol
14, 654–664 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1038/nrcardio.2017.76

