medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Model of a Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy to
Slow-Down the COVID-19 Outbreak in
Guadeloupe
Meriem Allali1, , Patrick Portecop1, , Michel Carlès2, , and Dominique Gibert3,
1

Emergency Medical Service (SAMU-SAU), University Hospital, Pointe à Pitre, Guadeloupe.
2
Critical Care Department, University Hospital, Pointe à Pitre, Guadeloupe.
3
Univ Lyon, Univ Lyon 1, ENSL, CNRS, UMS 3721, LGL-TPE, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France

Using a stochastic epidemic model explicitly considering the entire population of Guadeloupe (1), we explore the domain of solutions presenting an efficient slowing down of the COVID-19
epidemic spread during the post-containment period. The considered model parameters are the basic reproduction number
R0 to simulate the effects of social distancing, the time delay
δTQ elapsed between the detection of a symptomatic person and
her/his placement in quarantine to suppress her/his contagiousness, and the number Na of asymptomatic people tested positively and isolated. We show that acceptable solutions are obtained for a wide range of parameter values. Thanks to a good
control of the initial epidemic spread resulting from an early
containment and efficient communication by the sanitary and
administrative authorities, the present situation corresponds to
a pre-epidemic state. The most safe solutions are a combinations of social distancing, numerous testing to perform a systematic isolation of symptomatic patients and guided detection of
asymptomatic people in the entourage of localised symptomatic
patients.
COVID-19 | Time-evolution | Guadeloupe | SAMU | Critical care | Monte Carlo
Model | Spread slowdown | Quarantine | Testing
Correspondence: meriem.allali@chu-guadeloupe.fr

Introduction
For the time being,the COVID-19 disease caused by SARSCoV2 continues is rapid worldwide spreading and, according
to the World Health Organisation (Wor, 2020c), as of May
1, 2020, more than 3 millions of people have been infected
causing the death of about 230,000 persons (2). This has
led States to take drastic measures of containment to reduce
and hopefully stop the propagation of SARS-CoV2 across the
population (3, 4). However, containment may not last beyond
two or three months without causing collateral devastating
psychological (4–6), social and economical effects (7). For
instance, after a full month of containment, a growing part of
the French population is already asking for a partial release
of the containment conditions and is concerned with the postcontainment procedures (8).
Several countries seem to have passed the maximum of the
epidemic crisis and are now preparing their post-containment
epoch. Such is the case for France where the daily number
of new infected persons seems to begin to decrease slowly
(9). On April 13, the President of the French Republic, Mr
Macron, indicated that the end of strict containment period

could hopefully start on May 11, 2020. However, it is widely
accepted that any uncontrolled ending of containment would
undoubtedly result in an exponential restart of the COVID-19
infection (10). The main reason is that the number of noninfected represents a large fraction of the population, giving
to the virus a way to again propagate from only few infectious
people. It is of a primary importance to explore and document
the positive and negative effects of the different measures that
could be envisioned to, at least partly, release the containment
for a larger as possible part of the population.
Whatever the means involved to control the end of the containment stage, they all have the objective to reduce the basic
reproduction number, R0 , to an as small as possible value
below 1 in order to suppress any exponential divergence of
the number of infected (and also infectious) persons. In the
case of COVID-19, keeping R0 at or slightly above 1 would
reduce the instantaneous number of infected people and, subsequently, the instantaneous number of severely affected patients needing intensive cares. This procedure maintains the
load of intensive care units below their saturation and guaranties that every patient will benefit of adequate cares. Ultimately, the whole population will have been contaminated
and protected against a novel infection. However, because
of the infection fatality rate of COVID-19, about 1 − 2% of
the population will decease (11, 12). In France, this would
represent the death of approximately 1 million persons. It is
preferable to reduce R0 below 1 in order to stop the spread as
quickly as possible and make the absolute number of infected
persons as small as possible (3).
The present study is a sequel of an article (1) where we propose a predictive model of COVID-19 spreading in Guadeloupe. Presently, this model continues to accurately predict
the new data daily released by the sanitary authorities. In the
present paper, we evaluate the efficiency of testing and isolating people affected by COVID-19. We also consider the
global effects of social distancing through a control of the
basic reproduction number R0 (3). By using a slightly modified version of the model of Allali et al. we give estimates
of the efficiency of the testing-isolating-distancing combination of measures to produce a progressive shutdown of the
COVID-19 spread in Guadeloupe.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
Allali et al.

|

medRχiv

|

May 2, 2020

|

1–9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 1. Flowchart of the possible evolution schemes for the "asymptomatic" and "symptomatic" classes of the model. At time T1 , 4 susceptible persons are infected. At
the beginning, all four patients are asymptomatic (orange areas) and contagious (hatched areas). When becoming symptomatic (red areas), patient S4 is identified, tested
and isolated. The δTQ parameter represents the time-delay elapsed between the apparitions of the symptoms and the moment when the patient is placed in quarantine to
suppress her/his contagiousness. This marks the end of her/his contagiousness period. Asymptomatic patients (e.g. A3 and A2 located in the entourage of S4 are tested
and isolated. Patient A1 remains asymptomatic and undetected all along her/his illness period. In the model, patients S3 and S4 may evolve to other states: "severe",
"critical" and "deceased" (see (1) for details).

Description of the model
The stochastic model proposed by Allali et al. has been
adapted to introduce perturbing operations in the normal epidemic spread process described in our previous article. These
perturbing operations mimic sanitary procedures that modify
the contamination chain and their role is to lower the global
basic reproduction number R0 . We hereafter describe only
the changes applied to the model. The reader is referred to
Allali et al. for a detailed description of the initial model.
The main control parameter to consider is the R0 reproduction number. However, this number encompasses the various
ways by which the contamination by SARS-CoV2 proceeds
and, to reduce R0 , it is necessary to account for the different
step-process over which one may have some action. Following Grassly and Fraser, Ferretti et al. decompose the basic reproduction number of the COVID-19 spread as a sum of four
contributions representing asymptomatic transmission (Ra ),
pre-symptomatic transmission (Rp ), symptomatic transmis2

|

medRχiv

sion (Rs ), and environmental transmission (Re ):
R0 = Ra + Rp + Rs + Re .

(1)

Relying upon a review of clinical and epidemiological data,
Ferretti et al. use: Ra = 0.1, Rp = 0.9, Rs = 0.8 and Re =
0.2 whose sum gives R0 = 2.0. These partial reproduction
numbers are themselves the integrals of non-uniform infectiousness probability functions ξ (noted β by Ferretti et al.).
Because of their relative high values, both Rp and Rs are
the main quantities to reduce in a spread slow-down protocol. To reach this objective, procedures aimed at stopping the
contagiousness of a fraction of infected patients are considered. Owing to the fact that testing everybody everyday is
impossible, even for the 400,000 inhabitants of Guadeloupe,
we consider that the new symptomatic patients are good entry
points. In the present study, we assume that any new symptomatic person is identified, tested and placed in quarantine
in a time delay δTQ after the appearance of the symptoms.
By this way, Rs is diminished by reducing the duration of
contagiousness of symptomatic patients.
Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 2. Flowchart of the stochastic modelling procedure for the model proposed by Allali et al. including the detailed asymptomatic/symptomatic sequence of Figure 1. In this
modified version of the model, a symptomatic patient may evolve toward the "severe" state, the "critical state and the "deceased" state with respective probability ps , pc and
pd . The transition from one state to the next may only occur within time windows noted δTs , δTc and δTd . The recovery time represents the duration after which a patient
in a given state is declared "recovered", they are noted ∆TI , ∆Ts and ∆Tc respectively for the states "symptomatic and asymptomatic", "severe" and "critical".

A reduction of Rp may be obtained by detecting asymptomatic patients in the entourage of every detected symptomatic patient. Such a guided detection procedure is efficient because asymptomatic persons are more likely to be
found near symptomatic patients. Testings are consequently
more efficiently performed. Because the detection procedure
is causal, it is impossible to be sure that all detected asymptomatic people are future pre-symptomatic ones in the sense
of Ferretti et al.. In the present study, we make no distinction
between asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic because such a
distinction can only be made a posteriori. The average number, δNa , of detected asymptomatic people is a parameter
whose threshold value necessary to obtain R0 < 1 has to be
determined by simulation.
Another action, not considered in our model, is to perform
testing on people having high social contacts like, for instance, nurses, teachers, cooks, etc.. and who could have a
high personal R0 .
Figure 1 shows the flowchart of all possible evolution
schemes for the "asymptomatic" and "symptomatic" classes
of the model. At time T1 , some susceptible people are infected and become asymptomatic patients A1 , A2 , A3 , A4 .
Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

Then, some time later, patient A4 becomes symptomatic (S4 )
and is detected and tested within a time delay δTQ after the
apparition of the first symptoms. Once detected, patient S4 is
placed in quarantine and is no more contagious. This results
in a decrease of Rs . At the same time, tests are performed
on people in the entourage of S4 and asymptomatic persons
A2 and A3 are detected and also placed in quarantine, producing a decrease of Ra . In the flowchart of Figure 1, the
asymptomatic patient A1 remains undetected all during the
contagiousness period and is able to contaminate other persons. Both S3 and S4 patients may either recover or evolve
toward "severe", "critical" and "deceased" states (Fig. 2).
To implement the evolution scheme of Figure 1, the stochastic model proposed by Allali et al. has been modified to simulate the very beginning of the period of illness, when newly
infected patients may switch from asymptomatic to symptomatic. By this way, we are able to model the date of appearance of symptoms and decide to apply prescribed testing
and containment procedures. The class of infected people
"minor" in the previous model has been split into 2 classes,
namely: "asymptomatic" and "symptomatic" people. As said
above, the causal nature of our model makes impossible to
medRχiv

|

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

distinguish "asymptomatic" from "pre-symptomatic" persons
as considered by Ferretti et al.. In the present study, these two
classes have been merged into a single one called "asymptomatic".
The contagiousness function ξc corresponding to the "presymptomatic" class is also assigned to our "asymptomatic"
class. This makes the model more pessimistic in order to
make the conclusions more constraining than needed in reality. In the present study, we set ξc as a gamma distribution
with shape and scale parameters respectively equal to 5 and
1.
Following in Linton et al., we represent the switching function ζa/s by a lognormal probability function with mean µζ
and standard deviation σζ to randomly draw the dates of
switching from "asymptomatic" to "symptomatic". In the
present article, we use the right-truncated values of µζ = 5.6
days and σz eta = 3.9 days proposed by Linton et al..
Figure 2 shown the general flowchart of the stochastic model
with the new asymptomatic/symptomatic sequence included.
The other states are identical to those of the model of Allali
et al.. The meaning of the different parameters is given in the
Figure legend and all input parameters are listed in Table 1.

Data
The data used in the present study, are daily communicated
by the University Hospital to the local authorities, i.e. the
Regional Health Agency (Agence Régionale de Santé in
French). They correspond to the cumulative number of persons with COVID-19, the cumulative number of deceased patients and the number of patients presently in intensive care
units. Detailed data for France are made available by Santé
Publique France (9) (see also Alamo et al. for a review of
open data repositories).
Both the cumulative number of deceased patients and the
number of patients presently in intensive care units respectively correspond to ΣNd and Nc in the model. The cumulative number of persons with COVID-19 could be something
between ΣNI and ΣNs , depending on the screening procedure. In France, a majority of the persons tested for COVID19 are patients with severe symptoms and admitted in specialised COVID-19 units. Such is the case in Guadeloupe
and, consequently, the cumulative number of persons with
COVID-19 as announced by ARS correspond to the ΣNs of
the model.
In the present study, we use the data going from March 13
2020 to April 21 2020 shown in Figure 3. The model shown
on this Figure is an update of the model prediction model proposed by Allali et al.. The parameter values of the updated
model are almost identical to those of the former model despite the fact that the contagiousness function ξc is now nonuniform in time.

Results
The principal parameters that may represent the various measures taken to control the epidemic spread during the postcontainment period are R0 , δTQ and Na (Table 1). The basic
4

|

medRχiv

reproduction number R0 represents the overall effect of social distancing and basic hygiene measures. The time delay
δTQ represents the duration between the onset of symptoms
in a patient and the moment when this patient is identified,
tested and isolated. The number Na is the average number
of asymptomatic people that are supposed to be identified in
the entourage of a detected symptomatic patient. We assume
that these asymptomatic patients are isolated simultaneously
with the symptomatic person.
We shall assume that all other parameters are kept unchanged
for all simulations. The values of these parameters are either
taken from literature (17) or determined from the fit with the
data (Figure 3). The parameter values are given in Table 1.
We performed numerous simulations for triplets
(R0 , δTQ , Na ) in the ranges: R0 ∈ (1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0),
δTQ ∈ (1, 2, 3, 4) and 0 ≤ Na ≤ 4. Depending on the values
chosen for the parameters, the model solutions fall into 3
classes:
Diverging solutions. An example of such a solution is

shown in Figure 4 which corresponds to an uncontrolled situation where the exponential growth (Fig. 4A,F) of infected
people continues until the entire population is affected (Fig.
4E). These solutions inevitably conduct to a very large number of critical (ΣNc ≈ 10500) and deceased patients (ΣNd ≈
2800, Fig. 4D). Because of the large instantaneous number
Nc of critical patients, intensive care units are overloaded and
many patients may not receive adequate cares. This failure of
sanitary facilities would induce additional deceased people,
i.e. roughly the sum ΣNc + ΣNd .
Slowdown solutions. These solutions correspond to con-

trolled situations where the exponential spread is rapidly
stopped and followed by a sharp damping of the number of
new infected people (Fig. 5A). The short exponential growing observed at the beginning of the spread occurs during the
delay when no symptomatic patients are declared and isolated. In the model, this delay corresponds to the mean of
the log-normal distribution (see Table 1). For this kind of solutions, the number of critical and deceased patients remains
small (Fig. 5D) when compared with diverging solutions.
The number of persons to isolated every day (black curve in
Fig. 5B) may reach ≈ 200, and adequate logistical and testing facilities are necessary to treat this quantity of people. In
case of failure of these facilities, the situation could rapidly
become uncontrolled and diverging. The 50% envelopes of
the model outputs obtained for the 40 runs (i.e. coloured areas) are narrow, indicating a stability of the stochastic process.
Critical solutions. An example of a critical solution is

shown in Figure 6. These solutions correspond to situations
where the effective reproduction number ≈ 1. In this case,
neither the exponential divergence not the damping are observed at long term. Instead, after a short period of exponential growth, the number of asymptomatic and symptomatic
people oscillates around a constant level during a long duration (Fig. 6A). Similar oscillations are observed in the other
Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 3. Model 1 results. A) semi-logarithmic (Natural logarithm) plot of the cumulative number ΣNs of severe cases. Green bars = data and red bars = model. B)
Instantaneous number NI of infectious. C) same as (A) in linear axis. D) Instantaneous number Nc of critical cases. Green bars = data and red bars = model. E) Cumulative
number ΣNd of deceased patients. Green bars = data and red bars = model. The parameter values used in the model are shown in the upper-right part of the figure together
with the time-variation of the basic reproductive number R0 . The red rectangles represent the 80% confidence interval centred on the median.

curves. The instantaneous number of critical patients, Nc is
maintained at relative high levels (Nc ≈ 50 − 100, Fig. 6D),
and the cumulative number of deceased persons, ΣNd augments linearly. Contrarily to what is observed for the controlled slow-down solutions of Figure 5, the 50% envelopes
of the critical solutions are very wide. This indicates that the
stochastic process is very unstable due to the presence of a bifurcation between diverging and damped solutions (18, 19).
The long-period oscillations visible in several curves (6A-D)
may not be attributed to seasonal effects as described by Aron
and Schwartz but could be due to stochastic resonance (20).
Domains of solutions. We performed a set of simulations

in order to explore the solution domain (R0 , δTQ , Na ) in the
limits given above. Figure 7 shows the sub-domains obtained
for 4 values of R0 = 1.5, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0. All simulations have
been performed with an initial number of contagious persons
ZI = 100. This number, although realistic, is probably too
large, and the results shown in the Figures must be proportionally divided or multiplied to consider a different value
for ZI .
The sub-domain for R0 = 4 corresponds to a situation where
no social distancing is applied. This R0 value is slightly
smaller than the value found before the beginning of the containment, i.e. when no social distancing policies were given,
in the model shown in Figure 3. As can be observed in the
corresponding graph of Figure 7, no slowing down of the epidemic spread can be obtained without both detecting symptomatic and asymptomatic people. In the most favourable
case when δTQ = 1 day, at least 2.5 and even better 3 asympAllali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

tomatic people must be detected each time a symptomatic
patient is identified. Increasing δTQ worsens the situation
with the necessity to detect a larger number of asymptomatic
persons.
When social distancing is applied, we may expect a decrease
of R0 . In such a case, the smaller the R0 the wider the slowing down solution domain (Fig. 7). We observe that even
a reduction of R0 from 4 to 3, an objective that seems very
likely to reach, the slowing down can be obtained with seemingly reasonable conditions: δTQ = 2 days and Na > 2. The
solution domains for R0 = 2 and R0 = 1.5 offer solutions
where it may be unnecessary to systematically detect symptomatic people to obtain a damping of the epidemic spread.
However, it must be emphasised that these solutions do not
converge quickly and they should only be considered as limit
cases.

Concluding remarks
The model used in the present study is an improved version
of the stochastic model proposed by Allali et al.. The improvements concern the explicit distinction of asymptomatic
and symptomatic people and the introduction of a log-normal
distribution ζa/s to represent the switching period between
asymptomatic and symptomatic (Table 1). A non-uniform
contagiousness function ξc is represented by a gamma distribution (Table 1). This improved model allows to simulate the effects of several sanitary measures during the decontainment stage in Guadeloupe: i) the detection and isolation of symptomatic patients, ii) the testing and isolation
of asymptomatic people, iii) a global reduction of the basic
medRχiv

|

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 4. Example of diverging solution obtained for R0 = 4, δTQ = 1 day and Na = 0. The curves represent the median of 40 runs of the model with the same initial
conditions. A) Instantaneous number of asymptomatic (Na ), symptomatic (Ns ) and newly infected (NI ) people. B) Instantaneous number of isolated symptomatic and
newly isolated patients. In this example, no asymptomatic persons are isolated and the total number of isolated people equals the number of isolated symptomatic. C)
Instantaneous number of non-isolated (i.e. infectious) symptomatic and asymptomatic people. Also shown is the number of newly infected person (also shown in A). D)
Instantaneous number of patients in critical state and cumulative number of deceased patients. E) Percentage of the population infected. F) Semi logarithmic plot of the
number of newly infected people (also shown in A and C with linear axes). The origin of the time axis corresponds to the beginning of the post-containment period.

Fig. 5. Example of slow-down solution obtained for R0 = 2, δTQ = 2 days and Na = 3. The coloured areas represent the envelopes of the 50% of models centred on the
median model corresponding to the solid curves. The origin of the time axis corresponds to the beginning of the post-containment period.

6

|

medRχiv

Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 6. Example of critical solution obtained for R0 = 4, δTQ = 2 days and Na = 2.3. The origin of the time axis corresponds to the beginning of the post-containment
period.

Fig. 7. Solution domains (δTq , Na ) obtained for R0 = 4, 3, 2, 1.5. δTQ is the time-delay elapsed between the apparition of symptoms in a patient and the moment when
this patient is placed in quarantine. Na is the average number of asymptomatic persons detected and placed in quarantine when a symptomatic patient is detected. The
green domains represent the models for which the epidemic spread is controlled. The red domains are the set of model for which the epidemic spread is uncontrolled with an
exponential growing. The solid red lines represent the boundary between both domains and where the models are unstable with oscillations and large fluctuations.

reproduction number through social distancing (21).
The simulations performed for different combinations of the
three key parameters, R0 , δTQ and Na , allowed to identify
3 main types of solutions: diverging exponential, slowdown
damped and critical. These classes of solutions define two
domains in the parameter space where conditions conduct either to an exponential spread of the disease or, instead, to a
rapid damping of the exponential growth and a cease of the
epidemic spread (Fig. 7). Critical solutions, where no exponential divergence occurs but where a sustained production
of infected people remains, are located on a narrow boundary
separating the two domains (red solid lines in Fig. 7).
Our simulations show that relatively wide domains of slowdown solutions exist provided the basic reproduction number
R0 ≤ 2 (Fig. 7). These solutions are clearly those that should
be engaged to control the epidemic spread. Owing to the
fact that in normal conditions without any social distancing
measures R0 ≈ 4.5 in Guadeloupe (1), it can be concluded
Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

that the condition R0 ≤ 2 can only be obtained by applying
some social distancing measures with no strict containment
excepted for all symptomatic patients and a subset of asymptomatic people.
At the time of completing the present paper, the French Government just issues his post-containment policy based on a
mapping of the present (i.e. April 30, 2020) sanitary conditions in each French department. Guadeloupe belongs to the
most favourable cases, with a sharp decrease of the number
of new infected people (see Fig. 3A,C). This success certainly results from the conjunction of several positive factors,
in particular: i) the fact that the epidemic spread started a
few days before the beginning of the containment produced
a rapid decrease of R0 ; ii) the island nature of Guadeloupe
enabled a tight control of possibly infected incoming passengers; iii) an efficient and coordinated actions from all sanitary
and administrative authorities resulting in clear and coherent
messages sent to the population. This good control of the epimedRχiv

|

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

demic spread was already visible in the study by Allali et al.
where all model solutions indicated a rapid decrease of R0 .
The management of the post-containment period strongly depends on the number ZI of infected people present in the territory at the beginning of the period. This number depends
on the fraction of asymptomatic people who may concur to
the propagation of the virus. It is commonly assumed that
asymptomatic people represent about 20%, as used in our
model. However, values up to 40% seem possible (11, 12).
In the case of Guadeloupe, considering that 12 patients are
deceased from COVID-19 by May 1, 2020, and taking an
IFR = 0.7% (11), we find a total of 1700 infected persons,
representing less than 0.4% of the population of Guadeloupe.
Using these figures, at the beginning of the post-containment
period scheduled on May 11, 2020, we may expect that the
situation in Guadeloupe will correspond to a pre-epidemic
situation, where only some tens of infected persons will be
present on the territory among a non-immune population. In
this case, one may envision that sanitary procedures successfully applied by several countries to contain and quickly stop
the epidemic spread at its very beginning are likely to be successful in Guadeloupe. In the case of Singapore (22), spread
control was mainly due to early detection of cases through
testing and contact tracing around known cases in a way similar to our modelling assumptions described above. The case
of Singapore shows that such procedures can be applied without creating a major disruption to daily living.
Returning to the case of Guadeloupe, we must consider that
certainly not all symptomatic patients will be detected in the
δTQ delay and that social distancing will not be applied in
several isolated groups of people. Consequently, a safety
margin must be kept in mind when looking for solutions, and
our simulations show that R0 = 2, δTQ = 2 days and Na = 3
(Fig. 5) ensure an efficient slowing down with a very small
number of critical and deceased people. This simulation also
shows that, at the maximum of the crisis, about 80 symptomatic and asymptomatic people will have to be detected
and isolated every day ("New isolated" curve in Fig. 5B).
Supposing that only 10% of tested persons are really infected
asymptomatic, it is then necessary to be able to perform at
least 1000 tests per day to reach the objective of an average
of 3 asymptomatic persons detected for 1 symptomatic. This
objective corresponds to a slowdown solution in all four domains of Figure 7 with a preference for the cases of Fig. 7C,D
to ensure a sufficiently large distance with the critical boundary. This clearly supposes the involvement of a numerous
team of sanitary people to accomplish this task. In addition,
the detection of clusters of contaminated people belonging to
groups that do not apply social distancing rules should deserve a particular attention (12, 23).

3. Oliva Bendtsen Cano, Sabrina Cano Morales, and Claus Bendtsen. Covid-19 modelling:
the effects of social distancing. medRxiv, 2020.
4. Yixuan Wang, Yuyi Wang, Yan Chen, and Qingsong Qin. Unique epidemiological and clinical
features of the emerging 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19) implicate special
control measures. Journal of medical virology, 92(6):568–576, 2020.
5. Cyrus SH Ho, Cornelia Yi Chee, and Roger Cm Ho. Mental health strategies to combat the
psychological impact of covid-19 beyond paranoia and panic. Ann Acad Med Singapore, 49
(1):1–3, 2020.
6. Emily A Holmes, Rory C O’Connor, V Hugh Perry, Irene Tracey, Simon Wessely, Louise
Arseneault, Clive Ballard, Helen Christensen, Roxane Cohen Silver, Ian Everall, et al. Multidisciplinary research priorities for the covid-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental health
science. The Lancet Psychiatry, 2020.
7. Warwick J McKibbin and Roshen Fernando. The global macroeconomic impacts of covid19: Seven scenarios. 2020.
8. Huffington Post.
Tracker covid-19 - le huffpost, 2020 (accessed April 25,
2020).
https://docs.cdn.yougov.com/uq3ysojalx/Results%20for%
20YouGovFR1%20(Coronavirus%20tracker_%20w6).pdf.
9. Santé
Publique
France.
Guadeloupe
2020,
2020
(accessed
April
2,
2020).
https://www.data.gouv.fr/fr/datasets/
donnees-hospitalieres-relatives-a-lepidemie-de-covid-19/.
10. Shunqing Xu and Yuanyuan Li. Beware of the second wave of covid-19. The Lancet, 2020.
11. Robert Verity, Lucy C Okell, Ilaria Dorigatti, Peter Winskill, Charles Whittaker, Natsuko Imai,
Gina Cuomo-Dannenburg, Hayley Thompson, Patrick Walker, Han Fu, et al. Estimates of
the severity of covid-19 disease. MedRxiv, 2020.
12. Arnaud Fontanet, Laura Tondeur, Yoann Madec, Rebecca Grant, Camille Besombes,
Nathalie Jolly, Sandrine Fernandes Pellerin, Marie-Noelle Ungeheuer, Isabelle Cailleau,
Lucie Kuhmel, et al. Cluster of covid-19 in northern france: A retrospective closed cohort
study. medRxiv, 2020.
13. Nicholas C Grassly and Christophe Fraser. Mathematical models of infectious disease
transmission. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 6(6):477–487, 2008.
14. Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner,
Michael Parker, David Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission
suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science, 2020.
15. Natalie M Linton, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov, Sung-mok Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura. Incubation
period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with
right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available case data. Journal of clinical
medicine, 9(2):538, 2020.
16. Teodoro Alamo, Daniel G Reina, Martina Mammarella, and Alberto Abella. Open data
resources for fighting covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06111, 2020.
17. Minah Park, Alex R Cook, Jue Tao Lim, Yinxiaohe Sun, and Borame L Dickens. A systematic
review of covid-19 epidemiology based on current evidence. Journal of Clinical Medicine, 9
(4):967, 2020.
18. Joan L Aron and Ira B Schwartz. Seasonality and period-doubling bifurcations in an epidemic model. Journal of theoretical biology, 110(4):665–679, 1984.
19. Hui Cao, Yicang Zhou, and Baojun Song. Complex dynamics of discrete seis models with
simple demography. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2011, 2011.
20. Rachel Kuske, Luis F Gordillo, and Priscilla Greenwood. Sustained oscillations via coherence resonance in sir. Journal of theoretical biology, 245(3):459–469, 2007.
21. Joel Hellewell, Sam Abbott, Amy Gimma, Nikos I Bosse, Christopher I Jarvis, Timothy W
Russell, James D Munday, Adam J Kucharski, W John Edmunds, Fiona Sun, et al. Feasibility of controlling covid-19 outbreaks by isolation of cases and contacts. The Lancet Global
Health, 2020.
22. Vernon J Lee, Calvin J Chiew, and Wei Xin Khong. Interrupting transmission of covid-19:
lessons from containment efforts in singapore. Journal of Travel Medicine, 2020.
23. Susanne Pfefferle, Robin Kobbe, Thomas Guenther, Dominik Noerz, Rene Santer, Jun Oh,
Stefan Kluge, Lisa Oestereich, Kersten Peldschus, Daniela Indenbirken, et al. Infection
control and virological assessment of the first cluster of covid-19 in northern germany. 2020.
24. Kenji Mizumoto, Katsushi Kagaya, Alexander Zarebski, and Gerardo Chowell. Estimating
the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) cases on board the
diamond princess cruise ship, yokohama, japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(10):2000180,
2020.

Supplementary Note 1: Model parameters

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Bibliography
1. Meriem Allali, Patrick Portecop, Michel Carlès, and Dominique Gibert. Prediction of the
time evolution of the covid-19 disease in guadeloupe with a stochastic evolutionary model.
medRxiv, 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.12.20063008.
2. World Health Organization et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): situation report, 67.
2020.

8

|

medRχiv

Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.01.20088138; this version posted May 6, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter name
Basic reproduction number
Detection delay

Symbol
R0
δTQ

Value
1.5, 2, 3, 4
1, 2, 3, 4

Number of detected asymptomatic

Na

0 to 4

Number of initial asymptomatic

ZI

100

Switching function (lognormal)

ζa/s

Contagiousness function (gamma)

ξc

Fraction of asymptomatic people

αa

µζ = 5.6
(days)
σζ = 3.9
(days)
αξ = 5
(shape)
βξ = 1
(scale)
0.20

Recovery time of asymptomatic
and symptomatic
Recovery time of critical
Recovery time of severe
Switching period from symptomatic to severe
Switching period from severe to
critical
Switching period from critical to
deceased
Switching probability from symptomatic to severe
Switching probability from severe
to critical
Switching probability from critical
to deceased

∆Ts

14 days

∆Tc
∆TI
δTs

21 days
14 days
4-10 days

δTc

0-4 days

δTd

2-4 days

ps

0.14

pc

0.25

pd

0.35

Comment
Time-varying parameter through the contagiousness function ξc .
This parameter is a time difference defined as the delay (in days)
between the apparition of symptoms in a patient and the moment
when this patient is placed in quarantine. This represents the
time delay taken by the sanitary authorities to tackle stop the
contagiousness of a symptomatic patient.
Number of asymptomatic people detected in the entourage of
each detected symptomatic patient.
This is a conservative value for ZI , and the model fitting to the
data available up to now (Fig. 3) indicates that a smaller value for
ZI may be expected. The results obtained with ZI = 100 may
be proportionally multiplied or divided to account for different
values of ZI .
This probability function give the switching time dependence
of the contagiousness of asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic and
symptomatic people. ζa/s is taken as a lognormal distribution
with mean and standard deviation given by Ferretti et al..
Represents the time dependence of the contagiousness of asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic and symptomatic people. ξc is taken
as a gamma distribution (15). In the model, the mean and standard deviation are respectively equal to 5 and 2.2 days.
αa represents the fraction of asymptomatic with respect to symptomatic patients. αa = 0.2 corresponds to 20% of asymptomatic
and 80% of symptomatic. The value taken in this study is given
by Mizumoto et al..
Patients who remained in a given state during the
corresponding recovery time is automatically
switched to the "removed" state.
Time window during which a patient may switch
to the next evolution state. For example, a
"severe" patient may switch to "critical" from day
0 to day 4. After day 4, the patient is supposed
medically stabilised. The switching date is
randomly drawn in the time window.
Probability to switch to the newt state during the
switching period.

Table 1. Model input parameters. The three first top parameters in the Table (R0 , δTQ , Na ) have changing values in the different simulations. Other parameters remain
unchanged for all simulations.

Allali et al.

|

Testing-and-Quarantine Strategy for COVID-19 Slow-Down

medRχiv

|

9

