medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Screening for SARS-CoV-2 infections with
colorimetric RT-LAMP and LAMP sequencing
Viet Loan Dao Thi1,2*, Konrad Herbst3§, Kathleen Boerner2,4§, Matthias Meurer3§, Lukas PM
Kremer3,5,6, Daniel Kirrmaier3,5, Andrew Freistaedter1,2, Dimitrios Papagiannidis3, Carla
Galmozzi3,6, Steffen Klein1,2, Petr Chlanda1,2, Dina Khalid2, Isabel Barreto Miranda2, Paul
Schnitzler2, Hans-Georg Kräusslich2,4, Michael Knop3,5,6*, and Simon Anders3*
1

2

3
4
5
6
§

Schaller Research Groups, Center of Infectious Diseases, Department of Virology, Heidelberg University
Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany
Center of Infectious Diseases, Department of Virology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg,
Germany
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), Heidelberg, Germany
German Center for Infection Research (DZIF), Heidelberg, Germany
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ-ZMBH Alliance, Heidelberg, Germany
equal contribution

* Correspondence to: VietLoan.DaoThi@med.uni-heidelberg.de, M.Knop@zmbh.uni-heidelberg.de,
S.Anders@zmbh.uni-heidelberg.de

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic caused by the novel SARS-CoV-2 virus poses a significant publichealth problem. In order to control the pandemic, rapid tests for detecting existing
infections and assessing virus spread are critical.
Approaches to detect viral RNA based on reverse transcription loop-mediated
isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) hold outstanding promise towards greatly simplified
and broadly applicable testing methods. RT-LAMP assays appear more robust than qPCRbased methods and only require incubation at a constant temperature, thus eliminating
the need for sophisticated instrumentation.
Here, we tested a two-color RT-LAMP protocol using clinical SARS-CoV-2 samples and also
established a protocol that does not require prior RNA isolation (“swab-to-RT-LAMP”). Our
study is based on several hundred clinical patient samples with a wide range of viral loads,
thus allowing, for the first time, to accurately determine the sensitivity and specificity of
the RT-LAMP assay for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in patients. We found that RT-LAMP
can reliably detect SARS-CoV-2 samples with a qPCR threshold cycle number (CT value) of
up to 30 in the standard RT-qPCR assay. We used both, either purified RNA or direct
pharyngeal swab specimens and showed that RT-LAMP assays have, despite a decreased
sensitivity compared to RT-qPCR, excellent specificity. We also developed a multiplexed
LAMP-sequencing protocol as a diagnostic and validation procedure to detect and record
the outcome of RT-LAMP assays. LAMP-sequencing is fully scalable and can assess the
results of thousands of LAMP reactions in parallel. Finally, we propose applications of RTLAMP based assays for SARS-CoV-2 detection.
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The outbreak of a pandemic caused by a new coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2 (Zhu et al.,
2020), poses major challenges for national health care systems. A yet rather unspecified
proportion of people, especially the elderly and those with pre-existing conditions, are at
high risk of a severe course of the SARS-CoV-2-induced disease COVID-19 (Phua et al.,
2020). This can lead to a high burden on the health care system resulting in a situation
where not all patients can receive adequate treatment. Further, due to limited capacities,
only people with symptoms are usually being tested, although recent studies confirmed
that many SARS-CoV-2 carriers are asymptomatic (Mizumoto et al., 2020, Arons et al.,
2020). This suggests that infection-control strategies focussing on symptomatic patients
are not sufficient to prevent virus spread.
Therefore, large scale diagnostic procedures are needed to determine the spread of
the virus in the population quickly, comprehensively, and sensitively. This allows for the
rapid isolation of infected persons during an existing wave of infection and helps to identify
newly emerging outbreaks; and further for measures to slow down the pandemic, to adapt
the capacity of the health care system to the expected number of patients, and distribute
essential resources. Moreover, continuous and repeated testing for acute infections of
large groups within a population will be required as a long-term perspective to contain new
outbreaks while keeping societies and economies functional until efficient vaccines
become available.
An active SARS-CoV-2 infection can be diagnosed by detecting the viral genome or
viral antigens in patient samples. An assay for the latter is limited by the sensitivity,
specificity, and production speed of diagnostic antibodies, while detecting viral genomes
only requires specific oligonucleotides, which facilitates testing of large cohorts.
The SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic pipeline which has proven to be successful and which is
currently used in many test centers consists of three steps: collecting nasopharyngeal or
oropharyngeal swab specimens, isolation of total RNA, and specific detection of the viral
genome by RT-qPCR which includes a reverse transcriptase (RT) step, translating the viral
RNA into DNA, followed by a semi-quantitative DNA polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) using
oligonucleotides specific for the viral cDNA (RT-qPCR). As a result, a short piece of the
viral genome is strongly amplified, which is detected by a sequence-specific
oligonucleotide-probe labelled with a fluorescent dye.
This procedure includes several steps that require liquid handling; therefore, the
detection process in a clinical diagnostics laboratory takes about 3 to 24 hours or more,
depending on the sample volume and process optimization of the test center. In addition,
in the context of the pandemic, many of the reagents required are only slowly being
replenished due to insufficient production capacity or lack of international transport.
Therefore, increasing daily test capacities based on RT-qPCR-based SARS-CoV-2 diagnostics
is limited. In order to accelerate and optimize diagnostics, new, scalable methods for RNA
isolation and the detection of viral genomes are needed.
An alternative to RT-qPCR is reverse transcription loop mediated isothermal amplification
(RT-LAMP) (Notomi et al., 2000; Nagamine et al., 2002; Tomita et al., 2008). RT-LAMP
reactions include a reverse transcriptase as well as a DNA polymerase with strong strand
displacement activity and tolerance for elevated temperatures, and up to six DNA

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

oligonucleotides of a certain architecture. Samples with potential template molecules are
added to the reaction and incubated for 20–60 minutes at a constant temperature (e.g.
65°C). The oligos act as primers for the reverse transcriptase and additional oligos for the
DNA polymerase that are designed so the DNA products loop back at their ends. These in
turn serve as self-priming templates for the DNA polymerase. In the presence of a few RNA
template molecules, a chain reaction is set in motion, which then runs until the added
reagents (e.g., dNTPs) are used up.
In order to detect the DNA production in LAMP assays, various approaches have been
described in the literature. One possibility is to use a pH indicator (e.g. phenol red) and
run the reaction in a weakly buffered environment. As the chain reaction proceeds, the
pH lowered, which results in a visible color change from red to yellow making it an
especially appealing assay for point-of-care diagnostics (Tanner et al., 2015). Previously,
RT-LAMP assays have been proposed for diagnostic detection of other RNA viruses, such as
e.g. influenza (Ito et al., 2006). Also, several preprints demonstrate the use of isothermal
DNA amplification to detect small amounts of SARS-CoV-2 RNA. The majority of these
studies used in vitro transcribed short fragments of the viral genomic RNA (Yu et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2020; El-Tholoth et al., 2020) and showed a detection limit of somewhere
between 10-100 RNA molecules per reaction.
We therefore set out and assessed the sensitivity and selectivity of the RT-LAMP assay
to detect SARS-CoV-2 infections from clinical RNA preparations as well as directly from
pharyngeal swab specimens (termed “swab-to-RT-LAMP assay”) from COVID-19 patients.
Here, we used a sufficient sample size with a wide viral load range allowing for the first
time to determine accurately the sensitivity range of the colorimetric RT-LAMP assay for
the detection of SARS-CoV-2 in patients. An overview of the samples available to us is
shown in Figure 1.
The performance of an RT-LAMP test does not require expensive special equipment
such as a thermal cycler with real time fluorescence measurement, as positive samples are
determined by a color change in the sample from red to yellow within 30 min after start
of the incubation at 65 °C. For detection, simple mobile phone cameras, copy machines,
office scanners to spectrophotometric quantification can be used. We then describe a
multiplexed sequencing protocol using barcoded tagmentation that enables rapid

Figure 1. SARS-CoV-2/COVID-19 samples used in this study. Samples available for this study were
derived from COVID-19 tests from the hospital or a municipal testing station and surplus material
was passed on to us, usually within a few hours to one day after the hospital diagnostic laboratory
had removed an aliquot for qPCR analysis. Aliquots of the samples were used for individual assays
or for seed plate generation (96-well format) for multiplexed analyses.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

identification of correct and false positive reactions in many thousands of RT-LAMP assays
within the same next-generation sequencing run, e.g. using Illumina dye or Oxford
nanopore sequencing.
Together, the results of this study allow a critical evaluation of the RT-LAMP colorimetric
reaction for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in patient samples. Our data show the
limitations of the RT-LAMP method, but also the possibilities and different applications of
a simplified 'hot swab-to-RT-LAMP' procedure, which does not require any purification of
the swab specimen

Results
Sensitivity of colorimetric RT-LAMP assay using artificial SARS-CoV-2 RNA template
To validate the detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA RT-LAMP, we used the WarmStart
Colorimetric RT-LAMP 2X Master Mix (DNA & RNA) from New England Biolabs. Several primer
sets were recently proposed for RT-LAMP-based detection of SARS-CoV-2 by Zhang et al.
(2020) as well as by Yu et al. (2020) and subsequently validated with in vitro translated
RNA. We prepared and tested two primer sets for different RNA sections of the SARS CoV2 genome, namely Zhang et al's set N-A (targeting N gene) and their set 1a-A (targeting
ORF 1a gene) (Table 1, Materials and Methods). Figure 2 shows that the oligo set for the N
gene is capable of detecting 100 in vitro transcribed (IVT) RNA molecules in a test reaction
with 1 microliter (µl) of RNA solution. To put this into perspective: Wölfel et al. (2020)
found that COVID-19 patients showed up to 7×108 RNA copies per throat swab in the first
week after infection. Assuming a quantitative extraction of all RNA molecules in the
sample, this should equal a concentration of up to several million RNA molecules per 1 µl

Figure 2: Sensitivity of the RT-LAMP test with IVT RNA. (a) Defined numbers of in vitro transcribed
(IVT) RNA molecules of N gene were added to the reaction and incubated at 65 °C. At indicated
times, samples were taken out of the heating block, cooled on ice to stop the reaction, and
photographed. (b) 5 µl of the RT-LAMP reaction product (after 60 min) were analysed on a 2% agarose
gel. The typical band pattern of a successful RT-LAMP reaction was visible in the samples with 100
or more RNA molecules, i.e., in those samples that showed a color change after 30 minutes. Upon
prolonged incubation at 65°C, in the case of the colorimetric assay for timepoints > 30-35 min, the
negative control becomes yellowish and non-specific DNA smear appears when loaded on a gel. This
is a well known problem with RT-LAMP (Gadkar et al., 2018).

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

of RNA extract, depending on the efficiency and concentration factor of the used RNA
extraction protocol. Thus, the RT-LAMP reaction should be sufficiently sensitive for a
reliable detection of SARS CoV-2 viruses even in patients with a much lower pharyngeal
viral load.
To further establish the sensitivity and stability of RT-LAMP reagents and assay, we
also explored storage of the premixed reaction at different temperatures, temperature
optima of the RT-LAMP assay, and sensitivity of different primer sets (see Methods and
Supplementary Discussion and Comments). In conclusion, the primer set N-A for the N gene
appears to provide the best sensitivity for detection of RNA. Premixed primer/RT-LAMP
reagents can be stored at –20° overnight (but not longer), and they should not be stored
for more than 30 to 60 min on ice before use. We also noticed that exposure to air (open
tubes) leads to an acidification of the reaction mix, which, due to its low buffer capacity,
rapidly changes its color.
Establishing colorimetric RT-LAMP test with clinical samples
For evaluation of the RT-LAMP test procedure with patient samples, its sensitivity and
specificity has to be compared with a validated RT-qPCR method.
To do so, we first compared the detection of viral RNA in 95 human RNA extracts from
pharyngeal swabs both by RT-qPCR and by the RT-LAMP assay using primer sets against ORF
1a and the N gene (Figure 3). To visualize the RT-LAMP reaction, the photo-function of a
normal mobile phone is sufficient (Figure 3a). To quantify the reaction, the difference in
absorbance (ΔOD) of the samples at 434 nm and 560 nm (corresponding to the absorbance
maxima of the two forms of phenol red that is used in the RT-LAMP assay as pH-sensitive
dye) was measured. For measurement a Tecan Spark Cyto plate scanner was used, but any
plate scanner that allows OD measurements at different wavelengths can be used. ΔOD
values were compared in a scatter plot with the CT values of the standard RT-qPCR of the
hospital laboratory's routine diagnostic pipeline (which used primers against the E gene)
(Figure 3b). The used RT-LAMP enzyme mix contains oligonucleotide-based aptamers that
function as reversible inhibitors for the RTx (reverse transcription xenopolymerase) and
Bst 2.0 (strand-displacing polymerase) enzyme present in the reaction. This allowed
stopping of the reaction at different timepoints by cooling the samples on ice and
inspecting the color visually (Figure 3a) or by measuring ΔOD at a given time point of
incubation at 65°C (e.g. ΔOD30min) (Figure 3c). We noted that interruption of the reaction
by cooling on ice for extended periods of up to 20 min is possible without loss of sensitivity.
Usually the color change is detected in positive samples at timepoints > 10 min, and all
positive samples have changed at 30 min. Further incubation led to color changes in
negative samples. Inspection of the color curves revealed a wide gap between positive and
negative samples, indicating that measurement in the time window from 25 to 30 min
yields very robust results: negative samples had an absorbance difference below 0 and
positive an absorbance difference well above +0.3 (Figure 3b).
Comparison of RT-LAMP positive samples with the CT values from RT-qPCR showed
that for N-A oligos all patient samples with a CT < 30 showed a color change in the RTLAMP test, whereas for CT values between 30–35, a color change was observed for 1/10
patient samples. We also tested other oligos, e.g. oligos against ORF1a gene, which
revealed a lower sensitivity of detection (Supplementary Figure 1). We concluded that the
RT-LAMP test with the primer set against the N gene could robustly detect SARS-CoV-2

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3: Sensitivity and specificity of the colorimetric RT-LAMP test with clinical samples in
comparison to RT-qPCR (a) Isolated RNA from 95 pharyngeal swabs (Figure 1) were processed for a
RT-LAMP reaction. The RT-LAMP reaction was incubated at 65°C, stopped at different time points
by cooling on ice for 30 sec, and the plate was photographed with a mobile phone. The image shown
was taken 30 min after the start of the incubation at 65°C. Wells with yellow color: color change
due to successful RT-LAMP amplification of a fragment of SARS-CoV-2 N gene (oligos N-A, see
Methods). (b) Quantification of the color change in all wells using spectrophotometric OD
measurements of the color change at two wavelengths 434 nm and 560 nm at the given time points.
The color change is given as the difference between the absorbances at the two wavelengths (ΔOD
= OD434 nm - OD560 nm). Yellow, positive samples yield a ΔOD of approximately 0.3–0.4. Each line
represents one sample, the line color codes for the sample's CT value from RT-qPCR (see legend)
(c) Comparison of the RT-LAMP results from (b) for time point 30 minutes with the CT values from
RT-qPCR.

infection in patient samples with a CT value below 30 and we decided to use this primer
set for all further experiments.
Validation of colorimetric RT-LAMP for SARS-CoV-2 testing using a large cohort
In order to ensure the specificity and selectivity of the test, it must be demonstrated that
the test works with RNA samples obtained on different RNA extraction platforms, and that
it is robust against the subject-to-subject heterogeneity of material obtained from
pharyngeal swabs. Therefore, we analyzed further RNA samples, to a total of 792
pharyngeal swabs taken from the hospital laboratory's clinical routine tests, for which RNA
had been extracted using different platforms (QiaSymphony and QiaCube, Qiagen). A
visualisation of the data, again taken 30 minutes after the start of the incubation at 65 °C,

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

showed comparable behaviour of the samples on all ten plates that were run (represented
by different colors in Figure 4a). This meant that none of the extraction protocols affected
the RT-LAMP test significantly.
We considered an absorbance difference above +0.3 as a positive and equal or below
+0.3 as a negative result. Overall, RT-qPCR positive samples with a CT-value < 30 scored
positive in RT-LAMP assay, whereas samples with CT values between 30 and 40 mostly
scored negative. We observed small differences between different plates on the exact
sensitivity threshold, probably caused by slight variability in plate or reagent handling or
individual samples. We observed two RT-qPCR negative samples that scored positive in the
RT-LAMP (Figure 4a). The overall specificity of the test was 99.7% (Wilson's 95% confidence
interval: 98.9% – 99.9%), the sensitivity for samples with CT < 30 was 92.0% (Wilson's 95%
confidence interval: 84.3% – 96.0%). For details, see Figure 4b and Supplementary Table
S1.
Multiplexed sequencing of RT-LAMP products (LAMP-sequencing)
So far the results indicated that the colorimetric RT-LAMP offers a robust readout after 25–
30 min incubation at 65 °C. However, some negative samples occasionally also turned
yellow upon prolonged incubation (Figure 2a). It is known that RT-LAMP reactions can
occasionally generate spurious amplicons, especially in the absence of target sequences
and upon prolonged incubation, resulting in false positive results (Gadkar et al., 2018). By

Figure 4: Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in patient samples using the RT-LAMP assay. (a) Scatter
plot to visualize all samples across the ten test plates. RT-LAMP quantification as shown in Figure
3c. Time point of measurement: 30 min after the start of the 65°C incubation. See Supplementary
Table S1 for counts. The plate shown in Figure 3 is not included here. (b) Sensitivity and specificity
of the RT-LAMP assay, as inferred from the data shown in (a). Left: The specificity (i.e., the fraction
of qPCR negatives correctly identified as negative by the RT-LAMP assay) and its 95% CI. Right: Blackhorizontal lines give, for several ranges of CT values, the sensitivity of the test (i.e., the proportion
of samples within this CT range that the test detects as positive). The gray boxes indicate the 95%
confidence intervals (Wilson's binomial CI) for these values. Sample numbers are indicated at the
bottom.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

electrophoresis, these samples do not show the characteristic ladder for a successful RTLAMP (Figure 2b).
A scalable approach to further verify RT-LAMP results unambiguously would hence be
useful. LAMP reactions yield DNA products of heterogeneous structure which is why we
needed to use a sequencing strategy that is as unbiased as possible as well as fully
scalable in order to allow the analysis of the large number of samples involved. To this
end, we established LAMP-sequencing, a fully scalable multiplexed sequencing strategy
using Tn5 tagmentation. This allowed us to enrich LAMP-specific amplicons without
selecting for a certain subset of LAMP products. We used a set of 96 barcoded adapters to
barcode the RT-LAMP reaction products in 96-well plates. These adapters also contained
unique molecular identifiers (UMIs) for quantification purposes (Kiviola et al., 2011). After
tagmentation, the barcoded fragments were pooled and size-selected by bead purification
to remove excess adapters. A second set of barcoded primers was then used to amplify the
pooled tagmented RT-LAMP fragments (Figure 5a). Analysis of the sequences allowed us to
unambiguously identify for each well whether the RT-LAMP reaction yielded a product that
incorporated the viral genomic sequence.
LAMP-sequencing yielded results for 789 of the 792 samples previously evaluated by
RT-LAMP, confirming almost all of the findings of the colorimetric scoring of the RT-LAMP
assay (Figure 5, Supplementary Figure S2, Table 2). All samples which appeared positive in
LAMP-sequencing also scored positive in the RT-LAMP and RT-qPCR assays, indicating an
exceptional precision. LAMP-sequencing is directly dependent on the RT-LAMP reaction.
We observed two negative samples in the sequencing which had scored positive in the RTLAMP reaction, indicating that these were false positives of the colorimetric RT-LAMP assay
(compare Figure 4a and Figure 5a). Overall, we could show that LAMP-sequencing can serve
as a powerful validation tool for a large number of RT-LAMP assays in high-throughput. In
addition, LAMP-sequencing confirmed our high threshold for positive RT-LAMP samples as
spurious amplification in some RT-LAMP samples did result in a weak colorimetric shift but
not in detectable virus sequences.
Swab-to-RT-LAMP assays using crude specimen
RNA isolation is time-consuming, costly, and depends on reagents with potentially
limited supply in the course of a pandemic. Alternative, non-commercial solutions for RNA
isolation, e.g. using silica gel matrix or magnetic beads, require specialized knowledge and
cannot be implemented easily for point-of-care or decentralized patient screening.
Several reports indicate that RT-qPCR (Bruce et al., 2020, Smyrlaki et al., 2020, Wee
et al. 2020) and RT-LAMP assays (Lamb et al. 2020, Rabe and Cepko 2020) are compatible
with direct testing of nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab specimens without a prior
purification or extraction step (in the following termed ‘swab-to-RT-LAMP’ for RT-LAMP
assays), but these studies relied on detecting spiked-in IVT RNA. Towards establishing RTLAMP assays with crude specimens, we first wanted to assess the stability of ‘naked’ RNA
in swab specimens, which were collected in Amies medium (eSwab, Copan Italia). To this
end we titrated defined numbers of IVT RNA molecules of SARS-CoV-2 N gene into swab
samples from COVID-19 negative control subjects. We tested different conditions, in
particular the influence of detergent (to inactivate the virus) and heat (to denature the

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5: Multiplexed sequencing of RT-LAMP products (LAMP-sequencing) (a) Workflow for
LAMP-sequencing. We used a plate of 96 barcoded adaptors that included unique molecular
identifiers (UMIs) for Tn5 tagmentation of the RT-LAMP products for each 96-well RT-LAMP
reaction. Tagmentation involves one pipetting step per RT-LAMP reaction plate, before the
samples from each plate can be pooled. After purification and size selection of tagmented
fragments, one PCR per plate is used to introduce a second barcode, one for each plate.
Afterwards, the samples were analyzed using an Illumina NextSeq 550 run. (b) Comparison of RTLAMP, RT-qPCR, and sequencing results for all samples detected during sequencing. The left panel
shows the results for a total of ten plates, comprising the same plates as shown in Figure 4. The
sequencing outcome is color-coded: black if a substantial number of reads contained SARS-CoV-2
sequence, white otherwise. While the RT-LAMP test was scored after 30 minutes of incubation,
the sequencing was performed after the samples had been incubated for 40 minutes (which yields
the spurious LAMP reactions in negative samples, as shown by the high ΔOD value for many of
them). Therefore, we show the RT-LAMP score after both 30 minutes (left) and 40 minutes (right)
total incubation time. For statistical parameters, see Supplementary Table S2.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6: RNA stability and limit of detection of RT-LAMP assay in pharyngeal swab specimens
with IVT RNA. SARS-CoV-2 RNA titration in control specimen by RT-LAMP (a) Defined numbers of
molecules of IVT RNA of gene N were added to aliquots of control specimen adjusted or not to 0.1%
SDS and/or treated with RNAse inhibitor as indicated, n=2. Control specimens from different
negative patients were spiked with RNA or DNA before (b and c), between (d) or after (e) heat
treatment (95 °C / 5 mins). RT-LAMP was performed at 65°C for 30 mins, followed by measuring
absorbance (OD) at 434 and 560 nm.

capsid and release the viral RNA as well as inactivate the virus). Heat treatment has been
LAMP assays with crude specimens, we first wanted to assess the stability of ‘naked’ RNA
in swab specimens, which were collected in Amies medium (eSwab, Copan Italia). To this
end we titrated defined numbers of IVT RNA molecules of SARS-CoV-2 N gene into swab
samples from COVID-19 negative control subjects. We tested different conditions, in
particular the influence of detergent (to inactivate the virus) and heat (to denature the
capsid and release the viral RNA as well as inactivate the virus). Heat treatment has been
shown to be beneficial for testing swab specimens without RNA isolation in RT-qPCR assays
(Fomsgaard et al., 2020).
As shown in Figure 6a, IVT RNA when spiked into swabs taken from control (COVID-19
negative) test subjects, is hardly detected by RT-LAMP, most likely indicating degradation
of the RNA. Neither the addition of SDS or a heat-stable RNAse inhibitor prevented this
rapid degradation. Similarly, IVT RNA added before heat incubation of swab specimens at

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

95 °C for 5 mins failed to be detected by a RT-LAMP assay, with slight differences
depending on the swab specimen tested (Figure 6b). However, when DNA instead of RNA
was used, much higher stability was observed (Figure 6c).
This difference between DNA and RNA could indicate the presence of RNAses or
decomposition of the (chemically much less stable) RNA in the swab specimen due to heat
incubation. However, IVT RNA that was added to heat incubated samples, followed by a
second heat incubation, was still detected in the RT-LAMP assay (Figure 6d). Therefore,
RNAses, and not heat, are the likely cause for the degradation of the IVT RNA. On the other
hand, heat incubation is likely to inactivate RNAses, but does not affect the IVT RNA.
Indeed, IVT RNA added after heat incubation could be detected in a subsequently
conducted RT-LAMP assay with the RT-LAMP-specific sensitivity of approx 100 copies per
µl sample (Figure 6e).
This analysis suggests that heat-inactivated swab specimens should be stable enough
to allow detection of RNA, as long as no other components of these samples interfere with
the RT-LAMP reaction.
In contrast to exogenous IVT RNA, the viral RNA in swab specimens of COVID-19 patients is
present either inside cells or in viral capsids. This probably protects the RNA from RNAses
until the sample is used for diagnostics. We next titrated a positive COVID-19 sample
(CT=21) into control specimens from COVID-19 negative test subjects, alone or in the
presence of 0.1% SDS. This SDS concentration was determined empirically to not disturb a
subsequent RT-LAMP assay, when diluted 1:20 in the RT-LAMP mixture. The mixed extracts
were then used for RT-LAMP, without (Figure 7a) and with (Figure 7b) heat treatment. In
the absence of SDS, the viral RNA from the positive sample could still be detected at a
dilution of 1:4096, while it was not detected at all in the presence of SDS, indicating that
SDS leads to the release of RNAses and that the RNAs detected in the RT-LAMP assay are
susceptible to degradation by these RNAses. We again tried to block degradation using an
RNAse inhibitor that is active at 65°C (SUPERase-In RNase Inhibitor, Invitrogen), but
without success (Figure 7).

Figure 7: Swab-to-RT-LAMP assay titration of positive COVID-19 specimen. (a) A high titer
positive COVID-19 specimen was diluted in control specimens and treated or not with 0.1% SDS
and/or RNAse inhibitor as indicated, prior to RT-LAMP assay, n=2. (b) A high titer positive COVID19 specimen was diluted in control specimens, heated (95 °C / 5 min) and then treated or not as
indicated, prior to RT-LAMP assay. RT-LAMP was performed at 65 °C for 30 mins, followed by
measuring absorbance (OD) at 434 nm and 560 nm.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

These experiments established that, in addition to heat-treated swab specimens (hot
swab-to-RT-LAMP assay), also ‘native’ swab specimens (direct swab-to-RT-LAMP assay)
could be used directly for sensitive detection of viral RNA from a SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Testing the swab-to-RT-LAMP assay on a collection of patient samples
Based on these preliminary experiments, we decided to use swab samples either directly,
without any treatment, or after heat incubation for 5 min at 95 °C. As an additional
precaution we kept the samples in the cold (e.g. on ice) wherever possible. For testing
large numbers of patient samples, we performed the assay in several 96-well plates. As
shown in Figure 8 and Table 3, the majority of highly positive samples with CT < 30 induced
a strong color change 30 mins into the RT-LAMP reaction. We have experienced that some

Figure 8: Direct swab-to-RT-LAMP assay on COVID-19 patient samples. (a) Scatter plot to
visualize all samples of the swab-to-RT-LAMP assay test plates in one picture. Time point of
measurement: 30 min after the start of the 65 °C incubation. For the left panel, samples were
assayed directly (direct swab-to-RT LAMP), for the right panel, the samples were first incubated at
95°C for 5 minutes, placed on ice and then used in the RT-LAMP assay (hot swab-to-RT LAMP). See
Table 3 for counts. (b) Sensitivity and specificity of the RT-LAMP assay, as inferred from the data
shown in (a) using the decision threshold indicated by the gray line in (a). Left: The specificity
(i.e., the fraction of qPCR negatives correctly identified as negative by the RT-LAMP assay) and its
95% CI. Right: Thicker horizontal lines give, for several ranges of CT values, the sensitivity of the
test (i.e., the proportion of samples within this CT range that the test detects as positive). The
colored boxes indicate the 95% confidence intervals (Wilson's binomial CI) for these values. Sample
numbers are indicated at the bottom. For statistical parameters, see Supplementary Table S3.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

positive samples do not induce a color change but did so when assayed a second time. We
therefore recommend running this assay at least using technical duplicates.
For the direct swab-to-RT-LAMP assay overall specificity was 94.1 % (Wilson's 95% CI:
89.2% – 96.9%), with a sensitivity for samples CT 0-25 93.8% (Wilson's 95% CI: 71.7% – 98.9%)
and for samples CT 25-30 35.3 % (Wilson's 95% CI:17.3% – 58.7%).
For the hot swab-to-RT-LAMP, the overall specificity was 99.5 % (Wilson's 95% CI: 97.4%
– 99.9%) with a sensitivity for samples CT 0-25 90.5% (Wilson's 95% CI: 77.9% – 94.9%) and
for samples CT 25-30 77.3 % (Wilson's 95% CI:56.6% – 77.8%). For more details, see Figure
8b and Supplementary Table S3. The heat treatment renders the assay more stringent with
few false positives and at the same time more sensitive for samples CT 25-30 (defining a
threshold at 0.3).
Heterogeneity of pH specimen in swab-to-RT-LAMP assays
Comparison of the results of the swab-to-RT-LAMP assays with the isolated RNA
revealed a much broader distribution of the ΔOD measurements in negative samples (Figure
9a, compared to Figure 3b). This is likely due to the patient-specific sample variability that
influences the starting pH in the LAMP reaction. This might affect the interpretability of
the measurement at 30 min (ΔOD30min). We investigated how this pH-shift influences the
RT-LAMP assay. For three plates, the data acquired for the RT-LAMP assay also included
measurements for time point 10 min (ΔOD10min). We plotted the change of the ΔOD between
time points 10 min and 30 min (i.e. the difference ΔOD30min – ΔOD10min, corresponding to the
slope of the lines) versus ΔOD30min (Figure 9b). This removed the variability of the values
for samples that did not change the color (negative samples) and permitted a better
separation of the positive from the negative samples.
We noticed that the pH-variability depended on the sample volume used for the RTLAMP assay and the media composition of the swabs. For swabs in Amies medium (which
was used for the clinical samples in this study) an RT-LAMP assay containing 1 µl of sample
in a total volume of 20 µl was optimal.
In summary, the results obtained using native and heat-treated swab specimens from
patients suggested better performance when using heat treatment of COVID-19 swab
specimens prior to RT-LAMP assay.

Discussion
Primers
In this study we evaluated the use and suitability of RT-LAMP for the detection of SARSCoV-2 infections in patients. We first compared primers and identified one primer set to
detect SARS-CoV-2 N gene as the best, in agreement with Badhra et al., (2020) and Zhang
et al. (2020). This coincides with the observation of Viehweger et al. (2020) that this gene
showed the highest read coverage of all coronavirus genes when they sequenced RNA from
tissue culture cells infected with coronavirus HCoV-229E. Using isolated IVT RNA, we
established that the detection limit of RT-LAMP using N gene primers is approximately 100
copies, as reported by others (Lu et al. 2020).

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 9: Scoring direct and hot swab-to-RT-LAMP by colorimetric changes over time. (a)
Colorimetric read-out for swab-to-RT-LAMP, assessed every 10 minutes. Note the heterogeneity at
the early time points. Heat treated samples are kept always on ice prior to incubation at 65°C.
Therefore, we did not measure the ΔOD values at time point 0 min for this experiment. Also, time
point 40 min was not available for one plate, and the kink in some lines of the right panel (at 30
min) was due to a transient equipment malfunction. (b) The samples shown here are those labelled
in Figure 8 with the three colors at the bottom of the color legend.

Decreased sensitivity of RT-LAMP in comparison to RT-qPCR
After establishing RT-LAMP for the detection of SARS-CoV-2 IVT RNA, we tested clinical
samples. Using isolated RNA or direct swab specimens from COVID-19 patients, we found
that RT-LAMP reliably detects SARS-CoV-2 IVT RNA in samples up to a CT ≈ 30 in RT-qPCR
with a reported sensitivity and specificity values of RT-LAMP for SARS-CoV-2 detection in
this study (99.7% specificity, 92.0% sensitivity for samples with CT < 30, Figure 4).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA in samples from convalescent patients with low viral load
and RT-qPCR test result with CT of > 30 often tested negative in the preceding or the
subsequent RT-qPCR test. This could result from fluctuating viral load. During
convalescence, Wölfel et al. (2020) detected less than one RNA molecule per µl of
pharyngeal swab. Taken into account that the input of a typical RT-qPCR is equivalent to
approximately 1-2% of a swab sample, this low number of molecules could result in a
stochastic detection efficiency.
Based on our data we can conclude that RT-LAMP assays are suitable to recognize
patients with a high viral load. On the other hand, for patients with low viral load (at the
onset or later stages of disease), the sensitivity of RT-LAMP is insufficient to detect a SARSCoV-2 infection. Whether alternative sampling, e.g. using sputum or stool, might be more
reliable (Wölfel et al., 2020), is still under discussion, but it is certainly less practical for
mass testing. Here, saliva samples collected according to the protocol of Wyllie et al.
(2020) might offer advantages, if it turns out to be as sensitive as recent reports suggest.
Direct and hot swab-to-RT-LAMP assays
While faster and more convenient, the direct swab-to-RT-LAMP assay is less sensitive
and less robust than RT-LAMP using isolated RNA. To increase robustness, various
treatments of crude swab samples are described (reviewed by Ribeiro da Silva et al.
(2020)), many of which require additional processing of the samples by pipetting, as for
example, adding Proteinase K to degrade contaminating proteins. However, Proteinase K
has the same temperature optimum as the RT-LAMP reaction (65°C) and heat inactivation
is not 100% efficient, even when incubating at 95°C for 10 min (see FAQ pages on
www.qiagen.com), thus exposing the enzymes in the RT-LAMP reaction to unpredictable
proteolytic influences. Rabe and Cepko (2020) suggest to use cheap silika preparation and
novel sample inactivation protocols to enrich the RNA prior to LAMP, which however would
come at the expense of complicating the simple swab-to-RT-LAMP workflow.
Finally, our analysis found that a short heat treatment of 5 min at 95 °C, which poses
minimal additional handling steps, does not destroy the RNA but rather stabilised it in the
inactivated specimen, and improved the sensitivity and specificity of the swab-to-RT-LAMP
assay (Figure 8). The heat likely helps to homogenize the sample, inactivate RNAses, and
to break up the viral capsid to release the viral RNA.
Overall, our data clearly demonstrate the feasibility of swab-to-RT-LAMP testing and
suggest applications especially in scenarios where no alternatives, such as RNA isolation
before RT-LAMP or RT-qPCR tests, are available, e.g., due to shortages or in resource-poor
settings. One promising lead for future applications is the exploration of hot swab-to-RTLAMP with saliva specimens, which may show a higher sensitivity than in oropharyngeal
swab specimens (To et al., 2020; Wyllie et al., 2020). Compatibility of RT-LAMP with direct
saliva specimens has been shown before but only using spiked-in IVT RNA (Badhra et al.,
2020, Rabe and Cepko 2020).
If RNA isolation is not an option, the hot swab-to-RT-LAMP performs best, whereas
direct swab-to-RT-LAMP yields a substantial number of false positives, due to spurious
amplification as also found elsewhere (Butler et al., (2020); Supplementary Figure S5,
version 5 of the preprint). In general, while spike-in experiments with IVT RNA are
somewhat informative, we have experienced clear differences when comparing to real
swab specimens (Figure 6 and 7). We therefore strongly recommend validating any novel
proposed rapid test for SARS-CoV-2 diagnostic using “real-life” clinical samples including a

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

large fraction of negative clinical samples. To overcome the problem of spurious
amplification, besides the solutions we propose here, also an expanded oligo set that
incorporates sequence-specific probes (Bhadra et al., 2020) or a CRISPR/Cas12a based
approach (Broughton et al., 2020) could be used. But these applications have yet to be
tested with large numbers of diverse samples.
Application of RT-LAMP for SARS-CoV-2 testing
With its good sensitivity for samples up to CT ≈ 30, the colorimetric RT-LAMP assay has
several advantages to offer: It is fast, inexpensive, and it can be evaluated without any
equipment. RT-LAMP reactions also appear to be less sensitive to contaminants in the
sample; but care has to be taken that the used sample does not alter the pH, since the
colorimetric RT-LAMP assay occurs under conditions of weak pH buffering. This is likely the
bottleneck of the colorimetric RT-LAMP assay, which we found to work optimally with an
input of 1 μl into the reaction. This corresponds to only 10% of the input used for the RTqPCR. Some clinical samples contain high levels of contaminants which can lead to
acidification of the reaction independent of the presence of a template RNA if too much
sample is added (see also Supplementary Comments and Discussion for a detailed list of
considerations and observations).
Diagnostic RT-qPCR tests usually include a technical internal control, i.e., another
RNA species, which is spiked into all samples. This internal control is detected independent
of the gene of interest to safeguard against the possibility of a general reaction failure
within a sample tube. It would be desirable to have a similar precaution for RT-LAMP.
Implementing such an approach for RT-LAMP with fluorescence read-out by multiplexing
will likely be possible, but at the dispense of the simplicity of a colorimetric readout.
We see the potential role of RT-LAMP in the fight against the pandemic as follows: In
settings where conventional diagnostic capacities are not exhausted, RT-qPCR tests with
regulatory approval should be used for the diagnostic testing of suspected COVID-19
patients. Wherever available capacity allows so, regular testing of hospital personnel
should also be continued with RT-qPCR, maybe in combination with sample pooling
strategies to reach a higher throughput (Shani-Narkiss et al., 2020). Potential applications
for RT-LAMP lie where the capacity of RT-qPCR cannot offer sufficient throughput as it is
the case for needed mass screenings. Following the identification of one or few positive
cases one can then apply "test, trace, and isolate" protocols using RT-qPCR to test this
person's contacts or everyone in their facility.
An important case here is sentinel testing: Especially in periods of the pandemic
where social distancing has been relaxed due to a reduced rate of new infections, it is
important to develop simple to implement instruments to test larger populations or
selected cohorts. As we may expect that a local outbreak quickly comprises several
individuals, it is more likely to detect at least one of them if priority is given to performing
a large number of tests over using fewer but more sensitive tests.
Application of LAMP-sequencing
We demonstrated a strategy to sequence the products of the LAMP reactions using
multiplexed sample processing. Our particular implementation uses two sets of barcoded
primers and is fully scalable so that in one sequencing run, many thousands of LAMP
reactions can be quantitatively analyzed for the presence of viral genomic sequences.
While we used Illumina dye sequencing on a NextSeq 550, more compartementalizable

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

sequencing technologies, such as Oxford Nanopore Technologies sequencing, could be used
for amplicon sequencing and counting (Buchmuller et al., 2019). The workflows shown here
use LAMP-sequencing as a validation and backup procedure to double check the results of
visual RT-LAMP assays. However, LAMP-sequencing could also facilitate upscaling of the
workflows towards a direct analysis of many thousands of samples in an efficient manner,
provided that an infrastructure is established that allows the collection of them. This could
become an important part of workflows for routine testing of large populations.
The Zheng lab proposed decentralized LAMP assays using combinatorial primer
barcoding and centralized mass analysis of LAMP products by next-generation sequencing
as a means to upscale test-numbers dramatically (Schmid-Burgk et al., 2020). While this
poses additional challenges in generating the LAMP reagents, it would reduce the challenge
of sample handling on the analytical side.
In conclusion, we have comprehensively established how RT-LAMP could be used to
implement testing for SARS-CoV-2 at a very high throughput, thus presenting a potentially
highly effective instrument to combat the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.

Methods and materials
Patient samples and sample handling
Specimens were collected as nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal flocked swabs in Amies
medium (eSwab, Copan Italia). Collected samples were transported in sterile containers,
delivered to the diagnostic laboratory within a few hours, and then examined directly or
stored at 4°C until further processing.
RNA isolation and RT-qPCR
The standard diagnostic pipeline of the hospital laboratory was as follows: RNA was isolated
from nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab specimens using QIAGEN Kits (QIAGEN,
Hilden, Germany); either automated on the QIASymphony (DSP Virus/Pathogen mini Kits)
or QIAcube (QIAamp Viral RNA mini Kits) devices, or manually (QIAamp Viral RNA mini Kits),
and eluted in 115 μl elution buffer. 10 μl of extracted sample was used in a 20 μl RT-qPCR
reaction. RT-qPCR was carried out using various reagent mixes – LightMix Modular SARS and
Wuhan CoV E-gene, LightMix Modular SARS and Wuhan CoV N-gene, LightMix Modular Wuhan
CoV RdRP-gene and LightMix Modular EAV RNA Extraction Control (as internal Control) from
TIB MOLBIOL Syntheselabor GmbH (Berlin, Germany) and LightCycler Multiplex RNA Virus
Master (Roche, Germany) – according to manufacturer's instructions. RT-qPCR was
performed on a LightCycler 480 or 480 II (Roche, Germany). Thermal profile was as follows:
reverse transcription step at 55 °C for 5 min, followed by denaturation at 95°C for 5 min,
and 45 amplification cycles (denaturation at 95°C 5 sec, annealing at 60°C 15 sec, and
elongation at 72°C for 15 sec). For most incoming samples, PCR was performed first for
gene E as a screen. Positive samples (CP≤ 40) were further analyzed for N gene and RdRP
using the LightMix sets.
RT-LAMP primer design and positive control
The RT-LAMP primer sets used in this study are designed against the ORF1a and N genes
(Zhang et al., 2020) and were synthesized by Sigma-Aldrich (synthesis scale: 0.025 µmol,
purification: desalt, solution: water). The sequences and the concentrations of each

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

oligonucleotide in the 10x primer mix used for the RT-LAMP assay can be found in
Supplementary Table S4.
An RNA positive control for N gene was obtained by amplifying a short fragment from 2019nCoV_N_Positive Control plasmid (IDT, 10006625) with oligonucleotides T7-GeneNFragment.for and GeneN-Fragment.rev including the T7 promoter and a subsequent IVT
with the MEGAscript T7 Kit (Invitrogen) purified using RNeasy MinElute Cleanup Kit
(Qiagen).
RT-LAMP assay
The assays were assembled in total reaction volumes of either 12.5 or 20 µl. Master mixes
were prepared at room temperature for each reaction with 1x (6.25 or 10 µl respectively)
of the WarmStart Colorimetric RT-LAMP 2X Master Mix (M1800, NEB) and 1x (1.25 or 2 µl
respectively) of the 10x primer mix, filled up to 11.5 or 19 µl with nuclease-free water
(AM9937, Ambion). 1 µl of sample was added and the reactions were incubated in a PCR
cycler at 65 °C for 15 - 60 min with the lid heated to 75 °C. To take photographs or
measurements at the indicated time points the reactions were taken out of the PCR cycler
and placed into a 4 °C cooling block for 30 sec to intensify the red and yellow color prior
to the measurement. Photographs were taken with cell phone cameras.
Quantification of the RT-LAMP reaction
Absorbance measurements of assays in 96-well PCR plates (4ti-0960/C, Brooks Life Sciences
or 0030128672, Eppendorf) sealed with optically clear adhesive seals (GK480-OS, Kisker
Biotech) were performed with a Spark Cyto or Infinite M200 (Tecan) at 434 and 560 nm
with 25 flashes. These two peaks from phenol red are strongly changing during the
acidification of the reaction (434 nm absorbance is increased, 560 nm absorbance is
decreased), so we were subtracting the absorbance at 560 nm from the one at 434 nm to
get a good readout of the color change.
Swab-to-RT-LAMP assays
For direct and hot swab-to-RT-LAMP assays, patient swab specimens were transferred onto
a 96-well plate. For direct swab-to-RT-LAMP assays, 1 µl of the patient specimens was
added directly to the RT-LAMP mix in a ready-made plate with 19 µl LAMP mix per well.
For hot swab-to-RT-LAMP assay, the plate with the specimens was sealed with a seal and
heated in a PCR cycler for 5 mins at 95 °C (with the lid heated to 105 °C). The plate was
cooled down to 4 °C and 1 µl of the heat-treated patient specimens was quickly added to
a ready-made plate with 19 µl LAMP mix per well. Plates with direct and hot swab-to-RTLAMP assays were sealed, briefly spun down, and then incubated in a PCR cycler at 65 °C
for 10 - 60 min (with the lid heated to 75 °C). To measure OD changes, the plates were
removed at the indicated time points, quickly cooled down to 4 °C, and measured using a
Tecan reader (as described above). For time measurements, only the time at 65°C was
counted.
Data analysis
All data was analysed using R (R Core Team, 2020), using the tidyverse (Wickham et al.,
2019), and ggplot2 system (Wickham, 2016), or using Graphpad Prism. Sensitivity and
specificity values were obtained from count tables as indicated, binomial confidence
intervals for these figures were calculated using Wilson's method. The R code used to

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

perform analyses and produce figures can be found on GitHub, together with well/samplelevel data tables: https://github.com/anders-biostat/LAMP-Paper-Figures
LAMP-sequencing procedure
Sequencing libraries for detecting viral sequences in RT-LAMP products were prepared by
a modified Anchor-Seq protocol (Meurer et al., 2018; Buchmuller et al., 2019) using
tagmentation instead of sonication for gDNA fragmentation (Picelli et al., 2014). The
relevant primers are summarized in Supplementary Table S5.
In detail, transposon adapters containing well-defining barcodes and UMIs were
annealed by mixing 25 µM of oligos (P5-UMI-xi501…5096-ME.fw, Tn5hY-Rd2-Wat-SC3) in 5
µM Tris-HCl (pH 8), incubating at 99 °C for 5 min, and slowly cooling down to 20 °C within
15 min in a thermocycler. Transposons were assembled by mixing 100 ng/µl Tn5(E54K,
L372P) transposase (purified according to Hennig et al., 2018) with 1.25 µM annealed
adapters in 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and incubating the reaction for 1 h at 23 °C.
Tagmentation was carried out by mixing 1.2 µl RT-LAMP product (~200 ng DNA) with freshly
prepared tagmentation buffer (10 mM TAPS, pH 8.5; 5 mM MgCl2, 10 % (v/v)
dimethylformamide) and 1.5 µl loaded transposase, and the reaction was incubated at
55 °C for 10 min. Reactions were stopped by adding SDS to a final concentration of 0.033
%. Tagmented DNA of each plate was pooled and size-selected using a two-step AMPureXP
bead (Beckman Coulter) purification to target for fragments between 300 and 600 bp. First,
50 µl pooled reaction was mixed with 50 µl water and bound to 55 µl beads to remove large
fragments. To further remove small fragments, the supernatant of this reaction was added
to 25 µl fresh beads and further purified using two washes with 80 % Ethanol before the
samples were finally eluted in 10 µl 5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8. One PCR per plate with 1 µl of
the eluate and RT-LAMP-specific and Tn5-adapter-specific primers (P7nxt-GeneN-A-LBrc
and P7-xi701..16, P5.fw) was performed using NEBNext Q5 HotStart polymerase (New
England BioLabs) with two cycles at 62 °C for annealing and 90 seconds elongation,
followed by two cycles at 65 °C for annealing and 90 seconds elongation, and 13 cycles at
72 °C annealing and 90 seconds elongation. All PCR reactions were combined and 19 % of
this pool was size-selected for 400-550 bp using a 2 % agarose/TAE gel and column
purification (Macherey-Nagel). The final sequencing library was quantified by qPCR (NEB)
and sequenced with a paired-end sequencing run on a NextSeq 550 machine (Illumina) with
20 % phiX spike-in and 136 cycles for the first read, 11 cycles to read the 11 nt long plateindex (i7) and 20 cycles to read the 11 nt-long well-index (i5) and the 9 nt-long UMI.
Reads were assigned to wells and counted using custom scripts. A read was considered
as a match to SARS-CoV-2 N gene if at least one of three short sequences (~10 nt) not
covered by RT-LAMP primers were observed, otherwise it was counted as unmatched.
Sequencing reads were grouped by UMI and matched sequence positions with the aim to
account for PCR amplification bias.
Ethics statement
The intent of the work was for clinical methods development, as a response to the COVID19 emergency. In this work we used pseudo-anonymized surplus material from samples that
had been collected for clinical diagnostics of SARS-CoV-2. This is in accordance with the
German Act concerning the Ethical Review of Research Involving Humans, which allows

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

development and improvement of diagnostic assays using patient samples which were
collected to perform the testing in question.
Acknowledgments
We thank Vicent Pelechano (Karolinska), Xiushan Yin (Shenyang University of Chemical
Technology), and Volker Lohmann (University of Heidelberg) for discussions and sharing
unpublished work, Uta Merle for providing specimens and the Diagnostic department at
University Hospital Heidelberg for providing isolated RNA from COVID-19 patients. We
thank Vera Sonntag-Buck, Anke-Mareil Heuser, Ina Ambiel, Sophie Winter, Thorsten Müller,
and Susanne Horner for excellent technical support. We thank Alexey Uvarovskii and
Svetlana Ovchinnikova for IT support and Sylvia Kreger and Ursula Jäkle for additional
technical help. VLDT and AF were supported by the Chica and Heinz Schaller foundation.
DK was funded through internal funds from the DKFZ.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: VLDT, MK, and SA, Methodology: VLDT, KH, MM, KB, DK, MK, and SA,
Investigation: VLDT, KH, MM, KB, DK, AF, LPMK, DP, CG, SK, PC, DK, IBM, PS, MK, and SA,
Formal Analysis: VLDT, KH, PC, LPMK, MK, and SA, Supervision: VLDT, KB, HGK, MK, and SA
Administration: MK, HGK, IBM, KB, PS, and SA, Writing – Original Draft: VLDT, KH, MK and
SA, Writing – Review and Editing: all authors.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest

References
A itken et al. (2020): Scalable and resilient SARS-CoV-2 testing in an academic centre.
medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.19.20071373
Arons et al. (2020): Presymptomatic SARS-CoV-2 infections and transmission in a skilled
nursing facility. New England Journal of Medicine. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2008457
Bhadra et al. (2020): High-surety isothermal amplification and detection of SARS-CoV-2,
including with crude enzymes. bioRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.13.039941
Broughton et al. (2020): CRISPR–Cas12-based detection of SARS-CoV-2. Nature
Biotechnology. doi:10.1038/s41587-020-0513-4
Bruce et al. (2020): Direct RT-qPCR detection of SARS-CoV-2 RNA from patient
nasopharyngeal swabs without an RNA extraction step. bioRxiv preprint.
doi:10.1101/2020.03.20.001008
Buchmuller et al. (2019): Pooled clone collections by multiplexed CRISPR-Cas12a-assisted
gene tagging in yeast. Nature Communications. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-10816-7

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Butler et al. (2020): Host, viral, and environmental transcriptome profiles of the severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). bioRxiv preprint.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.20.048066
Corman et al. (2020): Detection of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) by real-time RTPCR. Eurosurveillance 25:2000045. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.3.2000045
El-Tholoth et al (2020): A single and two-stage, closed-tube, molecular test for the 2019
novel coronavirus (COVID-19) at home, clinic, and points of entry. chemRxiv preprint.
doi:10.26434/chemrxiv.11860137.v1
Fomsgaard and Rosenstierne (2020): An alternative workflow for molecular detection of
SARS-CoV-2 – escape from the NA extraction kit-shortage. Eurosurveillance 25:2000398.
doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.14.2000398
Gadkar et al (2018): Real-time detection and monitoring of loop mediated amplification
(LAMP) reaction using self-quenching and de-quenching fluorogenic probes. Scientific
Reports 8:1. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-23930-1
Henning et al (2018): Large-scale low-cost NGS library preparation using a robust Tn5
purification and tagmentation protocol. G3 (Bethesda). doi:10.1534/g3.117.300257
Ito et al (2006): Rapid detection and typing of influenza A and B by loop-mediated
isothermal amplification: comparison with immunochromatography and virus isolation.
Journal of Virological Methods 135(2):272-275. doi:10.1016/j.jviromet.2006.03.003
Kivioja et al (2011): Counting absolute numbers of molecules using unique molecular
identifiers. Nature Methods 9:72. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1778
Lamb et al (2020): Rapid detection of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) by reverse
transcription-loop-mediated
isothermal
amplification.
medRxiv
preprint.
doi:10.1101/2020.02.19.20025155
Lu et al (2020): A novel reverse transcription loop-mediated isothermal amplification
method for rapid detection of SARS-CoV-2. International Journal of Molecular Sciences
21:2826. doi:10.3390/ijms21082826
Meurer et al (2018): Genome-wide C-SWAT library for high-throughput yeast genome
tagging. Nature Methods. doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0045-8
Mizumoto et al (2020): Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019
(COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020.
Eurosurveillance. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180.
Nagamine et al (2002). Accelerated reaction by loop-mediated isothermal amplification
using loop primers. Molecular and Cellular Probes 16:223. doi:10.1006/mcpr.2002.0415
Notomi et al (2000): Loop-mediated isothermal amplification of DNA. Nucleic Acids
Research 28:E63. doi:10.1093/nar/28.12.e63
Phua et al (2020): Intensive care management of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19):
challenges and recommendations. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine. doi:10.1016/S22132600(20)30161-2
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Picelli et al (2014): Tn5 transposase and tagmentation procedures for massively scaled
sequencing projects. Genome Research. doi:10.1101/gr.177881.114
Rabe and Cepko (2020): SARS-CoV-2 detection using an isothermal amplification reaction
and a rapid, inexpensive protocol for sample inactivation and purification. medRxiv
preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.23.20076877
Ribeiro da Silva et al (2019): Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) for the
diagnosis of Zika virus: A Review. Viruses. doi:10.3390/v12010019
R Core Team (2020): R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation
for Statistical Computing. https://www.r-project.org
Schmid-Burgk JL, Li D, Feldman D, Słabicki M, Borrajo J, Strecker J, Cleary B, Regev A &
Zhang F (2020) LAMP-Seq: Population-scale COVID-19 diagnostics using a compressed
barcode space. bioRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.06.025635
Shani-Narkiss et al (2020): Efficient and practical sample pooling for high-throughput PCR
diagnosis of COVID-19. medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.06.20052159
Smyrlaki et al (2020): Massive and rapid COVID-19 testing is feasible by extraction-free
SARS-CoV-2 RT-qPCR. medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.17.20067348
Tanner et al (2015): Visual detection of isothermal nucleic acid amplification using pHsensitive dyes. BioTechniques 58. doi:10.2144/000114253
To et al. (2020): Consistent detection of 2019 novel coronavirus in saliva. Clinical Infectious
Diseases. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa149
Tomita et al (2008): Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) of gene sequences
and
simple
visual
detection
of
products.
Nature
Protocols
3:877.
doi:10.1038/nprot.2008.57
Viehweger et al (2019): Direct RNA nanopore sequencing of full-length coronavirus genomes
provides novel insights into structural variants and enables modification analysis.
Genome Research 29:1545. doi:10.1101/gr.247064.118
Wee et al (2020): Rapid direct nucleic acid amplification test without RNA extraction for
SARS-CoV-2
using
a
portable
PCR
thermocycler.
biorXiv
preprint.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.17.042366
Wickham (2016). ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis. Springer. ISBN 978-3-31924277-4
Wickham et al. (2019). Welcome to the Tidyverse. Journal of Open Source Software 4:1686.
doi:10.21105/joss.01686
Wölfel et al. (2020). Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019.
Nature. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
Wyllie et al (2020): Saliva is more sensitive for SARS-CoV-2 detection in COVID-19 patients
than nasopharyngeal swabs. medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20067835

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Yu et al. (2020). Rapid colorimetric detection of COVID-19 coronavirus using a reverse
transcriptional loop-mediated isothermal amplification (RT-LAMP) diagnostic plat-form:
iLACO. medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.02.20.20025874
Zhang et al. (2020): Rapid molecular detection of SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19) virus RNA using
colorimetric LAMP. medRxiv preprint. doi:10.1101/2020.02.26.20028373
Zhu et al. (2020): A novel coronavirus from patients with pneumonia in China, 2019. New
England Journal of Medicine 382, 727–733. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001017

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Material

Supplementary Table S1: Cross tabulation of the results shown in Figure 4, comparing RT-qPCR and
RT-LAMP test for 792 patient samples, stratified into CT value bins, and, inferred from this data,
sensitivity (for each CT bin) and specificity of the LAMP test with respect to the qPCR results. "conf.
int." = Wilson's 95% binomial confidence interval.

Supplementary Table S2: Cross-tabulation summarizing LAMP-sequencing results (Figure 5): RTqPCR and RT-LAMP results as in Supplementary Table 1. Numbers are split into cases where
sequencing of RT-LAMP products showed virus sequences (LAMP-sequencing positive) and where they
did not (LAMP-sequencing negative).

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Table S3: Cross tabulation of results from Figure 8 comparing RT- qPCR and RTLAMP test for 592 patient samples, with sensitivity and specificity. "conf. int." = Wilson's 95%
binomial confidence interval.

Supplementary Table S4: Sequences of amplicons and RT-LAMP primer sets

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

[ provided as separate file ]
Supplementary Table S5: Sequences of primers used for LAMP-sequencing (provided as separate
data file).

Supplementary Figure S1: Comparison of the RT-LAMP results with the CT values from RT-qPCR.
(d) Same samples as in (Figure 3c) using a primer set for the 1a gene for time point 40 minutes.

Supplementary Figure S2: Multiplexed sequencing count data used for Figure 5 stratified by RTqPCR-derived CT values (a) or processed sample plate (b). RT-LAMP assay values were read after
incubating 30 min at 65 °C. A sequencing count of 3000 virus-matching sequences (grey vertical
line) was used to flag a sample as virus-positive.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Discussion and Comments
Important considerations when using RT-LAMP assays and reagents
1. The buffer capacity of the WarmStart Colorimetric RT-LAMP 2X Master Mix (DNA &
RNA) from NEB (M1800) is very low in order to allow a color change as a function of
synthesized DNA. High sample volumina, buffered samples and compounds
influencing the buffer capacity of the reaction can yield false positive or false
negative results.
2. The LAMP reaction can yield non-specific products which induce a pH shift; these
appear with a delay of approx 10 min and thus measurements at time points > 35
min are prone to contain increasing numbers of false positives.
3. Best results were obtained with freshly prepared RT-LAMP master mixes that were
kept on ice in a closed tube prior to the addition of the sample
4. Colorimetric RT-LAMP mastermixes are not very stable. Old master mixes (set up
with primers) are characterized by a color change in the negative control sample
already at the time point 30 min, or even earlier. This yields false positive results.
Freshly prepared mastermixes can be stored maximally 14-18 hours at -20°C. Longer
storage also yields false positive results.
5. Exposure to the atmosphere (open lid) leads to a slow drop in pH, presumably due
to acidification by atmospheric CO2. Pipetting of RT-LAMP mixes into 96 well plates
needs to be done immediately before use. Keep plates on ice while adding the
samples. Pipette carefully and avoid bubbles which, if they burst, could
contaminate adjacent samples.
Sample and reaction volume
6. For purified RNA samples we use 1 µl of RNA in a total reaction volume of 12.5 µl.
Larger quantities of the RNA (e.g. 4 µl) did not significantly improve detection
sensitivity (probably due to impurities in the RNA preparations, e.g. EtOH).
7. For swab-to-RT-LAMP assays we use 1 µl of sample in a total reaction volume of 20
µl. Likewise, larger quantities of sample input did not significantly improve
detection sensitivity, likely due to the presence of undefined inhibitors.
Stability of color change (see also points 1-4)
8. Swab samples in Amies medium are slightly acidic and, depending on the patient,
we observed a drop in pH in the reaction mixture already before the reaction
started (see also Figure 9). Using 0.9% saline solution (instead of the Amies medium
used in clinical samples) does not lead to a pH drop at the time point 0 min.
Quantification of the color change
9. The RT-LAMP test, like the qPCR, is based on a time-dependent reaction. Our
experiments show that the measurement is best between 27-30 min and we propose
to implement this time point for read-out.
10. Documentation of the color change can be done in many ways. While we used a
Tecan plate scanner for OD measurements at two wavelengths, we found that
placing the test strips or plates on a color scanner or copy machine with scanner
function is another very reliable and reproducible way to document results. Hue
measurements can then be used to quantify the results. Cameras of mobile phones

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092288; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

work also well (Figure 2a), but reflection of light and perspective distortions make
such images less reproducible and difficult to quantify.
Contaminations
11. When pipetting PCR strips, always close the lids to avoid contaminations. When
using 96 well plates, pipette carefully and absolutely avoid bubbles which, if they
burst, could contaminate adjacent samples.
12. Successful RT-LAMP reactions contain large quantities of DNA that are a perfect
template for the assay. Therefore, after the reaction the tubes should not be
opened and be carefully disposed of.
13. Analysis of RT-LAMP reactions for gel electrophoresis requires that the tubes are
opened. This should be done in a well separated location and using equipment that
is not shared with work benches where RT-LAMP reactions are set up or where
patient samples are manipulated.

28

