medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Impact of essential workers in the context of social distancing for epidemic control
William R. Milligan​1​, Zachary L. Fuller​1​, Ipsita Agarwal​1​, Michael B. Eisen​2,3*​, Molly
Przeworski​1,4,5​, Guy Sella​1,5*
1​

Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, Berkeley
3​
Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley
4​
Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University
5​
Program for Mathematical Genomics, Columbia University
2​

*​

to whom correspondence should be addressed: ​mbeisen@berkeley.edu​,
gs2747@columbia.edu

Abstract
Many governments have responded to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic by imposing social
policies that restrict interactions outside of the home, resulting in a large fraction of the
workforce either working from home or not working. However, to maintain essential services, a
substantial number of workers are not subject to these limitations, and maintain many of their
pre-intervention interactions. To explore how interactions among such “essential” workers, and
between essential workers and the rest of the population, impact disease risk and the
effectiveness of pandemic control, we evaluated several models of essential worker interactions
within a standard epidemiology framework. The models were designed to correspond to key
characteristics of, respectively, cashiers, factory employees, and healthcare workers. We find in
all three models that essential workers are at substantially elevated risk of infection compared to
the rest of the population, and that increasing the numbers of essential workers necessitates the
imposition of more stringent interaction controls on the rest of the population in order to manage
the pandemic. However, different archetypes of essential workers differ in both their individual
probability of infection and impact on the broader pandemic, highlighting the need to understand
and target for intervention the specific risks faced by different groups of essential workers.
Introduction
In response to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, governments across the world have imposed
measures to reduce the transmission of the virus. These measures often involve some form of
“shelter in place” (SIP) in which the majority of the population remains in their homes except for
essential activities like grocery shopping. The motivation is to either locally eradicate the
infection, or to reduce its spread enough to decrease peak demand on healthcare and gain time
to develop testing capacity, therapies and a vaccine. SIP orders have been guided by extensive
modeling of the COVID-19 pandemic to predict its future and understand its impact on the
population under various scenarios, including different stringencies of SIP (e.g.,​[1–3]​).

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

By necessity, SIP involves exceptions for “essential workers”, typically including those involved
in the delivery of health care, the production and distribution of food, emergency services and
defense, public works and utilities, communications and information technology, and logistics
and delivery. The fraction of workers designated as essential varies geographically due to
different regulations and the makeup of the local economy ​[4]​. Within the United States,
industries designated as essential are estimated to employ approximately 40 percent of the
workforce [​ 4]​. In New York City, essential workers were estimated to comprise a quarter of the
workforce [​ 5]​, or over 1M people, of whom over half are employed in healthcare and 15 percent
in grocery, convenience and drug stores. Estimates in California are that one in eight ​[6]
individuals is an essential worker.
Here we extend the widely-employed “SEIR” epidemiological model ​[1–3]​ to evaluate the
individual infection risk faced by different types of essential workers, and the impact that
essential workers have on pandemic control.
Modeling Essential Workers
We began by implementing a standard SEIR model to describe the dynamics of COVID-19 in a
population (Figure 1A). Following recent work ​[1–3]​, we included three types of infected
individuals, corresponding to those destined to a) show no symptoms, b) to have symptoms but
not require hospitalization, and c) to require hospitalization. We also included three types of
hospitalized individuals corresponding to a) those who will recover without critical care, b) those
who will require critical care but will recover, and c) those who will die after receiving critical
care. We make the standard modeling assumption that recovered individuals cannot be
reinfected.
We parameterized the differential equations that describe the rate at which individuals transition
between model states based on the epidemiological literature for COVID-19 (see Table 1), and
chose the lockdown date and R0 (​the number of new infections expected to arise from an
infected individual in a fully susceptible population) ​based roughly on New York City data (see
Modeling Details). Although it was not our goal to model the outbreak in any particular region,
we verified that the parameters we used match observed pandemic dynamics in three US cities
(see the computational notebook).
We next created two parallel instances of the base SEIR model, one for essential workers and
one for everyone else, and connected them via terms that describe the probability that an
infected individual in one subpopulation infects a susceptible individual in the other (Figure
1B-D). In what follows we refer to these two subpopulations as essential workers (EWs) and
non-essential-workers (nEWs), the latter category encompassing all other workers and people
not in the labor force. The models for EWs and nEWs have identical structure and parameters,
except for the within and between subpopulation transmission rates.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

For our analysis, the critical characteristic of EWs that distinguishes them from nEWs is that
they maintain a substantial fraction of their work-associated interactions after the institution of
SIP. However, there is great diversity among EWs in their interaction profiles. For example,
factory, warehouse and agricultural workers retain interactions with the other employees at their
place of work, but have their interactions with the remainder of the population reduced by SIP.
Others, such as cashiers, transportation workers, and police have frequent interactions with
many people who are nEWs. Hospital workers, in turn, interact not only among themselves, but
also with the people hospitalized with the virus.
We therefore generated three separate EW-containing SEIR models, one for each of these
archetypal EWs. These models differ in how an individual’s interactions are distributed within
and between subgroups, in how SIP affects these interactions, and, for healthcare workers, in
which individuals are the source of new infections.
The three models have two shared parameters: f , the fraction of the population that are EWs,
and θ , the remaining proportion of individual to individual disease transmission after s​ocial
distancing ( θ = 1 is no social distancing​; θ = 0 is complete isolation for everyone). ​Without EWs
( f = 0 ), the pandemic is suppressed when R0 θ ​(the post-SIP number of new infections

expected to arise from an infected individual in a fully susceptible population) is less than one.
Mathematical details and full parameter choices for each model are described in the Modeling
Details section, and implementation and the results of simulations with these models are
available in the included computational notebook.
Model 1: ​Public-facing essential workers (Figure 1B)
We began by considering workers such as cashiers and other shopworkers, transportation
workers and public safety personnel, whose work involves extensive interactions with nEWs.
The critical feature of our model of such “public-facing” EWs is that only interactions among
nEWs are reduced by SIP.
Model 2: ​Non public-facing essential workers (Figure 1C)
Unlike public-facing EWs, factory, warehouse, and agricultural workers interact extensively with
other EWs, but their work does not involve interactions with nEWs. The critical feature of our
model of such “non-public-facing” EWs is that all interactions except those among EWs are
reduced by SIP.
Model 3: ​Healthcare workers​ (Figure 1D)
Healthcare workers are exposed to infected individuals in hospitals and other critical care
settings. We therefore created a specific “healthcare worker” model with an additional

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

interaction term describing the rate at which individuals hospitalized with COVID infect
susceptible healthcare workers (see Modeling details). Neither these hospital-specific infections
nor infections among healthcare workers are affected by SIP, while interactions between
healthcare workers and nEWs, as well as interactions among nEWs, are.
Results
Essential workers have elevated infection risk
We began by examining the personal infection risk of each class of EW. ​Figure 2 shows the
cumulative fraction of EWs and nEWs infected as the pandemic progresses for each model, with
f = 0.05 (five percent of the population EWs) and θ ​value​ ​corresponding to partially effective (
R0 θ = 1.5 ), effective ( R0 θ = 0.9 ) and highly effective ( R0 θ = 0.5 ) SIP.

For all three models, ​EWs have a substantially higher risk of infection than nEWs. The risk is
greatest for healthcare workers, who, under our model parametrization, are nearly all infected
quite rapidly, even when the rest of the population is under stringent SIP. But both public-facing
and non-public-facing EWs have much higher risk than nEWs: non-public-facing EWs are
susceptible to the wave of infection that sweeps through their workplaces even after SIP, while
public-facing EWs are exposed to infected people at a much higher rate than those under SIP.
Our model predicts a somewhat higher rate of infection at 100 days than seems plausible, likely
because we are not taking into account measures taken by EWs, in particular healthcare
workers, to reduce transmission in their workplaces.
Public-facing essential workers increase infection risk in the remainder of population
Although the individual risk to public-facing EWs is relatively low, they have a substantial impact
on nEWs. In conditions when SIP would be expected to be effective at controlling the growth of
the pandemic ( R0 θ < 1 ), having five percent of the population working in public-facing EW jobs
leads to nearly doubling the number of nEWs who are infected (Figure 2).
We were initially surprised that the high rate of infection of both non-public-facing and
healthcare EWs led only to marginal increases in the infection risk for nEWs (Figure 2).
However, the combination of the model assumptions of a relatively small EW population (five
percent of the total), that half of EW interactions are with other EWs (see Model Details), and
SIP suppression of interactions between EWs and the rest of the population means that, even
when there is rampant infection among EW, there is a low leakage of infections to nEWs. And,
although some transmission from EWs to nEWs does occur, because of SIP, those infections do
not take root in the nEW population.
Effects on pandemic control of increasing number of essential workers

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The differing effects of EWs on disease risk in EWs and nEWs led us to next examine how the
different types of EW impact the pandemic. Figure 3 shows ​the total fraction of the population
expected to be infected after one year as a combined function ​of f and θ ​for all three EW
models (Figure 3A), as well as the breakdown for EWs (Figure 3B) and nEWs (Figure 3C).
The red contour line in each panel of Figure 3A represents f , θ ​values for which the total

fraction of the population infected after one year is equal to the fraction infected for f = 0 and
R0 θ = 1 . Values below and to the right of this band result in fewer people infected, values above
and to the left more.
In all models, increasing the number of EWs requires a compensatory increase in the stringency
of SIP. However, there is considerable difference in the stringency required in each case. An
approximately two-fold greater decrease in R0 θ is required to compensate for an increase in the
number of public-facing EWs compared to the same increase in the number of non-public-facing
and healthcare EWs.
Dynamics of infections to, from and within essential worker populations
The differences in infectious interactions within and between subpopulations after SIP results in
a complex dynamics of the number and source of infections of EW and nEW over the course of
a year. To investigate their nature, and understand how they manifest in the three different EW
models, we examined the prevalence of infection in EWs and nEWs at f = 0.05 and R0 θ = 0.5
as a function of time (Figure 4A).
Unsurprisingly, after SIP is imposed, the incidence of infections in nEWs begins to decline, while
the prevalence in EWs continues its previous rise. In all three models, infections in EWs rapidly
peak, after which EW prevalence tracks with nEW prevalence, albeit at a higher level. There is,
however, a striking difference between the public-facing EW model and the other two, with both
a slower decay of incidence, and less of a gap between EWs and nEWs in the public-facing EW
model.
This difference is more evident when examining the fraction of all infections that are in EWs as a
function of time (Figure 4B). In the public-facing EW model, there is a rapid rise from the initial
setting 0.05 to a peak of 0.15, where it levels off. In contrast both the non-public facing and
healthcare EW models reach a point where roughly half of all infections occur in EWs before
stabilizing slowly to a value of approximately one third.
The changes in the distribution of infections across the EW and nEW populations over time
results in complex, shifting patterns of who is infecting who (Figure 4C). In the public-facing EW
model, there is a rapid shift post-SIP to there being a roughly equal probability that a new nEW
infection came from either another nEW or an EW - a striking result given that in this scenario

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

only five percent of the population are EWs. In contrast, public-facing EWs are roughly ten times
more likely to be infected by an nEW than an EW.
The non-public-facing EW model has quite different dynamics. It takes longer for EWs to
become a significant source of new infections for nEWs, a product of the time it takes for the
infection to spread extensively within the EW population. In contrast to the public-facing model,
where EW to nEW and nEW to nEW are effectively tied for the most common type of infection
transfer, in the non-public-facing model, the two most common infection types are both within
group terms. The dynamics of the healthcare EW model are largely similar to the
non-public-facing EW model, except that infections associated with hospital care of infected
individuals become a major source of infection for healthcare EWs.
Thus it is a fundamental aspect of all three EW models that one important and potentially
observable feature of the pandemic - who is infecting who - is expected to change over time.
Discussion
It may be intuitively obvious that, when populations are sheltering in place to reduce virus
transmission, EWs whose jobs require them to maintain interactions with each other and/or the
public have a higher risk of infection, and, if infected, an increased probability of spreading. Yet
the precise nature of this effect has received relatively little attention in COVID-19 modeling and
public planning. Our goal here was to address a critical issue, how variation in the interaction
profiles of common types of EWs affect their disease risk and efforts to control the pandemic,
within the context of the epidemiological models that are being widely used to guide policy
decisions.
We want to emphasize that, while our modeling has led to several general observations about
the potential interaction of EWs with COVID-19, it was not designed to be used for predicting
pandemic progress in specific populations with given types and numbers of EWs, different
starting states and disease parameters, and distinct types and timings of SIP. This would
require, at a minimum, accurate data on interactions among EWs and between EWs and nEWs
in the specific context being modeled, incorporation of demographic differences in EW and nEW
populations, and treatment of the compartmentalization of both populations into specific
workplaces and households ​[5,7–9]​.
Moreover, the ​R​0​ ​value we used in the model may be more representative of urban areas,
which, because of population density, public transportation and other factors, tend to have a
higher rates of contact than do regions with lower population density ​[10]​. Nonetheless,
empirical data on rates of infection and fatalities in groups of EWs in urban areas hard-hit by
COVID-19 paint a clear picture of increased individual risk ​[11–14]​, and the models developed
here suggest that, at a minimum, this is likely to be a pervasive challenge in population centers.
There is also evidence for elevated EW risk in factories and food-processing facilities in areas

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with lower population density ​[15]​; however we did not explore how the models behave in such
conditions.
We also have not fully explored the full range of scenarios that our models could capture. In
particular, we focused on the impact on and of EWs within the context of SIP orders applied in
the midst of a rapidly growing local outbreak, as has occurred repeatedly in past few months
across the planet. EWs may have a very different disease risk and impact on the epidemic when
SIP is applied before a large number of individuals are infected, or after the outbreak is already
under control. There is also likely to be a significant effect of the conditions under which EWs
under consideration live and work (e.g.,​[16]​). Our models, for example, do not take into account
protective measures taken by EWs, in particular healthcare workers.
What is clear, however, is that the type of essential work in which a person is engaged has a big
effect on their individual risk of infection. For example, even with limited exposure to the public,
EWs at high interaction workplaces such as manufacturing and food processing facilities, or with
high exposure to infected individuals, are at the highest individual risk of infection. But more
public-facing workers, such as cashiers, even when they have a much lower individual risk, can
have a much greater impact on the pandemic.
Although the specific observations are tentative in their dependence on the assumptions of our
models, these results highlight the importance of not treating EWs as an undifferentiated class,
and establish the extent of EW interaction with nEWs as a critical feature in studying EWs in the
future and designing strategies to mitigate individual and collective risk arising from their
essential work.
Our modeling results also emphasize that increasing the number of EWs, as is now being
considered worldwide ​[17–19]​, will require the remainder of the population to increase the
stringency of their shelter in place if pandemic suppression is to be maintained. Thus it is
particularly important that policy decisions regarding how and when to expand the EW pool
factor in the possible impact of these policies on the willingness and ability of the nEWs to
increase or even maintain the stringency of SIP.
Finally, while we treat the interaction profiles, and therefore disease transmission probabilities,
of EWs as static, this is by no means the case. Workplace social distancing policies, design
changes and the deployment of personal protective equipment in both EWs and nEWs can play
a significant role in limiting EW exposure to infected individuals, and, if infected, minimizing their
role in disease transmission. Widespread workplace testing for infections and temporary
removal of infected individuals from the workplace would also reduce transmission. We hope
that modeling efforts like ours can help inform the best way to target these interventions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Modeling Details
We were guided by two principles in designing our models for different types of EWs. First, we
wanted them to capture essential characteristics of archetypes of EWs: cashiers interact
extensively with the public, factory workers have a large fraction of their interactions in the
workplace, and healthcare workers are exposed to a unique infection risk from their exposure to
a high concentration of infected individuals. Second, we wanted the models to be simple
enough that we could connect the modeling results back to these essential characteristics.
Hence none of these models should be considered to fully represent a real group of EWs; rather
they represent distinct essential characteristics that are often found in real groups of EWs.
All models are described in terms of the number of potentially infectious contacts per day, where
these interactions are apportioned between subpopulations according to β ij , ​which represents
the number of contacts an individual in population ​i h
​ as with individuals in population ​j.​
Representing EWs by ​E​ and nEWs by ​N​, the four corresponding param​eters are β N N , β N E , β EN ,
and β EE .

We assume that contacts are symmetric, such that with proportion f of EWs and 1 − f of NEs:
(1 − f )β N E = f β EN .

We further assume that ​before SIP​ every individual has a set total number of contacts β T such
that:

β N E + β N N = β EE + β EN = β T .

For public-facing EWs, we assumed that before SIP interactions between subpopulations are
proportional to the susceptible subpopulation’s size such that:
β EE = f β T , β EN = (1 − f )β T , β N E = f β T , and β N N = (1 − f )β T .

As we are further assuming that public-facing EWs interactions are unaffected by SIP, ​θ​ is
applied ​only to β N N ,​ such that after SIP the parameters are:
β EE = f β T , β EN = (1 − f )β T , β N E = f β T , ​and​ β N N = θ(1 − f )β T .

For non-public-facing EWs, prior to the proportional assortment of interactions, we reserve a
fraction ρ of their interactions to be with other EWs. Thus, we assume that before SIP:
β EE = (ρ + f (1 − ρ))β T , β EN = (1 − f )(1 − ρ)β T , β N E = f (1 − ρ)β T , and β N N = (1 − f (1 − ρ) )β T .

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

For non-public-facing EWs, we assume that all interactions except the ρβ T reserved to be
among EWs in the workplace are reduced by SIP, and thus post SIP the parameters are:
β EE = (ρ + θf (1 − ρ))β T , β EN = θ(1 − f )(1 − ρ)β T , β N E = θf (1 − ρ)β T , ​and​ β N N = θ(1 − f (1 − ρ) )β T .
For the examples presented here, we set ρ to 0.5. Other values are explored in the
accompanying computational notebook.
The healthcare model builds on the non-public facing model, but in this case all hospitalized
individuals have an extra β HE interactions with healthcare workers per day. We assume β HE
scales with the number of healthcare workers, and parameterize the choice of its value such
that a healthcare worker is κ times more likely to get infected by a nEW than is a nEW (see the
computational notebook for details). In the main text, we set κ =1.5. Alternative parameter
values and parameterization of β HE are explored in the computational notebook.
The other parameters used in the SEIR model come largely from ​[1,2]​, as detailed in Table 1,
with further consideration of the dynamics of COVID-19 in New York City before SIP. In
particular, the observed doubling time of three days in the number of deaths in New York City
before formal SIP orders ​[20,21]​ is best fit with R0 = 3.2 . We used this value to determine the
value of β T . We further placed the start of SIP at day 59, such that our model without EWs
predicts approximately the observed number of deaths in New York City on the day formal SIP
orders were issued. This is relatively late in the pandemic progression, in that a substantial
fraction of the population was already infected (as seems to have been the case in New York
City, according to recent serological estimates ​[22,23]​), and accounts for the high prevalences
in the models. ​Similar qualitative results are seen for earlier SIP dates (see the computational
notebook).
Acknowledgments
We thank Laura Hayward, Magnus Nordborg and Michael Zeitz for helpful discussions.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1: Parameter estimates for the model
Parameter Description

Literature Estimates

Values Used

4.6 days ​[1,2]
5 days (1-14) ​[24]

4.6 days

5 days​[1,2]
8 days ​[24]

5 days

5 days ​[1,2]
8 days ​[24]
Median 2 weeks ​[25]
1-2 weeks ​[26]

5 days

5 days ​[1,2]
1 week ​[25]
5-12 days ​[27]
7 +/- 4 days ​[28]

5 days

t​E

Latency period

t​IA

Infectious period (asymptomatic class)

t​IR

Time of between infection and recovery (mild
symptoms) [infectious period for mild cases]

t​IH

Time between infection and hospitalization

t​HR

Time in hospital (with no critical care)

8 days ​[1,2]
11 days ​[24]

8 days

Total duration of infectious period through critical care path
(to recovered or dead)

21 days ​[1,2]
3-6 weeks ​[25]
16-23 days ​[28]

21 days

t​HC

Time in hospital before critical care

6 days​[1,2]

6 days

t​CR

Time in critical care before recovery

10 days​[1,2]

7 days

t​L

Time in critical care before recovery

-

3 days

t​CD

Time in critical care before death

10 days ​[1,2]

10 days

p​EIA

Proportion of infections that are asymptomatic

33% ​[1,2]​ 17.9% ​[29]
13.5% ​[30]​ 25% ​[31]

33%

p​EIH

Proportion of infections requiring hospitalization

4.4% ​[1,2]

4.4%

p​EIR

Proportion of symptomatic not requiring hospitalization

-

62.6%

p​IHR

Proportion of hospitalizations requiring critical care

-

30%

p​IHC

Proportion of hospitalizations that require critical care

30%​[1,2]
26%-32% ​[27]

30%

p​HCR

Proportion of recoveries from critical care

-

50%

p​HCD

Proportion of deaths in critical care

50% ​[1,2]
39% to 72% ​[27]

50%

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1​: Diagram of the SEIR model with extensions. ​A)​ An illustration of the basic SEIR
model used in all scenarios, including additional compartments within the infected (outlined in
green) and hospitalized (outlined in blue) classes. ‘S’ is susceptible, ‘E’ is exposed, ‘I’ is
infected, ‘H’ is hospitalized, ‘D’ is dead, and ‘R’ is recovered. Within the infected class,
individuals can be asymptomatic ‘I​A​’ and destined to recover; symptomatic ‘I​R​’ but destined to
recover; or symptomatic ‘I​H​’ and destined to be hospitalized. Within the hospital, individuals
either go to recovery ‘H​R​’ or go to critical care ‘H​c​’. For those in critical care, individuals either die
‘C​D​’ or go on to the recovered class ‘C​R​’, with an additional time spent in the hospital ‘L’. ​B)​ To
model the impact of EWs, who make up a proportion ​f​ of the total population, we cloned the
SEIR model. Here, for visualization, the infectious and hospitalized classes are collapsed into a
single compartment. The ​β ​terms represent the transmission routes between​ infectious
individuals within and between essential ‘E’ and non-essential ‘N’ groups. In the model of
public-facing EWs, SIP reduces interactions (highlighted in red) only among nEWs. ​C)​ In the
model of non-public-facing EWs, SIP reduces all interactions (highlighted in red) except for
those among other EWs. ​D)​ To model the impact of healthcare workers, an additional infectious
route (​β​H)​ is included from within the hospitalized compartments to susceptible individuals in the
essential group.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2​: Cumulative infection rates among EWs and nEWs for different scenarios and values
of θ . The dotted and solid lines correspond to EWs and the rest of the population, respectively.
Note that the ordering of the colors is not the same for EWs and nEWs. f is assumed to be 0.05
for all models. Alternative values of f yield similar qualitative results, as does an earlier
lockdown date relative to the pandemic progression (see the computational notebook).

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3​: Heatmaps of cumulative infections after a year in the total population (left), in nEWs
(middle), and in EW (right). The red contour line corresponds to the number of cumulative
infections within a year assuming no EWs. For equivalent figures with an earlier lockdown date
see the computational notebook.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4:​ Time resolved dynamics of infections, for ​f​=0.05 and R0 θ =0.5. ​A) ​Time-resolved

proportion of EWs and nEWs that are infected. Before SIP, the epidemic progression is identical
in public facing and non-public facing EWs, and in nEWs. However even before SIP, healthcare
workers bear a proportionally larger burden of the epidemic due to within-hospital infections.
After SIP, the fraction of nEWs infected begins to decline, but, because EWs cannot social
distance as effectively as nEWs, the fraction of EWs continues to increase, albeit more slowly.
B)​ The fraction of infected individuals that are EWs. Prior to SIP, this fraction is ​f​ ​except in the
healthcare model where EWs have an additional route of infection. After SIP, EWs bear a
proportionally larger burden of the epidemic and this fraction increases. Under the public-facing
worker model, ​the rate of contact between EWs and nEWs isn't reduced by SIP, mitigating
divergence in the rate of infection in the two subpopulations.​ In the non-public facing and
healthcare worker models, ​SIP largely decouples t​he epidemic ​between EWs and nEW.​ Thus,
the increased infection rate among EWs does not cause substantially more infections among
nEWs, resulting in EWs comprising a disproportionately large proportion of the infections (i.e.,
>> f ). As the epidemic dies out in both subpopulations, the proportion of EWs among those

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

infected stabilizes on a value that is model and parameter-dependent. ​C) ​Where new infections
originate. SIP reorganizes the flow of infections through the populations in a model-dependent
manner. Before SIP, the most infections spread among nEWs, as they constitute the vast
majority of the population. After SIP, we would naively expect a reduction in infections stemming
from interaction terms that are reduced by SIP. Indeed, immediately after SIP, infections
associated with reduced interaction terms are reduced (e.g. EN in non-public facing and NN in
all models). However, EWs also bear a disproportionately large burden of infections. Thus after
a short lag, as infections among EWs increase, so does their contribution to new infections in
both other EWs and in nEW; in fact EWs often become the predominant spreaders of new
infections. For equivalent figures with a lockdown earlier in the pandemic progression, see the
computational notebook.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

Ferguson NM, Laydon D, Nedjati-Gilani G, Imai N, Ainslie K, Baguelin M. Report 9: Impact
of non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare
demand. doi:​10.25561/77482

2.

Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Projecting the transmission
dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science. 2020.
doi:​10.1126/science.abb5793

3.

Pasco R, Wang X, Petty M, Du Z, Fox SJ, Pignone M, et al. COVID-19 Healthcare Demand
Projections: Austin, Texas. Available:
https://sites.cns.utexas.edu/sites/default/files/cid/files/covid-19_analysis_for_austin_march2
020.pdf?m=1585249934

4.

Tomer A, Kane J. How to protect essential workers during COVID-19. In: Brookings
[Internet]. Brookings; 31 Mar 2020 [cited 4 May 2020]. Available:
https://www.brookings.edu/research/how-to-protect-essential-workers-during-covid-19/

5.

New York City’s Frontline Workers. In: Office of the New York City Comptroller Scott M.
Stringer [Internet]. [cited 4 May 2020]. Available:
https://comptroller.nyc.gov/reports/new-york-citys-frontline-workers/

6.

Essential Workers and COVID-19 - Public Policy Institute of California. In: Public Policy
Institute of California [Internet]. 31 Mar 2020 [cited 4 May 2020]. Available:
https://www.ppic.org/blog/essential-workers-and-covid-19/

7.

Hu W, Goldbaum C. “The Worst-Case Scenario”: New York’s Subway Faces Its Biggest
Crisis. The New York Times. 20 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/20/nyregion/nyc-mta-subway-coronavirus.html​. Accessed
4 May 2020.

8.

Vanhems P, Barrat A, Cattuto C, Pinton J-F, Khanafer N, Régis C, et al. Estimating
potential infection transmission routes in hospital wards using wearable proximity sensors.
PLoS One. 2013;8: e73970. doi:​10.1371/journal.pone.0073970

9.

Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R, et al. Social contacts and
mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases. PLoS Med. 2008;5: e74.
doi:​10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074

10. Fernández-Villaverde J, Jones CI. Estimating and Simulating a SIRD Model of COVID-19
for Many Countries, States, and Cities. 2020. Available:
https://web.stanford.edu/~chadj/sird-paper.pdf
11. Assessment RR. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in the EU/EEA and the UK– ninth
update. Available:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-rapid-risk-assessment-c
oronavirus-disease-2019-ninth-update-23-april-2020.pdf
12. Heinzerling A, Stuckey MJ, Scheuer T, Xu K, Perkins KM, Resseger H, et al. Transmission

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of COVID-19 to Health Care Personnel During Exposures to a Hospitalized Patient - Solano
County, California, February 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69: 472–476.
doi:​10.15585/mmwr.mm6915e5
13. Beckett L. Revealed: nearly 100 US transit workers have died of Covid-19 amid lack of
basic protections. The Guardian. 20 Apr 2020. Available:
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/apr/20/us-bus-drivers-lack-life-saving-basic-protecti
ons-transit-worker-deaths-coronavirus​. Accessed 4 May 2020.
14. Initial Results of Mission District COVID-19 Testing Announced. In: Initial Results of Mission
District COVID-19 Testing Announced | UC San Francisco [Internet]. [cited 5 May 2020].
Available:
https://www.ucsf.edu/news/2020/05/417356/initial-results-mission-district-covid-19-testing-a
nnounced
15. Dyal JW. COVID-19 Among Workers in Meat and Poultry Processing Facilities ― 19
States, April 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69.
doi:​10.15585/mmwr.mm6918e3
16. Cai W, Rebecca Lai KK. Packed With Migrant Workers, Dormitories Fuel Coronavirus in
Singapore. The New York Times. 28 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/04/28/world/asia/coronavirus-singapore-migrants.
html​. Accessed 4 May 2020.
17. Cowan J. Reopening California. The New York Times. 29 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/29/us/california-reopen-coronavirus.html​. Accessed 4
May 2020.
18. Savage S. Subscribe to read. Financial Times. 30 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.ft.com/content/3de3f84e-548d-474e-b3a4-0a1182532780​. Accessed 4 May
2020.
19. Nussbaum A, Horobin W. France to Begin Easing Virus Curbs With Plan to Reopen Shops.
Bloomberg News. 28 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-04-28/france-to-reopen-shops-may-11-in-c
autious-easing-of-virus-curbs​. Accessed 4 May 2020.
20. N.Y. Virus Deaths Double in Three Days to Almost 3,000. The New York Times. 3 Apr
2020. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/03/nyregion/coronavirus-ny-updates.html​. Accessed 4
May 2020.
21. COVID-19: Data - NYC Health. [cited 4 May 2020]. Available:
https://www1.nyc.gov/site/doh/covid/covid-19-data.page
22. David Goodman J, Rothfeld M. 1 in 5 New Yorkers May Have Had Covid-19, Antibody
Tests Suggest. The New York Times. 23 Apr 2020. Available:
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/23/nyregion/coronavirus-antibodies-test-ny.html​.
Accessed 4 May 2020.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.05.20092262; this version posted May 9, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

23. Amid Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic, Governor Cuomo Announces Results of Completed
Antibody Testing Study of 15,000 People Showing 12.3 Percent of Population Has
COVID-19 Antibodies. In: Governor Andrew M. Cuomo [Internet]. 2 May 2020 [cited 4 May
2020]. Available:
https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/amid-ongoing-covid-19-pandemic-governor-cuomo-anno
unces-results-completed-antibody-testing
24. Guidance for discharge and ending isolation in the context of widespread community
transmission of COVID-19, first update. Available:
https://www.ecdc.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/covid-19-guidance-discharge-and
-ending-isolation-first%20update.pdf
25. MEMBERS, Work MOF. I. THE MISSION 3. Available:
https://www.who.int/docs/default-source/coronaviruse/who-china-joint-mission-on-covid-19-f
inal-report.pdf
26. I’ve Been Diagnosed With the New Coronavirus (COVID-19). What Should I Expect? [cited
4 May 2020]. Available:
https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/health/conditions-and-diseases/coronavirus/diagnosed-wit
h-covid-19-what-to-expect
27. CDC. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). In: Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention [Internet]. 30 Apr 2020 [cited 4 May 2020]. Available:
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/clinical-guidance-management-patients.ht
ml
28. Bhatraju PK, Ghassemieh BJ, Nichols M, Kim R, Jerome KR, Nalla AK, et al. Covid-19 in
Critically Ill Patients in the Seattle Region - Case Series. N Engl J Med. 2020.
doi:​10.1056/NEJMoa2004500
29. Mizumoto K, Kagaya K, Zarebski A, Chowell G. Estimating the asymptomatic proportion of
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond Princess cruise ship,
Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Euro Surveill. 2020;25.
doi:​10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180
30. Sutton D, Fuchs K, D’Alton M, Goffman D. Universal Screening for SARS-CoV-2 in Women
Admitted for Delivery. N Engl J Med. 2020. doi:​10.1056/NEJMc2009316
31. Feibel C. CDC Director On Models For The Months To Come: “This Virus Is Going To Be
With Us.” NPR. 31 Mar 2020. Available:
https://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2020/03/31/824155179/cdc-director-on-models-fo
r-the-months-to-come-this-virus-is-going-to-be-with-us​. Accessed 4 May 2020.

