medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Correlations of Mobility and Covid-19 Transmission in Global Data1
Nittai K. Bergman2 and Ram Fishman3
First Draft: April 29th, 2020

This Draft: May 21st, 2020

Abstract
Assessing the contribution of mobility declines to the control of Covid-19 diffusion is an urgent
challenge of global import. We analyze the temporal correlation between transmission rates and
societal mobility levels using daily mobility data from Google and Apple in an international panel
of 99 countries and a panel of all states in the United States. Reduced form regression
estimates that flexibly control for time trends suggest that a 10 percentage point reduction in
mobility is associated with a 0.04-0.07 reduction in the value of the effective reproduction
number, ​R​(​t)​ , depending on geographical region and modelling choice. According to these
estimates, to avoid the critical value of ​R ​= 1, easing mobility restrictions may have to be limited
or delayed until other non-mobility related preventative measures reduce ​R to a level of
approximately 0.7 in Europe, 0.75 in Asia, and 0.8 in the United States. Given gaps in data
availability and inference challenges, these estimates should be interpreted with caution.

1

We thank Yinon Bar-On, Joshua Graff Zivin, Joseph Klafter, Ofer Malamud, Ron Milo, Zvi Mintser,
Jeffrey Sachs, Itay Saporta, Analia Schlosser, and Anna Tompsett for useful comments and suggestions.
2
Tel Aviv University, Berglas School of Economics, nbergman@tauex.tau.ac.il
3
Tel Aviv University, Department of Public Policy, ramf@tauex.tau.ac.il

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Introduction
By some estimates, more than a third of the global population have been subjected to severe
mobility restrictions since the start of the Covid-19 pandemic. Numerous governments around
the world have resorted to such “lockdowns” as their primary strategy of limiting the
transmission of infection, at enormous economic and social costs. As costs escalate, and
transmission rates decline in some countries, a growing debate has emerged regarding when
and how lockdowns should be eased, and whether it is possible to do so without unleashing
additional waves of infection. An assessment of the relation between mobility levels and
transmission rates can be of value in helping to navigate this policy dilemma and in
understanding the determinants of diffusion.
Several papers have estimated the declines in transmission rates that occurred following
lockdowns and other non pharmaceutical interventions (NPI) by using detailed case-level data
in specific localities or countries—mainly Wuhan and France (see., e.g., ​Leung et al., 2020;
Lipsitch et al., 2020; Pan et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020; Salje et al., 2020; Roux et al., 2020).
Hsiang et al. (2020) use detailed sub-national panel data to estimate the impacts of NPIs in
China, South Korea, Iran, Italy, France, and the United States (US) and find variable, but overall
large impacts on transmission rates. ​Flaxman (2020a; 2020b) and Kučinskas (2020) estimate
the effects of NPIs on effective reproduction numbers using a panel of 14 European states,
finding that the results are sensitive to the manner in which the regression model is specified.
In this paper, we use publicly available data to empirically estimate the relation between
transmission rates (effective reproduction numbers) and societal mobility levels using a large,
international 99-country panel, as well as a panel covering all states in the United States,
covering the period between late February and early May 2020. Our assessment employs a
reduced-form regression analysis based on daily mobility data provided by Google and Apple,
estimates of daily transmission rates at the country level from Kučinskas (2020), and daily
estimates of transmission rates at the U.S. state level from Systrom and Vladeck (2020).4
While studying the effect of lockdowns is clearly important, we focus on the association between
transmission rates and mobility rather than on the association between transmission rates and
4

Available at rt.live.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

government NPIs, and in particular, lockdown orders. \\We do so for three reasons. The first is
that evidence suggests an imperfect correspondence between lockdowns and mobility levels,
with mobility declining prior to lockdowns (or even in their absence), and in certain cases
increasing prior to formal lockdown easing (see e.g., Gupta et al., 2020). Second, as
governments consider the degree to which lockdown conditions can be eased, it is important to
analyze the span of the relation between mobility and transmission rates and not only the
effects of discrete, large reductions in mobility resulting from lockdown orders.5 Finally,
lockdowns may impact transmission rates not solely due to their direct effect on mobility rates,
but also through their impact on other forms of individual behavior. Future changes in mobility
levels need not necessarily come about in tandem with such changes in individual level
behavior. One additional analysis of the relation between mobility and Covid-19 transmission
rates is provided by Kissler et al. (2020) who show that reductions in between-borough
commuting movements in New York City are negatively correlated with Covid-19 prevalence.
A visual inspection of the country level data suggests mixed patterns regarding the relation
between transmission rates and mobility. In Australia, for example (Figure 1, top panel),
transmission rates seem to track mobility levels: during the initial sample period, steep
reductions in mobility are followed by significant reductions in transmission rates, while
subsequent to a rise in mobility commencing mid-April, transmission rates rise as well. In
contrast, in Germany (Figure 1, middle panel) transmission rates fall following steep reductions
in mobility levels, but they continue their decline even after mobility levels start to rise at the end
of March. In South Korea (Figure 1, bottom panel), transmission rates decline significantly by
the beginning of March, and only initially coincide with relatively modest reductions in mobility,
implying a weaker relation between the two.
Our reduced form regression analysis is designed to estimate the average correlation between
mobility and transmission rates in a large international sample of countries. By providing such
summary estimates at global scale, our analysis complements important studies that analyze
sub-national transmission dynamics and underlying epidemiological processes at finer
resolution.

5

As one example, government ordered lockdowns may have acted as a signalling device indicating the
severity of the health crisis, thereby influencing individual behavior.

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

As discussed in detail below, there are significant challenges in estimating and interpreting the
transmission-mobility relation. First, the limited precision of transmission indicators may
introduce substantial measurement error into the data, making it hard to identify a correlation.
Second, changes in mobility may also endogenously respond to infection rates. Third, variation
in mobility levels may be correlated with variation in other forms of preventative behavior,
whether voluntary or government dictated, meaning that any observed correlation can be
wrongfully attributed to changes in mobility levels.
Given the absence of detailed data on such behavior, we employ standard panel data
techniques to absorb some of the variation in these unobserved potential confounders. In
particular, we base our estimates only on variation in mobility and transmission that occur within
countries over time, rather than on variation across countries, which is especially prone to
omitted variable bias (e.g. economic development levels, infrastructure, health system
functionality). Further, we include various forms of flexible temporal trends in our regressions to
capture some of the temporal variation in potential confounders that may occur within countries
over time. Nevertheless, we emphasize that a great deal of caution must be exercised in
interpreting our estimates as capturing the causal impacts of mobility changes on transmission.
For that reason, we also emphasize that there is no straightforward way to infer policy
prescriptions from the correlations we estimate, as policy induced changes in mobility may
impact other variables which influence transmission rates. As such, our results do not provide
definitive conclusions, but should be viewed as a first step that utilizes publicly available
measures of mobility levels and transmission to study a question of enormous social import.
Our current point estimates from the international cross-country panel suggest that a 10
percentage point (p.p.) reduction in mobility is associated with a 0.05-0.07 reduction in the value
of the effective reproduction number, ​R(​ ​t)​ , depending on geographical region and modelling
choice. Estimates from the U.S. state-level panel suggest that a 10 p.p. reduction in mobility is
associated with roughly a 0.04 reduction in the value of the effective reproduction number, ​R​(​t​).
Our analysis documents a decline in the strength of the mobility-transmission correlation over
the study period. During the month of March, mobility levels exhibit dramatic declines in many
countries in the world. During this intense “lockdown” period, we estimate that a 10 p.p.
reduction in mobility is associated with a 0.06-0.09 reduction in ​R(​ ​t)​ . In April, in contrast, the
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

estimated association remains positive, but drops by roughly a factor of three to 0.02-0.03 units
of ​R(​ ​t)​ . This decline could potentially reflect fundamental differences between the dynamics of
the initial “lockdown” and the later phase of the crisis driven by individual-level changes in
behavior (such as individual level social distancing, hygiene, mask use) or government-level
steps to curb transmission. In addition, changes in environmental conditions may also affect
transmission rates (see, e.g., Carleton et al., 2020) in a manner which weakens the association
between mobility and Covid-19 transmission.
With the appropriate caveats in mind, our estimates of the relation between mobility and
transmission rates imply that in order to avoid allowing ​R​(​t​) to exceed unsustainable levels,
easing of mobility restrictions may have to be limited or delayed until further declines in ​R are
achieved through other means.6 Indeed, assuming an additive model for the impact of mobility
and non-mobility related suppression methods on transmission rates, to avoid the critical value
of ​R = 1, our estimates suggest that ​R​(t​ ​) may have to be reduced to levels of about 0.55​–​0.7 in
Europe, 0.64​–​0.76 in Asia, and approximately 0.8 in the United States before mobility levels are
fully restored to pre-pandemic levels.7

Data and Methods
Mobility Data
The principal measure of mobility used in this analysis is taken from the ​Covid 19 Community
Mobility Reports provided by Google. As an alternative measure, we also use the ​Mobility
Trends Reports p
​ rovided by Apple. The Google data utilize ​anonymized ​location-based
information to assess changes in the number of visits to several categories of locations in a

6

These include non-mobility related social distancing and other non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs),
or potentially, through environmental changes such as warming or increased UV radiation (Carleton et al,
2020) which may independently also reduce transmission rates.
7
These estimates are calculated from the analysis conducted on the full sample period. To the extent that
there are interaction effects between various methods of transmission suppression​—​for example, if mask
usage reduces the impact of increased mobility on ​R—
​ ​required reductions in transmission rates will be
lower. This issue is the subject of ongoing work.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

given day and country, as compared to a baseline value for that day of week.8 The categories
include retail and recreation, groceries and pharmacy, parks, transit stations, workplaces, and
residential.9 ​Similarly, the Apple data report the “​relative volume of directions requests” sent
using the Apple Maps application, compared to a baseline volume on January 13th, 2020. The
Apple data differentiate between three types of direction requests: driving, walking, and transit.
Google data is available for 132 countries, whereas Apple data is available for 63 countries.
Figure S1 plots Google data on visits to workplaces over time, averaged in six world regions.
Figure S2 plots the six measures of Google mobility data over time, averaged over Europe.
Both Google and Apple data are updated continuously. Google data are available for the period
February 15th​–​May 2nd and Apple data for the period January 13th​–​May 3rd.10
Covid-19 Transmission Rates
The preferred indicator of Covid-19 transmission rates is the effective reproduction number ​R​(​t​),
which measures the number of individuals an average infected person infects during the period
of infection. In the primary analysis, we make use of two independent sets of estimates of ​R​(​t​),
one at the country level and one for U.S. states.
Country level estimates of ​R(t) a
​ re provided by Kučinskas (2020) between January 23rd and
May 6th for 124 countries (temporal coverage varies by country and begins after 100 cases are
confirmed). To construct this proxy, Kučinskas (2020) uses data on new cases, recoveries, and
deaths and backs out estimates of ​R(​ ​t​) on the basis of disease models. Importantly, the data
(and the estimates) are smoothed with Kalman-filtering techniques. This means that discrete,
high frequency movements in the actual effective reproduction number will be difficult to
observe in these estimates. In addition, the estimates do not account for the delay between
actual infection and official diagnosis. As such, they reflect lagged infection rates, with a lag size
that combines the delay between infection and Covid-19 testing and the time between testing
and official reporting of test results. In our analysis we assume an overall lag of seven days to

8

The baseline period is the median value for the corresponding day of week, calculated during the
5-week period Jan 3–Feb 6, 2020.
9
​https://www.google.com/Covid19/mobility/
10
Apple data extended beyond Google data at the day of data download.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

account for an incubation period of approximately 4-5 days (Qun Li et al. 2020) and a 2-3 day
lag between testing and the official recording of positive test results.11
As is well known, a major limitation shared by all proxies based on confirmed case counts is that
they are likely to substantially underestimate the true number of cases in the population. To the
extent that the ratio of confirmed to actual cases is constant within countries (even if not
between countries), however, this will not bias the ​R estimates. Further, Kučinskas (2020)
argues that the estimation method is “robust in the sense that the estimates of ​R remain fairly
accurate even when new cases are imperfectly measured, or the true dynamics of the disease
do not follow the SIR model”.
For the state-level analysis in the United States, estimates of ​R​(​t​) at the state level are provided
by Sysrom and Vladeck (2020), which adjusts the estimates for state-level testing capacity and
for the delay in test reporting.

Sample
The sample studied in our international analysis includes 4,804 observations from 99 countries
(shown in Figure S3) over the period March 13th - May 2nd when using Google data, and 3,294
observations from 61 countries over the period March13th - May 8th when using Apple data. In
both cases, data coverage is uneven across countries, starting when the confirmed number of
cases reaches 100 in each country.
Figure S4 plots our principal mobility measure (Google visits to workplaces) and estimates of
R​(​t)​ against time for those countries that have more than 30 days in which both data exist.
The U.S. sample includes all states over the period March 13th - May 2nd when using Google
data, and March 13th - May8th when using Apple data.

11

Qun Li et al. 2020 report an average incubation period of 5 days and Linton et al. report a median
incubation period of 4–5 days.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Empirical Strategy
We employ standard panel-regression techniques to estimate the association between
transmission rates (proxied by the ​R estimates described above) and mobility measures. The
regressions include country specific fixed effects (intercepts) to flexibly account for all
time-invariant country attributes, thus basing estimates of the relation between transmission
rates and mobility on the correlation between these two variables over time within countries.12
In addition to the inherent limitations of the precision with which transmission rates are
measured, a significant challenge in estimating the transmission-mobility relationship is the likely
presence of time varying behavioral, environmental, and epidemiological variables that can also
affect transmission rates and which are difficult to observe. Behavioral variables can include
hygienic practices, mask usage rates, and dimensions of social distancing not captured by
mobility (such as, for example, maintaining minimal distance between individuals and maximal
room occupancy rates). Epidemiological models predict transmission rates to respond to the
diffusion of the virus in the population. As one example, in standard SIR models, effective
reproduction numbers rates decline over time with the fraction of susceptible individuals in the
population. Environmental factors may include temperature, UV radiation, and humidity
(Carleton et al, 2020). Failing to control for these variables in the regressions may reduce the
precision of the estimates, and may also bias them whenever these variables are correlated
with mobility and affect transmission rates.
An additional concern in analyzing the relation between infection rates and mobility levels is the
endogenous nature of mobility behavior. In particular, mobility rates are influenced by individual
choice as well as by policy directives (such as lockdown easing and tightening), which may in
turn be influenced by disease transmission rates and rising case counts.
For the above reasons, panel-regression estimates relating within-country variation in infection
rates to levels of mobility may be subject to bias and should be interpreted with a good deal of
caution. Unless all potential confounders are observed, or exogenous variation in mobility is
utilized, the estimates are not amenable to causal interpretation. We note, however, with the
appropriate caution, that many of the unobserved confounders would tend to bias our estimates
12

For the state-level analysis in the United States, all regressions include state-level fixed effects.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

on the relation between mobility and transmission rates upwards, as variation in these
confounders likely served to reduce transmission rates in tandem with mobility restrictions
(examples include increased mask usage and hygiene).
To partially alleviate concerns stemming from unobservable within-country time variation, our
analysis includes a host of fixed effects and time trends that may capture some of the
unobserved variation. As mentioned above, all regressions estimated include country (or state)
specific fixed effects. The regressions also flexibly control for temporal trends using individual
date fixed effects, at either the global or regional level.13 Such fixed effects absorb the
potentially confounding influences of any time varying factor that behaves in a similar manner
globally or regionally. They also help absorb variation stemming from within-week mobility
cycles. In another check, we flexibly control not for calendar time, but for fixed effects of the
number of days which have elapsed in each country since the 100th case was confirmed. This
allows us to absorb the potentially confounding effects of, for example, dynamical factors related
to the ecological evolution of the pandemic in the absence of interventions. In a final test, we
allow the regressions to include a separate (linear) time-trend for each country. We remain
acutely aware, however, that none of these approaches can fully address the possibility that our
results are biased by unobserved confounders, and emphasize the need for caution in
interpreting them.
Formally, we estimate the following baseline regression:
(1)

T ct = μ M c,t−7 + αc + β t + εct

(2)

T rct = μ M c,t−7 + αc + β rt + εct

(3)

T ct = μ M c,t−7 + αc + γ c × t + εct

where ​T is a proxy for Covid-19 transmission rates in country ​c (in region ​r​) on date ​t as
described above, and ​M is one of the mobility measures described above, measured seven

13

We classify countries into six geographical regions: Africa, Asia and Pacific, Europe, Middle East,
North America and South/Latin America.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

days before the date at which ​T is observed. The regression include country fixed effects αc ,
date fixed effects β t at either global (eq.1) or regional (eq.2) levels, or country specific time
trends (eq.3). Because transmission and mobility may exhibit temporal autocorrelation within
countries, all standard errors are clustered at the country level. For the U.S. panel, we run
similar regressions to (1) and (3) except that the unit of observation is the state-day.
As explained above, when analyzing the international panel, we use 7-day lagged values of
mobility in the regression to account for the delay between infection and confirmation of the
case. Estimates of ​R​(​t​) used in the U.S. analysis already account for this delay, so we use the
contemporaneous value. Tests of alternative lag periods, displayed in Figure S5, provide
support for this choice: when lagged values of between 0-3 weeks are included in the
regression, the lags we choose in practice show the largest and more significant coefficients.
Finally, since mobility measures are strongly correlated temporally within countries (Figure S2),
separating out the effects of each type of mobility indicator demands statistical power that is
unlikely to be provided by the current sample. Our main regression models therefore include a
single measure of societal mobility as the explanatory variable. We focus on the Google
workplace mobility measure, being a natural proxy for economic activity. In an exploratory
analysis reported below, we also estimate models that simultaneously include the various
components of mobility levels (workplace, residential, transit, etc).

General Trends in Mobility and Transmission
During the earlier part of the sample period, the data exhibit significant downward trends in both
mobility and estimated transmission rates. Figure 2 (top panel) exhibits the daily average of
Google workplace mobility, Apple driving-based mobility, and (unlagged) ​R(​ ​t​) estimates o
​ ver the
sample period in Europe. As can be seen, average European mobility levels decline sharply
between mid-February and mid-March (with Google workplace mobility declining by
approximately 50 percentage points), stabilize between mid-March and mid-April, and
subsequently display a rising trend. Over the same time period, Figure 2 (top panel) shows a
decline in estimated ​R ​values from 3.5 to below approximately 0.8.
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2 (middle panel) provides analogous information for countries in the sample within the
“Asia and Pacific” region. Similar to Europe, the figure indicates a decline of average ​R of
approximately 3.1 units from a peak of 4 to a value of 0.9, and a decline of 40 percentage points
in the Google workplace mobility measure. The bottom panel of Figure 2 focuses on the United
States using the state-level panel dataset. As can be seen, the average reproduction number
falls by approximately 0.50 units during the sample period (from approximately 1.4 to 0.9), while
the average Google workplace mobility levels decline by 45 percentage points. We note that the
sample period of state-level reproduction numbers, ​R,​ begins only in mid-March, and so we
cannot rule out higher levels of ​R—
​ similar to those observed in Europe and Asia—prior to that.

Changes in average mobility levels mask a good deal of country-level heterogeneity. Figure S4
in the supplementary material plots Google workplace mobility measures and estimated ​R
values for sixty countries that have at least 30 days of both mobility and transmission data.
Figure 3 (top panel) provides two snapshots of the international data, showing scatter plots of
each country’s estimated reproduction number ​R against its level of Google workplace mobility
on March 15th and May 1st. Between the two periods, there is clear movement of most
countries towards lower reproduction numbers and mobility levels. There is no indication of a
significant cross-sectional relation between ​R​ and mobility levels in either period.
The bottom panel of Figure 3 provides a parallel graph for U.S. states on the same two dates.
Here too, during the initial stage of the pandemic in the United States, transmission rates are
high, mobility levels have not yet declined, and there is no discernable cross-sectional relation
between the two. In contrast, by May 1st, transmission rates and mobility levels decline
significantly across the United States, and display a positive correlation .
However, cross-sectional correlations of this kind can easily be confounded by numerous other
sources of heterogeneity (even if such heterogeneity could be lower across U.S. states than
across countries). It is for this reason that, in order to estimate the relation between R and
mobility, the analysis below focuses on variation within countries over time.

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Results
We begin by reporting results from the international sample. The results are summarized in
Figure 4, and tabulated in Tables 1-7.
Table 1 and the left panel of Figure 4 provide results of regressions that use estimates of the
effective reproduction number (​R)​ from Kučinskas (2020) as the outcome variable, and a
seven-day lagged measure of workplace mobility from Google data. Google mobility data is
coded here as the fraction decline from baseline levels.14 The coefficients should therefore be
interpreted as the associated decline in the effective reproduction number associated with a 100
percentage point (p.p) decline in mobility.
All specifications include country fixed effects (intercepts) to account for all cross-country
differences in transmission stemming from time invariant country characteristics. To account for
time trends, the specification in Column 1 includes global date fixed effects and the specification
in Column 2 includes region-by-date fixed effects. The specification in Column 3 includes
country-specific linear time trends. The specification in Column 4 flexibly controls for the number
of days elapsed in each country since it confirmed its 100th Covid-19 case, using fixed effects
for each value of this lapse.
Across the four specifications reported in Table 1, we estimate a positive and statistically
significant relation between effective reproduction numbers, ​R​, and Google mobility levels,
indicating that increased mobility is associated with increased transmission. The coefficient on
lagged mobility ranges from 0.72 to 0.53, depending on the specification. The estimates imply
that a ten percentage point drop in the Google mobility measure is associated with a decline of
between 0.05-0.07 units of ​R​, depending on the specification used​.
Figure 5 plots the country-level fixed effects estimated in specification (1) in Table 1. The figure
provides a measure of the reduction in transmission rates that is unexplained by mobility levels.
The figure also plots the fixed effects of a variant of specification (1) which uses region, as
opposed to country, fixed effects. A clear ranking emerges in regions’ ability to reduce

14

For example, a 10 percentage point reduction in mobility is coded as -0.1.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

transmission rates using non-mobility suppression methods, with Asia most successful, North
America least successful, and European countries in between.15
Figure S6 plots the day fixed effects estimated in specification (1), which reflect the average
daily variation in transmission that is unexplained by mobility reductions or by time-invariant
country specific factors. As can be seen, the day fixed effects decline over time, indicating
increased global suppression of transmission rates stemming from measures unrelated to
variation in mobility (these measures could potentially include increased usage of masks,
increased hygiene, favorable weather trends, etc).
In a secondary analysis (Table S1), we also use related, but somewhat cruder indicators of
transmission as the outcome variables, which consist of the growth rates of the total number of
cases and deaths and the growth rates of the daily new cases or deaths. The results are
consistent with our primary specification.
The right panel of Figure 4 and Table 2 repeats the analysis in Table 1 but uses the Apple
driving mobility measure to proxy for mobility levels. Results are similar to those in Table 1 and
indicate positive and statistically significant relations between ​R and mobility in all four
specifications. The estimates imply that a ten percentage point drop in the Apple mobility
measure is associated with a decline of 0.07​–​0.08 units of ​R,​ depending on the specification
used.
Table 3 examines the relation between transmission rates and mobility levels in an analogous
manner, but uses the state-level panel dataset in the United States. Transmission rates are
taken from Systrom and Vladeck (2020), and mobility is measured either through Google
workplace mobility or Apple driving mobility indicators. All regressions include state fixed effects
and either date fixed effects or state-level time trends. As can be seen, similarly to the global
analysis, the results in the United States indicate a positive relation between transmission rates
and mobility levels. Focusing on Column 1, which is most similar to our benchmark global model
(i.e., with country and date fixed effects), the estimates suggest that a 10 percentage point
reduction in mobility levels is associated with a 0.04 decrease in the value of ​R.​ The size of the
effect is rather similar to that in the benchmark global estimate (0.06) despite the different
15

The omitted regional fixed effect is Europe.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

geographic context and the fact that the estimates of ​R​(​t​) used in the two regressions are
derived by independent methods and researchers.
The top panel of Table 4 repeats the global estimation model separately in five different
geographical regions using Google mobility data (see also Figure 4).16 As can be seen, the
positive relation between transmission rates and mobility levels is concentrated in Europe, the
“Asia and Pacific” region, and the South/Latin America region. No statistically significant relation
between transmission rates and lagged mobility is observed in the Middle East or Africa,
perhaps owing to the relatively small number of observations within these regions.17 Employing
the Apple driving mobility measure (bottom panel in table), shows that the relation between
transmission rates and mobility is concentrated in countries within Europe, with imprecision for
other regions potentially stemming from the substantially lower country coverage offered by the
Apple mobility data and the resulting sample size.
We next conduct an exploratory analysis of how infection rates relate to the various mobility
measures provided by Google and Apple. Results should be interpreted with caution given the
high levels of temporal correlation between the various location-based Google mobility
measures (workplace, residential, parks, retail and recreation, transit, grocery and pharmacy) as
well as the high correlation between the search-type Apple mobility measures (driving, transit,
walking). Table 5 reports estimates of regressions (1) and (2), respectively, that include as
independent variables all six location-based measures of Google mobility (with date and
date-by-region fixed effects, respectively). Columns 3 and 4 report the analogous specifications
that simultaneously include all three search-type Apple measures. Figure 6 compares the
coefficients on the various measures of Google mobility when estimated separately and
simultaneously.
Focusing on the first column of Table 5, the results provide suggestive evidence that increased
mobility in “work places”, “retail and recreation”, and “residential” areas are positively associated
with transmission rates. Coefficients on the Google location-based measure should be

16

As there are only two countries in the North America region in our data, we do not run the regression
separately for that region.
17
To estimate ​R,​ Kučinskas (2020) requires that the number of reported Covid-19 cases exceed 100,
implying that countries where infection rates climbed in later time periods are underrepresented in the
sample.

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

interpreted in relation to an omitted location category defined as the complement to the union of
the six locations defined by Google. Similarly, the results in Column 1 indicate a negative
relation between transmission rates and increased population mobility in “grocery and
pharmacy”. These results continue to hold after adding regional date fixed effects (Column 2)
but the magintudes of the coefficients are reduced. The positive coefficient on “Residential
Areas” is somewhat counterintuitive. One potential explanation might stem from increased
prevalence of infection between members of the same household (see, e.g., Bi et al., 2020;
Qian et al, 2020). Regional inspection suggests this effect is concentrated in Asia (results not
shown).
Column 3 provides a parallel analysis to that reported in Column 2, but uses the U.S. state
panel with estimates of infection reproduction numbers taken from Systrom and Vladeck, 2020.
Similar to Column 2, results indicate that workplace mobility in the United States is positively
related to transmission rates in a statistically significant manner, with the coefficient on mobility
estimated at 0.36 . All other mobility measures in Column 3 are non-significant.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 5 use Apple search-type mobility data. Focusing on Column 4, when
all three mobility measures are included in the regression, the coefficient on transit related
searches is the only measure which is statistically significant, while the other mobility measures
based on driving and walking​—​activities involving less social interactions​—​are not related to ​R
in a statistically significant manner. However, once regional fixed effects are added, none of the
coefficients associated with the three Apple mobility measures are statistically significant,
potentially due to their high levels of correlation. As additional data becomes available, we will
continue to update these estimates with the hope that increased sample size may allow for
greater precision.
We continue by analyzing evidence for a structural break in the relation between transmission
rates and mobility levels during our sample period. As shown in Figure 2, countries in Europe
and the Asia and Pacific region exhibit an initial large decline in both Google workplace mobility
as well as transmission levels up to late March. This is followed by a phase of relative
stabilization in workplace mobility but a continued decline in estimated reproduction numbers. In
some countries, there are indications of rising mobility levels towards the end of April. We

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

therefore examine the possibility that the different nature of the “lockdown” and later phases can
result in differences in the strength of the mobility-transmission relation.
Table 6 repeats the baseline analysis reported in Table 1, but separately conducted over the
time period up to, and following April 7th (because of the 7-day lag, this means the data used in
these two analyses extends up to and after April 1st). Results in the table provide suggestive
evidence for a weakening in the relation between transmission rates and mobility, with larger
point estimates and higher significance levels in the three specifications estimated over the
former part of the sample period as compared to those in the latter part of the sample period.
Focusing on the top panel (using Google workplace mobility measures) and comparing columns
(1) and (3) shows that the relation between transmission rates and mobility estimated after April
7th is roughly 25% of that estimated prior to April 7th. Using the Apple driving mobility measure
(bottom panel), we do not find a statistically significant relation between transmission rates and
mobility levels after April 7th.
The decline in the relation between transmission rates and mobility levels could be explained by
policy responses undertaken at the country-level or individual-level behavioral changes.
Additionally, environmental changes could also weaken the association between mobility and
Covid-19 transmission. We note that mobility levels in a number of countries have begun rising
in the latter part of the sample period. As transmission rate indicators arrive with a lag,
additional data arriving in the upcoming weeks will be of particular interest in tracking the
evolution of mobility levels and Covid-19 transmission rates.

Discussion
Given the estimates in Table 1, a 10 percentage point decline in the Google workplace mobility
measure is associated with a 0.05​–​0.07 unit decline in the estimated reproduction number ​R.​
Based on these estimates, it is instructive to analyze the share of the overall decline in
transmission rates that can be explained by mobility reductions.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Overall, Google mobility rates in Europe declined by approximately 50 percentage points by the
beginning of April, which our estimates imply is associated with a reduction in ​R of 0.25​–​0.35
units. The fraction of the overall decline in ​R that is explained by this mobility reduction depends
on the time window chosen for the calculation. By April 11th, the mean value of ​R across the
European countries in our sample had declined to 0.95.18 Taking the starting date for the
calculation as February 21st, when ​R = 3.1, implies an overall decline in ​R of 2.2 units, meaning
that mobility reductions explain about 12%-16% of this decline. However, data from February is
still very sparse, and derived from only a few countries. If we more conservatively choose the
starting time of the calculation to be a month later, on March 11th, when ​R = 2.1—at this point
data is available from more than 20 countries, and most of the European mobility reduction has
yet to take place—the overall reduction in ​R is reduced to 1.1 units, so that mobility reductions
explain approximately 22%​–​30% of the decline in ​R.​
Analogously, in countries within the “Asia and Pacific” region the decline in average Google
mobility measures—approximately 40 percentage points to date—imply a reduction of
0.24​–​0.36 units in ​R.​ Again, the fraction of the overall decline in ​R explained by mobility
depends on the time frame chosen. Taking the starting date of the calculation to be March 11
(average ​R = 1.7), and given the April 11th average value of ​R of approximately 1.27, we obtain
that mobility reductions in Asia explain approximately 30%-41% of the reduction in ​R.​
Our estimates, to a large extent, are estimated during a period when both mobility levels and
transmission rates decline. Assuming that the association between mobility and ​R remains
similar when the two variables rise, the same coefficients, interpreted at face value, also imply
that in Europe, returning from current levels of mobility to pre-pandemic baseline
levels—approximately a 50 percentage point increase—would entail an increase of between
0.25 (S.E. 0.08) to 0.35 (S.E. 0.08) points in ​R.​ Under this scenario, in order to avoid levels of
R(​ ​t)​ from systematically climbing above the critical value of ​R = 1, easing of mobility restrictions
may have to coincide with other ​non-mobility ​measures which reduce R
​ ​ to a level of 0.65​–​0.75.
Similarly,

the

coefficients

imply

that

in

Asia,

returning

to

baseline

levels

of

mobility—approximately a 40 percentage point increase—would entail an increase of between
18

Given the assumption of a seven-day lag between actual and observed R in the international data, the
values corresponding to a given date refer to the R estimated seven days afterwards.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

0.20 (S.E. 0.06) to 0.28 (S.E. 0.06) points in ​R.​ To avoid levels of ​R​(​t​) from systematically
climbing above ​R = 1, easing of mobility restrictions in Asia may have to coincide with other
non-mobility measures which reduce ​R​ to a level of 0.72​–​0.8.
Turning to the United States, the estimates based on the state-level analysis imply that a 10
percentage point decline in the Google workplace mobility measure is associated with a
reduction of between 0.04 units (S.E. 0.013) and 0.05 units (S.E. 0.004) in the value of ​R​. As
during the sample period average reproduction numbers in the United States fell by
approximately 0.5 units, this estimate suggests that the decline in mobility in the United States
can explain approximately 32%-42% of the overall decline in ​R​. This estimate, obtained using
within country variation and a different source and methodology for estimating ​R​, is rather

similar to that obtained in Europe and Asia. Taken at face value, our estimates suggest that to
avoid levels of ​R(​ ​t)​ from systematically climbing above ​R = 1, returning to pre-pandemic levels
of mobility in the United States may have to coincide with other non-mobility m
​ easures which
reduce ​R​ to a level of approximately 0.8.

Understanding the determinants of Covid-19 transmission rates is one of the most pressing
policy questions facing society. This paper provides an empirical analysis of this question,
utilizing comprehensive data at global scale to analyze the correlation between mobility levels
and transmission rates over time within countries. As such, it provides an important complement
to detailed epidemiological modelling of the spread of Covid-19. It will be valuable to revisit the
estimates provided in this paper as mobility levels and Covid-19 transmission rates continue to
vary in the coming months and as additional data become available.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
Bi, Qifang, Yongsheng Wu, Shujiang Mei, Chenfei Ye, Xuan Zou, Zhen Zhang, Xiaojian Liu et
al. "Epidemiology and transmission of COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts
in Shenzhen, China: a retrospective cohort study." ​The Lancet Infectious Diseases​ (2020).
Carleton, Tamma, Jules Cornetet, Peter Huybers, Kyle C. Meng, and Jonathan Proctor, 2020.
“Ultraviolet radiation decreases COVID-19 growth rates: Global causal estimates and seasonal
implications.” Working Paper.
Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H. Unwin, H. Coupland, T. Mellan, H. Zhu et al.
"Report 13: Estimating the number of infections and the impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries." (2020).
Flaxman, Seth, Swapnil Mishra, Axel Gandy, H. Juliette T. Unwin, Helen Coupland, Thomas A.
Mellan, Harrison Zhu et al. "Estimating the number of infections and the impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in European countries: technical description
update." ​arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.11342​ (2020).
Gupta, Sumedha, Thuy D. Nguyen, Felipe Lozano Rojas, Shyam Raman, Byungkyu Lee, Ana
Bento, Kosali I. Simon, and Coady Wing. Tracking Public and Private Response to the
COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State and Local Government Actions. No. w27027.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2020.
Kissler, Stephen M., Nishant Kishore, Malavika Prabhu, Dena Goffman, Yaakov Beilin, et al.
“Reductions in commuting mobility predict geographic differences in SARS-CoV-2 prevalence in
New York City.” (2020)
Kučinskas​, S., 2020. “Tracking R of COVID-19.” ​Available at SSRN 3581633​.
Hsiang, Solomon, Daniel Allen, Sebastien Annan-Phan, Kendon Bell, Ian Bolliger, Trinetta
Chong, Hannah Druckenmiller et al. 2020. "The effect of large-scale anti-contagion policies on
the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic." medRxiv (2020).
Leung, Kathy, Joseph T. Wu, Di Liu, and Gabriel M. Leung. "First-wave COVID-19
transmissibility and severity in China outside Hubei after control measures, and second-wave
scenario planning: a modelling impact assessment." The Lancet (2020).
Li, Qun, Xuhua Guan, Peng Wu, Xiaoye Wang, Lei Zhou, Yeqing Tong, Ruiqi Ren et al, 2020.
"Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel coronavirus–infected pneumonia." ​New
England Journal of Medicine​.
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Linton, Natalie M., Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R. Akhmetzhanov,
Sung-mok Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura, 2020. "Epidemiological
characteristics of novel coronavirus infection: A statistical analysis of publicly available case
data." medRxiv.
Lipsitch, Marc, Keya Joshi, and Sarah E. Cobey. "Comment on Pan A, Liu L, Wang C, et al.,"
Association of Public Health Interventions With the Epidemiology of the COVID-19 Outbreak in
Wuhan, China," JAMA, Published online April 10, 2020." (2020).
Pan, An, Li Liu, Chaolong Wang, Huan Guo, Xingjie Hao, Qi Wang, Jiao Huang et al.
"Association of public health interventions with the epidemiology of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Wuhan, China." ​Jama​ (2020).
Qian, Hua, Te Miao, L. I. U. Li, Xiaohong Zheng, Danting Luo, and Yuguo Li. "Indoor
transmission of SARS-CoV-2." medRxiv (2020)
Roux, Jonathan, Clément Massonnaud, and Pascal Crépey. "COVID-19: One-month impact of
the French lockdown on the epidemic burden." ​medRxiv​ (2020).
Salje, Henrik, Cécile Tran Kiem, Noémie Lefrancq, Noémie Courtejoie, Paolo Bosetti, Juliette
Paireau, Alessio Andronico et al. "Estimating the burden of SARS-CoV-2 in France." ​medRxiv
(2020).
Systrom, Kevin ​and Thomas Vladeck, 2020​: ​Documentation available at: rt.live.
Wang, Weier, Jianming Tang, and Fangqiang Wei, 2020. "Updated understanding of the
outbreak of 2019 novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in Wuhan, China." ​Journal of Medical Virology.
Wang, Chaolong, Li Liu, Xingjie Hao, Huan Guo, Qi Wang, Jiao Huang, Na He et al. "Evolving
epidemiology and impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on the outbreak of coronavirus
disease 2019 in Wuhan, China." ​medRxiv​ (2020).

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 1: Plots of estimated effective reproduction numbers ​R(​ ​t)​ , Google workplace mobility and
Apple driving mobility indicators for Spain and South Korea. ​R​(​t​) is plotted against the left axis.
Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see data section) are plotted against the
right axis.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Plots of ​R​(​t​), Google (visit to workplaces) and Apple (driving searches) mobility
indicators over time, averaged for Europe and Asia. ​R​(​t)​ is plotted against the left axis. Mobility
changes from baseline (in percentage points, see data section) are plotted against the right
axis.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 3​: Scatter plots of estimated R values vs. Google workplace mobility for countries
(top panel) and U.S. states (bottom panel) on March 15th (red) and May 1st (blue).

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 4​: Coefficients from regressions of estimated effective reproduction numbers ​R(​ ​t)​
observed at the country-date level on Google workplace mobility (left panel) and Apple
driving mobility (right panel) indicators (see text for details). Markers indicate point
estimates and error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals corresponding to standard
errors that are clustered at the country level. The benchmark model includes country and
date fixed effects. Alternative models include additional controls as specified.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 5:​ Top: Estimated country fixed effects from regression (1), sorted from smallest to
largest by country. Bottom: region fixed effects from a version of regression (1) which replaces
country fixed effects with region fixed effects.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure 6​: Coefficients from regressions of estimated effective reproduction numbers ​R(​ ​t)​
observed at the country-date level on six Google workplace mobility indicators, estimated in
separate regressions (blue markers) or together in a single regression (red markers). Markers
indicate point estimates and error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals corresponding to
standard errors that are clustered at the country level. The model includes country and date
fixed effects.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

R

R

R

R

0.61***

0.53***

0.56***

0.72***

(0.15)

(0.16)

(0.09)

(0.16)

Observations

4803

4779

4803

4802

Adjusted R-squared

0.640

0.729

0.813

0.650

Date F.E.

Global

Regional

Global

N

Country Specific Time Trends

N

N

N

Y

Days Since 100th Case F.E.

N

N

Y

N

Google Workplace Mobility
(Seven-day Lagged)

Table 1​: Baseline regression results relating estimated ​R values to seven-day lagged Google
workplace mobility. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions
include country fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in parentheses.
Stars indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01).

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

R

R

R

R

0.69***

0.75***

0.79***

0.77***

(0.20)

(0.25)

(0.11)

(0.20)

Observations

3294

3228

3295

3293

Adjusted R-squared

0.727

0.777

0.839

0.727

Date F.E.

Global

Regional

Global

N

Country Specific Time Trends

N

N

N

Y

Days Since 100th Case F.E.

N

N

Y

N

Apple Driving Mobility
(Seven-day Lagged)

Table 2​: Regression results relating estimated ​R values to seven-day lagged Apple driving
mobility. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions include
country fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in parentheses. Stars
indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01).

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

Google Workplace

Mobility

(3)

(4)

Apple Driving

0.36***

0.47***

0.13**

0.32***

(0.13)

(0.04)

(0.06)

(0.02)

Observations

2601

2601

2850

2850

Adjusted R-squared

0.888

0.901

0.886

0.887

Date F.E.

Y.

N

Y

N

StateState Specific
Time Trends

N

Y

N

Y

Table 3​: Regression results relating estimated ​R values (obtained from rt.live) to Google
workplace mobility (Columns 1-2) and Apple driving mobility (Columns 3-4) measures in the
U.S. panel. Each column reports results from a separate regression. All regressions include
state fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in parentheses. Stars
indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01).

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

R

R

R

R

R

Africa

Asia &
Pacific

Europe

Middle
East

South/
Latin
America

Google Workplace Mobility
Mobility (7-day Lagged)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

-0.37

0.55*

0.70**

0.44

0.46**

(0.42)

(0.31)

(0.26)

(0.25)

(0.18)

446

960

1966

512

783

0.436

0.606

0.794

0.487

0.814

Apple Driving Mobility
Mobility (7-day Lagged)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Date Fixed Effects

Regional

0.47

0.96**

0.21

0.17

(0.27)

(0.36)

(0.15)

(0.50)

719

1905

200

292

0.605

0.820

0.565

0.910

Regional

Regional

Regional

Regional

Table 4​: Regional regression results relating estimated ​R values to seven-day lagged Google
workplace mobility. Each column report results from a separate regression. All regressions
include country fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in parentheses.
Stars indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01). Apple mobility data is not
available in Africa.

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

R

R

R

R

R

-0.50

-0.29

(0.43)

(0.45)

-0.05

0.26

(0.41)

(0.35)

1.81***

0.99

(0.53)

(0.64)

Google Mobility
Retail and Recreation

Apple Mobility
1.03***

0.66**

0.17

(0.34)

(0.29)

(0.16)

-0.40***

-0.28*

-0.08

(0.14)

(0.15)

(0.10)

-0.20

0.04

0.01

(0.12)

(0.09)

(0.02)

0.44

0.42

0.00

(0.44)

(0.41)

(0.14)

0.81***

0.36*

0.30*

(0.22)

(0.19)

(0.16)

2.39***

1.21*

0.13

(0.78)

(0.71)

(0.34)

Observations

4799

4775

2599

Observations

1170

1071

Adjusted R-squared

0.657

0.735

0.889

Adjusted R-squared

0.780

0.782

Date Fixed Effects

Global

Regional

U.S.

Date Fixed Effects

Global

Regional

Grocery and Pharmacy

Parks

Transit Stations

Work Places

Residential

Walking

Driving

Transit

Table 5​: Regression results relating estimated ​R values to all seven-day lagged Google mobility
indicators, jointly estimated. Dependent variable: estimates of ​R f​ rom Kučinskas (2020) in
Columns 1,2,4,5 and from rt.live in Column 3. Each column reports results from a separate
regression. Columns 1,2,3: Google mobility indicators. Column 4,5: Apple mobility indicators,
with all mobility indicators lagged seven days (other than in Column 3). All regressions include
country fixed effects (column 3 includes state fixed effects). Standard errors, clustered by
country (or state), are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,**
p<0.05,*** p<0.01).

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

Before April 7th

(3)

(4)

After April 7th

Google Workplace Mobility
Mobility (7-day lagged)

0.89***

0.63***

0.23***

0.26***

(0.21)

(0.19)

(0.08)

(0.08)

Observations

1949

1925

2853

2853

Adjusted R-squared

0.658

0.719

0.801

0.821

Apple Driving Mobility
Mobility (7-day lagged)

1.07***

1.01***

0.12

0.25

(0.20)

(0.27)

(0.17)

(0.18)

Observations

1525

1488

1769

1740

Adjusted R-squared

0.711

0.728

0.895

0.901

Date F.E.

Global

Regional

Global

Regional

Table 6​: Regression results relating estimated ​R values to 7-day lagged Google workplace
mobility (top panel) and Apple driving mobility (bottom panel) indicators in the international
panel. Columns 1-2: sample is restricted to before April 7th. Columns 3-4: after April 7th. All
regressions include country fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by country, are reported in
parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,*** p<0.01).

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Information

Figure S1​: Average measure of Google workplace mobility over time, by region.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S2​: Average measures in Europe in Europe of Google mobility data, by mobility indicator
type, by mobility indicator type, over time.

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S3:​ Countries included in the international sample (shaded in dark red). Prepared
through simplemaps.com.

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4:​ Country plots of ​R(​ ​t​) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only countries for
which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and ​R​(​t)​ data are included. ​R(​ ​t​) is plotted
against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see datasection) are
plotted against the right axis.

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of ​R​(t​ )​ and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and ​R(​ ​t​) data are included. ​R​(​t)​ is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see data
section) are plotted against the right axis.

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

50

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.):​ Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

51

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.): Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see
datasection) are plotted against the right axis.

52

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S4 (cont.): Country plots of R(t) and Google workplace mobility over time. Only
countries for which there are at least 30 days of both mobility and R(t) data are included. R(t) is
plotted against the left axis. Mobility changes from baseline (in percentage points, see data
section) are plotted against the right axis.

53

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S5: Coefficients of regressions of estimated ​R(t) values on various lags of the Google
workplace mobility indicator as the explanatory variable, estimated in separate regressions
(green markers) or jointly (orange markers) for the international panel (top) and the U.S. state
panel (bottom). Error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals. All regressions include
country/state and date fixed effects.

54

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Figure S6:​ Estimated date fixed effects from regression (1), sorted chronologically.

55

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039; this version posted June 2, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

New Cases Total Cases New Deaths Total Deaths
Growth Rates
L7.Mobility

0.13**

0.11***

0.16*

0.10***

(0.05)

(0.02)

(0.10)

(0.04)

1.12***

1.13***

1.12***

1.13***

(0.02)

(0.01)

(0.04)

(0.01)

Observations

3924

4704

1165

3112

Adjusted R-squared

0.095

0.492

0.174

0.448

Constant

Table S1: Regression results relating alternative measures of Covid-19 transmission to the
7-day lagged Google workplace mobility indicator. Column 1: dependent variable is the daily
growth rate of new cases (3-day running mean). Column 2: dependent variable is the daily
growth rate of total confirmed cases. Column 3: dependent variable is the daily growth rate of
new deaths (3-day running mean). Column 4: dependent variable is the daily growth rate of total
deaths. All regressions include country and date fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered by
country, are reported in parentheses. Stars indicate statistical significance (* p<0.1,** p<0.05,***
p<0.01).

56

