medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Title: Improved survival outcome in SARs-CoV-2 (COVID-19) Acute Respiratory Distress
Syndrome patients with Tocilizumab administration
Authors:
Nafisa Wadud2, Naim Ahmed2, Mannu Shergil2, Maida Khan2, Murali Krishna3, Aamir Gilani3,
Samer El Zarif3, Jodi Galaydick3, Karthika Linga3, Shravan Koor3, Julia Galea4, Lauren
Stuczynski4, Maria B Osundele4
Affiliations:
1. Orange Regional Medical Center (All authors)
2. Department of Internal Medicine
3. Department of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine
4. Department of Pharmacy
Please address correspondence to:
Murali G. Krishna, MD
mkrishna@ghvhs.org

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
Background:
The novel human coronavirus, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARs-CoV-2),
was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. Hence,
there is an urgency to find effective treatment. Of those patients afflicted in the United States,
many have required treatment with ventilator secondary to acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS). Data are needed regarding the benefit of treatment and prevention of the cytokine storms
in COVID-19 patients with Tocilizumab.
Methods:
Clinical outcomes data for patients admitted to Orange Regional Medical Center with confirmed
COVID-19 from Mar 15, 2020 to Apr 20, 2020 were identified through electronic health record
chart review. We conducted a retrospective case-control study in confirmed COVID 19 positive
patients with ARDS requiring mechanical ventilation and compared outcome in terms of mortality
and length of stay amongst those who received Tocilizumab as treatment modality opposed to
those that did not.
Results:
A total of 94 patients with COVID-19 ARDS were analyzed. 44 were in the study group and 50 in
the control group. We tried to match both group as close as possible in terms of age, sex, BMI
and HS score- calculated using inflammatory markers- ferritin, triglycerides, AST and fibrinogen.
The median age was 55.5 years in the study group and 66 in the control group, difference was
not statistically significant. Average HS score was 114 in the Tocilizumab group and 92 in the
control group, difference was statistically significant with P<0.0001. Also, the patients in the study
group had elevated levels of IL-6, triglycerides, AST, ferritin which were statistically significant
with p < 0.0001 when compared to the control group. Length of stay was longer, average 17.9
days in the Tocilizumab. Survival rate was much lower at 48 % in the control group and 61.36 %
in patients who received Tocilizumab with significant P value of < 0.00001. The number needed
to treat (NNT) was 7.48, if we treat 8 patients with Tocilizumab, 1 will not die.
Conclusions:
Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS) occurs in a large number of patients with severe COVID-19,
which is also an important cause of death. IL- 6 is the key molecule of CRS, so IL-6R antagonist
Tocilizumab may be of value in improving outcomes. In our study Tocilizumab group seemed to
have improved survival outcome. Results have to be interpreted with caution since this is a
retrospective study and mortality is affected by multiple, confounding factors. We await the results
of ongoing randomized controlled trials to definitely answer the question of whether Tocilizumab
improves survival in COVID-19 ARDS patients.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
The novel human coronavirus, Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARs-CoV-2),
was declared a global pandemic by the World Health Organization on March 11, 2020. Over 2.7
million confirmed cases and 190,890 deaths have been identified worldwide1. In the USA, there
have been 52,400 deaths as of April 24, 20201, New York State being the epicenter of pandemic2.
Hence, there is an urgency to find effective treatment. Of those patients afflicted in the United
States, many have required treatment with ventilator secondary to acute respiratory distress
syndrome.
The pathogenesis of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) related to coronavirus involves
a cytokine storm with high serum levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines interleukin
6 (IL-6). The pro-inflammatory cytokine IL-6 seems to have a prominent role in this inflammatory
cascade, which may result in increased alveolar-capillary blood-gas exchange dysfunction3,4. The
most recent clinical experiences in China and Italy 5 suggested that patients admitted to intensive
care units, the cytokine storm syndrome was proportional to the severity of disease6, often
progressing to cardiovascular collapse, multiple organ dysfunction and death rapidly7. Therefore,
early identification, treatment and prevention of the cytokine storms are of crucial importance for
these patients.
Tocilizumab is a blocker of IL-6R, which can effectively block IL-6 signal transduction pathway.
The safety of tocilizumab in phase III double-blind controlled trials was studied in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. There were no complications associated with tocilizumab and no history of
illness deterioration or death. Overall, the risk of secondary infection with Tocilizumab is not too
high8. We recommend treatment of hyperinflammation using existing, approved therapies with
proven safety profiles to address the immediate need to reduce the rising mortality. Data are
needed regarding the benefit of treatment and prevention of the cytokine storms in COVID-19
patients with Tocilizumab.
Currently, a small clinical trial in China has shown good efficacy in tocilizumab. After a few days
of treatment, patients experienced clinical improvement, became afebrile and with gradually
decreased oxygen consumption, all other symptoms were significantly improved. CT chest
showed regression of the pulmonary infiltrates and ground glass appearance9. Laboratory
examination showed improvement in peripheral blood lymphocytes and C-reactive protein,
suggesting that tocilizumab could be an efficient treatment for COVID-19 patients. A multicenter,
randomized controlled trial for the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in the treatment of new
coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19 is underway.10,11
Secondary haemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (sHLH) is an under-recognized, characterized
by a fulminant and fatal hypercytokinaemia with multiorgan failure12. A cytokine profile resembling
sHLH is associated with COVID-19 disease severity. All patients with severe COVID-19 should
be screened for hyperinflammation using laboratory trends (eg, increasing ferritin, decreasing
platelet counts, or CRP) and the HScore to identify the subgroup of patients for whom
immunosuppression could improve mortality. HScores greater than 169 are 93% sensitive and
86% specific for HLH12.
METHODS
Study Population
Orange Regional Medical Center serves racially and ethnically diverse patient population in the
Hudson Valley. In this study, patient data came from ICU and floor during the Coronavirus

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pandemic. We included patients who were at least 18 years old, had a laboratory confirmed
Covid-19 infection, and were admitted to the hospital between Mar 15, 2020 to Apr 20, 2020. A
confirmed case of Covid-19 was defined by a positive reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) assay of a specimen collected via nasopharyngeal swab. The Orange
Regional Medical Center Institutional Review Board approved this research under a regulatory
protocol allowing for analysis of limited patient data.
Data Collection
We obtained demographics, laboratory test results, diagnosis codes (International Classification
of Diseases-10), procedures, ICU and floor progress notes during hospitalization. Demographics
included age, sex, BMI, race, ethnic group in the electronic health records. All laboratory values
(CRP, IL-6, TGL, ferritin, fibrinogen, AST, D-dimer/ fibrinogen, EKG) were obtained as part of
indicated clinical care. Treatment modalities used were also compared (Tocilizumab - Dose in
mg/kg, One or two doses, Hydroxychloroquine, Azithromycin, Steroids - hydrocortisone/
methylprednisolone/ dexamethasone). For patients who sustained acute kidney injury – mode of
management – Hemodialysis, CRRT were also obtained. During ICU stay Ventilator setting:
Average PEEP, Average FiO2, Average plateau pressure, Average driving pressure; use of
Paralytic medication (cisatracurium, atracurium, rocuronium or vecuronium infusions) and proning
were taken into account for data analysis.
Definitions of Co-morbidities
We defined co-morbidities as the presence of diagnosis codes associated with asthma, COPD,
Diabetes, use of immunosuppressant medications.
Definitions of Outcomes
We assessed length of stay – number of days on ventilator, in-hospital and Intensive care unit;
mortality, survival and discharge (home, rehab, transfer to outside facility) during admission.
Statistical Analysis
We used descriptive statistics to summarize the data; results are reported as Medians, ranges,
averages and p-values as appropriate. Categorical variables were summarized as counts and
percentages. Compared by Z score and comparison of mean between Tocilizumab and nonTocilizumab group within 1 Standard deviation and 95% Confidence Interval. All statistical tests
were 2-tailed, and statistical significance was defined as P <0 .05. https://www.medcalc.org/

RESULTS
A total of 94 patients with COVID-19 ARDS were analyzed. 44 were in the study group and 50 in
the control group. We tried to match both group as close as possible in terms of age, sex, BMI
and HS score- calculated using inflammatory markers- ferritin, triglycerides, AST and fibrinogen.
The median age was 55.5 years in the study group and 66 in the control group, difference was
not statistically significant. Average HS score was 114 in the Tocilizumab group and 92 in the
control group, difference was statistically significant with P<0.0001. Also, the patients in the study
group had elevated levels of IL-6, triglycerides, AST, ferritin which were statistically significant
with p < 0.0001when compared to the control group. Length of stay was longer, average 17.9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

days in the Tocilizumab. Survival rate was much lower at 48 % in the control group and 61.36 %
in patients who received Tocilizumab with significant P value of < 0.00001. The number needed
to treat (NNT) was 7.48, if we treat 8 patients with Tocilizumab, 1 will not die.
DISCUSSION
The COVID-19 pandemic presents as a public health challenge and emergency. Limited data is
available in the US to guide management with effective treatment. To the best of our knowledge,
no study has compared the outcome in Tocilizumab patients to a control group. For COVID-19
infection, clinical studies have shown that serum levels of inflammatory mediators are significantly
higher in patients with severe disease. Excessive immune responses can trigger cytokine storms
and cause damage to multiple target organs. Recent guidelines also point that a progressive rise
in IL-6 may be a clinical warning indicator for the deterioration of COVID-1913. Tocilizumab, a
monoclonal antibody against interleukin-6, emerged as an alternative treatment for COVID-19
patients with a risk of cytokine storms recently14. In our study, we aim to discuss the treatment
response of therapy in COVID-19 infected patients in terms of survival outcome.
This report provides a perspective on patients admitted with confirmed COVID-19 in both
Intensive care and floor setting. Our hospital serves an ethnically and socioeconomically diverse
population being close to New York City. A significant number of patients displayed abnormal
laboratory measurements at the time of admission. A COVID-19 laboratory order set was used in
the EMR to order labs at the time of hospital admission or ICU transfer which included IL-6, ferritin,
CRP, triglyceride, Fibrinogen, D-dimer, CMP and CBC with differential. The majority of patients
were admitted to the ICU because of acute hypoxemic respiratory failure that required respiratory
support. Endotracheal intubation and invasive mechanical ventilation were needed in a significant
proportion of the patients. Several key findings were observed. Several key findings were
observed in the Tocilizumab group laboratory values of IL-6, Ferritin, Triglyceride and Fibrinogen
were significantly higher indicating that these patients demonstrated cytokine storms. Early
laboratory evaluation may be crucial in identifying cytokine storm, and may also aid clinicians in
identifying patients at high risk of decompensation, ICU admission, and potentially even death. A
study from China reported that increased expression of interleukin (IL)-2R and IL-6 in serum
appears to predict the severity and prognosis of patients with COVID-1918. Elevated levels of the
inflammatory indicator IL-6 in the blood have been reported to be predictive of a fatal outcome in
patients with COVID-19.19
Out of all patients who received Tocilizumab 84.09 % were male and 15.91% were females. The
overall survival rate was 61.36% in patients who received Tocilizumab compared to 48% in the
control group. 59.46% percentage of male patients survived compared to 71.43% females if they
received Tocilizumab. Total 72 males and 22 females were enrolled in this study, indicating that
male gender has predominance of being affected with COVID-19. Our study should be considered
in light of several limitations. In the study group 5 patients did not have fibrinogen level tested
before they received Tocilizumab and in the control group 11 patients did not have the results for
fibrinogen.
CONCLUSION
In the context of the urgent need for effective therapies in the current pandemic, particularly in
severe cases. However, there is no systematically recommended treatment for COVID-19.
Tocilizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody against the in-terleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R) and
is FDA-approved for cytokine release syndrome and recently, has been administered
experimentally in the treatment of severe COVID-19 pneumonia in China and Italy with promising

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

results16. Cytokine Release Syndrome (CRS) occurs in a large number of patients with severe
COVID-19, which is also an important cause of death. IL- 6 is the key molecule of CRS, so
Tocilizumab may be of value in improving outcomes. In our study Tocilizumab group seemed to
have improved survival outcome. Results have to be interpreted with caution since this a
retrospective study and mortality is affected by multiple, confounding factors. In the largest clinical
trials database (clinicaltrials.gov) there are 35 ongoing studies registered around the world
regarding the use of Tocilizumab in COVID-19 patients. We await the results of ongoing
randomized controlled trials to definitely answer the question of whether Tocilizumab improves
survival in COVID-19 ARDS patients.
REFERENCES:
1. COVID-19 world map. https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
2. CDC: Cases of COVID-19 by state. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/casesupdates/cases-in-us.html
3. Michot JM, Albiges L, Chaput N, Saada V, Pommeret F, Griscelli F,Balleyguier C, Besse
B, Marabelle A, Netzer F, Merad M, Robert C, Barlesi F, Gachot B, Stoclin A.Tocilizumab,
an anti-IL6 receptor antibody, to treat Covid-19-related respiratory failure: a case report.
Annals of Oncology, 2020
4. Bingwen Liu, Min Li, Zhiguang Zhou, Xuan Guan, Yufei Xiang. Can we use interleukin-6
(IL-6) blockade for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)- induced cytokine release
syndrome (CRS)? Journal of Autoimmunity, April 2020.
5. Grasselli G, Zangrillo A, Zanella A, et al. Baseline Characteristics and Outcomes of 1591
Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 Admitted to ICUs of the Lombardy Region, Italy.
JAMA 2020
6. Chen C, Zhang XR, Ju ZY, He WF. Advances in the research of cytokine storm
mechanism induced by CoronaVirus Disease 2019 and the corresponding
immunotherapies Chinese Journal of Burns. March 2020
7. Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China.
N Engl J Med 2020
8. Zhang C, Wu Z, Li JW, Zhao H, Wang GQ. The cytokine release syndrome (CRS) of
severe COVID-19 and Interleukin-6 receptor (IL-6R) antagonist Tocilizumab may be the
key to reduce the mortality. Int J Antimicrob Agents. Mar 2020
9. Xiaoling Xu, Mingfeng Han, Tiantian Li, Wei Sun, Dongsheng Wang, Binqing Fu,
Yonggang Zhou, Xiaohu Zheng, Yun Yang, Xiuyong Li, Xiaohua Zhang, Aijun Pan,
Haiming Wei. Effective Treatment of Severe COVID-19 Patients with Tocilizumab.
10. A multicenter, randomized controlled trial for the efficacy and safety of tocilizumab in the
treatment of new coronavirus pneumonia (COVID-19).
http://www.chictr.org.cn/showprojen.aspx?proj=49409

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100081; this version posted May 16, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11. Zhang W, Zhao Y, Zhang F, et al. The use of anti-inflammatory drugs in the treatment of
people with severe coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): The Perspectives of clinical
immunologists from China. Clin Immunol. 2020
12. Puja Mehta, Daniel McAuley, Michael Brown, Emilie Sanchez, Rachel Tattersall, Jessica
Mason. COVID-19: Consider cytokine storm syndromes and immunosuppression. The
Lancet, March 2020
13. Zhou, M., Zhang, X. Qu, J. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19): a clinical update. Front.
Med. 2020
14. Pan Luo, Yi Liu, Lin Qiu, Xiulan Liu, Dong Liu, Juan Li. Tocilizumab treatment in COVID19: a single center experience. Journal of Medical Virology, April 2020
15. Huang C, Wang Y, Li X, Ren L, Zhao J, Hu Y, Zhang L, Fan G, Xu J, Gu X, Cheng Z, Yu
T, Xia J, Wei Y, Wu W, Xie X, Yin W, Li H, Liu M, Xiao Y, Gao H, Guo L, Xie J, Wang G,
Jiang R, Gao Z, Jin Q, Wang J, Cao B. Clinical features of patients infected with 2019
novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China. Lancet 2020
16. Ortiz-Martínez Y. Tocilizumab: A new opportunity in the possible therapeutic arsenal
against COVID-19.Travel Med Infect Dis. 2020 Apr
17. Perrone F, et al. Tocilizumab in COVID-19 pneumonia (TOCIVID-19)–full text viewClinicalTrials.gov. 2020https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04317092
18. Zhao M. Cytokine storm and immunomodulatory therapy in COVID-19: Role of
chloroquine and anti-IL-6 monoclonal antibodies. Int J Antimicrob Agents. 2020.
19. Ruan Q, Yang K, Wang W, Jiang L, Song J. Clinical predictors of mortality due to COVID19 based on an analysis of data of 150 patients from Wuhan, China. Intensive Care Med
2020
20. Di Giambenedetto S, Ciccullo A, Borghetti A, Gambassi G, Landi F, Visconti E, Zileri Dal
Verme L, Bernabei R, Tamburrini E, Cauda R, Gasbarrini A; Off-label Use of Tocilizumab
in Patients with SARS-CoV-2 Infection. J Med Virol. 2020 Apr

