medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.20099036; this version posted May 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Stepping out of lockdown should start with school re-openings while maintaining distancing
measures. Insights from mixing matrices and mathematical models.
Emma S McBryde1, James M Trauer2, Adeshina Adekunle1, Romain Ragonnet2, Michael T. Meehan1
Affiliations:
1

Australian Institute of Tropical Health and Medicine, James Cook University

2

Monash University

Abstract
Australia is one of a few countries which has managed to control COVID-19 epidemic before a major
epidemic took place. Currently with just under 7000 cases and 100 deaths, Australia is seeing less
than 20 new cases per day. This is a positive outcome but makes estimation of current effective
reproduction numbers difficult to estimate. Australia, like much of the world is poised to step out of
lockdown and looking at which measures to relax first.
We use age-based contact matrices, calibrated to Chinese data on reproduction numbers and
difference in infectiousness and susceptibility of children to generate next generation matrices
(NGMs) for Australia. These matrices have a spectral radius of 2.49, which is hence our estimated
basic reproduction number for Australia. The effective reproduction number (Reff) for Australia
during the April/May lockdown period is estimated by other means to be around 0.8. We simulate
the impact of lockdown on the NGM by first applying observations through Google Mobility Report
for Australia at 3 locations: home (increased contacts by 18%), work (reduced contacts by 34%) and
other (reduced contacts by 40%), and we reduce schools to 3% reflecting attendance rates during
lockdown. Applying macro-distancing to the NGM leads to a spectral radius of 1.76. We estimate
that the further reduction of the reproduction number to current levels of Reff = 0.8 is achieved by a
micro-distancing factor of 0.26. That is, in a given location, people are 26% as likely as usual to have
an effective contact with another person.
We apply both macro and micro-distancing to the NGMs to examine the impact of different exit
strategies. We find that reopening schools is estimated to reduce Reff from 0.8 to 0.78. This is
because increase in school contact is offset by decrease in home contact. The NGMs all estimate that
adults aged 30-50 are responsible for the majority of transmission. We also find that microdistancing is critically important to maintain Reff <1. There is considerable uncertainty in these
estimates and a sensitivity and uncertainty analysis is presented.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.20099036; this version posted May 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Introduction
Australia is now sustaining an estimated effective reproduction number (Reff) less than one across all
jurisdictions. This success has prompted government to consider easing current lockdown
restrictions, with several industries set to be re-opened. Among these are schools – whose shutdown
has been an unceasing source of controversy.
Despite consistent advice to Commonwealth that childhood disease poses little risk for community
transmission, most jurisdictions have enacted school closure policies. In view of the strategy of
easing current restrictions whilst maintaining a suppression trajectory 1, this paper aims to address
in epidemiological and modelling terms, the impact of opening schools, returning to workplaces and
easing home lockdown requirements on the control of the COVID-19 epidemic in Australia.

Methods
To estimate the relative contributions to transmission provided by different locations we begin with
national age-specific contact rates generated by Prem et al. 2 (Figure 1). Initially, we weight these
contact rates according to the relative susceptibility and infectiousness of different age groups,
before multiplying through by the mean transmission rate per contact over the lifetime of infection.
Matrix scaling factors are calibrated to the age-distribution of cases and basic reproduction number
R0 = 2.68 for China at baseline 3,4. We then applied the calibrated values to the Australian contact
matrix, and estimated R0 for Australia.
We apply Commonwealth and Google data to adjust location-specific mixing subsequent to
restrictive policies and further scale for behavioural “micro-distancing” to reach Australia’s lockdown
estimated Reff of 0.8. 5
We examined five intervention scenarios and the impact on Reff.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)

Current conditions continued
Return to school
Return to school and cease home lockdown, but with micro-distancing
Return to school and work, and cease home lockdown, but with improved micro-distancing
Return to pre-COVID-19 activity levels

See supporting online materials (SOM) for elaboration.

Results
We estimate R0 for Australia to be 2.49. Figure 1 demonstrates the contact and infection matrices
under five scenarios. We estimate that schools opening while maintaining the current lockdown
reduces Reff from 0.8 to 0.78, exiting home lockdown leads to Reff = 0.86, and work returning leads to
Reff = 0.94, provided strenuous levels of micro-distancing remain in place. Outcomes are sensitive to

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.20099036; this version posted May 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

model parameters, explored in the SOM.

Figure 1 Top row of panels, mixing matrices by 5-year age groups for Australia taken from Prem et
al.,2 overall and by four “location” components. Second row of panels, next generation matrices for
each location (see SOM for derivation). Third row of panels, impact of five scenarios on the next
generation matrix. Fourth row of panels, resulting Reff. All four intervention scenarios assume that
micro-distancing is sustained at current high levels. The final value shows the impact of removing
micro-distancing and returning to contact rates pre-COVID-19.

Discussion
We use Australian age-specific contacts, and global COVID-19 infection rates to estimate the impact
of government policies on Australian COVID-19 control. We estimate a slightly lower R0 for Australia
than for China due to differences in mixing patterns. We then calibrate the impact of interventions
undertaken through March-May 2020 to an effective reproduction number of 0.8. Our contact dataderived matrices show that age-assortative mixing between adults at home, work and the
community are the major sources of transmission.
We examine strategies to move out of lockdown and conclude that school-opening would have
minimal impact on COVID-19 transmission and is compensated by reduced home transmission.
Changes in out-of-home contacts have greater impact. Although the role of micro-distancing
remains highly uncertain, reopening workplaces and ceasing lockdown while sustaining strict
distancing may allow suppression of COVID-19.
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.12.20099036; this version posted May 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1.
McBryde ES, Meehan MT, Trauer JM. Flattening the curve is not enough, we need to squash
it. An explainer using a simple model. medRxiv 2020.
2.
Prem K, Cook AR, Jit M. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact
surveys and demographic data. PLoS Comput Biol 2017; 13(9): e1005697.
3.
Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72314 Cases From the Chinese
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA 2020.
4.
Liu Y, Gayle AA, Wilder-Smith A, Rocklov J. The reproductive number of COVID-19 is higher
compared to SARS coronavirus. J Travel Med 2020.
5.
Price DJ, Shearer FM, Meehan M, et al. Estimating the case detection rate and temporal
variation in transmission of COVID-19 in Australia Technical Report 14th April 2020. 2020.

4

