medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Predicting SARS-CoV-2 infection trend using
technical analysis indicators
Marino Paroli and Maria Isabella Sirinian

Department of Clinical, Anesthesiologic and Cardiovascular Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome,

Viale del Policlinico 166, Rome, Italy.

ABSTRACT
COVID-19 pandemic is a global emergency caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection. Without efficacious

antiviral drugs or vaccines available, mass quarantine has been the main strategy adopted by

governments to contain the virus spread. This has led to a significant reduction in the number of

infected people and deaths and to a diminished pressure over the health care system. However,

an economic depression is following due to the forced absence of worker from their job and to the

closure of many productive activities. For these reasons, governments are lessening progressively

the mass quarantine measures to avoid an economic catastrophe. However, most people has not

been yet exposed to the virus, so are susceptible to Covid-19. Therefore, the reopening of firms

and commercial activities might lead to a resurgence of infection, as already reported in South

Korea and in China were epidemic was considered almost gone although in a few of cases. In the

worst-case scenario, this might impose the return to strict lockdown measures.

models

are

therefore

necessary

to

forecast

possible

new

infection

outbreaks

Epidemiological

and

to

inform

government to promptly adopt new containment measures. In this context, we tested here if

technical analysis methods commonly used in the financial market might provide early signal of

change in the direction of SARS-Cov-2 infection trend in Italy, Iran and Brazil, three countries

which have been strongly hit by the pandemic but whose present infection trends are substantially

different from each other being therefore particularly useful to understand the potential of TA

models.

We conclude that technical analysis indicators can be usefully adopted to this aim.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Severe

Acute

Respiratory

Syndrome

Coronavirus

2

(SARS-CoV-2)

is

the

etiological

agent

of

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) (1). At the time of writing, COVID-19 pandemic is a global

emergency with more than 280,000 deaths worldwide (https://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/home).

With no effective antiviral drugs and no vaccines available, prevention of COVID-19 relies upon

detection

and

isolation

of

symptomatic

cases

and

restrictive

mass

quarantines

(2).

Mass

quarantine, however, poses a serious risk of a second crisis in the form of an economic recession

(3). Therefore, governments are cautiously allowing the progressive come back to work without

certainty that further infection waves will not occur. Different epidemiological models are used to

forecast real-time

the number of new cases and identify possible pandemic outbreaks. These

include compartmental models, agent-based models and metapopulation models (4-5).

However,

any epidemiological model has its own limitation, and the addition of new predictive tools is

methodology used in the financial market aimed to forecast the
direction of security prices through the study of statistical trends of post-market data (6).
tools called indicators developed to generate signals for traders to buy or to sell.
These tools include indicators just plotted over the top of the prices on a stock chart like Simple Moving
Averages (SMEs) or which oscillate between minimum and maximum value like Moving Average
Convergence/Divergence (MACD) and the Relative Strength Index (RSI) (7-8).
desired. Technical analysis (TA) is a

TA is based on

the use of mathematical

We examined here the

capacity of different TA indicators to predict the SARS-CoV-2 spreading using daily reported new

cases of infection for our data analysis.

METHODS
Open data of new daily infection cases in Italy, Iran and Brazil were obtained from European Union

official website (9). TA indicators used in this study included a) the combined use of fast (3-day)

and slow (20-day) Simple Mean Averages (SMAs).

In particular, the crossing between the fast and

the slow SMAs either to the upside or the downside are considered as signs of trend reversals; b)

Moving Average Convergence Divergence (MACD). MACD is a commonly used indicator which

consists of the so-called

MACD line calculated by subtracting the 26-day Exponential Moving

Average (EMA) from the 12-day EMA of a series of consecutive data. Nine-day EMA of the MACD

line (signal line) is then calculated and plotted on top of the MACD line. Finally, MACD histogram is

calculated by subtracting the signal line from the MACD line. A trend reversal to the upside is

signaled when the MACD line crosses above its signal line, while a reversal trend to the downside

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

is signaled when the MACD line crosses below the signal line. Additionally, signals of a trend

reversals are revealed when the MACD line cross the zero axis; c) the 14-day Relative Strength

Index

(RSI)

was

calculated

according

to

the

standard

formula:

RSI

=

100

–

(100/1+

Relative

Strength (RS)) where RS is the ratio between the average of the absolute increase of values upper

and down the previous day in a 14-day timeframe. Plotting RSI values on a chart results in a line

that fluctuates between 0 and 100 values

.

The crossing of the 50 value by the RSI line either to the

upside or to the downside are considered reversal signals of the current trend;

between MACD histogram and daily new infections trends were also analyzed.

were

calculated

according

to

the

appropriate

formula

using

the

Microsoft

f) divergence

All TA indicators

Excel

spreadsheet

program.

RESULTS
Trend analysis of daily new infections in Italy (fig. 1A) showed that the fast (3-days) SMA crossed

the slow (20-days) line from above on April 1, 2020 indicating that the upward trend was likely to

change in a downward direction. This signal occurred about 10 days after that a peak in the

number of new infected cases was recorded on 22 March, 2020.

MACD analysis (fig. 2A) showed

to subsequent signals or trend reversal to the downside. The first signal consisting in the crossing

of MACD line by the signal line from above appeared on 30 March and the second one on 20 April.

Finally, RSI (Fig 3A) showed the crossing of 50-axos by the RSI line. In Iran (fig. 1B) a signal of

reversal to the uptrend appeared on April 8, about 8 days after the highest number of newly

reported cases on March 31 (solid arrow). Thereafter, and uptrend signal followed on May 6

represented by the crossing of slow SMA by the fast SMA from above (dotted arrow). Similarly,

MACD analysis signaled two opposite trend reversal signals. The first was a downtrend signal and

appeared on March 24 followed by an uptrend signal on April, 5. This trend was confirmed by the

zero-axis crossing by MACD line on April 20. A new trend reversal appeared on May 5 concomitant

with the change of MACD histogram from negative to positive. After this signal, the trend reversal

was confirmed by an increase of the daily reported infections. In fig. 3B the RSI line signaled a

trend inversion to the downside on March 28 and to the upside on April 24 by crossing the 50-axis.

As regards Brazil (fig. 1C, 2C and 3C) the trend of new infections was constantly toward the upside

and no signal of reversal was signaled during all the timeframe observed. Finally, divergences

between trends (dotted lines) of the number of new daily cases (solid line) and MACD (histograms)

were

alalyzed.

In

Italy

(fig.

4A)

a

divergence

appeared

during

the

downtrend

phase

of

the

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

epidemic, as indicated by the dotted lines. However, no trend reversal occurred so this should be
considered as a false signal. In Iran (fig 4B) the chart displayed two divergences. The first one was
noticeable in the early phase of the time period examined. This also was a false signal. After the
second divergence, however, a trend reversal actually occurred (dotted arrow). In Brazil (fig. 4C)
no trend divergence between case of infections and MACD histogram was found.

DISCUSSION
Technical analysis is a means to examine and forecast how financial market will trend. TA is based
on the idea that if previous market patterns can be identified a fairly accurate prediction of future
price trajectories can be made, and this is obtained by the use of mathematical tools called market
indicators. This approach is opposed to fundamental analysis which is focuses on the true values of
assets (6). A series of TA indicators were tested here for their ability to predict SARS-Cov-2
infection spread using as data the number of daily reported new infections in analogy to stock
quote prices. Open data on infections obtained by the European official site concerned Italy, Iran
and Brazil, all countries greatly struck by the pandemic. We found that all indicators considered
here provided trend reversal signals which were easily spotted on charts. This led us to the
conclusion that TA indicators can be useful to obtain real-time information on how SARS-CoV-2
infection is spreading. It is worth to note that prompt signals of a trend inversion can provide
essential information to governments to adopt prompt measures to contain the pandemic and to
identify new outbreaks. Although TA is not intended to be a substitute of classical epidemiological
models, we believe that any new method able to predict the infection trend deserve
consideration. This is true especially during such an emergency situation where at present neither
the biology of the virus nor the host immunological response is fully understood. A major
limitation of this study is the intrinsic nature of the data. The reported number of daily new cases
is at least in part inaccurate since a consistent number of new infections can be missed due to the
presence of asymptomatic subjects (10). Underreporting of cases due to several factors is a major
limitation of any epidemiological model. Moreover, the number of diagnostic tests taken daily may
fluctuate significantly. It is worth to note that the number of tests does not refer to the same in
each country. One main difference is that some countries report the number of people tested,
while others report the number of tests which can be higher if the same person is tested more
than once. Finally, the incidence of infection can vary among areas of the same country not
necessarily reflecting the situation of the whole country (11). This has been particularly evident in

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Italy where in Lombardy region cases account for about half of total cases of Italy. Nevertheless,
we suggest that TA indicators might provide reliable real-time information of how SARS-Cov-2
infection is spreading to rush the set-up of new containment measures by governments when
needed.

REFERENCES
1.

Wang, C, Horby, PW, Hayden FG, et al. A novel coronavirus outbreak of global health

concern. Lancet. 2020; 395:470-473.
2.

Hellewell, J, Abbott, S, Gimma, A, et al. Feasibility of controlling COVID-19 outbreaks by

isolation of cases and contacts. Lancet Glob Health. 2020; 8:e488-e496.
3.

Nicola, M, Alsafi, Z, Sohrabi C, et al. The Socio-Economic Implications of the Coronavirus

and COVID-19 Pandemic: A Review. Int J Surg. 2020; 16: S1743-9191
4.

Richiardi, L, Bellocco, R, Zugna, D, et al. Mediation analysis in epidemiology: methods,

interpretation and bias. Int J Epidemiol. 2013 Oct;42(5):1511-9. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyt127. Epub
2013 Sep 9. Review. PubMed PMID: 24019424.
5.

Rothman, KJ, and Greenland, S. Causation and causal inference in epidemiology. Am J

Public Health. 2005; 95 Suppl 1: S144-50.

Murphy, John J. Technical Analysis of the Financial Markets. New York Institute of Finance, 1999,
pp. 1-5, 24-31
6.

7.

Appel, Gerald. Technical Analysis Power Tools for Active Investors. Financial Times Prentice

Hall, 2005
8.

J. Welles Wilder New Concepts in Technical Trading Systems. Trend Research, 1978

9.

EU open data portal. Available from: https://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/home

10.

Bai, Y, Yao L, Wei T, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-19.

JAMA. 2020; 323:1406-1407

11.

de Lusignan, S, Lopez Bernal, J, Zambon, M, et al. Emergence of a Novel Coronavirus

(COVID-19): Protocol for Extending Surveillance Used by the Royal College of General
Practitioners Research and Surveillance Centre and Public Health England. JMIR Public Health
Surveill. 2020 Apr 2; 6: e18606.

FIGURE LEGENDS

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1.

In Italy (A) the fast SMA crosses the slow SMA from above (red arrow) indicating that the

trend is changing in a downward direction. Histograms represent the reported new daily
infections. In Iran (B) a first signal of trend reversal to the downside (red arrow) is followed by a
trend reversal to the upside (black arrow). In Brazil (C) the upward trend is constant without any
signals of reversal.

Figure 2. A trend reversal to the downside in Italy (A) is first signaled by the crossing of the faster
signal line to the slower MACD line from the above and confirmed later by the crossing of the
zero-axis by the MACD line from the above (red arrows). In Iran (B) the red arrow signals an initial
downtrend followed by a return to the upside as signaled by the black arrow. In Brazil (C) no signal
of trend reversal is spotted.

Figure 3. Relative strength indicator (RSI) is shown. In Italy (A) the crossing of the 50-line by the RSI
line confirms a trend reversal to the downside (red arrow). In Iran (B) a signal of reversal to the
uptrend follows a first signal to the downtrend (red and black arrows, respectively). In Brazil (C) no
signal of trend reversal is detected.

Figure 4. Divergences between the number of new daily cases (solid line) and MACD (histogram)
are shown. In Italy (A) a divergence appears during the downtrend phase of the epidemic, as
indicated by the dotted lines. However, no trend reversal occurs (false signal). In Iran (B) two
divergences occur at the first and second phases of the epidemic. After the second divergence, a
trend reversal actually occurs (black arrow). In Brazil (C) no divergence is found.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.13.20100784; this version posted May 24, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

