medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Title: The Challenge of Using Epidemiological Case Count Data: The Example of Confirmed COVID19 Cases and the Weather
Short title: Challenges of using COVID-19 case count data
One Sentence Summary: Measurement issues in the currently available data on confirmed COVID-19
cases undermine the analyses of the drivers of the spread of the disease.

Authors: Francois Coheni, Moritz Schwarzi,ii, Sihan Liiii, Yangsiyu Lui and Anant Janiiv

Abstract: The publicly available data on COVID-19 cases provides an opportunity to better understand
this new disease. However, strong attention needs to be paid to the limitations of the data to avoid
making inaccurate conclusions. This article, which focuses on the relationship between the weather and
COVID-19, raises the concern that the same factors influencing the spread of the disease might also
affect the number of tests performed and who gets tested. For example, weather conditions impact the
prevalence of respiratory diseases with symptoms similar to COVID-19, and this will likely influence
the number of tests performed. This general limitation could severely undermine any similar analysis
using existing COVID-19 data or similar epidemiological data, which could, therefore, mislead
decision-makers on questions of great policy relevance.

i

Smith School of Enterprise and the Environment, University of Oxford; and Institute for New Economic Thinking
at the Oxford Martin School, University of Oxford.
ii
Climate Econometrics, Nuffield College, Oxford.
iii
Environmental
Institute,
Oxford.
NOTE:
This preprintChange
reports new
researchUniversity
that has not of
been
certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
iv
Nuffield Department of Primary Care Health Sciences, University of Oxford.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Main text: The publicly available datasets on confirmed COVID-19v cases and deaths provide a key
opportunity to better understand the drivers of the pandemic. Research using these datasets has been
growing at a very fast pace (see an indicative list of references in supplementary material 1). However,
little attention has been paid to the reliability of this type of epidemiological data to make statistical
inferences.
Our initial aim was to produce a detailed statistical analysis of the relationship between weather
conditions and the spread of COVID-19. This question has attracted significant attention from the media
(e.g. 1, 2) and the research community (e.g. 3, 4; see a wider list in supplementary material 1) due to the
possibility that summer weather might slow the spread of the virus. After going through all the steps of
such an analysis, we reached the unexpected conclusion that the limitations of the available COVID-19
data are so severe that we would not be able to make any reliable statistical inference. This applies, for
example, to the data provided by the John Hopkins University (5) and the data collated by Xu et al.
(2020) (6).
This is a concerning yet very important finding considering that such data is being widely used to make
crucial policy decisions on a wide range of topics. Since invalid causal inferences could be made with
the publicly available COVID-19 data, and then enter policy-making discourse, there is an urgent need
to raise awareness among the scientific community and decision-makers regarding the limitations of the
information at their disposal. The elements discussed in this paper are also likely to be applicable to
other epidemiological datasets obtained with insufficient testing and monitoring, either during
exceptional epidemics or seasonal outbreaks.

***
Several challenges could undermine any causal statistical analysis of the influence of a potential
determinant, such as the weather, on the spread of COVID-19. To start, confounding variables are likely

v

In this article we follow Xu et al. (2020) who define COVID-19 cases as individuals for whom SARS-CoV-2 has
been detected using rt-PCR.

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

to pose a significant problem: many factors (e.g. changes in policy or social interactions) are
simultaneously influencing how the disease spreads.
In addition, significant challenges come from the limitations of the COVID-19 case count data itself.
Firstly, testing capacity has been a major issue in most countries. Before March 1st, 2020, very few
countries had sufficient testing capacity. By April 30th, 2020, high-income countries had significantly
increased their testing capacity, but testing remained critically infrequent in most low- and middleincome countries.vi Figure 1, panel a illustrates the effect that insufficient testing capacity has on the
number of confirmed cases. It distinguishes between three phases of limited (I), intermediate (II) and
widespread (III) testing. In Phases I and II, there is a risk that the number of confirmed cases depends
more on the number of tests available than on the actual number of people who have COVID-19,
questioning the validity of any analysis relying too heavily on this data.
Figure 1: Difference between actual COVID-19 cases in population and reported confirmed COVID-19
cases. Confirmed COVID-19 cases (green) represent the number of people tested with a positive test result. They
include false positive and exclude false negative tests. The circles of panel b represent the size of the populations
with true positive, false negative or false positive tests. Quantities in the y-axis of panel a, as well as the size of
the circles in panel b, do not represent any true value or proportion.
b) Challenge of test accuracy

a) Challenge of testing capacity

Phase I

Phase II

Phase III

Daily counts

Yes

Includes false
positive tests

No

No
Yes
Includes false negative tests

Time
Legend:

Tests

Legend:

Population infected

Confirmed cases

vi

Confirmed cases

False positive tests

True positive tests

False negative tests

Figures on testing are available in Our World In Data (accessed on May 1st, 2020):
https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

Moreover, there have been numerous concerns regarding the accuracy of the COVID-19 tests performed
so far (7, 8, 9, 10). Figure 1, panel b illustrates the effects of both false-negative and false-positive test
results on the number of confirmed cases. False-negative results would imply that the number of
confirmed COVID-19 cases is underestimated. False-positive results would imply that people who do
not have COVID-19 are included in the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases. Concerns regarding test
accuracy create an additional problem of measurement that might affect statistical analyses.
The two above-mentioned challenges are inherent to all current datasets of COVID-19 confirmed case
count and mortality. In addition, specific datasets may have imperfect geographical or time coverage.
To look at the impact of the weather on the spread of COVID-19, we initially used a well-established
approach, similar to the ones used previously to look at the impact of the weather on other diseases (e.g.
11, 12) (see details in supplementary material 2). However, the fundamental measurement issues
associated with the COVID-19 case count data cannot be corrected by statistical techniques, as we
outline below.
The main problem is that the weather could be influencing the number of tests carried out and the
segment of the population tested. For example, other respiratory diseases are often similar to COVID19 in their symptoms (e.g. 13) and are more common during cold weather (e.g. 11, 12), which could
influence the number of tests performed on people displaying symptoms of respiratory infection.
Therefore, even if the model correctly identified the impact of the weather on COVID-19 case counts,
it could not distinguish between the impact of the weather on the spread of the disease and its impact on
testing. Table 1 provides a non-exhaustive list of elements that could undermine any analysis of the
impact of the weather on the spread of COVID-19 using data on confirmed cases. The evidence suggests
that the weather may correlate with the number of tests conducted and who gets tested. We have not
been able to find any specific COVID-19 related evidence that the weather would correlate with test
accuracy (e.g. the weather affecting the nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal swabs used in the PCR
analysis), even though this could be possible.
Other points of concern include: the fact that there may be indirect effects of weather conditions on other
factors that could have an impact on the spread of COVID-19 (such as social interactions or air
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

pollution); the heterogeneity of impacts across populations and subgroups within a population; or the
fact that some people may have travelled and therefore been infected in a different place from where the
cases are reported.
Table 1: Non-exhaustive list of reasons why weather conditions could affect the number of COVID-19 tests
carried out and who gets tested.
Potential reason
Unrelated respiratory diseases are
weather sensitive (e.g. 11, 12) and
can be confused with COVID-19 (e.g.
7, 14).

The incidence of other pathologies
(e.g. cardiovascular diseases) is
influenced by the weather (e.g. 11,
12).

People may be more inclined to seek
medical attention depending on the
weather (e.g. 15).

Potential implication
- More patients with symptoms of unrelated respiratory diseases
could be tested during cold weather.
- The prevalence of other weather-sensitive respiratory diseases
might make false-positive results more likely, especially if only
radiographic imaging is used, since it is possible to confuse these
diseases for COVID-19 (e.g. 7, 14).
- Hospital capacity, and the workload of medical staff and testing
structures is affected by weather conditions, with potential
implications on the number of tests conducted.
- At-risk individuals suffering from unrelated conditions are more
likely to be tested for COVID-19, even if they only have mild
symptoms for COVID-19.
- Due to weather conditions, people may or may not decide to seek
medical attention, affecting the number of patients going to the
hospital with COVID-19, and the workload of medical staff.

We ran our model (as detailed in the supplementary material 2) and provide results and robustness
checks in supplementary material 3. The model would technically suggest a negative correlation (e.g.
colder days would be associated with more confirmed COVID-19 cases, and hotter days with fewer
cases). Yet, these results could be highly misleading since these estimates are likely to be substantially
biased because of the aforementioned reasons.
Figure 2, panel a, provides an illustration of how we could have obtained a negative correlation even
if temperature had no impact or a positive impact on the spread of COVID-19 in our sample. The total
number of estimated cases is given by the size of the circles as a function of temperature (x-axis). The
circles in green correspond to the effects we are interested in – those that explain the influence of
temperature on the spread of COVID-19. If temperature has no effect on the spread of COVID-19, then
the green circles should be the same size at low and high temperatures. The pink circles represent the
possible effect of temperature on testing (as reported in Table 1) under the illustrative assumption that
high temperatures reduce testing frequency. In this case, the overall result is a negative correlation
between temperature and confirmed COVID-19 cases, even if temperature has no effect on the spread
of the disease. In practice, we naturally do not know the direction of the bias caused by the effect of
5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

temperature on testing when using standard statistical methods. There is also no way for us to evaluate
the contribution of each of these effects (green or pink) in our estimate. We arrive at the final size of the
circles and cannot be sure if the association that we are interested in is either negative, null or positive.
Figure 2, panel b, focuses on the risk that effects could be different across different samples. The circles
in blue capture other underlying factors that are influenced by temperature (such as acclimatisation or
the level of social interactions in the population), as well as other socioeconomic factors (such as the
demographic characteristics of a population). These factors could be radically different in different
regions but may also evolve over time (e.g. between winter and summer seasons).
Figure 2: Effects potentially captured by our estimate. The size of the circles represents the estimated number
of cases at different temperatures. These are examples that do not correspond to actual data. In these examples, we
assume no correlation between temperature and the effects in green (see legend below), a negative correlation with
the effects in pink (example 1) and a positive correlation with those in blue.
a) Estimates are likely to be biased because the weather influences data collection

Temperature
b) Estimates could vary between samples

Example 2

Temperature

Effect of the weather on
COVID-19 spread

Effect of the weather on
tests

Effect of the weather in
another sample

For example, SARS-CoV-2 is
more infectious; the
weather affects people’s
immune systems; Peopleto-people transmission is
higher.

For example, changes in the
number of people with
respiratory diseases other
than COVID-19, affecting
the number of tests
performed.

For example, social
interactions evolve; or
samples are for different
countries.

There are strong reasons to be concerned with the scenario illustrated in Figure 2, panel b. In our
sample, for example, we only have data from the start of the pandemic until end of April 2020; some
countries (e.g. China) may be over-represented in the dataset; and the average daily temperature is
6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

relatively low at 10.5°C. Furthermore, many countries have implemented a stringent containment policy
during the period covered by the sample. Containment policies may have heightened (or lowered) the
sensitivity of the spread of the disease to the weather because social interactions are limited. We are not
able to observe how the impact of the weather on COVID-19 might change at different gradients of
social interaction. Finally, our estimate is based on small, observed changes in temperatures, and not on
radical increases or reductions in temperatures. The spread of COVID-19 may respond differently to
large variations in temperature, e.g. by 5°C or 10°C across seasons, making seasonal predictions even
more unreliable.
Strong precautions need to be taken before using COVID-19 case count datasets for inference. The
results of our model using existing COVID-19 data would seemingly imply a negative association
between temperature and confirmed COVID-19 cases. Any projection of COVID-19 cases with such
estimates could conclude that, during the upcoming months of June to September 2020, Southern
Hemisphere countries would be exposed to higher risks of COVID-19 spread, and Northern Hemisphere
countries to lower risks.vii These types of unsubstantiated results could be used as a misinformed
justification for an early relaxation of effective social distancing measures in the Northern Hemisphere.
These findings have equally strong implications for statistical analyses focusing on other questions that
rely on COVID-19 confirmed case count and/or mortality count data. Even though the exact nature of
the effects may change, such studies are also at risk of capturing the effect that their parameters of
interest have on tests and test results. For example, studies interested in the effect of containment policies
may have to consider that these policies substantially affect testing because they change the awareness
of the disease in the population, political demands for more testing or the risk of contracting other
respiratory diseases. Other studies may also produce estimates that are very specific to the current
circumstances in the development of the pandemic and are, therefore, not suitable to use for forecasts of
what could happen in the coming months.
In the medium term, more reliable data needs to be gathered, for example through experimental studies
that randomly test a sample of the population for COVID-19. In the short term, we are in a situation of
vii

We performed such a projection to confirm this point (see supplementary material 4).

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

fundamental uncertainty about how different factors affect or are affected by the widespread societal
changes we see with the COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, scientists, policymakers, journalists and the
general public need to be very cautious when discussing how the spread of COVID-19 correlates with
the weather or any other factor.
In the long term, this paper suggests that more attention should be given to how epidemiological data is
recorded and used during exceptional epidemics and seasonal outbreaks, since insufficient testing and
monitoring can undermine essential statistical analyses. This article calls for the complementary use of
different methods for data collection, such as random testing in samples of the population.

REFERENCES

1

Ravilious, K. (2020). Will spring slow spread of coronavirus in northern hemisphere? The Guardian, 11th March
2020.
2

Clive Cookson. (2020). Scientists hopeful warmer weather can slow spread of coronavirus. The Financial Times,
25th March 2020.
3

Araujo, M. B., & Naimi, B. (2020). Spread of SARS-CoV-2 Coronavirus likely to be constrained by climate.
medRxiv.
Carleton, Tamma et al. “Ultraviolet radiation decreases COVID-19 growth rates: Global causal estimates and
seasonal implications” (2020). Unpublished draft available at: http://www.kylemeng.com/ [Accessed 29th April,
2020]
4

5

Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. "An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19 in
real time." The Lancet infectious diseases (2020).
6

Xu, Bo, et al. "Epidemiological data from the COVID-19 outbreak, real-time case information." Scientific Data
7.1 (2020): 1-6.
7

Ai, Tao, et al. "Correlation of chest CT and RT-PCR testing in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in China:
a report of 1014 cases." Radiology (2020): 200642.
8

Apostolopoulos, Ioannis D., and Tzani A. Mpesiana. "Covid-19: automatic detection from x-ray images utilizing
transfer learning with convolutional neural networks." Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine (2020): 1.
9

Hu, Emily. "COVID-19 Testing: Challenges, Limitations and Suggestions for Improvement." (2020).

10

Hall, Lawrence O., et al. "Finding COVID-19 from Chest X-rays using Deep Learning on a Small Dataset."
arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.02060 (2020).
11

Deschenes, Olivier, and Enrico Moretti. "Extreme weather events, mortality, and migration." The Review of
Economics and Statistics 91.4 (2009): 659-681.
12

Gasparrini, A., Guo, Y., Hashizume, M., Lavigne, E., Zanobetti, A., Schwartz, J., ... & Leone, M. (2015).
Mortality risk attributable to high and low ambient temperature: a multicountry observational study. The Lancet,
386(9991), 369-375.
WHO. “Q&A: Similarities and Differences – COVID-19 and Influenza”. (2020) Consulted on 29th April, 2020:
https://www.who.int/news-room/q-a-detail/q-a-similarities-and-differences-covid-19-and-influenza
13

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.21.20108803; this version posted May 23, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-ND 4.0 International license .

14

Chen, Sin-Guang, et al. "Use of Radiographic Features in COVID-19 Diagnosis: Challenges and Perspectives."
Journal of the Chinese Medical Association: JCMA (2020).
15

Norris, John B., et al. "An empirical investigation into factors affecting patient cancellations and noshows at outpatient clinics." Decision Support Systems 57 (2014): 428-443.

Acknowledgements. For useful comments, we thank, among others, Eric Beinhocker, Cristina Castro,
Antoine Dechezlepretre, Doyne Farmer, Matthieu Glachant, Jeongmin Thomas Han, David Hendry,
Cameron Hepburn, José García Quevedo, Daniel Montolio, James Parkhurst, Rafael Perera, Felix Pretis,
Andra Tartakowsky, Elisabet Viladecans, Judit Vall Castelo and the team of the Future of Cooling
programme at the Oxford Martin School. For technical IT assistance, we thank David Ford. For
copyediting, we thank Jack Smith. Authors contributions: Cohen is the first author. He had the original
idea, wrote most of the paper and the code to produce the econometric analysis. He also coordinated the
team. Jani ensured the material was consistent with the epidemiological evidence. Li produced the
required climate data for the statistical analysis. Lu helped on literature review, on coding the
econometric analysis and on producing the tables. Schwarz helped on data coding and matching and
created the projections. All authors contributed to the text. Funding sources: Oxford Martin School
(Cohen and Jani), The Nature Conservancy (Cohen, Li and Lu), Newton Fund (Li), Clarendon Fund and
Robertson Foundation (Schwarz), China Scholarship Council and University of Oxford (Lu).
Competing interests: the authors have no conflict of interest. Data and materials availability: all data
and software are publicly available at https://github.com/moritzpschwarz/COVID-19-weather-Oxford.

Supplementary Materials
1. References from the emerging literature on the spread of COVID-19
2. Data and methods to correlate weather conditions to confirmed COVID-19 cases
3. Main results and robustness checks
4. Information on projections
Table A1 – A6
Fig A1 – A2

9

