medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

When to relax a lockdown? A modelling-based study of testing-led strategies coupled with
sero-surveillance against SARS-CoV-2 infection in India
Sandip Mandal1, Hemanshu Das2, Sarang Deo2, Nimalan Arinaminpathy3*
1

Independent Consultant, New Delhi, India; 2 Indian School of Business, Hyderabad, India; 3
MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis, School of Public Health, Imperial
College London, London, UK
* Corresponding author: nim.pathy@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract
India’s lockdown against SARS-CoV-2, if lifted without any other mitigations in place, could
risk a second wave of infection. A test-and-isolate strategy, using PCR diagnostic tests,
could help to minimise the impact of this second wave. Meanwhile, population-level
serological surveillance can provide valuable insights into the level of immunity in the
population. Using a mathematical model, consistent with an Indian megacity, we examined
how seroprevalence data could guide a test-and-isolate strategy, for lifting a lockdown. For
example, if seroprevalence is 20% of the population, we show that a testing strategy needs
to identify symptomatic cases within 5 – 8 days of symptom onset, in order to prevent a
resurgent wave from overwhelming hospital capacity in the city. This estimate is robust to
uncertainty in the effectiveness of the lockdown, as well as in immune protection against
reinfection. To set these results in their economic context, we estimate that the weekly cost
of such a PCR-based testing programme would be less than 2.1% of the weekly economic
loss due to the lockdown. Our results illustrate how PCR-based testing and serological
surveillance can be combined to design evidence-based policies, for lifting lockdowns in
Indian cities and elsewhere.

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Introduction
The emergence of the novel virus SARS-CoV-2 has prompted stringent physical distancing
measures around the world. In India, one of the world’s most populous countries, a
countrywide ‘lockdown’ has been in effect since March 25th 2020 1. The lockdown involves
blanket restrictions on movement, closure of shops with the exception of essential services,
closure of all school and universities, and banning of social gatherings 2. Similar measures
in China and elsewhere have succeeded in slowing transmission 3,4 . However, such
measures also inflict severe societal and economic disruption. Consequently, there is
increasing attention in India – and in many other countries under similar restrictions – on
how best to relax such control measures, while preserving public health imperatives 5.
Previous work has illustrated that the relaxing of a lockdown, if conducted too rapidly, could
risk another surge of infection, that can overwhelm health systems 6,7. Some proposed
strategies include (i) a cycle of lockdowns and releases 6,8, to maintain any resurgent
epidemic to within levels manageable by the health system, and (ii) the use of serological
tests to identify those who have had exposure to the virus, and might thus be presumed safe
to return to normal activity 9. For the latter to be implemented, there needs to be high
confidence in the serological test being used, particularly that is has minimal risk of false
positivity. The former strategy may face real challenges in such a complex society as in
India, particularly in view of the effect of such measures amongst the most disadvantaged 10.
Another strategy involves the use of systematic and intensive testing, to identify and
quarantine cases of SARS-CoV-2 infection as early as possible. This approach poses real
logistical challenges, not least the need to establish a population-wide system of contact
tracing, together with reliable, readily accessible network of testing facilities with ample
capacity, providing accurate monitoring and support for those who are diagnosed and
isolated. Such approaches are only feasible when prevalence is low and infections are
clustered in nature; they have been implemented successfully in South Korea, Taiwan and
elsewhere 11,12, to slow the initial pandemic waves and to allow health systems to cope.
For countries that instead had to impose population-wide lockdowns, community-based
testing programmes could still be invaluable, as part of a strategy to allow the lockdown to
be lifted, while still protecting the population. Essentially, testing offers a means for moving
from a blanket lockdown to targeted quarantine, more so for urban areas with high
transmission probability in densely populated pockets. However, such an approach raises
important questions of its own. For example, how can health authorities assess whether
cases in the community are being identified and isolated sufficiently rapidly, to safely lift the
lockdown? In low- and middle-income settings, where surveillance data is sparse, there is
real uncertainty about the degree of transmission that had already occurred by the time of
the lockdown, as well as the impact that the lockdown itself is having on transmission. How

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

should decisions about post-lockdown testing strategy be made in the face of such
uncertainty?
Here we address these questions using a dynamical mathematical model of SARS-CoV-2
transmission. Using this model, we illustrate the value of setting up a two-pronged testing
capacity for both surveillance (using serological testing) and outbreak control. Appropriately
coordinated, surveillance could provide valuable strategic information on the intensity of
community-based testing that would be needed in order to allow the lockdown to be lifted.
To place these results in their economic context, we provide preliminary estimates for the
economic impact of a lockdown and compare it with the cost of testing. Although our
analysis focuses on Indian metropolitan areas, it offers insights for other, similar settings that
face uncertainties about when a lockdown can safely be lifted.
Methods
The model is a compartmental, deterministic framework, described here in outline, and with
further technical details given in the appendix. For the purpose of illustration, we focus on a
megacity akin to India. To take account of the highly age-specific patterns of severity of
SARS-nCoV-2 infection 13, as well as age demographics typical of megacities in India, the
model is stratified into three age groups: <15 years old, 16 – 64 years old, and >65 years
old.
There is broad evidence that asymptomatic infection can contribute to transmission 14,15. The
model distinguishes asymptomatic vs presymptomatic infection, with parameters drawn from
previous analysis on the relative infectiousness of both 6. In the absence of robust estimates
for the basic reproduction number, R0 in India, we assume a range of scenarios from 2 to 3.
Interventions
We modelled the effects of a lockdown in a simple way, by assuming that it reduces
transmission across the whole population by a given amount, denoted as its ‘effectiveness’.
We assumed that the lockdown is lifted when hospital bed occupancy due to COVID-19
declines to 10% of total bed availability in the megacity. (The specific choice of trigger is not
critical for the purpose of the current study.) At this point we assumed that the lockdown is
gradually lifted over two weeks, with the overall community contact rate being restored to its
full value over this time.
We denote the ‘impact’ of a lockdown as the reduction that it achieves, in overall illness and
mortality due to COVID-19, and the ‘effectiveness’ of a lockdown as the daily reduction in
transmission intensity that it causes. Impact depends not only effectiveness, but also on the
timing of lockdown initiation with respect to the phase of epidemic. As illustrated in Figure S1
in the appendix, a lockdown that is initiated late in an epidemic can have a markedly worse
outcome than an equally strong lockdown that is initiated early. However, the available

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

surveillance data does not allow a robust estimate of either effectiveness nor timing. For the
purpose of illustrative simulations, we adopted scenarios with given assumptions for both
parameters. For subsequent, analytical simulations, we then sampled from a range of
scenarios for the effectiveness and timing of the lockdown, as well as for the role of
asymptomatic infection in transmission, and for the role of immunity in protection against
reinfection (see Table 1, and Table S1 in the appendix).
We simulated two types of scenarios for the lifting of a lockdown: first, that the lockdown is
relaxed with no other interventions in place, and second, that an intensive testing
programme is established two weeks before the lockdown is lifted, and maintained
indefinitely thereafter. For the latter scenario, we assumed a two-pronged testing
programme that utilises: (i) real-time RT-PCR tests to identify and isolate infectious cases in
the community, along with (ii) laboratory-based sero-surveillance in a populationrepresentative group, in order to monitor the development of population immunity over time.
We modelled the test-and-isolation activities in a simple way, assuming that symptomatic
individuals are identified and successfully isolated, within a given average delay from
symptom onset.
Cost of testing vs cost of lockdown
To set these findings in an economic context, we attempted to estimate the economic loss
arising from each week of lockdown in an Indian megacity similar to Delhi, and to compare it
with the potential cost of a community-level RT-PCR-testing programme. For economic loss,
we based our estimates on the loss in productivity due to shutdown of activities, separately
for each sector. We then combined the productivity loss in each sector with the sectoral
composition, taking the state of Delhi as an illustrative example, to generate the overall
economic loss per week of lockdown. For the cost of a testing programme, we considered
an illustrative scenario, wherein all COVID-19 symptomatics in the megacity are tested
sufficiently frequently to be identified and isolated within 5 days of symptom onset. As
discussed below, this scenario is artificially resource-intensive, but serves to provide an
upper bound on the potential cost of a testing programme. For this scenario we adopted an
activity-based costing approach, which covered sample collection and transportation along
with sample testing. Further details are provided in the supporting information, under
sections 2 and 3.

Results
Figure 1A illustrates model projections for the numbers of people needing hospitalisation
with SARS-CoV-2, in a megacity. The figure illustrates different scenarios for the strength of
the lockdown (ranging from a 25% reduction of transmission to 75%), as well as the potential
implications of ultimately lifting the lockdown. In the event that the lockdown is effective in

4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

controlling transmission (yellow curve), its release results in a resurgent epidemic, that can
be sufficiently severe to overwhelm the health system, i.e. with the number of persons
needing hospitalization exceeding the existing hospital capacity. However, a less effective
lockdown (red curve) does not see any resurgent epidemic upon being lifted.
We note that these overall dynamics are consistent with previous modelling findings in other
settings 6. Figure 1B helps to explain these dynamics, in terms of population immunity. A
poorly effective lockdown allows sufficient infection in the population, to exceed the herd
immunity threshold, i.e, the level of population immunity at which the virus can no longer
sustain transmission. By contrast a highly effective lockdown, through limiting transmission,
creates a population that has not achieved herd immunity: that is, a population that is
vulnerable to a resurgent epidemic, upon lifting of the lockdown.
Assuming a population under an effective lockdown, we next examine how such a
population might be protected through an intensive test-and-isolate strategy, that
accompanies the lifting of the lockdown. Figure 2A illustrates the potential implications of
such a strategy, assuming that it is instated two weeks prior to the lifting the lockdown, and
is sufficiently intensive to isolate all symptomatic individuals within, on average, 4 days of
symptom onset. Even though a resurgent epidemic occurs, the figure illustrates that it is
within levels that do not overwhelm the health system. Thus the lockdown, not only impacts
transmission, but also performs the critical role of allowing time to build up the necessary
testing capacity, to ultimately permit the lockdown safely to be lifted. Figure 2B again shows
the accumulation of population immunity under these different scenarios.
These figures illustrate how sero-surveillance could be invaluable in the face of uncertainty,
including about the effectiveness of a lockdown. In Figure 1, for example, estimates of
seroprevalence can help to establish whether the risk of a resurgent epidemic is low (as on
the red curve) or high (as on the yellow curve), at the point of lifting a lockdown. Therefore,
in Figure 2, it is reasonable to hypothesise that such data can help inform the intensity of
testing required, in order for a lockdown to be safely lifted, i.e. without overwhelming the
health system. For example, if population immunity is known, then how rapidly should
symptomatic cases be diagnosed and isolated? Is it adequate to test symptomatic cases
only, or is there a need to identify and isolate asymptomatic cases as well?
Figure 3 addresses these questions, for a virus having R0 = 2.5. For this figure we now allow
wide uncertainty in the lockdown effectiveness, and in its timing with respect to the epidemic.
Each point in Figure 3A represents a distinct scenario for each of these unknown
parameters, as well as for the importance of asymptomatic infection in transmission, and for
the role of immunity in protecting against reinfections (see table 1 for details). For each
scenario, we simulate a lockdown that is released when COVID-related hospitalisations
ultimately decline to 10% of the hospital bed capacity. We then record the proportion of the
population immune at this point in the epidemic (x-axis of Figure 3A), as well as the

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

minimum intensity of symptomatic testing that is required, in order to prevent a resurgent
epidemic from overwhelming the health system (y-axis of Figure 3A). The figure illustrates
that – despite the various uncertainties incorporated in these projections – there remains a
coherent relationship between population immunity, and the intensity of testing that is
required to protect a population from a resurgent epidemic. For instance, if the
seroprevalence in the population at the point of lifting the lockdown is 20%, Figure 3
suggests that a resurgent epidemic could be prevented from overwhelming the hospital bed
capacity as long as symptomatic cases are identified and isolated within 5 – 8 days of
symptom onset (vertical spread of points along the y-axis at 20% seroprevalence).
More broadly, the ‘band’ of points in Figure 3 demarcates two distinct zones. Parameters in
the lower zone correspond to testing strategies that prevent a resurgent epidemic from
overwhelming the health system; and vice versa for parameters in the upper zone. These
zones are illustrated by points P1 and P2, both corresponding to 20% seroprevalence at the
point of lifting the lockdown, but with two different levels of testing effort (see Figure caption
for details). As illustrated by the dynamics on the right-hand side, a resurgent epidemic
overwhelms health system capacity in scenario P1 but not in P2.
Figure 4 shows these results under different scenarios for the basic reproduction number,
R0. The dark-coloured points in both panels correspond to a testing strategy targeting solely
symptomatic individuals (thus the dark blue points are identical to those shown in Figure 3).
A comparison of dark-coloured points across the two panels illustrates that, for a given level
of seroprevalence in the population, more intensive testing is needed at higher levels of R0,
to prevent a resurgent epidemic from overwhelming hospital bed capacity. Taking the
example of R0 = 3 (right-hand panel), at a population immunity of 20%, symptomatic testing
would need to identify cases within 2.5 – 4 days on symptom onset. Such speed is unlikely
to be infeasible in practice; in these situations it would be necessary to expand the testing
strategy to include asymptomatic infection. The light-coloured dots in both panels show
results for a testing programme that combines symptomatic testing with additional efforts to
identify and isolate half of asymptomatic infections before they develop symptoms or
recover. Once again, the y-axis shows the timeliness that is required, of the symptomaticfocused arm of this combined strategy. As would be expected, the inclusion of asymptomatic
infections in the testing strategy has the effect of reducing the required intensity of
symptomatic testing. Taking once again the example of 20% seroprevalence with R0 = 3, the
symptomatic testing arm of a combined strategy would need to identify symptomatic
infections between 7-8 days of symptom onset. We note that these results do not address
how such testing performance might be met in practice, only the potential epidemiological
implications of doing so. Below we briefly discuss implications for implementation.
In the economic analysis to set these findings in context, we calculated the productivity loss
in the megacity due to lockdown to be between 58% to 83.4%, translating into an economic
loss of $1372 - $1979 million per week. By comparison, for the PCR-based testing

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

programme, we estimated the cost of each RT-PCR test to be between $34.1 - $53.8. Thus
we estimate that a hypothetical, symptom-based testing programme that identifies cases
within 5 days of symptom onset would cost $26.68 – 42.12 million per week. This estimate is
an upper bound as we used an artificially resource-intensive scenario for testing. For
reasons discussed below, testing costs in practice are likely to be substantially lower.
Discussion
Accurate and timely data will be critical in strategic planning for the control of the SARSCoV-2 pandemic. In the early days of the pandemic, India was amongst several countries
(including the USA) facing an acute shortage of testing capacity, rendering it infeasible to
perform intensive testing at the community level 16. Nonetheless, the current ‘lockdown’
offers an opportunity to build up this testing capacity to the levels required. Our analysis
illustrates how – even if there is uncertainty about how well a lockdown is working – ongoing
sero-surveillance can provide invaluable information about the ‘here and now’. In particular,
it provides an estimate of the fraction of the population that could still support transmission if
the lockdown were lifted. In turn, the information from sero-surveillance can inform the
intensity of effort that is needed, by any RT-PCR-based test-and-isolate strategy that aims to
suppress transmission (Figures 3 and 4).
For the purpose of costing, we have adopted a simple, hypothetical scenario of symptombased testing. As cautioned above, in practice it is unrealistic to test every individual
showing COVID-19-like symptoms, particularly in settings such as Indian megacities (below
we discuss alternative, more feasible approaches for timely case detection). Nonetheless,
this scenario serves as a helpful upper bound, for the potential cost of a testing-based
campaign. Our estimates suggest that even such a resource-intensive strategy would cost
the government exchequer less than 2.1% of the projected economic loss. As another
benchmark, this corresponds to less than half of the lockdown-caused loss in goods and
services tax (GST) revenue 17.
Our results highlight the importance of identifying and isolating cases as rapidly as possible,
but do not capture ways in which this speed of response could be achieved. Contact tracing
is one possible approach that is already being implemented in parts of India having a wellorganised public health cadre, for example Kerala 1. Recent evidence from China suggests
that contact tracing could reduce the delay from symptom onset to isolation by 2 days 18.
This strategy is best suited to low-prevalence conditions, where (i) the volume of contacts to
be investigated are within levels manageable by the health system, and (ii) the majority of
infections are amongst contacts of known cases. Therefore, contact tracing could have
strong value in the kind of testing programme that we have modelled here, with the purpose
of maintaining low prevalence while allowing a lockdown to be lifted. Additionally,
approaches such as pooling samples (while allowing for potential losses in accuracy) can
help to use limited capacity to increase population coverage of testing 19,20. Combinations of

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

these strategies could also be implemented, for example, in the scenario of household
contact tracing, with all samples from a household being pooled, and with all members of the
household being quarantined if the pooled sample tests positive.
Modelling such strategies is outside the scope of our current analysis, but an important area
for future work. We also note that our work does not address the performance requirements,
of the different types of test that we model. For antibody tests in particular, there is wide
recognition of the potential risks arising from imperfect specificity, at the individual level, i.e.,
that false positive results mean false assurance of immune protection 9,21. In the present
work, we only consider the use of such tests to assess immunity at the population level,
where it may be possible to adjust for imperfect sensitivity and specificity (upto a certain
level), in estimating seroprevalence 22,23. In doing so, ethical considerations may require that
participants in the test cohort remain uninformed of the results. We have also assumed that
the testing for such surveillance will be conducted using a laboratory based test, where test
accuracy is superior to point-of-care or home-based tests 24.
At the time of writing, only a few surveys of seroprevalence to SARS-CoV-2 have been
conducted around the world, with studies in the USA suggesting a seroprevalence of around
2 – 4% in different communities 25. There remains intensive discussion about the validity of
these and other early seroprevalence surveys 26, but lessons learned from these approaches
will be invaluable in other country settings. The use of well-validated antibody tests will be
critical, as well as ensuring a representative population. The testing for such surveillance will
need to be conducted at the laboratory level, where test accuracy is superior to point-of-care
or home-based tests 24. More broadly, in densely populated megacities with significant slum
populations such as New Delhi or Mumbai, it is plausible that – despite stringent control
measures during the lockdown – the proportion of the population ultimately exposed to the
virus would reach higher levels than in settings such as the USA. Example scenarios, of 10
– 20% seroprevalence considered in Figure 3, may therefore not be implausible in Indian
megacities, by the time the lockdown starts being lifted. At the time of writing, no such
survey has yet been completed in Asia or in other LMIC settings, but the Indian Council of
Medical Research has initiated a population-based sero-survey among adults in India 27.
As with any modelling study, our approach has several limitations to note. As noted above, it
offers illustrative scenarios using simple models of transmission. More detailed models could
be helpful in planning the implementation of actual testing strategies. Such models could
take account of population structure, including the elevated levels of transmission that might
be expected in areas of high crowding, as well as incorporating household contact structure
in a more explicit way than has been possible here. Fine-grained surveillance data would be
invaluable in adequately parameterising such models. Such data might also allow the lifting
of the lockdown to performed at a more granular geographic scale than what we have
modelled here, for example if certain zones within a city show higher rates of infection than
others. Our model currently does not accommodate these strategies, but could be modified

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

accordingly. As illustrated by Figures 3 and 4, the approach that we propose – that of
combining sero-surveillance and RT-PCR-testing – is also dependent on knowledge of the
basic reproduction number, R0. Once again, robust surveillance data – even at the level of
hospitalisations and mortality – can offer invaluable information for estimating this parameter
over time 4. Systematic follow-up of a cohort of cases and their contacts can also provide
helpful data in this regard. We have only considered the role of testing and isolation in lifting
a lockdown, whereas in practice this strategy might be combined with other measures,
including maintaining physical distancing in shopping areas, public transport and other
congregate settings. Depending on their effectiveness in reducing community transmission,
such measures would be expected to shift the curves shown in Figure 3 upwards: that is,
lowering the intensity that is required, of test-and-isolate programmes. Further data on the
effectiveness of these interventions will be invaluable in refining our model findings
accordingly. Our model is subject to various sources of uncertainty as well. Although we
have incorporated wide uncertainty in lockdown effectiveness, as well as in the role of
asymptomatic infection for transmission, there remain unanswered questions such as the
role of children in transmission 28,29, and the extent to which severity estimates, drawn from
other settings 13, may apply to Indian populations.
On the costing side, although our cost estimate is lower than the current ceiling price of $65
suggested by Indian Council of Medical Research for the private sector 30, since we do not
include the profit margins of the private sector, lower proportion of samples collected from
home and increased scale of testing. In our estimates of economic cost of lockdown, we
consider only productivity loss, which may be a reasonable approach in the immediate short
term. However, the economic loss due to lockdown in the long run, is likely to be far greater
as it would include demand side effects due to loss of employment and bankruptcies 31.
Despite these caveats, we expect the fundamental point of our study to hold true: given the
pressing need for evidence-based approaches towards lifting a lockdown, and in the face of
ongoing epidemiological uncertainty, systematic sero-surveillance can be an invaluable
source of evidence which can inform RT-PCR-based testing approaches in the community.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1. Additional sources of uncertainty used in Figures 3 and 4. See Table S1 for
further parameter values.

Parameter

Range

Notes

Timing of lockdown, relative to
epidemic

At time of n-th
COVID-related
death, where n is
between 1 and
1,000

Lockdown timing can have strong influence
on its effect (see Fig.S2, appendix). Here
we adopt a wide range of possibilities for
numbers of actual deaths before lockdown.

Effectiveness of lockdown in
reducing transmission

15 – 85%

Lockdown effectiveness depends on
compliance, and on achievable physical
distancing in crowded settings. Again
adopting wide uncertainty ranges given
lack of systematic data

Proportion of cases being
asymptomatic throughout their
infection

10 – 33%

Relative infectiousness of
asymptomatic and
presymptomatics vs
symptomatic infection

10 – 66%

Parameters relating to the role of
asymptomatic infections, for transmission.
Scenarios having a strong role for such
infections would diminish the impact of
isolating symptomatic infections alone.

Lockdown

Asymptomatic transmission

Post-infection immunity
Average duration of immunity

> 6 months

Studies with established human
coronaviruses suggest immunity lasting at
least a year 32; for SARS-CoV-2 we
assume a more pessimistic scenario of at
least 6 months

Susceptibility to reinfection,
relative to susceptibility to
primary infection

0 – 10%

0% indicates that immunity is completely
protective to reinfection

Author contributions
NA and SD conceptualised the study. SM and HD conducted the analysis, and NA and SD
validated the findings. SM and NA wrote a first draft of the manuscript, and all authors
contributed to the final draft.

Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.
6.

7.

8.

9.
10.
11.
12.

13.
14.

15.
16.
17.

18.

19.

20.

21.
22.
23.

Editorial. India under COVID-19 lockdown. Lancet 395, P1315 (2020).
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Tian, H. et al. An investigation of transmission control measures during the first 50
days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science (80-. ). (2020).
doi:10.1126/science.abb6105
Seth, F., Swapnil, M., Axel, G. & Al, E. Estimating the number of infections and the
impact of non- pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European countries.
(2020). doi:https://doi.org/10.25561/77731
Marius, G., Mathias, D., Eric, M., Jean-Philippe, P. & Goldman, M. Preparing for a
responsible lockdown exit strategy. Nat. Med. 1–2 (2020).
Ferguson, N. M., Laydon, D., Gemma, N.-G. & et al. Impact of non-pharmaceutical
interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID-19 mortality and healthcare demand. (2020).
doi:https://doi.org/10.25561/77482
Prem, K. et al. The effect of control strategies to reduce social mixing on outcomes of
the COVID-19 epidemic in Wuhan, China: a modelling study. Lancet Public Heal.
(2020). doi:10.1016/s2468-2667(20)30073-6
Kissler, S. M., Tedijanto, C., Goldstein, E., Grad, Y. H. & Lipsitch, M. Projecting the
transmission dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the post-pandemic period. medRxiv
(2020). doi:10.1101/2020.03.04.20031112
World Health Organization. ‘Immunity passports’ in the context of COVID-19. (2020).
Financial Times. Indian coronavirus lockdown triggers exodus to rural areas. (2020).
Normile, D. Coronavirus cases have dropped sharply in South Korea. What’s the
secret to its success? Science (80-. ). (2020). doi:10.1126/science.abb7566
Anderson, R. M., Heesterbeek, H., Klinkenberg, D. & Hollingsworth, T. D. How will
country-based mitigation measures influence the course of the COVID-19 epidemic?
The Lancet (2020). doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30567-5
Verity, R. et al. Estimates of the severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based
analysis. Lancet Infect. Dis. (2020). doi:10.1016/s1473-3099(20)30243-7
Mizumoto, K., Kagaya, K., Zarebski, A. & Chowell, G. Estimating the asymptomatic
proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cases on board the Diamond
Princess cruise ship, Yokohama, Japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance (2020).
doi:10.2807/1560-7917.ES.2020.25.10.2000180
Ferretti, L. et al. Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control
with digital contact tracing. Science (80-. ). (2020). doi:10.1126/science.abb6936
Sharfstein, J. M., Becker, S. J. & Mello, M. M. Diagnostic Testing for the Novel
Coronavirus. JAMA (2020). doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3864
Prasad, G. GST collections for April and May set to decline drastically. Livemint News
Available at: https://www.livemint.com/news/india/gst-revenue-for-april-may-set-to-falldrastically-11588167297581.html.
Bi, Q. et al. Epidemiology and Transmission of COVID-19 in Shenzhen China:
Analysis of 391 cases and 1,286 of their close contacts. medRxiv (2020).
doi:10.1101/2020.03.03.20028423
Hogan, C. A., Sahoo, M. K. & Pinsky, B. A. Sample Pooling as a Strategy to Detect
Community Transmission of SARS-CoV-2. JAMA - Journal of the American Medical
Association (2020). doi:10.1001/jama.2020.5445
Deckert, A., Barnighausen, T. & Kyei, N. Pooled-sample analysis strategies for
COVID-19 mass testing: a simulation study [Submitted]. Bull World Heal. Organ
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.2471/BLT.20.257188
Phelan, A. COVID-19 immunity passports and vaccination certificates: scientific,
equitable, and legal challenges. Lancet (2020).
Diggle, P. J. Estimating Prevalence Using an Imperfect Test. Epidemiol. Res. Int.
(2011). doi:10.1155/2011/608719
Lewis, F. I. & Torgerson, P. R. A tutorial in estimating the prevalence of disease in

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

29.

30.
31.
32.

humans and animals in the absence of a gold standard diagnostic. Emerg. Themes
Epidemiol. (2012). doi:10.1186/1742-7622-9-9
Adams, E. R. et al. Evaluation of antibody testing for SARS-Cov-2 using ELISA and
lateral flow immunoassays. medRxiv (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.04.15.20066407
Bendavid, E. et al. COVID-19 Antibody Seroprevalence in Santa Clara County,
California. medRxiv (2020). doi:10.1101/2020.04.14.20062463
Vogel, G. Antibody surveys suggesting vast undercount of coronavirus infections may
be unreliable. Science (80-. ). (2020). doi:10.1126/science.abc3831
Indian Council of Medical Research. National community based sero-survey for
COVID-19. (2020).
Lee, P. I., Hu, Y. L., Chen, P. Y., Huang, Y. C. & Hsueh, P. R. Are children less
susceptible to COVID-19? J. Microbiol. Immunol. Infect. (2020).
doi:10.1016/j.jmii.2020.02.011
Qiu, H. et al. Clinical and epidemiological features of 36 children with coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Zhejiang, China: an observational cohort study. Lancet
Infect. Dis. (2020). doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30198-5
Indian Council of Medical Research. Strategy of COVID19 Testing in India. (2020).
Bulsari, S. & Gumber, A. Economy’s Immunity against COVID-19. Econ. Polit. Wkly.
55, (2020).
Callow, K. A., Parry, H. F., Sergeant, M. & Tyrrell, D. A. J. The time course of the
immune response to experimental coronavirus infection of man. Epidemiol. Infect.
(1990). doi:10.1017/S0950268800048019

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure

Figure 1. Illustration of lockdown release, with no other interventions in effect. Shown
are three scenarios: no lockdown (blue curve); an ineffective lockdown that reduces
transmission by only 25% (red curve); and a more effective lockdown that reduces
transmission by 75% (yellow) curve. The pink-shaded area denotes the duration of the
lockdown: we assume that it is lifted when COVID-related hospitalisations decline to 10% of
capacity. Upper panel: numbers of individuals needing hospitalisation over time. Lower
panel: the accumulation of population immunity over time, for the scenarios simulated in the
upper panel. Stars on the red and yellow curves indicate the level of population immunity
that would be estimated by sero-surveillance, at the time of lifting the lockdown. The dashed
line indicates the approximate level of herd immunity (approximate because it is calculated
as 1  1/଴ , a formula for homogenous populations): a population having a higher level of
immunity would effectively be protected from a resurgent epidemic, without need for further
interventions or lockdown.

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2. Illustration of lockdown release, when accompanied by a test-and-isolate
strategy. Scenarios are as in Figure 1, but here assuming that – two weeks prior to the
lifting of the lockdown – PCR testing in the community is sufficiently ramped up to identify
and isolate all symptomatics within, on average, 4 days on symptom onset. As in Figure 1,
the pink shaded area denotes the duration of the lockdown; the green shaded area denotes
the period when the lockdown is lifted, and the test-and-isolate strategy is implemented in its
place. In the event that the lockdown has been effective in reducing transmission (yellow
curve), such a strategy succeeds in preventing the resurgent epidemic from overwhelming
healthcare capacity. In the event that the lockdown has been less effective (red curve), such
a strategy has little additional value for epidemic control, since population immunity is
already sufficiently widespread to interrupt transmission (lower panel).

14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. How sero-surveillance can guide post-lockdown strategy, with R0 = 2.5. Left
hand panel shows how sero-surveillance (x-axis) can guide decisions about the required
intensity of post-lockdown PCR testing in the community (y-axis). The figure is divided into
two zones, by the ‘band’ of points. In the lower zone, population immunity is high enough,
and the PCR testing strategy is intense enough, to prevent a resurgent epidemic from
overwhelming the health system - and conversely in the upper zone. Points P1 and P2 show
examples in both zones, their dynamics illustrated in the right-hand panels. As in Figure 2,
pink-shaded areas denote the duration of the lockdown, while the green shaded area
denotes the period when the test-and-isolate strategy is implemented. In the left-hand panel,
each point represents a scenario drawn from the range of parameter values listed in Table 1;
the spread of these points therefore captures the uncertainty in these different parameters.

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117010; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 4. Sensitivity analysis to R0, and to testing strategy. Graphs are constructed as
in Figure 3, left-hand panel. Figure shows results for R0 = 2.5 (left-hand panel) and for R0 =
3 (right-hand panel). The band of dark-shaded points corresponds to a strategy where only
symptomatic cases are tested and isolated. The band of light-shaded points corresponds to
a strategy where 50% of asymptomatic cases are additionally tested and isolated, before
they recover or develop symptoms. As in Figure 3, the vertical axis denotes the timeliness
with which symptomatic cases need to be identified and isolated, in order to prevent a
resurgent epidemic from overwhelming the health system.

16

