medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19
crisis in Guadeloupe: Early-warning signals of
destabilisation through bootstrapped
probability density functions
Meriem Allalia, , Patrick Portecopa , Michel Carlèsb , and Dominique Gibertc
a

Emergency Medical Service (SAMU-SAU), University Hospital, Pointe à Pitre, Guadeloupe.
b
Critical Care Department, University Hospital, Pointe à Pitre, Guadeloupe.
c
Univ Lyon, Univ Lyon 1, ENSL, CNRS, UMS 3721, LGL-TPE, F-69622 Villeurbanne, France

We propose a method to detect early-warning information in relation with subtle changes occurring in the trend of evolution in
data time series of the COVID-19 epidemic spread (e.g. daily
new cases). The method is simple and easy to implement on
laptop computers. It is designed to be able to provide reliable
results even with very small amounts of data (i.e. ≈ 10 − 20).
The results are given as compact graphics easy to interpret. The
data are separated into two subsets: the old data used as control
points to statistically define a "trend" and the recent data that
are tested to evaluate their conformity with this trend. The trend
is characterised by bootstrapping in order to obtain probability density functions of the expected misfit of each data point.
The probability densities are used to compute distance matrices
where data clusters and outliers are easily visually recognised.
In addition to be able to detect very subtle changes in trend,
the method is also able to detect outliers. A simulated case is
analysed where R0 is slowly augmented (i.e. from 1.5 to 2.0 in
20 days) to pass from a stable damped control of the epidemic
spread to an exponentially diverging situation. The method is
able to give an early warning signal as soon as the very beginning of the R0 variation. Application to the data of Guadeloupe
shows that a small destabilising event occurred in the data near
April 30, 2020. This may be due to an increase of R0 ≈ 0.7
around April 13-15, 2020.
COVID-19 | Monitoring | Guadeloupe | SAMU | Monte Carlo Model | Spread
control | Quarantine | Early warning | Bifurcation | Bootstrap | Probability density functions | Outlier | Change point model
Correspondence: meriem.allali@chu-guadeloupe.fr

Introduction
By mid-May 2020, the COVID-19 disease caused by SARSCoV2 continues its worldwide spreading with nearby 4 millions of people infected and 300,000 deceased persons (1).
Faced with this rapid and hardly controllable epidemic disease, many countries decided to close they frontiers, and to
strongly reduce their industrial and economic activities to decrease as much as possible the contagiousness of their population. Although these measures may take different forms,
many countries adopted the containment solution, i.e. the
lock down of people at home, to quickly and strongly enhance social distancing in order to reduce the transmission of
the virus among people (2, 3). Such is the case of France,
where the containment started on March 17, 2020 and is

scheduled to be partly released on May 11, 2020, i.e. a duration of 55 days. On the overall, the containment proved efficient, with a net decrease of the number of patients in critical
situation and necessitating intensive cares. This enabled to
avoid a collapse of the sanitary facilities, particularly the intensive care units. The efficiency of the containment is variable from one region to another, depending on the sanitary
situation at the beginning of the containment. As shown in
our previous study (4), the case of Guadeloupe was particularly favourable to a good control of the epidemic spread due
to several factors: i) the small number of infected persons
at the beginning of the containment, ii) a good and coherent
communication by the sanitary and administrative authorities, iii) a good respect of the social distancing rules by a vast
majority of the population, iv) a tight control of the incoming
passengers by either airport or ship.
Depending on the number of supposed infected people at the
end of the containment period, the sanitary procedures to apply are different. Such is the case in France, where the eastern
regions, including Ile-de-France around Paris, are tagged as
"red" (i.e. with a widespread circulation of the virus among
the population) while all other regions, excepted Mayotte, are
declared "green". In Allali et al., we show that the situation in
Guadeloupe at the beginning of the post-containment period
will correspond to a pre-epidemic state with a small number of infected people and an essentially non-infected population forming a large reservoir of "susceptible" persons (ie
who may be infected). Since no vaccine is yet available and
because of the high vulnerability of the population, the postcontainment period is particularly critical and a restart of the
epidemic spread, the so-called second wave, is inevitable if
no social distancing and no sanitary control is performed (6).
In Allali et al. (5), we tested a variety of solutions combining social distancing and systematic placement of symptomatic patients in quarantine. We also considered the detection and placement in quarantine of asymptomatic persons
by means of guided testing in the entourage of the detected
symptomatic people. As discussed by Allali et al. (5), the
model is mainly constrained by three key parameters: R0 , Na
and δTQ . Here, R0 is the basic reproduction number which
may be decomposed into several components (see (5) for a

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.
Allali et al.

|

medRχiv

|

May 20, 2020

|

1–10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 1. Solution domains (δTq , Na ) obtained for R0 = 4, 3, 2, 1.5. δTQ is the time-delay elapsed between the apparition of symptoms in a patient and the moment when
this patient is placed in quarantine. Na is the average number of asymptomatic persons detected and placed in quarantine when a symptomatic patient is detected. The
green domains represent the models for which the epidemic spread is controlled. The red domains are the set of model for which the epidemic spread is uncontrolled with an
exponential growing. The solid red lines represent the boundary between both domains and where the models are unstable with oscillations and large fluctuations.

detailed discussion). Na is the average number of asymptomatic persons that are supposed to be detected and placed
in quarantine each time one symptomatic patient is identified. δTQ is the time delay necessary to isolate a new symptomatic patient together with the asymptomatic identified in
her/his entourage. A main result of our study (5) is that, depending on the values assigned to the R0 , Na and δTQ parameters, the spread control may be either stable or unstable.
This allowed us to identify sub-domains in the 3D solution
space with coordinates (R0 , Na , δTQ (Fig. 1). In the case
where a stable solution is obtained, the exponential epidemic
spread is rapidly stopped and followed by a sharp damping
with a small number of patients needing intensive cares. An
example of such a damping is shown in Figure 2B for the
Turkish data. In the case of an unstable solution, the initial exponential increase is not damped and the dreaded second wave occurs. We also show that the stable and unstable
solution domains are separated by a narrow critical boundary where the effective basic reproduction number R0 ≈ 1
(1). On this boundary, both the exponential divergence and
the sharp damping are absent, and they are replaced by oscillating characteristics (i.e. number of new infected, critical cases and deceased persons) with a period of one or two
weeks. Interestingly, this seems to be case of the situation
both in the United States of America (Fig. 2A) and in Sweden (Fig. 2B) where strong oscillations are observed in the
time series of the number of daily new deaths. The reader
can compare these time-series with the synthetic curves of
Figure 6A-D in Allali et al. (5). The oscillations visible in
the curves for United States of America and for Sweden may
not be attributed to seasonal effects (7) but could be due to
stochastic resonance (8). Such a critical situation should be
avoided because the absence of damping produces an evergrowing number of deceased persons. Ultimately, the entire
population will have been contaminated.
In the present study, we address the problem of the realtime monitoring of the epidemic situation during the postcontainment period. The aim of this monitoring is to control
that the situation remains in the domain of stable solutions as
described by Allali et al. (5) and that it does not evolves dangerously toward the critical boundary. In the next Section,
we present some simulations performed with the stochastic model developed in Allali et al. (4). These simulations
2

|

medRχiv

are performed with a time-varying R0 in order to cross the
critical boundary from a stable solution to an unstable one.
Then, we propose a detection method able to detect subtle
changes in the data time-series and susceptible to constitute
early-warning signals indicating that the sanitary situation is
evolving toward an unstable configuration. We develop this
method by keeping in mind that it must be as simple as possible and easy to implement.

Method
This Section presents the method used hereafter and designed
to help detecting early-warning signals of possible destabilisation of the COVID-19 spread control during the postcontainment period.
The aim of the method is to help to detect as early as possible
subtle changes in the time-series of available data (i.e. daily
or cumulative number of new infected, new deaths, etc.).
There exist a huge amount of methods able to detect subtle changes, invisible for the human eyes, in time series (see
e.g. (10, 11) for synthetic and real data examples). However, most of these methods are not suitable for our purpose,
mainly because we have to deal with a very small number of
data points (see e.g. Royall (12) for a discussed on the pitfalls
of small-sample statistics). This is the main reason why we
developed a purposely designed method able to tackle with
this particularity. The method discussed hereafter may constitute the algorithmic core of change-point detection, outlier
signalling and clustering of data sets.
The problem we address is explained in Figure 3. Suppose
that we have a small number of data points {d1 , d2 , · · · , dN }
forming a short time-series corresponding, for instance, to
the number of new infected people. Using these points, we
want to check if the most recent data points, hereafter called
the "test" points (red dots Fig. 3), significantly depart from
the trend (purple line Fig. 3) defined by the older data points,
called the "control" points (black dots Fig. 3). We admit that
the older data used to determine what we call the trend may
contain some outliers that we also want to identify.
As stated above, we want to design an as simple method as
possible in order to give the user the maximum allowance of
adaptation to the data at hand depending on her/his expertise. As illustrated in Figure 3, the control points are scatAllali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 2. Daily number of new deaths recorded in USA (A), and in Turkey and Sweden (B). The conspicuous oscillations in the USA and Sweden curves are typical of a critical
equilibrium near a tipping point (i.e. somewhere on a critical boundary in Fig. 1. The bell-shaped curve of Turkey is typical of a stable damping of the epidemic spread (i.e.
somewhere in a green domain in Fig. 1). Data are from (9).

Fig. 3. Principle of the method proposed in the present study. A small data set is separated into two subsets. The subset of "control" points (black dots) is used to define a
trend (solid straight line in purple). The trend is continued (dashed purple line) toward the subset of "test" points (red dots) in order to test whether or not these "test" points
remain coherent with the trend of the "control" points. The method should be able to distinguish coherent "test" points (in the elliptic solid line) from incoherent "test" points
(elliptic dashed line). The method should also be able to determine the change-point (marked with a red ?) as precisely as possible.

tered and, depending on the importance (the weight) given to
each control point, the definition of the trend is fuzzy. The
idea at the root of the method is to explore the set of all acceptable trends by using a bootstrap technique where a very
large number of trends are determined by assigning different
weights 0 ≤ wi ≤ 1 to the control points (Fig. 4A). The misfits δi between the trends and the data points di (Fig. 4B)
are stored and subsequently used to compute the normalised
"discrepancy histograms" hereafter called "probability density functions" (pdf’s) fi . The pdf’s are used to statistically
identify clusters of coherent and incoherent data points (Fig.
4C).
Figure 5 shows the results for the different stages of the computational procedure. In this example, the experimental recovery of the probability density functions is achieved by fitting a trend model to the subset of control data points (here
Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

points number 1 to 9) including the outlier d6 . Bootstrap is
done by fitting the trend model a very large number of times
(≈ 1000 times) with real random weights assigned to the data
points (i.e. stage A of Fig. 4). The choice of the trend model
is free and depends on the particular data set to analyse. In
the present example, we use polynomials of degree one (i.e.
straight lines) and a least-squares fit. This choice may be
changed according to the data at hand. Figure 5B,C shows
two such fits. Because of the different values given to the
weights, the best-fit lines differ from one fit to the other (blue
solid lines). It is the same for the misfits represented by the
vertical dashed segments connecting each data point to the
best-fit line.
The collection of misfits obtained during the bootstrap iterations (i.e. stage B of Fig. 4) are subsequently used to construct normalised histograms (i.e. stage C of Fig. 4) which
medRχiv

|

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 4. Principle of the bootstrap implemented in the method. A) The trend model is fitted to the control points a great number of times with different random weights
0 ≤ wi ≤ 1 assigned to the control points. B) The bootstrapped misfits (i.e. the discrepancies between the data points and the trend) are stored. C) The misfits are used to
construct a normalised histogram (i.e. a probability density function) for each data point.

approximate the probability density functions f1 , f2 , · · · , f12
(Fig. 5D). At this stage of the processing chain, some interpretation is already made possible. For instance, it can be
observed that the pdf of data 6 (blue curve on the right part of
the plot) seems to depart from the set of pdf corresponding to
the other points used to perform the fits (black curves grouped
toward the centre of the graph). A quantitative assessment of
the discrepancies between pdf fi and fj may be obtained with
measures like, for instance, the Kullback-Leibler information
(see e.g. Section A1-4 of Martinez et al. (13)),


Z
fi (ξ)
KL(fi , fj ) = fi (ξ) log
dξ,
(1)
fj (ξ)

fi + fj
fi + fj
) + KL(fj ,
),
2
2

(2)

(3)

Figure 5E shows the D matrix represented in its natural time
ordering, i.e. with the lines and columns ordered according
to the time index. The distance matrix only contains a part of
the information brought by the pdf’s of Figure 5D, however

and the L1 norm,
Z
L1 (fi , fj ) =
4

|

medRχiv

|fi (ξ) − fj (ξ)|dξ,

The KL measure is non-symmetrical and may take infinite
values. It is not a metric and does not satisfy the triangle inequality. Such is not the case of JS which is symmetrical and
is a metric such that JS = 0 for identical distributions and
JS = 2 log 2 for maximally different distributions. The L1
norm is well-defined for arbitrary probability density functions and is such that 0 ≤ L1 (fi , fj ) ≤ 2, the minimum value
corresponds to fi = fj and the maximum value is obtained
when the supports of fi and fj are disjoint.
The distance measures defined in equations 1-3 may be used
to compute a symmetric distance matrix D filled with the
distances of all pairs (fi , fj ) that can be formed with the set
of experimental pdf like those shown in Figure 5D. In the
present example, the matrix D is computed with the L1 norm
and counts 122 entries, including the diagonal self-distances
(i.e. L1 (fi , fi ) = 0 for i = 1, · · · , 12).

the Jenssen-Shannon divergence (14), also called the information radius,
JS(fi , fj ) = KL(fi ,

which is twice the total variation distance.

Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 5. Implementation of the method proposed in the present study. A) A small set of data points is separated into two subsets: the "control" points (black dots) and the "test"
points (red dots). In the case of on-line change-point detection, the "test" points are the more recent data and the "control" points are the oldest data. B) The "control" points
are used to define a trend model, here a straight line (blue line) adjusted by least-squares fit. The adjustment of the trend is done by giving a random weight 0 ≤ w ≤ 1 to
each "control" point (e.g. a data point with w = 0 is not considered in the adjustment). The discrepancies between the fitted line and the data points (vertical dashed lines)
are stored to subsequently construct the probability density functions (pdf’s) shown in (D). C) Another example of trend adjustment obtained with different weights assigned
to the data points: the discrepancies are different from those obtained for case (B) and they are stored to compute the pdf’s. D) Experimental probability density functions
fi obtained by normalising the histograms of the discrepancies obtained for each data point. E) Matrix D filled with the distance between each pairs of pdf’s. Pixel (i, j)
corresponds to the distance L1 (fi , fj ) (eq. 3) between pdf fi and pdf fj . The diagonal is filled with zeros because L1 (fi , fi ) = 0. For example, column 9 and line 9 of
the matrix give the distances between pdf f9 and all pdf f1 , f2 , · · · , f12 . The colour bar goes from 0 (blue) to 2 (yellow). F) Reorganised matrix D∗ obtained by permuting
the lines and the columns of D so that the entropy (i.e. complexity) of D∗ is minimum. This reorganisation may (but not systematically) be useful to enhance particular
patterns that are not apparent in the original D matrix. Graphs B and C correspond to stage A in Figure 4, and graph D corresponds to stage C in Figure 4.

this representation allows to easily identify clusters of coherent data points that are grouped in a time interval. A quick
look at Figure 5E reveals the existence of a small cluster of
short distances that appears as a blue square in the upper-right
part of the matrix. This cluster corresponds to the data points
{d10 , d11 , d12 } which are statistically coherent and grouped
on the time axis. The remaining parts of the matrix are less
structured, with pixels of small to high distances (blue to yellow).
More patterns can sometimes be seen in the matrix after reordering the columns and the lines in order to minimise the
entropy of the image. This is simply achieved by permuting the lines and the columns in the same way in order to
keep the matrix structure. The rearranged matrix D∗ is represented in Figure 5F. We recognise the cluster of data points
{d10 , d11 , d12 } in the lower-left corner of the matrix (this
particular position is not mandatory). However, other features now appear, with a diagonal band of low-distance pixels showing that the "control" data points {d1 , · · · , d9 } used
to fit the trend model during the bootstrap are statistically
coherent. A noticeable exception is point d6 which locates
in the upper right corner of D∗ and shares no low-distance
pixel with any other data point (i.e. both the line 6 and the
column 6 of the matrix do not contain blue pixels). We may
then conclude that data point d6 is an outlier. The fact that
Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

the cluster of blue pixels {d10 , d11 , d12 } is not clearly disjoint from the blue diagonal band indicates that some data
points in {d10 , d11 , d12 } are not all statistically disjoint from
some points in {d1 , d2 , d3 , d4 , d5 , d7 , d8 , d9 }. Indeed, a careful examination of the lower-left part of D∗ reveals that data
{d10 , d11 } share blue/green pixels with data {d4 , d7 }. Such
is not the case of point d12 which only shares blue pixels with
its companions of cluster, i.e. the data points {d10 , d11 }.
To conclude this methodological section, we may claim that
our detection method is able to reliably identify both outliers
and data points marking a change with respect to a trend defined by older data. This identification relies on an examination of distance matrix represented in its natural ordering
(Fig. 5E) and in its low-entropy reordered configuration (Fig.
5F). Thanks to the bootstrap, it is possible to process very
small data sets, a characteristic mandatory to perform an online analysis of the data.

Analysis of a simulated destabilisation of
spread control
We now address the main question of the present study,
namely the online analysis of a simulated destabilisation of
the COVID-19 spread control. We use the stochastic computer code developed in (4, 5) to simulate a situation where
medRχiv

|

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 6. Analysis of a data corresponding to a slow destabilisation of spread control. A) Time series of the daily number of new infected people. Filled black dots = control
points used to fit the trend model, filled green and red dots = data points to be tested. B) Probability density functions obtained by bootstrap. Thin dashed curves = pdf’s of
data used to fit the trend model, coloured curves = pdf’s of data to be tested. C) Distance matrix D (see text for explanations of marked areas). Colour bar range from 0 to 2.

Fig. 7. Strategy of on-line monitoring with a sliding procedure where the sets of control and test points are moved along the time axis at each iteration. A1) First iteration
with control points {d6 , · · · , d20 } (filled black dots) and test points {d21 , · · · , d25 } (red dots). B1) Corresponding pdf’s for a linear trend model. C1) Distance matrix D
where the set of test points does appears coherent with the control points. A2-C2) Second iteration of the procedure with control points {d11 , · · · , d25 } and test points
{d26 , · · · , d30 }. A3-C3) Third iteration with control points {d16 , · · · , d30 } and test points {d31 , · · · , d35 }. The set of test points appears as an isolated blue square in the
upper-right part of the distance matrix (C3), indicating that a change-point occurred at day 31.

6

|

medRχiv

Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

we start from a stable convergent solution to cross the critical boundary in the solution domain (Fig. 1. As recalled in
the Introduction, and discussed in details by Allali et al. (5),
the critical boundary may be crossed by varying a single or
several of the R0 , Na and δTQ parameters. In the simulation
discussed in the present study, we chose to vary R0 while
keeping both Na and δTQ constant. The choice to vary only
R0 is motivated by the desire to simulate a likely situation
where social distancing is gradually deteriorates inside the
population of Guadeloupe. That may be due to some overestimate of the safety of the situation which incites people to
be less vigilant. Such an amplification of the epidemic risk is
comparable to the well-known fact that accidents and catastrophes often occur at the end of a dangerous period, when
people abusively consider they are now safe.
We define a trajectory starting at point PS = (R0 = 1.5, Na =
1, δTQ = 3) corresponding to a stable and damped control of
the epidemic spread. Point PS is located in the green domain
of the R0 = 1.5 graph of Figure 1. The end point of the
trajectory PE = (R0 = 2.0, Na = 1, δTQ = 3) is located in
the unstable red domain in the R0 = 2.0 graph of Figure 1.
In order to simulate a situation where an insidious and subtle
change of stability conditions occur, we linearly change R0
from 1.5 to 2.0 between day 31 and day 50 of the simulation.
The values of the other parameters are given in Table 1.
Without loss of generality, we analyse the simulated number
of daily new infected people shown in Figure 6 A. The first
half of the curve regularly decreases, indicating that the epidemic spread control is efficient. A conspicuous change of
slope occurs at time 35 where a clear change of trend is visible. However, this change of slope is seen with a delay of 5
days since we started to increase R0 at time 30. In order to
test whether our method is able to detect the change of R0 at
time 30, we use a set of control points {d10 , · · · , d25 } to fit
the trend model in the bootstrap procedure (black dots in Fig.
6 A). These control points belong to a period where the situation is stable with a good damping of the epidemic spread.
The points to be tested go from day 26 to day 40. The points
{d26 , . . . , d30 } shown as green dots in Fig. 6 A) belong to
the stable period like the control points, and the data points
{d31 , . . . , d40 } belong to the beginning of the destabilisation
period when R0 start to increase slowly (red dots in Fig. 6
A).
The bootstrapped probability density functions are shown in
Figure 6B where the dashed black curves represent the pdf’s
of the control points and the coloured curves represent the
pdf’s of the test points. The distance matrix is displayed in
Figure 6C in its natural order form D. In the present example,
the rearranged distance matrix D∗ is not particularly informative and is not shown. The distance matrix contains several interesting features, some of them are emphasised with
coloured rectangles in Figure 6C.
The principal features visible in the distance matrix are: i) a
large square, with a coherent texture, going from day 10 to
day 30; ii) a small square area of coherent texture, enclosed
in red, going from day 31 to day 35; iii) a small square area
with a more heterogeneous texture, enclosed in violet, going
Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

from day 36 to day 40.
The large square going from day 10 to day 30 contains all
control data points including the test points {d26 , · · · , d30 }
enclosed by a green square. This indicates that these test
points do not significantly depart from the trend constrained
by the control points. This is normal since these points belong to the stable period where R0 = 1.5. As can be checked
in Figure 6B, the pdf’s of these test points largely overlap the
pdf’s of the control points.
The area enclosed in red square corresponds to the test points
{d31 , · · · , d35 } belonging to the very beginning of the destabilisation period. The distances between these points and the
control points are contained in the two red dashed rectangles
that are mainly filled with yellow pixels, i.e. corresponding
to large distances. This clearly indicates that the set of test
points {d31 , · · · , d35 } significantly departs from the trend defined by the control points. Consequently, we may safely
conclude that "something happened" at day 31. The fact that
the corresponding pdf’s are located on the right side with respect to the pdf’s of the control points indicates that there is
a positive bias in the misfits. Such a positive bias is typical of
a decrease of the slope of the trend, indicative of a route to a
possible destabilisation.
The area enclosed by a violet square corresponds to the test
points {d36 , · · · , d40 }, i.e. during a period where R0 continues to increase, making the situation en route toward the exponential divergence after passing the critical boundary at the
tipping point which occurs at day 35 with R0 = 1.625. For
these test points, the disagreement with the trend model is
even more important, and the distances of these points with
all other points are large (i.e. yellow pixels in the hatched
rectangles). These test points thus firmly confirm the occurrence of the change announced with the analysis of the test
points {d31 , · · · , d35 }.
A last thing that can be found in the distance matrix of Figure
6C are the presence of outliers. Such is the case of data point
d12 which appears isolated from the other control points in
the sense that line 12 and column 12 are principally filled
with yellow pixels corresponding to the largest distances.
The same is observed to a lesser extent for data point d18 .
A strategy of on-line monitoring is shown in Figure 7 where
a sliding procedure is applied to the data. In the top row
of the Figure, the procedure starts with given sets of control points {d6 , · · · , d20 } and test points {d21 , · · · , d25 } (Fig.
7A1). The corresponding pdf’s and the distance matrix show
that both sets of control and test points are mutually coherent and that no clear change point appears (Fig. 7B1-C1).
In the next iteration of the sliding procedure, the test points
of the preceding iteration are included in the set of control
points {d11 , · · · , d25 } and new test points {d26 , · · · , d30 } are
considered (Fig. 7A2). Again, no clear change point is visible, and we proceed with the next iteration of the procedure where control points {d16 , · · · , d30 } and new test points
{d31 , · · · , d35 } (Fig. 7A3). Now, the set of test points appears
as an isolated self-coherent blue square in the upper-right corner of the distance matrix (Fig. 7C3). This indicates that the
test points are incoherent with respect to the control points as
medRχiv

|

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Fig. 8. Analysis of the data of Guadeloupe with a sliding procedure as in Figure 7. A1) First iteration with control points {d25 , · · · , d40 } (filled black dots) and test points
{d41 , · · · , d64 } (red dots). B1) Corresponding pdf’s for a linear trend model. C1) Distance matrix D where the control points enclosed by a white rectangle are coherent
with the test points {d41 , · · · , d48 }. The test points {d49 , · · · , d64 } constitute a disjoint blue self-coherent area in the upper-right part of D. A2-C2) Second iteration of the
procedure with control points {d28 , · · · , d43 } and test points {d44 , · · · , d64 }. A3-C3) Third iteration with control points {d31 , · · · , d48 } and test points {d49 , · · · , d64 }.
In all iterations, the test points {d49 , · · · , d64 } are clustered in an isolated blue area in the upper-right part of the distance matrix, indicating that a change-point occurred
near day 49 (i.e. April 30, 2020). Colour bar range from 0 to 2.

previously seen in the discussion of Figure 6.
To conclude with this Section, we may claim that our method
is able to reliably detect subtle changes in the trend of the
time-series of daily new infected persons (Fig. 6A). This detection was possible as early as day 30, i.e. precisely when
R0 begins to increase slowly and five days before a change
of trend becomes visible (i.e. at time 35).

Analysis of a Guadeloupe data set
The data used in the present study are shown in Figure 8A.
They correspond to the cumulative number of infected persons with COVID-19 in Guadeloupe and presenting severe
symptoms. The time series goes from March 13, 2020 to May
15, 2020. The data are communicated every day by the University Hospital and sanitary services to the Regional Health
Agency (Agence Régionale de Santé in French). Data for
France are available of the web site of Santé Publique France
(15) (see also Alamo et al. (16) for a review of open data
repositories).
Three iterations of a sliding procedure in the same spirit of
the one presented in Figure 7 are shown in Figure 8. At each
iteration, the set of control points (black dots) is moved along
the time axis by a step of 3 days, and the remaining data are
all included in the set of test points (red dots). In order to account for the curvature of the time-series formed by the control points, we use a polynomial of degree 2 as trend model.
The bootstrapped pdf’s and the distance matrices are shown
in Figure 8B and C respectively.
The first iteration is performed with control points
{d25 , · · · , d40 } and test points {d41 , · · · , d64 } (Fig. 8A1).
8

|

medRχiv

The pdf’s of the control points are well-grouped (Fig. 8B1)
and the distance matrix (Fig. 8C1) shows that the set of test
points is divided in two subsets. The first one counts the
test points {d41 , · · · , d48 } which are grouped in a blue domain that may not be considered significantly disjoint from
the set of control points. The second subset of test points
{d49 , · · · , d64 } constitutes a disjoint blue self-coherent area
in the upper-right part of D. In next two iterations, the incoherent characteristic of the data points {d49 , · · · , d64 } is confirmed. This indicates that a change-point is likely to have
occurred near day 49 (i.e. April 30, 2020).
The similarity between the Guadeloupe results (Fig. 8) and
the synthetic examples (Fig. 5 and 7) allows to suspect that
a subtle change occurred in the data around April 30, 2020.
The right-shifted position of the pdf’s after this date (Fig.
8B3) indicate that the change is in the sense of a slight acceleration of the number of infected people. This may be interpreted as a small increase of the basic reproduction number
R0 . Owing to the fact that the data are the cumulative number of infected persons presenting severe symptoms (i.e. sick
enough to go see the doctor), a delay of about 2 weeks is
likely between the change of R0 and the occurrence of the
subtle change detected on April 30 ((5)). This would place
the R0 change near April 15, i.e. approximately at the date
when French President Mr Macron announced that the postcontainment period will start on May 11, 2020. This coincidence may reflect the fact that the announcement of the containment end made people more confident and less strict in
their compliance with the sanitary rules. If we accept this
scenario, we find that the basic reproduction number should
Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

be augmented to R0 ≈ 0.7 after April 13-15.

Concluding remarks
The method proposed in the present study is easy to implement and relies on simple statistical considerations. The
computing time is very short and the results are displayed in
an easily understandable form (e.g. Fig. 5).
The simulation test of Figure 6 shows that early warning signals announcing small changes in the conditions of the epidemic spread control may be detected several days before the
appearance of a visually clear change point (Fig. 6A). Such a
possibility may help to monitor the evolution of the epidemic
spread during the post-containment period where it is of a
primary importance to detect any disturbance of the spread
control as soon as possible.
The analysis of the Guadeloupe data allows to suspect that a
subtle disturbance occurred in the data around April 30, 2020.
The most recent data available at the time of completion of
the present article show that the disturbance of April 30 is not
due to outliers but instead seems attributable to a persistent
change in the trend. This may be due to an increase of R0 ≈
0.7 around April 13-15, 2020.

19. Kenji Mizumoto, Katsushi Kagaya, Alexander Zarebski, and Gerardo Chowell. Estimating
the asymptomatic proportion of coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19) cases on board the
diamond princess cruise ship, yokohama, japan, 2020. Eurosurveillance, 25(10):2000180,
2020.

Supplementary Note 1: Model parameters

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The MatLab® codes are available upon request. No dedicated funds were attributed
to this study.

Bibliography
1. World Health Organization et al. Coronavirus disease 2019 (covid-19): situation report, 67.
2020.
2. Oliva Bendtsen Cano, Sabrina Cano Morales, and Claus Bendtsen. Covid-19 modelling:
the effects of social distancing. medRxiv, 2020.
3. Yixuan Wang, Yuyi Wang, Yan Chen, and Qingsong Qin. Unique epidemiological and clinical
features of the emerging 2019 novel coronavirus pneumonia (covid-19) implicate special
control measures. Journal of medical virology, 92(6):568–576, 2020.
4. Meriem Allali, Patrick Portecop, Michel Carlès, and Dominique Gibert. Prediction of the
time evolution of the covid-19 disease in guadeloupe with a stochastic evolutionary model.
medRxiv, 2020. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.12.20063008.
5. Meriem Allali, Patrick Portecop, Michel Carlès, and Dominique Gibert. Model of a testingand-quarantine strategy to slow-down the covid-19 outbreak in guadeloupe. medRxiv, 2020.
6. Shunqing Xu and Yuanyuan Li. Beware of the second wave of covid-19. The Lancet, 2020.
7. Joan L Aron and Ira B Schwartz. Seasonality and period-doubling bifurcations in an epidemic model. Journal of theoretical biology, 110(4):665–679, 1984.
8. Rachel Kuske, Luis F Gordillo, and Priscilla Greenwood. Sustained oscillations via coherence resonance in sir. Journal of theoretical biology, 245(3):459–469, 2007.
9. Johns Hopkins University. Covid-19 database, 2020 (accessed April 25, 2020). https:
//coronavirus.jhu.edu/.
10. Mioara Alexandrescu, Dominique Gibert, Gauthier Hulot, Jean-Louis Le Mouël, and Ginette
Saracco. Detection of geomagnetic jerks using wavelet analysis. Journal of Geophysical
Research: Solid Earth, 100(B7):12557–12572, 1995.
11. Dominique Gibert, Matthias Holschneider, and Jean-Louis Le Mouël. Wavelet analysis of
the chandler wobble. Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 103(B11):27069–
27089, 1998.
12. Richard M Royall. The effect of sample size on the meaning of significance tests. The
American Statistician, 40(4):313–315, 1986.
13. Wendy L Martinez, Angel R Martinez, Jeffrey Solka, and Angel Martinez. Exploratory data
analysis with MATLAB. Crc Press, 2010.
14. Jianhua Lin. Divergence measures based on the shannon entropy. IEEE Transactions on
Information theory, 37(1):145–151, 1991.
15. Santé
Publique
France.
Guadeloupe
2020,
2020
(accessed
April
2,
2020).
https://www.data.gouv.fr/fr/datasets/
donnees-hospitalieres-relatives-a-lepidemie-de-covid-19/.
16. Teodoro Alamo, Daniel G Reina, Martina Mammarella, and Alberto Abella. Open data
resources for fighting covid-19. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.06111, 2020.
17. Luca Ferretti, Chris Wymant, Michelle Kendall, Lele Zhao, Anel Nurtay, Lucie Abeler-Dörner,
Michael Parker, David Bonsall, and Christophe Fraser. Quantifying sars-cov-2 transmission
suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science, 2020.
18. Natalie M Linton, Tetsuro Kobayashi, Yichi Yang, Katsuma Hayashi, Andrei R Akhmetzhanov, Sung-mok Jung, Baoyin Yuan, Ryo Kinoshita, and Hiroshi Nishiura. Incubation
period and other epidemiological characteristics of 2019 novel coronavirus infections with
right truncation: a statistical analysis of publicly available case data. Journal of clinical
medicine, 9(2):538, 2020.

Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

medRχiv

|

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20117333; this version posted May 30, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Parameter name
Basic reproduction number
Detection delay

Symbol
R0
δTQ

Value
1.5, · · · , 2
1, 2, 3, 4

Number of detected asymptomatic

Na

0 to 4

Number of initial asymptomatic
Switching function (lognormal)

ZI
ζa/s

Contagiousness function (gamma)

ξc

Fraction of asymptomatic people

αa

1000
µζ = 5.6
(days)
σζ = 3.9
(days)
αξ = 5
(shape)
βξ = 1
(scale)
0.20

Recovery time of asymptomatic
and symptomatic
Recovery time of critical
Recovery time of severe
Switching period from symptomatic to severe
Switching period from severe to
critical
Switching period from critical to
deceased
Switching probability from symptomatic to severe
Switching probability from severe
to critical
Switching probability from critical
to deceased

∆Ts

14 days

∆Tc
∆TI
δTs

21 days
14 days
4-10 days

δTc

0-4 days

δTd

2-4 days

ps

0.14

pc

0.25

pd

0.35

Comment
Time-varying parameter through the contagiousness function ξc .
This parameter is a time difference defined as the delay (in days)
between the apparition of symptoms in a patient and the moment
when this patient is placed in quarantine. This represents the
time delay taken by the sanitary authorities to tackle stop the
contagiousness of a symptomatic patient.
Number of asymptomatic people detected in the entourage of
each detected symptomatic patient.
This probability function give the switching time dependence
of the contagiousness of asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic and
symptomatic people. ζa/s is taken as a lognormal distribution
with mean and standard deviation given by Ferretti et al. (17).
Represents the time dependence of the contagiousness of asymptomatic, pre-symptomatic and symptomatic people. ξc is taken
as a gamma distribution (18). In the model, the mean and standard deviation are respectively equal to 5 and 2.2 days.
αa represents the fraction of asymptomatic with respect to symptomatic patients. αa = 0.2 corresponds to 20% of asymptomatic
and 80% of symptomatic. The value taken in this study is given
by Mizumoto et al. (19).
Patients who remained in a given state during the
corresponding recovery time is automatically
switched to the "removed" state.
Time window during which a patient may switch
to the next evolution state. For example, a
"severe" patient may switch to "critical" from day
0 to day 4. After day 4, the patient is supposed
medically stabilised. The switching date is
randomly drawn in the time window.
Probability to switch to the newt state during the
switching period.

Table 1. Model input parameters. The three first top parameters in the Table (R0 , δTQ , Na ) have changing values in the different simulations. Other parameters remain
unchanged for all simulations.

10

|

medRχiv

Allali et al.

|

Monitoring the post-containment COVID-19 crisis

