medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Non-pharmaceutical behavioural measures for droplet-borne biological
hazards prevention: Health-EDRM for COVID-19 (SARS-CoV-2) Pandemic
Emily Ying Yang Chan 1-4, Tayyab Salim Shahzada 3, 4, Tiffany Sze Tung Sham 3, 4, Caroline Dubois
4
, Zhe Huang 1, 3, Sida Liu 1, 4, Janice Ying-en Ho 1,3, Kevin KC Hung 1, 3, 5, Kwok Kin On3, Ryoma
Kayano6, Rajib Shaw7.
1

Collaborating Centre for Oxford University and CUHK for Disaster and Medical Humanitarian Response (CCOUC), The Chinese University
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2
Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford OX37BN, UK
3
JC School of Public Health and Primary Care, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
4
GX Foundation, Hong Kong, China
5
Accident & Emergency Medicine Academic Unit, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China
6
WHO Centre for Health Development, Kobe, Japan
7
Keio University, Japan

Corresponding Author:
Professor Emily Ying Yang Chan
emily.chan@cuhk.edu.hk
+852 2252 8850
Rm 308, 3/F, JC School of Public Health, Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR
Short title: Non-pharmaceutical H-EDRM Measures for COVID-19

Abstract (143 words)
Introduction: Non-pharmaceutical interventions to facilitate response to the COVID-19
pandemic, a disease caused by novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, are urgently needed. Using the
WHO health emergency and disaster risk management (health-EDRM) framework, behavioural
measures for droplet-borne communicable disease, with their enabling and limiting factors at
various implementation levels were evaluated.
Sources of data: Keyword search was conducted in PubMed, Google Scholar, Embase, Medline,
Science Direct, WHO and CDC online publication database. Using OCEBM as review criteria,
105 English-language articles, with ten bottom-up, non-pharmaceutical prevention measures,
published between January 2000 and May 2020 were identified and examined.
Areas of Agreement: Evidence-guided behavioural measures against COVID-19 transmission
for global at-risk communities are identified.
Area of Concern: Strong evidence-based systematic behavioural studies for COVID-19
prevention are lacking.
Growing points: Very limited research publications are available for non-pharmaceutical
interventions to facilitate pandemic response.

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Areas timely for research: Research with strong implementation feasibility that targets
resource-poor settings with low baseline Health-EDRM capacity is urgently need.

Keywords: Health-EDRM, behavioural measures, non-pharmaceutical, primary prevention,
droplet-borne, biological hazards, COVID-19, SARS-CoV-2, coronavirus, pandemic

Introduction
Uncertainties in disease epidemiology, treatment and management in biological hazards have
often urged policy makers and community health protection to revisit prevention approaches to
maximise infection control and protection. The COVID-19 pandemic, a disease caused by novel
coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, has pushed global governments and communities to revisit the
appropriate non-pharmaceutical, health prevention measures in response to this unexpected virus
outbreak1. The World Health Organisation (WHO) health emergency and disaster risk
management (health-EDRM) framework refers to the structured analysis and management of
health risks brought upon by emergencies and disasters. The framework focuses on prevention
and risk mitigation through hazard and vulnerability reduction, preparedness, response and
recovery measures2, and further calls attention to the significance of community involvement to
counteract the potential negative impacts of hazardous events such as infectious disease
outbreaks2. COVID-19 is defined as a biological hazard under the health-EDRM disaster
classification3. While there is evidence for potential COVID-19 droplet transmission4, the WHO
has suggested that airborne transmission may only be possible in certain circumstances4. Further
evidence is needed to categorise it as an airborne disease specifically, per the framework.
Health-EDRM prevention measures can be classified into primary, secondary or tertiary levels5.
Primary prevention mitigates the occurrence of illness through an emphasis on health promotion
and education aimed at behavioural modification6; secondary prevention involves screening and
infection identification; and tertiary prevention focuses on treatment. In the context of COVID19, both secondary and tertiary preventive measures are complicated due to the high incidence of
asymptomatic patients7; the lack of consensus and availability of specific treatment or vaccine8;
and the added stress on the health system during a pandemic. Primary prevention that focuses on
protecting an individual from contracting an infection9 is thus the most practical option. A
comprehensive disaster management cycle (prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response and
recovery) encompasses both top-down and bottom-up measures10,11. Top-down measures require
well-driven bottom-up initiatives to successfully achieve primary prevention and effectively
modify community behaviours12.
Based on the health-EDRM framework, which emphases the impact of context on efficacy of
measure practices3, this paper examines available published evidence on primary prevention
measures that might be adopted at the personal, household and community level for droplet2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

borne transmitted diseases, and enabling and limiting factors for each measure. Additionally, this
paper reviews the strength of available scientific evidence for each of the behavioural changes
measure which may reduce health risks.

Methodology
A literature search was conducted in May 2020. English-language based, international peerreviewed articles, online reports, electronic books and press releases published between January
2000 and May 2020 were identified. The snowballing search methodology was also utilised.
Research databases examined in this study included PubMed, Google Scholar, Embase, Medline
and Science Direct. WHO, United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and
other local-government publications and information outlets were also included. The following
keywords or phrases were searched for: ‘health-EDRM’. ‘COVID-19’ ‘risk-management’,
‘droplet transmission’, ‘global health’, ‘epidemiology’, ‘virus’, ‘prevention’, ‘coronavirus
treatment’, ‘severe acute respiratory syndrome’, ‘disinfection’, ‘transmission’ ‘SARS’ ‘SARSCoV-2’, ‘coronaviruses’, ‘enveloped viruses’, ‘virus stability’, ‘COVID-19 stability’, ‘virus
transmission’, ‘host responses to virus’, ‘2019-nCOV’. ‘SARS-CoV-2 entry points’, ‘respiratory
virus’, ‘air pollution, ‘handwashing’, ‘pollution mask’, ‘face masks’, ‘infection risk reduction’,
‘rural handwashing’, ‘face touching’, ‘coughing and sneezing’, ‘virus outbreak’, ‘mass
gatherings’, ‘biocidal agents virus’, ‘utensil sharing risk’, ‘cutlery sharing risk’, ‘respiratory
hygiene’, ‘toilet plume’, ‘phone hygiene’. ‘COVID-19 policies’, ‘sodium hypochlorite
disinfection’, ‘alcohol disinfection’, ‘carbon footprint’, ‘water supply scarcity’, ‘influenza’,
‘swine flu’, ‘social isolation’, ‘quarantine’, ‘social distancing’, ‘open defecation’, ‘WHO
COVID-19’, ‘CDC COVID-19’, ‘COVID-19 advice’, ‘respiratory emission’, ‘ethics COVID-19’,
‘hygiene education’. Primary prevention measures as well as risk factors for infectious disease
transmission were reviewed in order to generate ten core preventative measures for discussion.
The avoidance of cutlery sharing, for example, was generated after determining it as a highly
preventable risk for infectious disease transmission. Three independent reviewers engaged in the
review and agreed on the final research used.
The literature was categorised according to the Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
(OCEBM) Levels of Evidence (Fig. 1)13, which systemises strength of evidence into levels,
based on process of study design and methodology.
Fig 1. The Oxford Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine (OCEBM) Levels of Evidence13
THERAPY / PREVENTION, AETIOLOGY / HARM
LEVEL
Systematic Review (SR) (with homogeneity) of Randomised Controlled Trials (RCTs)
1A
Individual RCT (with narrow Confidence Interval)
1B
All or none
1C

3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

2A
2B
2C
3A
3B
4
5

SR (with homogeneity) of cohort studies
Individual cohort study (including low quality RCT; e.g., <80% follow-up)
“Outcomes” Research; Ecological studies
SR (with homogeneity) of case-control studies
Individual Case-Control Study
Case-series (and poor quality cohort and case-control studies)
Expert opinion without explicit critical appraisal, or based on physiology, bench
research or “first principles”

Results
The search identified 105 relevant publications, all of which were reviewed and included in the
results analysis. The search identified ten bottom-up, non-pharmaceutical, primary prevention
measures, based on the health-EDRM framework. The review of evidence is disaggregated into
the ten prevention measures.
Six personal protective practices (engage in regular handwashing, wear face mask, avoid
touching the face, cover mouth and nose when coughing and sneezing, bring personal utensils for
when dining out, closing toilet cover when flushing), two household practices (disinfect
household surfaces, avoid sharing cutlery) and two community practices (avoid crowds and mass
gatherings, avoid travel) were identified. Tables 1a, 1b and 1c highlight the potential health risk;
desired behavioural changes; potential health co-benefits; enabling and limiting factors; and
strength of evidence available in published literature with regards to these measures.
Table 2 categorises all 105 reviewed publications according to the OCEBM Levels of
Evidence13 . Details each utilised reference can be found in Appendix 1. Quantity of evidence
varies between each of ten measures reviewed, with handwashing and face mask practices
having the most published resources available. Only a few systematic and longitudinal studies
could be identified. Available evidence consists of predominantly level IV and V studies, and
mainly
of
cross-sectional
studies,
guidelines
and
expert
opinion.

4

Engage in Regular Handwashing

Wear Face Mask

Avoid Touching the Face

Risk

• COVID-19 is transmittable through respiratory
fluid droplets4,14.
• Droplets can persist on hands and other
surfaces15.
• Droplets may be transferred if hands are not
disinfected.

• Respiratory droplets from other individuals and hand-toface contacts can result in droplet intake through the nose
and mouth16,17,4.
• Viruses have the potential to survive in the respiratory
tract18. The virus may also enter through ocular means,
although studies focusing specifically on COVID-19 are
limited19.
• COVID-19 has an incubation period of as long as 19
days20; asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic individuals
may spread the virus through coughing or sneezing.
• In 2010, WHO stated that where there is improper mask
usage, risk may increase21.

• Recent research has suggested that nasal carriage22 and ocular
entry19 are key alternative routes to oral entry into the respiratory
tract for COVID-19.
• It has been demonstrated that COVID-19 can be detected on
surfaces of plastic, stainless steel, copper and cardboard for up to 72
hours15 after contamination. Hand-to-face contact following contact
of public surfaces may pose a risk.

Behavioural
Change

• Wash hands with soap23,24,25,26,27,28,20,29 for a
minimum of 20 seconds using a step-by-step
guideline such as the WHO healthcare-based
11-step guideline30.
• Wash hands before eating, after bathroom
usage, after mask removal et cetera.
• Practice alternative handwashing routines as
long as they maintain the core principle of
ensuring that the entire surface area of the
hands is scrubbed31.
• Ensure commonly missed areas are washed,
such as the thumbs and fingertips32,33,34,35 .

• Wear surgical face masks36,37,38,39,28,20,29 to create a
physical barrier preventing the spread or intake of the
virus-containing respiratory droplet (which are released
by coughing or sneezing) through facial openings40.
• Wear face masks to minimise the touching of the nose
and mouth as these can serve as transmission routes for
COVID-1916,41,17,4.
• Use face masks correctly to ensure the best overall
effectiveness, including one-time usage; limiting usage
to one day; and avoid touching the surface to minimise
risk of self-contamination42,43.

• Avoid touching the face to minimise the risk of COVID-19 contact
through the body’s main entry points for transmittable
conditions44,36,27,28,29: the mouth, the eyes and the nose.
• Exercise increased awareness of this unwanted practice to minimise
the risk of infection, as self-touching of the face may be
spontaneous45,46.

Co-benefit(s)

• Prevention of other contact-transmissible
diseases such as influenza47,48, to some extent,
diarrhoea49,50 and eye infections51.
• Potential for reduced infection transmission in
community and household52.

• Protection against other microbes transmitted by
respiratory droplets through the nose, mouth or eyes19,22.
• Protection from air pollutants and other air particles53,54,
which could cause other respiratory conditions55 such as
asthma and lung cancer56,57.

• Minimises contracting diseases with similar transmission pathways
such as influenza58,44.
• Reduce risk of transferring bacterial pathogens found on hands59.

Enabling
Factor(s)

• Availability and affordability of running and
sufficient water, soap and alcohol-based rubs.

• Access to effective face masks.
• Information about the correct use of face masks,

• Effectiveness may be limited for infants, children, and others who
do not have sufficient conscious control of body movement.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Table 1a (Part 1): Personal practices as preventive measure - risk; behavioural change; health co-benefits; enabling and limiting
factors; and strength of evidence

Limiting
Factor(s)
and/or
Alternative(s)

• Alcohol-based formulas as alternative;
efficacy in killing enveloped viruses has been
demonstrated60.
• Use of ash and mud as an alternative in areas
where there is no access to soap or alcoholbased rubs, Although these carry potential
antimicrobial properties61, their efficacy in
counteracting viral infections is not wellevidenced62.
• In areas with scarce running water, sharing
and reusing of water or water-container
elevates risk of transmission through droplets63.

• For those who cannot access surgical face masks, due to
affordability, availability or otherwise, homemade
masks64 accompanied with the same hygienic measures
can be considered65.

• Where face-touching is necessary or difficult to control, for
example in infants or children, handwashing will be a more
effective prevention measure.

Strength of
Evidence

• Published evidence showed handwashing is a
core community prevention measure for
COVID-19 transmission.
• Handwashing communities display lower risks
of developing transmittable diseases when
compared
to
their
non-handwashing
counterparts, in both rural61 and urban
populations66.
• The measure is recommended by multiple
governing bodies, including the WHO36 and
CDC37.
• Studies from Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome (SARS), although not conclusive,
are suggestive of handwashing as an effective
measure67.
• 20-seconds may be considered a minimum
duration given that time reductions, for
example to 5 seconds68 have been demonstrated
as less effective.
• Soap and alcohol-based rubs are wellevidenced in their capability to interact with
and degrade enveloped viruses38,60.
• Evidence of ash or mud-based alternatives as
antimicrobials is limited; no concrete evidence

• Multiple extensive studies on the similar SARS
coronavirus concluded that there is evidence of effective
transmission risk reduction69,23,24,25. One study states
uncertainty over the effectiveness70.
• Success of Hong Kong and Taiwan's high compliance to
mask-wearing practices71 has been potentially reflected
in the low rate of locally infected cases of COVID-1972,
with both communities having reported periods of no
new infections despite initial surges73.
• Used in conjunction with other practices such as social
distancing, a model simulation demonstrate communitywide benefits of mask-wearing74.

• Such measures have been recommended for influenza in the past26.
• There is strong evidence of viral infections entering through the
facial entry points and has been demonstrated for COVID-1922,19,
although evidence for impact of face-touching in diseasetransmission was not found.
• The stability of COVID-19 virus on certain surfaces has been
evidenced. Similarly, previous studies have demonstrated the
stability of other coronaviruses such as SARS, on such surfaces75.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

including proper disposal.
• Information about when to wear facemasks.
• Socio-cultural acceptance and habit on wearing face
masks (global East vs. West)

Table 1a (Part 2): Personal practice as preventive measure - risk; behavioural change; health co-benefits; enabling and limiting
factors; and strength of evidence
Cover Mouth and Nose when Coughing and Sneezing

Bring Personal Utensils when Dining
Out

Close Toilet Cover when Flushing

Risk

• COVID-19 is transmittable through droplets14, and has the potential
to remain stable on surfaces up to 72 hours15. Open coughing,
sneezing, and talking, may directly or indirectly transmit COVID-1944.
Research suggests that such pathogen-bearing droplets can travel up to
7-8 metres76.

• There is a high possibility of COVID19 transmission through saliva
droplets77,78 in instances where public
utensils are not sufficiently
disinfected79,80.

• There is growing evidence of COVID-19 being present in
stool after clearance through the respiratory tract81,82.
• Virus particles present in stool can be transmitted through
toilet plume generated after flushing83,84, especially if the
toilet is unclosed.

Behavioural
Change

• Cough/sneeze into tissue paper that is disposed immediately.
• Replace mask after a major sneeze.
• Cough or sneeze into elbow or shirt if mask or tissue is unavailable85 .
• These practices36,37,38,25,20,29 minimise droplet landings on the hands,
which are most likely to come into contact with oneself and other
surfaces. Hands should be disinfected after coughing or sneezing.

• Avoid food consumption with public
utensils, or utensils that have not been
confirmed to be disinfected.
• Use personal utensils86,29,87 that have
been appropriately disinfected for food
consumption.

• Cover toilets prior to flushing, both at home and in public.
• Avoid public toilets during such a pandemic, especially
those with toilets lacking lids88.

Co-benefit(s)

• Minimising risk of other droplet-transmittable diseases44.

• Prevention of other diseases that are
transmitted through saliva58.

• Improved household hygiene and protection from
pathogens present in stool, such as bacterial or norovirus
infections causing gastroenteritis84.

Enabling
Factor(s)

• Access to masks and tissue.
• Adequate mobility and reaction to raise elbow or tissue to the face.

• Access to personal reusable or singleuse utensils.

• Access to a toilet with a functional lid.

Limiting
Factor(s)
and/or
Alternative(s)

• People with limited mobility, such as the elderly89,90, may not be able
to react in time. The alternative is to maximise mask wearing as a
permanent physical barrier.

• May not be applicable to contexts
where eating with hands is the
tradition. Handwashing should be the
primary preventive measure in these
contexts.
• Where personal utensils are not
available, single-use utensils can be
considered,
although
there
are
environmental
implications
of
disposable utensils91,92.

• Another study has suggested that due to space between the
lid and the toilet bowl, shutting the lid may not impede
emissions entirely93 .
• For households lacking lidded toilets, other protective
measures include regular cleaning; wearing a face amsk
during toilet usage; and avoiding sharing toilets.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

with respect to efficacy against COVID-19 or
other viral infections.

• There is strong evidence supporting the transmission of COVID-19
through respiratory droplets, which can be expelled in sneezing and
coughing94,95,27.
• Some evidence indicates that wearing a mask redirects coughed
particles to a less harmful direction39 - similar outcome may be
inferred for tissue or elbow blockage although it may not be as
effective.
• There is lacking evidence on how each of the behavioural changes
contribute to risk reduction for COVID-19 specifically.

• There is no specific evidence of
COVID-19 transmitting through public
cutlery.
• Limited
evidence
suggesting
restaurants or caterers fail to properly
disinfect their reusable cutlery.

• Although this has not been directly confirmed, there is
growing evidence that COVID-19 may be present in stool.
• There is evidence that toilet plumes ascend when toilets
remain open.
• This measure has been suggested by authorities in places
such as Hong Kong28.

Table 1b: Household practices as preventive measure - risk; behavioural change; health co-benefits; enabling and limiting factors;
and strength of evidence
Disinfect Household Surfaces

Avoid Sharing Utensils

Risk

• COVID-19 has varying stability on different household surfaces, including metal, wood, glass, plastic,
paper and steel96.
• Personal belongings such as mobile phones and laptops have been shown to carry a high load of
bacteria97,98 due to inadequate cleansing and lots of hand-contact. The same may apply for virus particles.

• Studies have previously demonstrated cutlery sharing practices as a
risk for oral transmission99.
• Due to the high possibility of COVID-19 transmission through saliva
droplets77,78, it may pose similar risk.
• There is additional unknown risk due to potential for asymptomatic
transmission20.

Behavioural
Change

• Disinfect households regularly37,24,25,27,28,29, especially frequently touched objects and surfaces43, with
biocidal agents such as 62-71% ethanol, 0.1% sodium hypochlorite or 0.5% hydrogen peroxide75.
• Use a dilution of 1:50 bleach for general household disinfecting of flooring and doors75.
• Disinfect smaller objects, such as keys, or surfaces that come in contact with the face and mouth, such as
mobile phones, with 62-71% ethanol or alcohol wipes instead75, due to potential hazards from bleach100.

• Avoid sharing of utensils or serving food from a communal dish with
used utensils.
• Use designated serving-utensils to prevent saliva-based droplet
transmission.
• Maintain hygiene practices, such as adequate cleaning of all utensils.

Co-benefit(s)

• Improved general household hygiene, such as mould reduction101,102.
• Opportunity for mild physical activity to compensate for lack of outdoor exercise during COVID-19
social isolation.

• Reduced risk of other saliva-transmitted bacteria while utensilsharing86.
• Reduced risk of dental caries transmission103.

Enabling
Factor(s)

• Access to proper disinfectants.
• Knowledge on safe use and storage of disinfectants.

• Availability of serving utensils.
• Cultural appropriateness, such as when seating in settings where such
sharing is expected.

Limiting
Factor(s)
and/or
Alternative(s)

• Where resources are limited, households should use the best disinfectant possible, reduce the frequency of
disinfection, or target frequently touched surfaces such as door handles.

• Where appropriate, hand-consumption after adequate handwashing
may be considered to avoid utensil-sharing. Proper handwashing
practices must be observed.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Strength of
Evidence

• Studies exist on the effectiveness of various household disinfectants against other viruses, including
coronaviruses75.
• Evidence on the effectiveness against COVID-19 specifically is lacking.

• Given its transmission through droplets14, and persistence in saliva77,
this prevention measure should be considered good practice.
• This measure was recommended by the CDC during the 2003 SARS
outbreak29.
• There is no study on the impact of utensil-sharing on COVID-19
specifically.
• Studies have noted potential spread of H. Pylori via shared
chopsticks87.

Table 1c: Community practice as preventive measure - risk; behavioural change; health co-benefits; enabling and limiting factors;
and strength of evidence
Avoid Crowds and Mass Gatherings

Avoid Travel

Risk

• Crowded areas with unknown people are considered high-risk due to risk of droplet transmission
and infection through contaminated surfaces.
• Talking can potentially result in respiratory infectious disease transmission104.
• Possibility of transmission by asymptomatic carriers within a crowd increases risk105.

• Travelling to areas with confirmed cases will increase an individual’s risk
of potential exposure to COVID-19.
• The stability of the virus on surfaces15, the potential prevalence of
asymptomatic carriers105, the difficulty and lack of distancing106, shared
toilets and risk of toilet plume82, and uncertain travel history of others
make environments such as trains and aeroplanes challenging in terms of
protection and high risk in terms of COVID-19 transmission.

Behavioural
Change

• Observe social distancing measures4,14,37,74,27,28,20,29,107.
• A separation of 1 metre is the minimum as recommended by the WHO36. Although most droplets
may not travel across this distance, novel studies exploring the influence of aerodynamics108 as well
as the potential for sneezes to travel up to 8 meters76 have led to the recommendation that possible
distancing should be maintained wherever possible.
• Avoid congregating and take precaution when in public areas such as parks, cinemas, restaurants.
These areas should make face mask wearing mandatory, carry out temperature checks, limit the
number of people in attendance, and practice distancing of people.

• Avoid travelling to areas with confirmed cases, which are of significant
risk28,20,29.
• Take all necessary personal protective measures such as wearing of face
masks, eye googles, disinfecting immediate area with alcohol-based
solution and avoiding food sharing.
• Implement (for authorities) appropriate protective measures such as
mandatory temperature checks prior to travel and/or upon arrival, reporting
the travel and medical history of each traveller, and distancing
requirements on transport.

Co-benefit(s)

• Reduced outdoor pollution due to minimised outdoor human activity109,110.
• Lower exposure to outdoor air pollution which causes respiratory illnesses such as lung cancer and
contributes to mortality111,55.

• Reduction of cross-border transmission107.
• Improved general hygiene on transport such as trains or aeroplanes
• Environmental benefit from reduced air-travel carbon footprint112.

Enabling
Factor(s)

• Ability to avoid crowded areas as permissible by population density, occupation, religion or culture.

• Ability to make decisions on when or how to travel.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Strength of
Evidence

• Crowded areas may not be avoidable due to occupation, religious belief or otherwise. Where
gathering is necessary, individuals should take personal responsibility to wear masks, keep hands
clean, and maintain maximum distance from others.

• Access to facemasks, goggles or alcohol-based solution for personal
protection during travel.
• The necessity of travel, for personal or professional reasons, such as pilots
and the cabin crew.

Strength of
Evidence

• Studies on influenza and COVID-19113 indicate a potential role of mass gathering reduction in
limiting transmission114, though studies are limited and not yet conclusive.
• There are also studies on the elevated transmission of other viruses as a result of mass
gatherings115,116,117.

• The proximity and contact with individuals heighten the evidenced risk of
taking in potential respiratory droplets containing COVID-19 from others.
• There is no clear evidence regarding increased risk from aeroplane travel
specifically.

Table 2: Number of referenced articles per measure by OCEBM categorisation level
Category
Primary preventive measure
Number of referenced articles per OCEBM categorisation level
1a
1b
1c
2a
2b
2c
3a
3b
4
5
Others
Engage in Regular Handwashing 4
5
0
0
1
0
2
2
3 17 0
Personal
Practices
Wear Face Mask
0
3
0
0
1
0
0
2
7 18 1
Avoid Touching the Face
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
1 10 0
Cover Mouth and Nose when 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 15 0
Coughing and Sneezing
Bring Personal Utensils for When 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 8
0
Dining Out
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 6
Close Toilet Cover When 0
Flushing
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
1 11 0
Household Disinfect Household Surfaces
Practices
Avoid Sharing Utensils
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
4 4
0
Crowds
and
Mass 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2 21 0
Community Avoid
Gatherings
Practices
Avoid Travel
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
3 6
0
Total
4
8
0
0
5
0
2
5
27 116 1
* Some of the 105 publications are referenced against more than one of the ten primary preventive measures.

Total
34
32
13
17
10
8
13
9
23
9
168*

10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Limiting
Factor(s)
and/or
Alternative(s)

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Discussion
Evidence relating to ten health-EDRM behavioural measures for primary prevention against
droplet-borne biological hazards were identified and reviewed. At the time of writing, there is an
outstanding question as to whether COVID-19 is transmitted through droplet or aerosol in the
community. The information referenced here is based on best available evidence, and will need
to be updated as new studies and guidelines are published, and the understanding of the scientific
community is enhanced. Although direct evidence on the efficacy of prevention measures against
COVID-19 specifically is lacking due to the novelty of the disease, five behavioural measures
were identified: regular handwashing; wearing of face masks; avoidance of face touching;
covering during sneezing or coughing; and household disinfecting were identified. Five other
potential behavioural measures were also identified through logical deductions from potential
behavioural risks associated with transmission of diseases similar to COVID-1975. Utensilrelated practices, in particular, were heavily limited in evidence to support their efficacy against
viral infections.
The efficacy and success of the ten bottom-up primary prevention measures reviewed here are
subject to specific enabling and limiting determinants, ranging from demographic (e.g. age,
gender, education), socio-cultural, economic (e.g. financial accessibility to commodities), and
knowledge (e.g. understanding of risk, equipment use). The viability and efficacy of each
measure may be limited by determinants and constraints in different contexts. Resource-deprived
areas may face constraints and reduced effectiveness of implementation, especially for measures
that require preventive commodities such as face masks and household disinfectants. As such,
special attention should be given to rural settings, informal settlements, and resource-deficit
contexts where access to information and resources such as clean water supply are often
limited119,120, and sanitation facilities are lacking121. For hygiene measures, different alternatives
should be promoted and their relative scientific merits should be evaluated, such as the use of ash
as an alternative to soap for handwashing62, or the efficacy of handwashing with alcohol sanitiser,
which has been demonstrated in previously-published studies for H1N1122 and noroviruses123 but
not yet for COVID-19. Meanwhile, for measures that have no direct alternatives available, it is
important for authorities and policymakers to understand the capacity limitations of certain target
groups, and provide additional support or put in place other preventive measures. In cases where
material resources are scarce, the measures of awareness on sneezing and coughing etiquette as
well as avoiding hand-to-face contact are the most convenient to adopt as they require little to no
commodities. However, it should be well-noted that these measures are likely the most
challenging in compliance and enforceability, as they rely on the modification of frequent and
natural human behaviours whose modifications would require awareness and practice45,46.
Furthermore, these can be challenging to implement in target groups with less capacity for health
literacy and translation of education into practice, such as infants and elderly suffering from
dementia. Cultural patterns can be associated with behavioural intentions, in the case of avoiding

11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

utensil-sharing during meals, enforcing change may be conflicted with cultural and traditional
norms in Asia and certain European communities124.
Of the enabling factors documented for each proposed measure, shared enablers can be identified:
accessibility and affordability of resources; related knowledge, awareness and understanding of
risk; and associated top-down policy facilitation. Majority of personal and household practices
heavily rely on access to resources, such as adequate water and soap supply for regular
handwashing, quality face masks and household-disinfectants. Various theories of the
‘Knowledge, Attitudes, Practices’ model have assumed that individual knowledge enhancement
will lead to positive behavioural changes118. Health measures targeting mask-wearing might aim
to enhance (1) the individual’s risk perception, knowledge and awareness on protection
effectiveness of masks, and how to properly wear a mask so that the prevention is most effective;
(2) an individual or community’s attitude towards the practice of mask-wearing and encouraging
compliance in the West, as studies demonstrate a relatively greater social stigmatisation towards
mask-wearing amongst Westerners than East Asians125, and (3) normalising the practice of
habitual mask-wearing. Such a conceptual framework should be utilized in the implementation
of the health initiatives. In terms of overarching knowledge, health education on symptomidentification is also important, as seen on government platforms such as the CDC37. Enhancing
health-seeking behaviour of potential carriers is critical to promoting a rapid response for
quarantine or hospitalisation.
At the individual level, behavioural changes have different sustainability potentials and
limitations. Measures can also result in unintended consequences, such as the improper disposal
of face masks126 and the incorrect use of household disinfectants127 should be carefully
monitored to maximise impact while minimising further health and safety risks. Top-down
policy facilitation and strengthening of infrastructure will be essential for effective
implementation. Top-down efforts in resource provision, such as the distribution of quality
masks to all citizens by the government or similar authority128, enhance personal and household
capacities to mitigate infection risks. On compliance, the effectiveness of community practices
such as crowd and travel avoidance are highly dependent on the needs and circumstances of an
individual and a community. More assertive top-down policies such as travel bans and social
distancing rules may drive bottom-up initiatives within communities under legal deterrence129.
However, in order to ensure population-level compliance to recommendations that have wideranging socioeconomic impact and involve more than a day-to-day behavioural change, careful
risk and information communication is required, which takes in to consideration practical, legal
and ethical aspects.
The strength of evidence available for each practice is dependent on multiple factors. In the case
of a novel or emerging disease such as COVID-19, available evidence can be related specifically
to the disease and pandemic, but some findings are deduced from studies on other similar viral
infections and transmittable conditions, such as SARS or Influenza. Many interventions
12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

proposed by health authorities are not based on rigorous population-based longitudinal studies.
While handwashing is well-regarded as a core measure by global and national public health
agencies such as the WHO36 and CDC37 the chemical properties of eliminating enveloped
viruses is understood60,38, specific studies on the practice’s efficacy and impact on COVID-19
transmission are lacking. Due to the uncertainties of disease pathology and epidemiology,
effectiveness of behavioural measures against COVID-19 are far from conclusive. Other
uncertainties are also reported on virus surface stability 15 and if the efficacy of disinfectants
against surface-stable viruses might vary with COVID-1975. Similar deductive evidence
approaches from studies on other viruses have been utilised to judge the efficacy of face masks
or the shutting of toilet lids84,83. Although published evidence suggested individual measures
such as covering coughs and sneezes to be helpful against droplet transmissions14, further
research is needed to understand the true efficacy of coverings such as masks, tissues or elbows
as an adequate preventive measure against COVID-19. Given the rapid knowledge advancement
and research updates related to COVID-19, further study updates will be warranted to identify
the most appropriate behavioural measures to support bottom up biological hazard responses.
Cost-effectiveness of the measures, their impact sustainability, co-benefits and risk implications
on other sectors should also be examined and evaluated. Standardised studies across different
contexts should be enhanced, for example conducting tests on the efficacy of different
disinfectants or soaps under a standardised protocol. Such studies would increase evidence on
individual and comparative efficacy.
The limitations in this review include language (English language only); database inclusion (grey
literature not included); online accessibility of the article; and missed keywords. Publications
documenting the experiences of traditional, non-English-speaking, rural communities during the
COVID-19 pandemic might not be included in this review. Further research should review the
measures’ efficacy in different contexts and make comparisons with their alternative measures.
Specifically, alternative preventive measures that can be practiced in resource-poor, developing
communities, whose health systems and economies generally suffer the greatest impact during
pandemics are urgently needed. Increased understanding of how to effectively mitigate against
biological hazards such as COVID-19 in various contexts will help communities prepare for
future outbreaks and build disaster resilience in line with the recommendations from the healthEDRM framework.
Despite the constraints, this review has nevertheless identified common, relevant behavioural
measures supported by best available evidence for the design and implementation of health
policies that prevent droplet-borne biological hazards. Many of the measures recommended by
authorities during the pandemic are based on best practice available rather than best available
evidence. The possibility of conducting large cohort or randomised controlled studies is often
complicated, and rather infeasible during a pandemic, as noted for face masks130,131. Further
studies are needed to understand the efficacy of frequently proposed measures for transmission

13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

risk reduction. Nonetheless, each of the measures identified has scientific basis in mitigating the
risk of droplet transmission14, either through personal measures such as handwashing, or
community-based measures which aim to reduce person-to-person contact. It is important to
explore the efficacy of alternatives, notably for transmission prevention and risk communication
in low-resources or developing contexts where the capacity of the health system to mitigate and
manage emergency events outbreaks are weak. For example, while face masks are understudied,
the scientific study of cloth masks as an alternative is severely limited65, although recommended
by the CDC132. Such alternative studies should expand to consider different cultures and contexts
where different varieties of disinfectants, face masks and utensils may be used. There is also
potential for comparative effectiveness studies to explore measures that provide the greatest
transmission risk reduction at the lowest transaction cost to the individual and community and
should thus be prioritised in low-resource contexts133.

Conclusion
During the outbreak of a novel transmissible disease such as COVID-19, primary prevention is
the strongest and most effective line of defence to reduce health risks when there is an absence of
effective treatment or vaccine. COVID-19 is and will be subjected to ongoing research and
scrutiny by global scientists, health professionals and policy makers. While research gaps remain
on the efficacy of various health-EDRM prevention measures in risk reduction and transmission
control of COVID-19, suboptimal scientific evidence does not negate the potential benefits
arising from good hygiene practices, especially where the likelihood for negative outcome is
minimal. Despite the lack of rigorous scientific evidence, the best available practice-based health
education content, effective means of information dissemination, equitable access to resources,
and monitoring of unintended consequences of the promoted measures, such as environmental
pollution due to poor waste management, will be essential. A top-down approach should be
multi-sectorial, bringing in policy makers with clinical, public health, environmental, and
community management expertise to develop a coordinated and comprehensive approach in a
globalised world.

Conflict of Interest and Financial Declaration
The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The study is fully funded by the CCOUC-University
of Oxford research fund (2019-2023).

14

Ref.
No.

Title

Journal or Publication

Date of
Publication

OCEBM Level of Evidence based on
Study Design (See Key 2)

Relevant Key Finding(s) and/or Conclusion

March 2020

Relevant
Measure(s)
(See Key 1)
A, B, I

4

Modes of Transmission of Virus
Causing COVID-19: Implications
for
IPC
Precaution
Recommendations

WHO Scientific Brief

Level 5: Expert opinion on precaution
recommendations, using research on
the characteristics of COVID-19

American Chemical
Society NANO

April 2020

A, D, H, I

Level 5: Expert opinion based on
clinicians’ experiences and
knowledge; presentation of questions,
hypotheses and research needs
regarding COVID-19

Aerosol and Surface Stability of
SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with
SARS-CoV-1

The New England
Journal of Medicine

April 2020

A, C, D, J

Level 5: An in vitro study of the
surface stability of the SARS-Cov-2
strain compared to SARS-CoV-1

16

Community
Transmission
of
Severe
Acute
Respiratory
Syndrome
Coronavirus
2,
Shenzhen, China, 2020

Emerging Infectious
Diseases

June 2020
(Early
Release)

B

Level 4: A case series on confirmed
COVID-19 studied in order to
understand the pattern of community
transmission

17

A Familial Cluster of Pneumonia
Associated with the 2019 Novel
Coronavirus Indicating Person-toPerson Transmission: A Study of a
Family Cluster

The Lancet

February
2020

B

Level 4: A case series exploring
epidemiological, clinical, laboratory,
radiology and microbiological
findings of a family cluster of
(initially) unexplained pneumonia

• With knowledge of droplet transmission (and
particle size), droplet and contact precautions are
recommended for COVID-19.
• Importance of PPE and other practices such as
frequent hand hygiene is indicated.
• Elucidates basic biology of viruses and their
transmission and infection pathway.
• Importance of handwashing and hygiene is
demonstrated via explanation of the need to
deactivate released virions before they reach a host.
• Identifies
the
major
complications
and
understandings associated with current measures
such as PPE and surface sanitization and make
recommendations accordingly.
• SARS-CoV-2 has similar surface stability compared
to SARS-CoV-1 under experimental circumstances.
• Demonstrates stability on surfaces such as plastic
and stainless steel with potential for aerosol and
fomite transmission.
• COVID-19 became endemic to Shenzhen.
Community,
intrafamily
and
nosocomial
transmission-routes were found.
• Maintenance strategies are derived, such as
minimising public activity, using personal protection
measures and the importance of early screening,
diagnosis and isolation.
• Indicating person-to-person transmission via
nosocomial and intrafamily means.
• Noted that many findings were similar to those of
SARS patients in 2003.
• One patient was initially asymptomatic – suggestion
for early tracing, quarantine and control measures.

14

COVID-19: A Call for Physical
Scientists and Engineers

15

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Appendix 1: Relevant Measure(s), Study Design, Relevant Key Finding(s) and/or Conclusion of Each
Utilised Reference

Tropism
and
Innate
Host
Responses of Influenza A/H5N6
Virus: An Analysis of Ex Vivo
and In Vitro Cultures of the
Human Respiratory Tract
2019-nCoV
Transmission
Through the Ocular Surface Must
Not Be Ignored

European Respiratory
Journal

March 2017

B

The Lancet

February
2020

B

20

Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier
Transmission of COVID-19

Journal of the
American Medical
Association

February
2020

A, B, D, I, J,
H

Level 4: A case series on a familial
cluster of 5 patients with COVID-19

21

Emergencies
Preparedness,
Response: What Can I Do?

WHO

January
2010

B

Level 5: A compilation of
information on Pandemic Response
(2009 H1N1) protective measures

22

SARS-CoV-2 Entry Factors are
Highly Expressed in Nasal
Epithelial Cells Together with
Innate Immune Genes
Use of Disposable Face Masks for
Public Health Protection against
SARS

Nature Medicine

April 2020

B, C

Level 5: A study on SARS-CoV-2
tropism study via study of expression
of viral entry-associated genes

Journal of
Epidemiology and
Community Health

April 2004

A, B

Level 5: Expert opinion on the use of
face masks and practice of personal
hygiene as important measures to
protect the general public from SARS

SARS Transmission, Risk Factors,
and Prevention in Hong Kong

Emerging Infectious
Diseases

April 2004

A, B, G

Level 3b: A case-control study to
compare SARS case-patients with
undefined sources of infection with
community controls

19

23

24

Level 5: An in vitro study on tropism,
replication competence and cytokine
induction of virus isolates in cultures
(Ex Vivo and In Vitro) derived from
human respiratory tract
Level 5: An ophthalmologist's expert
perspective on additional risk through
mucous membrane of eyes

• Human H5N6 virus adapted to human airways,
indicating a of risk pattern for the virus upon entry
into respiratory tract.

• Suggestion for consideration of studies into
conjunctival scrapings to look for signs of ocular
transmission.
• Ophthalmologists must wear protective eyewear
when examining suspect cases.
• There is a potential mechanism of COVID-19
transmission via an asymptomatic carrier.
• Further study on the relevant mechanism is
suggested.
• Regarding masks specifically, it suggests that masks
are only needed if you are sick.
• Remarks on the importance of proper mask wearing
practice if the measure is adopted.
• Genes found to be co-expressed in nasal epithelial
cells, indicating a role in the initial phase of viral
infection, spread and clearance.
• States that protection against SARS for healthcare
workers is different from the general public, as the
latter is not subject to continuous exposure to droplet
transmission from an infected patient.
• Expresses reduced risk of aerosol droplet
transmission with masks.
• Notes importance of proper usage and frequent
changing of masks.
• Also extends to mention importance of other
personal hygiene practices such as handwashing due
to survival of the virus on surfaces.
• Concluded that risk factors for SARS infection
include visiting mainland China, hospitals, and the
Amoy Gardens (an estate with a SARS outbreak).
• Indicates that frequent mask use in public venues,
frequent handwashing, and household disinfection
were prominent protective factors.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

18

Respiratory Infections during
SARS Outbreak, Hong Kong,
2003

Emerging Infectious
Diseases

November
2005

A, B, D, G

Level 4: A cross-sectional study to
compare the proportion of respiratory
virus positive specimens in 2003 and
those from 1998 to 2002

26

Controlling the Novel A (H1N1)
Influenza Virus: Don't Touch
Your Face!

The Journal of
Hospital Infection

November
2009

A, C

Level 5: A letter to the editor on a
study of surface swab specimens from
patients with confirmed influenza A

27

Stopping the Spread of COVID-19

Journal of the
American Medical
Association

March 2020

A, C, D, G, I

Level 5: A set of guidelines with
potential measures to stop the spread
of COVID-19

28

Prevention of Coronavirus Disease
2019 (COVID-19)

Hong Kong Centre for
Health Protection

May 2020

A, B, C, D,
F, G, I, J

29

Fact Sheet for SARS Patients and
Their Close Contact

Centres for Disease
Control and
Prevention

2003

A, B, C, D,
E, F, H, I, J

30

WHO Guidelines on
Hygiene in Health Care

WHO

2009

A

Level 5: A set of guidelines with
information related to COVID-19
such as prevention suggestions and
clinical features of the coronavirus.
Level 5: A set of guidelines with
information related to SARS such as
symptoms, mode of transmission, and
prevention measures
Level 5: An extensive evidence-based
guideline on the practice and science
behind handwashing

31

Simplifying the World Health
Organization Protocol: 3 Steps
Versus 6 Steps for Performance of
Hand Hygiene in a Clusterrandomized Trial

Clinical Infectious
Diseases

August
2019

A

Hand

Level 1b: A cluster-randomized trial
assigning 3-step vs. 6-step
handwashing protocol

• No direct causal relationship was established.
• However, the study suggests a positive association
between reduced influenza/respiratory infection
incidence and population-based hygienic measures
including face mask wearing, hand washing after
contact with potentially contaminated objects, using
soap for handwashing, mouth covering when
sneezing or coughing, and household disinfection.
• Indicates that virus strains of influenza A are found
in surfaces such as bed rails, walls, and sofas.
• Further implies the importance of hand hygiene,
droplet and contact precautions, and behavioural
conditioning such as avoiding touching of the nose,
eye or mouth touching to prevent and control
influenza.
• Different methods of infection prevention including
hand hygiene, social distancing, household
disinfection, and general personal hygiene are
suggested.
• Prevention advice such as mask wearing, avoidance
of face touching, covering mouth and nose, putting
the toilet lid down when flushing, and general travel
advice is suggested.
• Personal protection measures, such as the avoidance
of silverware sharing, handwashing and covering
mouth and nose when coughing or sneezing, are
recommended.
• Extensive findings on best handwashing practice and
efficacy of soap-based washing and alcohol against
enveloped viruses.

•
• Findings suggest that both significantly reduced the
bacterial colony (with no significant difference
between the two) but that the 3-step guidelines had
higher compliance.
Quantity of steps are not of great concern as long as
areas are covered.

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

25

The
Common
Missed
Handwashing Instances and Areas
after 15Years of Hand-Hygiene
Education

Journal of
Environmental and
Public Health

August
2019

A

Level 4: A cross-sectional study
looking at a cohort in Hong Kong and
their handwashing and hand hygiene
practices

33

Hygiene and Health: Systematic
Review of Handwashing Practices
Worldwide and Update of Health
Effects

Tropical Medicine and
International Health

May 2014

A

34

Assessment of Hand Hygiene
Techniques Using the World
Health Organization's Six Steps
Bacteriological Aspects of Hand
Washing: A Key for Health
Promotion and Infections Control
Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19)
Advice for the Public

Journal of Infection
and Public Health

Dec 2015

A

International Journal
of Preventative
Medicine
WHO

March 2017

A

Level 1a: A systematic review of
RCT’s and quasi-randomised trials
(+others). Studies observed rates of
handwashing with soap in various
populations and scenarios
Level 2b: An individual cohort study
observing hand hygiene techniques
over a period of 5 months
Level 3a: A sSystematic review of
case control studies

April 2020

A, B, C, D, I

Level 5: Expert opinion on personal
protection from COVID-19 such as
safe use of alcohol-based hand
sanitizers

37

How to Protect Yourself & Others

Centres for Disease
Control and
Prevention

April 2020

A, B, D, G, I

Level 5: Expert opinion on how
COVID-19 spreads and personal
protection measures for COVID-19

38

Hand Hygiene and the Novel
Coronavirus Pandemic: The Role
of Healthcare Workers

The Journal of
Hospital Infection

March 2020

A

Level 5: Expert opinion on the
importance of practicing respiratory
and hand hygiene, as well as using
personal protective equipment in
healthcare settings

35

36

• Indicates several areas of the hands which are
commonly missed, as well as occasions during
which handwashing should be performed.
• Relationship between age or education and hand
hygiene practice is indicated.
• Significant global problem regarding poor practice
of handwashing after contact with excrete is found.

• Certain areas of the hand achieved lower areas of
compliance during handwashing.
• Handwashing can reduce infectious agent’s
transmission in the community and healthcare
settings.
• Informs the public of the importance of actions such
as regular handwashing with soap and water,
cleaning hands with alcohol-based rub, social
distancing, avoiding crowds, avoid eye, nose, mouth
touching, covering mouth and nose, staying home,
and health-seeking behaviour under the pandemic.
• Precautions on alcohol-based hand sanitizer use is
also mentioned.
• Informs the public of person-to-person spread of the
virus, the lack of vaccine to prevent COVID-19, and
the importance of actions such as regular
handwashing with soap and water, avoiding close
contact, covering mouse and nose with a cloth face
cover, covering coughs and sneezes, as well as
cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces
and households under the pandemic.
• Details the role of healthcare workers, nurses and
midwives in providing primary point of care in
communities and for pregnant women respectively,
especially during infectious disease outbreaks.
• Mentions details and precautions when using
alcohol-based hand rubs for hand hygiene.

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

32

A Schlieren Optical Study of the
Human Cough With and Without
Wearing Masks for Aerosol
Infection Control

Journal of the Royal
Society, Interface

December
2009

B, D

Level 5: A study comparing the fluid
dynamics of coughing with or without
standard surgical or N95 mask
wearing using video records.

40

Respiratory Virus Shedding in
Exhaled Breath and Efficacy of
Face Masks

Nature Medicine

April 2020

B

Level 1b: A randomized controlled
trial comparing exhaled breath
samples (for respiratory virus
shedding) in mask wearing vs. non
mask wearing individuals

41

Early Transmission Dynamics in
Wuhan,
China,
of
Novel
Coronavirus-infected Pneumonia

The New England
Journal of Medicine

January
2020

B

42

Contamination by Respiratory
Viruses on Outer Surface of
Medical Masks Used by Hospital
Healthcare Workers

BMC Infectious
Diseases

June 2019

B

Level 4: A case series looking at
characteristics and illness timelines of
laboratory confirmed cases of
COVID-19
Level 1b: An individual randomised
controlled trial with two pilot studies
(cohort). Participants told to wear
medical masks and then masks were
checked for respiratory viruses on the
surface

43

Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in
different environmental conditions

The Lancet

May 2020

B, G

Level 5: An experimental study on
the stability of COVID-19 in different
induced environmental conditions
such as under heat stress and on
different surfaces

44

What You Need to Know About
Infectious Disease

US Institute of
Medicine

2010

C, D

Level 5: A book that contains expert
opinion on infectious diseases and the
nature of their transmission

45

Face Touching: A Frequent Habit
that Has Implications for Hand
Hygiene

American Journal of
Infection Control

February
2015

C

Level 2b: A behavioural observation
study of 26 participants exploring the
habit of face touching

• Human coughing projects a rapid turbulent jet into
the surrounding air
• Wearing a surgical or N95 mask interrupts the
natural mechanism of airborne infection transmission
through blocking turbulent jet formation (N95 mask)
or redirecting the exhalant (surgical mask).
• Surgical face masks can prevent transmission of
human coronaviruses and influenza viruses from
symptomatic individuals.
• Surgical face masks reduce detection of coronavirus
RNA in aerosols, with a trend towards reduced
detection of coronavirus RNA in respiratory
droplets.
• Human-to-human transmission has occurred and that
measures must be implemented towards populations
at risk.
• Virus presence on the face mask was higher when
worn for a longer period of time (in the 6>
subgroup).
• The study concluded that because of this risk, the
pathogens on the outer surface may cause selfcontamination, with greater risk when worn for >6
hours.
• Indications that there should be a maximum time on
mask usage.
• Infectious virus was not detected after 5 minutes
incubation at room temperature, wide range of pH
stability, was found to be stable on surfaces such as
the outer layer of surgical masks.
• Virus was susceptible to disinfection methods.
• The mouth, the eyes and the nose are the body’s
main entry points for transmittable conditions such
as influenza.
• Coughing and sneezing facilitates the spread of
droplet-transmittable diseases.
• Even amongst medical students, there was frequent
face touching behaviour.
• This indicates towards the importance of hand
hygiene too apart from the risk of self-inoculation
from face touching which needs to be elucidated.

19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

39

PLOS ONE
Medicine (Baltimore)

March 2019

C

Level 2b: A cohort study exploring
the behaviour of face touching and its
link to cognitive and emotional load

• Results showed the both the point of touch and
contact durations were under influence from
emotional and cognitive triggers.

Medicine (Baltimore)

March 2016

A

• Frequent handwashing and better hygiene habits
were associated with a reduction in the risk of
influenza infection.

48

Hand Hygiene and Risk of
Influenza Virus Infections in the
Community: A Systematic Review
and Meta-analysis

Epidemiology &
Infection

May 2014

A

49

Effect of Washing Hands with
Soap on Diarrhoea risk in the
community: A Systematic Review

Cochrane Database of
Systematic Reviews

September
2015

A

Level 3b: A single case-control study
testing the link between influenza
transmission and self-reported
handwashing / unhealthy hygiene
habits
Level 1a: A systematic review of 10
randomized controlled trials aiming
to evaluate the efficacy of hand
hygiene measures against the
reduction of influenza transmission
Level 1a: A systematic review of 22
randomised controlled trials to
compare diarrhoea occurrence in
children and adults with or without
handwashing measures

50

Hand Washing Promotion for
Preventing Diarrhoea

Cochrane Systematic
Review

September
2015

A

Level 1a: A systematic review of
randomized controlled trials and
cluster RCT’s to compare the effects
of measures associated with
handwashing on the occurrence of
diarrhoea episodes in children

51

Reducing the Risk of Infection:
Hand Washing Technique

Community Eye
Health

March 2008

A

Level 5: Expert guidance on
components of a good handwashing
route

47

• Findings suggested that while hand washing may be
effective (modest efficacy) against one mode of
transmission i.e. contact, further measures may also
be important to control influenza transmission, for
example face masks.
• Handwashing measures result in diarrhoea episode
reductions in child day-care centres in high-income
countries as well as communities in low- and
middle-income countries.
• It is a challenge to encourage the habitual
maintenance of handwashing habits in people in the
long-term.
• Hand washing most likely reduces diarrhoea
episodes in certain communities, as per the study’s
findings.
• There may be lack of understanding on how to help
people maintain habits related to handwashing in the
long term.
Indicates that handwashing is critical to infection
control and that there may be inadequate awareness on
importance of handwashing techniques, which may be
impeding effectiveness.

20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Self-touch: Contact Durations and
Point of Touch of Spontaneous
Facial
Self-touches
Differ
Depending on Cognitive and
Emotional Load
Protective Effect of Hand-washing
and Good Hygienic Habits against
Seasonal Influenza: A Casecontrol Study

46

The Effectiveness of Hand
Hygiene Procedures in Reducing
the Risks of Infections in Home
and Community Settings Including
Handwashing and Alcohol-based
Hand Sanitizers

American Journal of
Infection Control

December
2007

A

Level 5: A report reviewing the
evidence on hand hygiene and its link
to infectious disease transmissions

53

Effectiveness of Commercial Face
Masks to Reduce Personal PM
Exposure.

Science of the Total
Environment

September
2018

B

54

Exploring Motivations behind
Pollution-mask Use in a Sample of
Young Adults in Urban China

Globalization and
Health

December
2018

B

Level 5: A model-based study
evaluating the efficacy of face mask
respirators towards the reduction of
airborne particle exposure and
subsequent pollutant exposure
Level 4: A cross-sectional survey
exploring the role of socio-cognitive
factors in affecting the decision of
wearing a pollution mask in the
context of young educated people

55

WHO | Air Pollution

WHO

N/A

B, I

56

Air Pollution: A Smoking Gun for
Cancer

Chinese Journal of
Cancer

April 2014

B

57

A Retrospective Approach to
Assess Human Health Risks
Associated with Growing Air
Pollution in Urbanized Area of
Thar Desert, Western Rajasthan,
India

Journal of
Environmental Health
Science and
Engineering.

January
2014

B

58

Saliva and Viral Infections

Periodontology 2000

December
2015

C, E

Level 5: A collection of resources
including global data on air pollution
and subsequent protective measures
Level 5: A review on various articles
to discuss key questions surrounding
the link of air pollution with cancer
incidence, with a focus on China
Level 2b: A retrospective cohort
study looking into the air pollution
measures and associated statistics on
disease burden

Level 5: A review on various
publications associated with viral
infections via the oral cavity and
discussing assays

• Hand hygiene is a significant component of good
hygiene in households and communities and has
significant benefit towards the reduction of infection
transmission, including respiratory tract infections.
• Further conclusion that hand hygiene’s impact
towards infectious disease reduction can be enhanced
by improved persuasion of community handwashing
(properly and at the right times) and that hand
hygiene promotion should come hand in hand with
other aspects of hygiene and associated education.

•
• Facemasks reduce exposure to urban pollution.
The efficacy of available face masks can vary in
achieving exposure reduction to urban pollution.

• Mask wearing practice is influenced by various
reasons including but not limited to level of
education, social norms, self-efficacy, attitudes and
past behaviour.
• The conclusion indicates the need towards changing
the social perception towards mask-wearing practice.
• Demonstrates that 9/10 people breathe air containing
high levels of pollutants and concludes these as risk
factors towards health.
• Air pollution was and is a risk for cancer; makes
final recommendations such as the need for personal
pollution monitoring devices as well as increase
international collaborations upon this matter.
• Environmental burden of disease and association to
air pollution is a main concern in the fast-developing
areas of India.
• Households exposed to high vehicle-caused pollution
presented with greater prevalence of respiratory
diseases for example.
• Regarding saliva and its role in viral infections, it
indicates that it plays a key role and that the mouth
and eye are common sites for viral entry.
• Conclusion that the oral cavity is a significant area
for infection as well as virus transmission.

21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

52

Detection of Bacterial Pathogens
in the Hands of Rural School
Children Across Different Age
Groups and Emphasizing the
Importance of Hand Wash

Journal of Preventive
Medicine and Hygiene

June 2019

C

Level 4: A cross-sectional
observational study on hand
pathogens in 200 rural school
children

60

Viricidal Activity of World Health
Organization-recommended
Formulations Against Enveloped
Viruses, Including Zika, Ebola,
and Emerging Coronaviruses
Effect of Handwashing on Child
Health: A Randomised Controlled
Trial

The Journal of
Infectious Diseases

March 2017

A

The Lancet

July 2005

A

Level 5: An in vitro experiment
testing the efficacy of two WHO
recommended alcohol-based
formulations against different
enveloped viruses
Level 1b: A randomised controlled
trial randomly assigning of
handwashing promotion to one group
and no promotion to the other vs.
randomised controls. Outcomes
explored included diarrhoea and acute
respiratory tract infections.

62

Hand Cleaning with Ash for
Reducing the Spread of Viral and
Bacterial Infections: A Rapid
Review

Cochrane

April 2020

A

Level 5: A systematic review using
different types of studies to assess the
advantages and disadvantages of ash
as an alternative to soap or other
materials against viruses and bacteria

63

Comparison of Four Methods of
Hand Washing in Situations of
Inadequate Water Supply

West African Journal
of Medicine

January
2008

A

Level 1b: A randomised controlled
trial comparing different methods of
hand washing developed for use in
developing countries

64

Testing the Efficacy of Homemade
Masks: Would They Protect in an
Influenza Pandemic?

Disaster Medicine and
Public Health
Preparedness

August
2013

A

Level 1b: A randomised controlled
trial on the effectiveness of different
household materials in making
homemade masks as an alternative to
commercial face masks

61

• Concluded that in this rural-based cohort, the hands
of the children were harbouring various, potentially
fatal, pathogenic organisms and could thus be a
major source of infection.
• Indication towards the importance of hand washing
and the need to provide materials (which are not
available to these groups) in order to reduce spread
of infection which is otherwise reducible via hand
hygiene.
• WHO recommended alcohol-based formulations
worked against the different enveloped viruses and
the viricidal effect was strong.

• Study found that households receiving plain soap
with handwashing promotion had lower incidence of
the studied infections and that there was not much
difference between plain vs. antibacterial soap.
• Indicates the importance of such programs and
distribution of soap.
• Concluding that handwashing was effective in
preventing conditions like diarrhoea and respiratory
disease.
• Studies were unreliable and rarely adequate
examined rate of infection. Therefore, ash could not
be concluded as a suitable alternative.

• The ‘Elbow way’ of handwashing is the gold
standard with no evidence of post-contamination.
• Bucket and bowl as well as the single-bowl method
result in cross contamination.
• While a homemade mask also results in a decrease in
number of microorganisms expelled by volunteers, a
homemade mask is significantly less effective than
surgical masks and should only be a last resort for
droplet transmission prevention.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

59

Aerosol Filtration Efficiency of
Common
Fabrics
Used
in
Respiratory Cloth Masks

American Chemical
Society Nano

April 2020

B

Level 5: An experimental approach to
assess common fabrics (such as
cotton) and their filtration efficiencies

66

Handwashing: Clean Hands Save
Lives

Journal of Consumer
Health on the Internet

February
2020

A

Level 5: An expert collection of
information on handwashing as well
as the explanations behind it

67

Effectiveness of Handwashing in
Preventing SARS: A Review

Tropical Medicine and
International Health

September
2006

A

Level 3a: A systematic review of
case-control studies to evaluate
effectiveness of handwashing in
protecting against SARS transmission

68

Efficacy of Handwashing Duration
and Drying Methods

International
Association for Food
Protection

July 2012

A

Level 1b: A randomised controlled
trial on the impact of soap or plain
water, duration of practice, presence
of debris and drying method on
microorganism removal from hands
through handwashing

69

Risk Factors for SARS among
Persons without Known Contact
with SARS Patients, Beijing,
China

Emerging Infectious
Diseases

February
2004

B

Level 3b: An individual case-control
study to compare unlinked probable
SARS patients with other
community-based controls

70

Effectiveness of Surgical and
Cotton Masks in Blocking SARS–
CoV-2: A Controlled Comparison
in 4 Patients

Annals of Internal
Medicine

April 2020

B

Level 1b: A randomised controlled
trial to compare the effectiveness of
surgical and cotton masks in filtering
SARS-CoV-2

• Found that in general, cloth masks could potentially
offer notable protection against transmission of
particles which have sizes within the aerosol range.
• Further findings on factors limiting effectiveness
such as leakages due to fitting issues and influence
of factors such as humidity, repeated use and
washing.
•
Collects the key points on handwashing as well as the
science behind the measure to ultimate make
recommendations regarding when to wash and how to
wash.
• Only three studies out of the ten reviewed were
statistically significant.
• While there is no conclusive evidence on the
effectiveness of handwashing, this measure remains
suggestive to protect against SARS transmission in
the community and healthcare settings.
• The use of soap, longer duration of handwashing,
and
towel
drying
significantly
remove
microorganisms compared to plain water, shorter
duration and air drying respectively.
• Towel drying presented with a greater person-toperson variability. Presence of food debris made
handwashing less effective.
• Concluded that chronic medical conditions, visit to
fever clinics, eating outside home, and frequent taxi
taking were risk factors in case patients.
• Also indicated that mask wearing is strongly
protective in reducing risk for SARS.
• Both surgical and cotton masks are potentially
ineffective in the prevention of SARS-CoV-2 from
patient coughs to the environment and external mask
surface.

23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

65

Mass Masking in the COVID-19
Epidemic: People Need Guidance

The Lancet

March 2020

B

Level 5: Expert opinion on the
importance of plans for mass masking
adoptions in the community under the
emergence of COVID-19

72

The Role of Community-wide
Wearing of Face Mask for Control
of Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) Epidemic due to
SARS-CoV-2

Journal of Infection

April 2020

B

73

WHO
Coronavirus
(COVID-19) Dashboard

WHO

N/A

B

74

To Mask or Not to Mask:
Modelling the Potential for Face
Mask Use by the General Public to
Curtail the COVID-19 Pandemic

Infectious Disease
Modelling

April 2020

B, I

Level 4: A cross-sectional
observational study with
epidemiological analysis on COVID19 confirmed cases in Hong Kong
with community-wide masking and
that of non-mask-wearing countries
Others: Provides latest figures on
COVID-19 new cases, confirmed
cases, and deaths in a timely manner
Level 5: A study on hHypothetical
mask adoption scenarios with
proposed model simulations are used
to evaluatestudy the effect of mask
wearing on mortality reduction and
reduced COVID-19 transmission

75

Persistence of Coronaviruses on
Inanimate Surfaces and Their
Inactivation with Biocidal Agents

The Journal of
Hospital Infection

March 2020

C, G

Level 5: A literature review on the
persistence of coronaviruses on
inanimate surfaces and chemical
disinfection strategies for biocidal
agent inactivation

76

Turbulent Gas Clouds and
Respiratory Pathogen Emissions:
Potential
Implications
for
Reducing
Transmission
of
COVID-19

Journal of the
American Medical
Association JAMA

March 2020

D, I

Level 5: Expert opinion on turbulent
gas clouds and respiratory pathogen
emissions

Disease

• Indicates that compulsory social distancing and mass
masking are the measures that appear to be
temporarily successful in China.
• Expresses that while the efficacy of mask wearing
may be lacking evidence, absence of evidence should
not be equated to inefficacy, especially in the context
of COVID-19 with limited alternatives. Suggests that
masking can intercept the transmission link and.
Urges governments and health authorities to make
advance preparations on mass masking locally to
prepare for challenges ahead.
• Community-wide mask wearing may potentially
improve COVID-19 control through reducing
infected saliva and respiratory droplet emission from
infected individuals.

• Latest figure updates on COVID-19.

• Mask wearing by the general public may be
potentially effective in reducing community
transmission and relieving the pandemic burden.
• Suggests that the community-wide benefits are likely
to be the most significant when face masks are used
with other protection practices such as social
distancing, and when adoption is nearly universal
with a high compliance.
• Human coronaviruses can persist on inanimate
surfaces like metal, glass or plastic for up to 9 days.
• They can be efficiently inactivated using biocidal
agents.
• Early containment and prevention of further
COVID-19 spread is crucial.
• Suggests that pathogen-bearing droplets from a
human sneeze can travel up to 7-8 metres under
forward momentum of the gas cloud.
• Indicates implications for prevention and precaution
in COVID-19, including maintenance of distance
away from infected individuals in healthcare
settings.

24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

71

Human Saliva: Non-Invasive Fluid
for Detecting Novel Coronavirus
(2019-nCoV)

International Journal
of Environmental
Research and Public
Health

March
2020

E, H

Level 4: A case series on viral
detection in saliva samples of
COVID-19 patients on the first day of
hospitalisation

78

Consistent Detection of 2019
Novel Coronavirus in Saliva

Clinical Infectious
Diseases

Feb 2020

E, H

Level 4: A case series on saliva viral
load in self-collected saliva of
COVID-19 patients

79

Microbiological Contamination of
Environments and Surfaces at
Commercial Restaurants

Ciência & Saúde
Coletiva

2010

E

Level 5: A study on the levels of
microbiological contamination on
restaurant surfaces

80

Contamination by Bacillus Cereus
on Equipment and Utensil
Surfaces in a Food and Nutrition
Service Unit
Detectable SARS-CoV-2 Viral
RNA in Faeces of Three Children
During Recovery Period of
COVID-19 Pneumonia

Ciência & Saúde
Coletiva

September
2011

E

Level 5: A study on the levels of
microbiological contamination in
food processing plants

Journal of Medical
Virology

March 2020

F

CUHK Finds that the Coronavirus
Can Persist in Stool after Its
Clearance in Respiratory Tract;
Will Conduct Stool Test for
People in Quarantine Camps for
Early Identification

The Chinese
University of Hong
Kong

March 2020

F, J

Level 4: A case series in which
information of COVID-19 infected
children was collected, such as
clinical characteristics and chest
imaging
Level 4: A case series on the viral
load of faecal samples from COVID19 patients

81

82

• Indicates consistent detection of coronavirus in
saliva of COVID-19 patients admitted from first day
of hospitalization.
• Demonstrates advantage of saliva sampling
comfortability in epidemic situations such as
COVID-19.
• Suggests further investigation on human saliva
diagnostic capacity for coronaviruses.
• Indicates consistent detection of live virus in saliva
by viral culture.
• Suggests that saliva sampling is a promising and
non-invasive method with high diagnostic,
monitoring and infection control capacity in patients
with COVID-19 infection.
•
• Extensive contamination by bacteria was observed in
restaurant surfaces such as utensils, equipment, and
stainless-steel benches.
Suggests further sanitary measure to reduce risks of
foodborne diseases.
Significant contamination by bacteria was identified in
over 30% of the equipment and utensils studied in
food processing plants.
• Concluded that SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA is
detectable in the faecal samples of three children
during their recovery from COVID-19 pneumonia.

• Concluded that all studied patients have COVID-19
virus detected in their faecal samples.
• For a minority of patients, virus was still present in
the faecal sample 1-2 days after the respiratory
sample tested negative.

25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

77

The Potential Spread of Infection
Caused by Aerosol Contamination
of Surfaces after Flushing a
Domestic Toilet

Journal of Applied
Microbiology

June 2005

F

Level 5: A study to determine the
level of aerosol formation and fall out
within a toilet cubicle after toilet
flushing through mimicking
infectious diarrhoea

84

Lifting the Lid on Toilet Plume
Aerosol: A Literature Review with
Suggestions for Future Research

American Journal of
Infection Control

October
2012

F

Level 5: A review on the potential
health risks of aerosol production
during toilet flushing

85

Respiratory Hygiene and Cough
Etiquette

Infection Control in
the Dental Office

April 2020

D

Level 5: Expert opinion on
respiratory hygiene and cough
etiquette

86

Bacterial Transfer from Mouth to
Different Utensils and from
Utensils to Food
Helicobacter Pylori: Epidemiology
and Routes of Transmission

Graduate School of
Clemson University

August
2009

E, H

Epidemiologic
Reviews

July 2000

E, H

Level 5: A study on the transfer of
bacteria from mouth to different
utensils
Level 5: A review on the
epidemiology and routes of
transmission of Helicobacter pylori

88

Potential for Aerosolization of
Clostridium
Difficile
after
Flushing Toilets: The Role of
Toilet
Lids
in
Reducing
Environmental
Contamination
Risk

The Journal for
Hospital Infection

December
2011

F

Level 5: A study on iIn-situ testing
using faecal suspensions to mimic
disease bacteria and measure
microorganism aerosolization as well
as extent of splashing when toilet
flushing

89

Mobility Decline in Old Age: A
Time to Intervene

Exercise and Sport
Sciences Reviews

January
2013

D

Level 5: Expert opinion on mobility
impairment in ageing populations

90

Age-related Change in Mobility:
Perspectives from Life Course
Epidemiology and Geroscience

The Journals of
Gerontology. Series
A, Biological Sciences
and Medical Sciences

March 2016

D

Level 5: Expert opinion on mobility
impairment in ageing populations,
explored through the perspectives of
epidemiology and geroscience

87

• Large numbers of microorganisms remained on the
toilet bowl surface and in the bowl water, which are
further dispersed to the air through further toilet
flushing.
• Indicates potential health risk to individuals who are
unaware of this mode of transmission within the
household.
• Toilet plume under toilet flushing may contribute to
infectious disease transmission.
• Further research to assess toilet plume risks,
especially in healthcare settings, is encouraged.
• Prevention is the best method for respiratory disease
management.
• Proper hand hygiene and awareness on cough and
sneeze etiquette is encouraged for successful
prevention.
• There is a significant bacterial transfer from mouth
to utensils and further to food.
• H. pylori infection is prevalent in Chinese
immigrants in Australia who share chopsticks for
communal dishes.
• A common mode of H. pylori transmission involves
an oral-to-oral route through saliva.
• There is a potential health risk of microorganism
environmental contamination due to lidless toilets;
their use is thus discouraged thus their use is
discouraged.

• Mobility decline is prominent in the old aged.
• It is important for behavioural measures to be in
place for mobility function improvement.
• Further rigorous clinical trials are needed.
• The treatment and prevention of mobility
impairments through expert collaboration are
essential.
• Physical deterioration in older persons results in
mobility loss and impairment.
• It is important for behavioural measures to be in
place to reduce the disability burden in populations.

26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

83

Plastic Waste Inputs from Land
into the Ocean

Science

February
2015

E

Level 5: A report on the estimation of
plastic waste mass in oceans by
linking relevant worldwide data

92

Microplastic Contamination of
Wild and Captive Flathead Grey
Mullet (Mugil Cephalus)

International Journal
of Environmental
Research and Public
Health

March 2018

E

Level 5: An investigation on
microplastic ingestion in flathead
grey mullets

93

CityU Experts: Aerosol Droplets
from Toilet Flushing can Rise Up
to One Metre; Covering Toilet Lid
may not Completely Eliminate
Disease Transmission; Toilet
Bowl must be Regularly Cleaned

The City University of
Hong Kong

February
2020

F

Level 5: A study on how toilet
flushing may produce aerosol
droplets that facilitate disease
transmission

94

The Coronavirus Pandemic and
Aerosols:
Does
COVID-19
Transmit via Expiratory Particles?

Aerosol Science and
Technology

April 2020

D

Level 5: Expert opinion on the
potential of COVID-19 transmission
through expiratory particles

• The amount of plastic waste generated across 192
coastal countries is determined.
• The major determining factors of a country’s
contribution to plastic waste would be population
size and waste management system quality.
• An estimation is made on the cumulative plastic
waste quantity if waste management infrastructure is
not improved.
• There was evidence of microplastic ingestion in the
mullets.
• Individual, local and global actions to counteract the
issue of plastic waste disposal into seas are
encouraged.

•
• A single toilet flush can contaminate the washroom
through the spread of pathogens in the air.
• The covering of toilet lid before flushing for
washroom and air contamination reduction is
recommended.
Toilet lid covering may not completely inhibit
pathogenic dissemination due to potential space
between the lid and the bowl.
• Aerosol transmission may play a major role in the
high transmissibility of COVID-19.
• Ordinary speech has a potential of aerosolizing
respiratory particles.
• There are scientific unknowns relating to the mode
of transmission.
• It is important for experts to collaborate closely and
effectively inform the public of potential infectious
aerosol emission all the time, such as during
coughing and sneezing.

27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

91

Air, Surface Environmental, and
Personal Protective Equipment
Contamination by Severe Acute
Respiratory
Syndrome
Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2)
from a Symptomatic Patient

Journal of the
American Medical
Association

March 2020

D

Level 5: A study on the SARS-CoV-2
contamination and persistence on
environmental surfaces and personal
protective equipment around COVID19 patients in isolation rooms

96

Protection
and
Policies against
(COVID-19)

Le Infezioni in
Medicina

2020

G

97

Prevalence of Multidrug-resistant
Bacteria on Mobile Phone Surface

Journal of Microscopy
and Ultrastructure

2020

G

Level 5: Expert opinion on COVID19 transmission, the stability of the
virus, and relevant measures of
prevention
Level 5: A study on multi-drug
resistant bacteria on mobile phones

98

Degree of Bacterial Contamination
of Mobile Phone and Computer
Keyboard Surfaces and Efficacy of
Disinfection with Chlorhexidine
Digluconate and Triclosan to its
Reduction

International Journal
of Environmental
Research Public
Health

October
2018

G

Level 5: A study on the bacterial
contamination of mobile phone and
computer keyboard surfaces as well
as the subsequent disinfection
efficacy of selected disinfectants

99

Association of Household Foodand Drink-Sharing Practices with
Human
Herpesvirus
8
Seroconversion in a Cohort of
Zambian Children

The Journal of
Infectious Diseases

October
2017

H

Level 2b: An individual cohort study
on the link between household food
and drink sharing behaviour and the
risk of HHV-8 transmission

100

The Clinical Toxicology
Sodium Hypochlorite

Clinical Toxicology
Philadelphia

January
2018

G

Level 5: A review on the clinical
toxicology of sodium hypochlorite

101

Occurrence of Household Mould
and
Efficacy
of
Sodium
Hypochlorite Disinfectant

Journal of
Occupational and
Environmental
Hygiene

2012

G

Level 5: A study on the appearance of
household mould and the disinfecting
capability of sodium hypochlorite on
household surfaces

102

Efficacy of Sodium Hypochlorite
Disinfectant on the Viability and
Allergenic
Properties
of
Household Mould

Journal of Allergy and
Clinical Immunology

February
2004

G

Level 5: A study on the efficacy of
sodium hypochlorite as a disinfectant
for household moulds

Disinfection
SARS-CoV-2

of

• Environmental contamination is a highly potential
route of transmission for coronaviruses, which may
contribute to incidences of nosocomial transmission
of COVID-19 in hospitals.
• Further studies need to be conducted on the mode of
transmission of COVID-19 and the extent of
environmental contamination.
• The coronavirus can remain in airs and surfaces for
sustained periods of time.
• Recommendation of household disinfection is made.
• Nosocomial infection spread is accelerated by
microorganism presence on the mobile phones of
healthcare workers.
• Disinfection practices for phones in hospitals to ease
potential health risks is recommended.
• A high degree of surface contamination is found on
both surfaces.
• Disinfection with simple antibacterial wet wipes to
significantly reduce microbial contamination is
recommended.

•
• There is a temporal association between food and
drink sharing practices and HHV-8 transmission.
Such sharing practices should be minimised to reduce
transmission risks, in particular for households with
large sibling numbers.
• The unintended ingestion of household bleach in
large amounts may pose severe health risks such as
corrosive injury that may be fatal.
• Low concentrations of sodium hypochlorite
significantly reduce mould and related allergens.

• Low concentrations of sodium hypochlorite
significantly reduce mould and related allergens.

28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

95

Transmission
of
Mutans
Streptococci in Mother-Child Pairs

The Indian Journal of
Medical Research

August
2016

H

Level 4: A case series evaluating the
transmission of dental caries (Mutans
Streptococci) from mother to child

104

Aerosol
Emission
and
Superemission during Human
Speech Increase with Voice
Loudness

Scientific Reports

February
2019

I

Level 5: A review on the potential of
aerosol emission and disease
transmission through human speech

105

COVID-19 Transmission through
Asymptomatic Carriers is a
Challenge to Containment

Influenza and Other
Respiratory Viruses

April 2020

I, J

106

Routes of Transmission of
Influenza A H1N1, SARS CoV,
and Norovirus in Air Cabin:
Comparative Analyses

International Journal
of Indoor
Environment and
Health

January
2018

J

Level 5: A review on the transmission
of COVID-19 through asymptomatic
individuals and the associated
challenges
Level 5: A model simulation to assess
the transmission routes of various
infectious viruses

107

Epidemiological Characteristics of
the First 53 Laboratory-confirmed
Cases of COVID-19 Epidemic in
Hong Kong, 13 February 2020

Eurosurveillance

April 2020

I, J

Level 4: A case series on the key
epidemiological parameters of
COVID-19 cases in Hong Kong

108

Towards
Aerodynamically
Equivalent COVID19 1.5m Social
Distancing for Walking and
Running

Journal Pre-Print

January
2020

I

Level 5: A mathematical model to
understand the aerodynamics
associated with virus transmission
and the reasoning behind social
distancing

109

COVID-19 Lockdowns Cause
Global Air Pollution Declines with
Implications for Public Health
Risk

Journal Pre-Print

April 2020

I

Level 5: A study on the declination of
global air pollution as a result of
reduced activity in COVID-19

110

COVID-19 as a Factor Influencing
Air Pollution?

Environmental
Pollution

April 2020

I

Level 5: A review on the impacts of
COVID-19 on air pollution

• A vertical transmission of Mutans Streptococci from
mother to child is concluded.
• Further development of strategies to reduce food and
utensil sharing between mothers and children is
recommended.
• Particle emission during speech has a positive
correlation with speech loudness.
• Respiratory infectious disease transmission is
facilitated by many unknown physiological factors
such as speech.
• Asymptomatic transmission of COVID-19 is
possible between persons within communities.

• Virus control in indoor environments such as
airplanes should take into consideration respiratory
and enteric transmission routes.
• A method to analyse the comparative significance of
different modes of virus transmission is highlighted.
• The risk of transmission may be heightened through
increased social contact
• Physical distancing is a key measure to counteract
the pandemic
• The 1.5-meter social distancing suggestion may not
suffice if the aerodynamics associated with walking
and running is taken into consideration.
• Further work to understand the effect of
aerodynamic factors such as head-wind on droplet
transmissions is necessary.
• Health hazards such as premature deaths and
paediatric asthma associated with air pollution have
been minimised as a result of reduced activity in
COVID-19.
• There are potential health benefits from reduced air
pollutant emissions as a result of decreased
economic activity during the pandemic.
• The emergence of COVID-19 has been followed by
decreased air pollution in areas like China, and
subsequently a reduced number of fatalities as a
result of air pollution.
• There are potential benefits of non-communicable
disease prevention due to air pollution reduction.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

103

Air Pollution and Public Health:
Emerging Hazards and Improved
Understanding of Risk

Environmental
Geochemistry and
Health

June 2015

I

Level 5: A study on air pollution as
an emerging public health hazard

112

Point of View: How Scientists can
Reduce Their Carbon Footprint

eLife

March 2016

J

113

What is the Evidence for Mass
Gatherings
During
Global
Pandemics?

Centre for EvidenceBased Medicine

March 2020

I

Level 5: Expert opinion on the impact
of reduced long-distance air travel on
carbon footprint and the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions
Level 5: A review on the potential
effects of mass gatherings on
infectious diseases

114

Could Influenza Transmission be
Reduced by Restricting Mass
Gatherings?
Towards
an
Evidence-based
Policy
Framework.

Journal of
Epidemiology and
Global Health

August
2011

I

Level 5: A narrative analysis on the
effect of mass gathering restrictions
on influenza transmission risks

115

Mass Gatherings Medicine: Public
Health Issues Arising from Mass
Gathering Religious and Sporting
Events

The Lancet

May 2019

I

Level 5: A review on the association
of mass gathering events with
potential public health hazards

116

Influenza Outbreaks During World
Youth Day 2008 Mass Gathering

Emerging Infectious
Diseases

May 2010

I

Level 5: A review on influenza
outbreaks during the 2008 World
Youth Day mass gathering

117

Measles Virus Spread Initiated at
International Mass Gatherings in
Europe, 2011

Eurosurveillance

September
2014

I

Level 5: Expert analysis on the
associated measles virus spread
during the 2011 mass gatherings

• Air pollution is historically linked to increased
respiratory and cardiovascular mortality.
• Air quality improvement is a significant challenge.
• There is a need for effective policies to ease the
burden of air pollution on health hazards.
• Carbon dioxide emissions are significantly reduced
under decreased long-distance travel amongst the
scientific community.
• Measures involving the restriction and cancellation
of mass gatherings appear important, but relevant
evidence is lacking.
• Active analysis of risks associated to mass
gatherings is encouraged on a case-by-case basis.
• While mass gathering restrictions together with other
social distancing measures may help reduce
transmission, the individual effects of mass gathering
restriction remain inconclusive.
• The duration of the event and crowd density may
significantly influence influenza transmission risks.
•
• Extensive crowd interactions raise burdens on health
systems, especially for large-scale sporting or
religious events.
Further research into public health prevention and
surveillance is recommended.
• Mass gatherings introduce and amplify viruses.
• Isolated viruses may impose unpredictable risks on
communities.
• Authorities and hospitals are responsible for
managing influenza outbreaks with greater
flexibility.
• Transmission chains of the measles virus originated
from mass sporting events.
• Importance of measles virus transmission chain
monitoring and surveillance is reinforced.

KEY 1 – MEASURES
A Engage in Regular Handwashing
F Close Toilet Cover When Flushing

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

111

Wear Face Mask
Avoid Touching the Face
Cover Mouth and Nose when Coughing and Sneezing
Bring Personal Utensils When Dining Out

G
H
I
J

Disinfect Household Surfaces
Avoid Sharing Utensils
Avoid Crowds and Mass Gatherings
Avoid Travel

KEY 2 – OCEBM LEVEL OF EVIDENCE
Therapy / Prevention, Aetiology / Harm
LEVEL
Systematic Review (SR) (with homogeneity) of Randomised Controlled Trials (RCTs)
1A
Individual RCT (with narrow Confidence Interval)
1B
All or none
1C
SR (with homogeneity) of cohort studies
2A
Individual cohort study (including low quality RCT; e.g., <80% follow-up)
2B
“Outcomes” Research; Ecological studies
2C
SR (with homogeneity) of case-control studies
3A
Individual Case-Control Study
3B
Case-series (and poor quality cohort and case-control studies)
4
Expert opinion without explicit critical appraisal, or based on physiology, bench research or “first principles”
5
Others E.g. model simulations, non-human based experiment, in vitro or in situ studies, and statistical reports or dashboards

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

B
C
D
E

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

References
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

Singer DRJ. Health policy and technology challenges in responding to the COVID-19
pandemic. Heal Policy Technol. Published online 2020.
World Health Organisation. Emergency Risk Management for Health - Overview. Emerg
Risk Manag Heal Fact Sheets. 2013;(May Issue):1-6.
WHO. Health Emergency and Disaster Risk Management: Overview.; 2019.
https://www.who.int/hac/techguidance/preparedness/health-emergency-and-disaster-riskmanagement-framework-eng.pdf?ua=1
WHO. Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID-19: implications for IPC
precaution recommendations. Sci Br. 2020;(March):1-3. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001316.5.
Chan EYY, Shaw R. Public Health and Disasters: Health Emergency and Disaster Risk
Management in Asia.; 2020.
Boslaugh S. Encyclopedia of Epidemiology.; 2012. doi:10.4135/9781412953948
Zhang J, Wu S, Xu L. Asymptomatic carriers of COVID-19 as a concern for disease
prevention and control: more testing, more follow-up. Biosci Trends. Published online
2020. doi:10.5582/bst.2020.03069
Cascella M, Rajnik M, Cuomo A, Dulebohn SC, Di Napoli R. Features, Evaluation and
Treatment Coronavirus (COVID-19).; 2020.
WHO. Health promotion and disease prevention through population-based measures,
including action to address social determinants and health inequity. PLoS Negl Trop Dis.
Published online 2013.
Chan EYY. Public Health Humanitarian Responses to Natural Disasters.; 2017.
doi:10.4324/9781315667218
Wisner B, Adams J. 15 . Health promotion and community participation. Environ Heal
Emergencies Disasters a Pract Guid. Published online 2003.
Laaser U, Dorey S, Nurse J. A plea for global health action bottom-up. Front Public Heal.
Published online 2016. doi:10.3389/FPUBH.2016.00241
Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine – Levels of Evidence. The Centre for
Evidence-Based Medicine. Published 2009. https://www.cebm.net/2009/06/oxford-centreevidence-based-medicine-levels-evidence-march-2009/
Huang H, Fan C, Li M, et al. COVID-19: A Call for Physical Scientists and Engineers.
ACS Nano. Published online 2020. doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c02618
van Doremalen N, Bushmaker T, Morris DH, et al. Aerosol and Surface Stability of
SARS-CoV-2 as Compared with SARS-CoV-1. N Engl J Med. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1056/NEJMc2004973
Liu J, Liao X, Qian S, et al. Community Transmission of Severe Acute Respiratory
Syndrome Coronavirus 2, Shenzhen, China, 2020. Emerg Infect Dis. Published online
2020. doi:10.3201/eid2606.200239
Chan JFW, Yuan S, Kok KH, et al. A familial cluster of pneumonia associated with the
2019 novel coronavirus indicating person-to-person transmission: a study of a family
cluster. Lancet. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30154-9
Hui KPY, Chan LLY, Kuok DIT, et al. Tropism and innate host responses of influenza
A/H5N6 virus: An analysis of ex vivo and in vitro cultures of the human respiratory tract.
Eur Respir J. Published online 2017. doi:10.1183/13993003.01710-2016
Lu C wei, Liu X fen, Jia Z fang. 2019-nCoV transmission through the ocular surface must
32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

20.
21.

22.

23.
24.
25.

26.

27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.

not be ignored. Lancet. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30313-5
Bai Y, Yao L, Wei T, et al. Presumed Asymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-19.
JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. Published online 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2565
World Health Organization. What can I do? Emergencies preparedness, response.
Published 2010. Accessed May 17, 2020.
https://www.who.int/csr/disease/swineflu/frequently_asked_questions/what/en/
Sungnak W, Huang N, Bécavin C, et al. SARS-CoV-2 entry factors are highly expressed
in nasal epithelial cells together with innate immune genes. Nat Med. Published online
2020. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0868-6
Lange JH. Use of disposable face masks for public health protection against SARS. J
Epidemiol Community Health. Published online 2004.
Lau JTF, Tsui H, Lau M, Yang X. SARS Transmission, Risk Factors, and Prevention in
Hong Kong. Emerg Infect Dis. Published online 2004. doi:10.3201/eid1004.030628
Lo JYC, Tsang THF, Leung YH, Yeung EYH, Wu T, Lim WWL. Respiratory infections
during SARS Outbreak, Hong Kong, 2003. Emerg Infect Dis. Published online 2005.
doi:10.3201/eid1111.050729
Macias AE, de la Torre A, Moreno-Espinosa S, Leal PE, Bourlon MT, Ruiz-Palacios GM.
Controlling the novel A (H1N1) influenza virus: don’t touch your face! J Hosp Infect.
Published online 2009. doi:10.1016/j.jhin.2009.06.017
Desai AN, Patel P. Stopping the Spread of COVID-19. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc.
Published online 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4269
Centre for Health Protection. Prevention of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19).
Health Information - Communicable Diseases. Published 2020.
https://www.chp.gov.hk/files/pdf/prevention_of_covid_19_en.pdf
CDC. Fact Sheet for SARS Patients and Their Close Contact. Published online 2004.
https://www.cdc.gov/sars/about/fs-closecontact.pdf
Organisation World Health. WHO Guidelines On Hand Hygiene in Health Care. World
Heal Organ. 2009;30(1):270. doi:10.1086/600379
Tschudin-Sutter S, Sepulcri D, Dangel M, Ulrich A, Frei R, Widmer AF. Simplifying the
World Health Organization Protocol: 3 Steps Versus 6 Steps for Performance of Hand
Hygiene in a Cluster-randomized Trial. Clin Infect Dis. Published online 2019.
doi:10.1093/cid/ciy948
Wong JSW, Lee JKF. The Common Missed Handwashing Instances and Areas after 15
Years of Hand-Hygiene Education. J Environ Public Health. Published online 2019.
doi:10.1155/2019/5928924
Freeman MC, Stocks ME, Cumming O, et al. Systematic review: Hygiene and health:
Systematic review of handwashing practices worldwide and update of health effects. Trop
Med Int Heal. Published online 2014. doi:10.1111/tmi.12339
Arias A V., Garcell HG, Ochoa YR, Arias KF, Miranda FR. Assessment of hand hygiene
techniques using the World Health Organization’s six steps. J Infect Public Health.
Published online 2016. doi:10.1016/j.jiph.2015.11.006
Ataee RA, Ataee MH, Mehrabi Tavana A, Salesi M. Bacteriological aspects of hand
washing: A key for health promotion and infections control. Int J Prev Med. Published
online 2017. doi:10.4103/2008-7802.201923
World Health Organization W. Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public.
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public. Published 2020.

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

37.
38.

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.
52.

https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/advice-for-public
CDC. How to Protect Yourself and Others. CDC.gov. Published online 2020.
Lotfinejad N, Peters A, Pittet D. Hand hygiene and the novel coronavirus pandemic: The
role of healthcare workers. J Hosp Infect. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1016/j.jhin.2020.03.017
Tang JW, Liebner TJ, Craven BA, Settles GS. A schlieren optical study of the human
cough with and without wearing masks for aerosol infection control. J R Soc Interface.
Published online 2009. doi:10.1098/rsif.2009.0295.focus
Leung NHL, Chu DKW, Shiu EYC, et al. Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath
and efficacy of face masks. Nat Med. Published online 2020. doi:10.1038/s41591-0200843-2
Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, et al. Early transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China, of novel
coronavirus-infected pneumonia. N Engl J Med. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001316
Chughtai AA, Stelzer-Braid S, Rawlinson W, et al. Contamination by respiratory viruses
on outer surface of medical masks used by hospital healthcare workers. BMC Infect Dis.
Published online 2019. doi:10.1186/s12879-019-4109-x
Chin AWH, Chu JTS, Perera MRA, et al. Stability of SARS-CoV-2 in different
environmental conditions. The Lancet Microbe. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1016/s2666-5247(20)30003-3
Drexler M, (US) I of M. How Infection Works. In: What You Need to Know About
Infectious Disease. ; 2010. doi:10.17226/13006
Kwok YLA, Gralton J, McLaws ML. Face touching: A frequent habit that has
implications for hand hygiene. Am J Infect Control. Published online 2015.
doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2014.10.015
Mueller SM, Martin S, Grunwald M. Self-touch: Contact durations and point of touch of
spontaneous facial self-touches differ depending on cognitive and emotional load. PLoS
One. Published online 2019. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0213677
Liu M, Ou J, Zhang L, et al. Protective effect of hand-washing and good hygienic habits
against seasonal influenza: A case-control study. Med (United States). Published online
2016. doi:10.1097/MD.0000000000003046
Wong VWY, Cowling BJ, Aiello AE. Hand hygiene and risk of influenza virus infections
in the community: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Epidemiol Infect. Published
online 2014. doi:10.1017/S095026881400003X
Curtis V, Cairncross S. Effect of washing hands with soap on diarrhoea risk in the
community: A systematic review. Lancet Infect Dis. Published online 2003.
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(03)00606-6
Ejemot-Nwadiaro RI, Ehiri JE, Arikpo D, Meremikwu MM, Critchley JA. Hand washing
promotion for preventing diarrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. Published online 2015.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004265.pub3
Stevens S. Reducing the risk of infection: Hand washing technique. Community Eye Heal
J. Published online 2008.
Bloomfield SF, Aiello AE, Cookson B, O’Boyle C, Larson EL. The effectiveness of hand
hygiene procedures in reducing the risks of infections in home and community settings
including handwashing and alcohol-based hand sanitizers. Am J Infect Control. Published
online 2007. doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2007.07.001

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

53.

54.

55.
56.
57.

58.
59.

60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.

66.
67.
68.
69.

70.

Pacitto A, Amato F, Salmatonidis A, et al. Effectiveness of commercial face masks to
reduce personal PM exposure. Sci Total Environ. Published online 2019.
doi:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2018.09.109
Hansstein FV, Echegaray F. Exploring motivations behind pollution-mask use in a sample
of young adults in urban China. Global Health. Published online 2018.
doi:10.1186/s12992-018-0441-y
World Health Organization. WHO | Air pollution. World Health Organization.
Zhang W, Qian CN, Zeng YX. Air pollution: A smoking gun for cancer. Chin J Cancer.
Published online 2014. doi:10.5732/cjc.014.10034
Rumana HS, Sharma RC, Beniwal V, Sharma AK. A retrospective approach to assess
human health risks associated with growing air pollution in urbanized area of Thar Desert,
western Rajasthan, India. J Environ Heal Sci Eng. Published online 2014.
doi:10.1186/2052-336X-12-23
Corstjens PLAM, Abrams WR, Malamud D. Saliva and viral infections. Periodontol 2000.
Published online 2016. doi:10.1111/prd.12112
Vishwanath R, Selvabai AP, Shanmugam P. Detection of bacterial pathogens in the hands
of rural school children across different age groups and emphasizing the importance of
hand wash. J Prev Med Hyg. Published online 2019. doi:10.15167/24214248/jpmh2019.60.2.1186
Siddharta A, Pfaender S, Vielle NJ, et al. Virucidal activity of world health organizationrecommended formulations against enveloped viruses, including zika, ebola, and
emerging coronaviruses. J Infect Dis. Published online 2017. doi:10.1093/infdis/jix046
Luby SP, Agboatwalla M, Feikin DR, et al. Effect of handwashing on child health: A
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. Published online 2005. doi:10.1016/S01406736(05)66912-7
Paludan-Müller AS, Boesen K, Klerings I, Jørgensen KJ, Munkholm K. Hand cleaning
with ash for reducing the spread of viral and bacterial infections: a rapid review. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev. Published online 2020. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD013597
Ogunsola FT, Adesiji YO. Comparison of four methods of hand washing in situations of
inadequate water supply. West Afr J Med. Published online 2008.
Davies A, Thompson KA, Giri K, Kafatos G, Walker J, Bennett A. Testing the efficacy of
homemade masks: would they protect in an influenza pandemic? Disaster Med Public
Health Prep. Published online 2013. doi:10.1017/dmp.2013.43
Konda A, Prakash A, Moss GA, Schmoldt M, Grant GD, Guha S. Aerosol Filtration
Efficiency of Common Fabrics Used in Respiratory Cloth Masks. ACS Nano. Published
online 2020. doi:10.1021/acsnano.0c03252
Hadaway A. Handwashing: Clean Hands Save Lives. J Consum Health Internet.
Published online 2020. doi:10.1080/15398285.2019.1710981
Fung ICH, Cairncross S. Effectiveness of handwashing in preventing SARS: A review.
Trop Med Int Heal. Published online 2006. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3156.2006.01734.x
Jensen D. Efficacy of Handwashing Duration and Drying Methods. In: 2012 Annual
Meeting. ; 2012.
Wu J, Xu F, Zhou W, et al. Risk Factors for SARS among Persons without Known
Contact with SARS Patients, Beijing, China. Emerg Infect Dis. Published online 2004.
doi:10.3201/eid1002.030730
Bae S, Kim M-C, Kim JY, et al. Effectiveness of Surgical and Cotton Masks in Blocking

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

71.
72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

SARS–CoV-2: A Controlled Comparison in 4 Patients. Ann Intern Med. Published online
2020. doi:10.7326/m20-1342
Leung CC, Lam TH, Cheng KK. Mass masking in the COVID-19 epidemic: people need
guidance. Lancet. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30520-1
Cheng VCC, Wong S-C, Chuang VWM, et al. The role of community-wide wearing of
face mask for control of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) epidemic due to SARSCoV-2. J Infect. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/j.jinf.2020.04.024
World Health Organization W. WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard.
WHO Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Dashboard. Published 2020.
https://covid19.who.int/explorer
Eikenberry SE, Mancuso M, Iboi E, et al. To mask or not to mask: Modeling the potential
for face mask use by the general public to curtail the COVID-19 pandemic. Infect Dis
Model. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/j.idm.2020.04.001
Kampf G, Todt D, Pfaender S, Steinmann E. Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate
surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents. J Hosp Infect. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1016/j.jhin.2020.01.022
Bourouiba L. Turbulent Gas Clouds and Respiratory Pathogen Emissions: Potential
Implications for Reducing Transmission of COVID-19. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc.
Published online 2020. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.4756
Khurshid Z, Asiri FYI, Al Wadaani H. Human saliva: Non-invasive fluid for detecting
novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV). Int J Environ Res Public Health. Published online 2020.
doi:10.3390/ijerph17072225
To KKW, Tsang OTY, Chik-Yan Yip C, et al. Consistent detection of 2019 novel
coronavirus in saliva. Clin Infect Dis. Published online 2020. doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa149
Coelho AÍM, Milagres RCRM, Martins J de FL, de Azeredo RMC, Santana ÂMC.
Microbiological contamination of environments and surfaces at commercial restaurants.
Cienc e Saude Coletiva. Published online 2010. doi:10.1590/S1413-81232010000700071
Mendes RA, Coelho AÍM, de Azeredo RMC. Contamination by Bacillus cereus on
equipment and utensil surfaces in a food and nutrition service unit. Cienc e Saude Coletiva.
Published online 2011. doi:10.1590/S1413-81232011001000030
Zhang T, Cui X, Zhao X, et al. Detectable SARS-CoV-2 viral RNA in feces of three
children during recovery period of COVID-19 pneumonia. J Med Virol. Published online
2020. doi:10.1002/jmv.25795
Chinese University of Hong Kong. CUHK Finds that the Coronavirus Can Persist in Stool
after Its Clearance in Respiratory Tract Will Conduct Stool Test for People in Quarantine
Camps for Early Identification. 2020. Accessed May 17, 2020.
https://www.med.cuhk.edu.hk/press-releases/cuhk-finds-that-the-coronavirus-can-persistin-stool-after-its-clearance-in-respiratory-tract-will-conduct-stool-test-for-people-inquarantine-camps-for-early-identification
Barker J, Jones M V. The potential spread of infection caused by aerosol contamination of
surfaces after flushing a domestic toilet. J Appl Microbiol. Published online 2005.
doi:10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02610.x
Johnson DL, Mead KR, Lynch RA, Hirst DVL. Lifting the lid on toilet plume aerosol: A
literature review with suggestions for future research. Am J Infect Control. Published
online 2013. doi:10.1016/j.ajic.2012.04.330
Chavis S, Ganesh N. Respiratory Hygiene and Cough Etiquette. In: Infection Control in

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

the Dental Office. ; 2020. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-30085-2_7
86. Purohit C. Bacterial transfer from mouth to different utensils and from utensils to food.
Environ Heal East Africa. Published online 2009:1-46.
87. Brown LM. Helicobacter pylori: Epidemiology and routes of transmission. Epidemiol Rev.
2000;22(2):283-297. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.epirev.a018040
88. Best EL, Sandoe JAT, Wilcox MH. Potential for aerosolization of Clostridium difficile
after flushing toilets: The role of toilet lids in reducing environmental contamination risk.
J Hosp Infect. Published online 2012. doi:10.1016/j.jhin.2011.08.010
89. Manini TM. Mobility decline in old age: A time to intervene. Exerc Sport Sci Rev.
Published online 2013. doi:10.1097/JES.0b013e318279fdc5
90. Ferrucci L, Cooper R, Shardell M, Simonsick EM, Schrack JA, Kuh D. Age-related
change in mobility: Perspectives from life course epidemiology and geroscience. Journals
Gerontol - Ser A Biol Sci Med Sci. Published online 2016. doi:10.1093/gerona/glw043
91. Jambeck JR, Geyer R, Wilcox C, et al. Plastic waste inputs from land into the ocean.
Science (80- ). Published online 2015. doi:10.1126/science.1260352
92. Cheung LTO, Lui CY, Fok L. Microplastic contamination ofwild and captive flathead
grey mullet (Mugil cephalus). Int J Environ Res Public Health. Published online 2018.
doi:10.3390/ijerph15040597
93. City University of Hong Kong. CityU experts: Aerosol droplets from toilet flushing can
rise up to one metre Covering toilet lid may not completely eliminate disease transmission
Toilet bowl must be regularly cleaned. Published 2020. Accessed May 17, 2020.
https://www.cityu.edu.hk/media/press-release/2020/02/13/cityu-experts-aerosol-dropletstoilet-flushing-can-rise-one-metre-covering-toilet-lid-may-not-completely-eliminatedisease-transmission-toilet-bowl-must-be-regularly-cleaned
94. Asadi S, Bouvier N, Wexler AS, Ristenpart WD. The coronavirus pandemic and aerosols:
Does COVID-19 transmit via expiratory particles? Aerosol Sci Technol. Published online
2020. doi:10.1080/02786826.2020.1749229
95. Ong SWX, Tan YK, Chia PY, et al. Air, Surface Environmental, and Personal Protective
Equipment Contamination by Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARSCoV-2) from a Symptomatic Patient. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.3227
96. Fathizadeh H, Maroufi P, Momen-Heravi M, et al. Protection and disinfection policies
against SARS-CoV-2 (COVID-19). Le Infez Med. Published online 2020.
97. Rozario S, Rahman H, Fakhruddin AM, Rabbani K. Prevalence of multidrug-Resistant
bacteria on mobile phone surface. J Microsc Ultrastruct. Published online 2020.
doi:10.4103/jmau.jmau_7_19
98. Koscova J, Hurnikova Z, Pistl J. Degree of bacterial contamination of mobile phone and
computer keyboard surfaces and efficacy of disinfection with chlorhexidine digluconate
and triclosan to its reduction. Int J Environ Res Public Health. Published online 2018.
doi:10.3390/ijerph15102238
99. Crabtree KL, Wojcicki JM, Minhas V, Kankasa C, Mitchell C, Wood C. Association of
Household Food- and Drink-Sharing Practices with Human Herpesvirus 8 Seroconversion
in a Cohort of Zambian Children. J Infect Dis. Published online 2017.
doi:10.1093/infdis/jix399
100. Slaughter RJ, Watts M, Vale JA, Grieve JR, Schep LJ. The clinical toxicology of sodium
hypochlorite. Clin Toxicol. Published online 2019. doi:10.1080/15563650.2018.1543889

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

101. Reynolds KA, Boone S, Bright KR, Gerba CP. Occurrence of household mold and
efficacy of sodium hypochlorite disinfectant. J Occup Environ Hyg. Published online
2012. doi:10.1080/15459624.2012.724650
102. REYNOLDS K. Efficacy of sodium hypochlorite disinfectant on the viability and
allergenic properties of household mold*1. J Allergy Clin Immunol. Published online 2004.
doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2004.01.082
103. Damle SG, Yadav R, Garg S, et al. Transmission of mutans streptococci in mother-child
pairs. Indian J Med Res. Published online 2016. doi:10.4103/0971-5916.195042
104. Asadi S, Wexler AS, Cappa CD, Barreda S, Bouvier NM, Ristenpart WD. Aerosol
emission and superemission during human speech increase with voice loudness. Sci Rep.
Published online 2019. doi:10.1038/s41598-019-38808-z
105. Yu X, Yang R. COVID-19 transmission through asymptomatic carriers is a challenge to
containment. Influenza Other Respi Viruses. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1111/irv.12743
106. Lei H, Li Y, Xiao S, et al. Routes of transmission of influenza A H1N1, SARS CoV, and
norovirus in air cabin: Comparative analyses. Indoor Air. Published online 2018.
doi:10.1111/ina.12445
107. Kwok KO, Wong VWY, Wei WI, Wong SYS, Tang JW-T. Epidemiological
characteristics of the first 53 laboratory-confirmed cases of COVID-19 epidemic in Hong
Kong, 13 February 2020. Eurosurveillance. Published online 2020. doi:10.2807/15607917.es.2020.25.16.2000155
108. Blocken B, Malizia F, van Druenen T, Marchal T. Towards Aerodynamically Equivalent
COVID19 1.5 m Social Distancing for Walking and Running.; 2020.
109. Venter ZS, Aunan K, Chowdhury S, Lelieveld J. COVID-19 lockdowns cause global air
pollution declines with implications for public health risk. medRxiv. Published online
2020. doi:10.1101/2020.04.10.20060673
110. Dutheil F, Baker JS, Navel V. COVID-19 as a factor influencing air pollution? Environ
Pollut. Published online 2020. doi:10.1016/j.envpol.2020.114466
111. Kelly FJ, Fussell JC. Air pollution and public health: emerging hazards and improved
understanding of risk. Environ Geochem Health. Published online 2015.
doi:10.1007/s10653-015-9720-1
112. Nathans J, Sterling P. How scientists can reduce their carbon footprint. Elife. Published
online 2016. doi:10.7554/eLife.15928
113. Nuana D, Brassey J. What is the evidence for mass gatherings during global pandemics?
Oxford Covid-19 Evidence Service.
114. Ishola DA, Phin N. Could influenza transmission be reduced by restricting mass
gatherings? Towards an evidence-based policy framework. J Epidemiol Glob Health.
Published online 2011. doi:10.1016/j.jegh.2011.06.004
115. Memish ZA, Steffen R, White P, et al. Mass gatherings medicine: public health issues
arising from mass gathering religious and sporting events. Lancet. Published online 2019.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(19)30501-X
116. Blyth CC, Foo H, van Hal SJ, et al. Influenza outbreaks during world youth day 2008
mass gathering. Emerg Infect Dis. Published online 2010. doi:10.3201/eid1605.091136
117. Santibanez S, Prosenc K, Lohr D, Pfaff G, Markocic OJ, Mankertz A. Measles virus
spread initiated at international mass gatherings in Europe, 2011. Eurosurveillance.
Published online 2014. doi:10.2807/1560-7917.es2014.19.35.20891

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.29.20116475; this version posted May 29, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

118. World Health Organization. Health Education: Theoretical Concepts, Effective Strategies
and Core Competencies: A Foundation Document to Guide Capacity Development of
Health Educators.; 2012.
119. Omarova A, Tussupova K, Hjorth P, Kalishev M, Dosmagambetova R. Water supply
challenges in rural areas: A case study from central Kazakhstan. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. Published online 2019. doi:10.3390/ijerph16050688
120. Kiyu A, Hardin S. Functioning and utilization of rural water supplies in Sarawak,
Malaysia. Bull World Health Organ. Published online 1992.
121. Busienei PJ, Ogendi GM, Mokua MA. Open Defecation Practices in Lodwar, Kenya: A
Mixed-Methods Research. Environ Health Insights. Published online 2019.
doi:10.1177/1178630219828370
122. Grayson ML, Melvani S, Druce J, et al. Efficacy of Soap and Water and AlcoholBased
HandRub Preparations against Live H1N1 Influenza Virus on the Hands of Human
Volunteers. Clin Infect Dis. Published online 2009. doi:10.1086/595845
123. Tuladhar E, Hazeleger WC, Koopmans M, Zwietering MH, Duizer E, Beumer RR.
Reducing viral contamination from finger pads: Handwashing is more effective than
alcohol-based hand disinfectants. J Hosp Infect. Published online 2015.
doi:10.1016/j.jhin.2015.02.019
124. Chan EY, Cheng CK, Tam G, Huang Z, Lee P. Knowledge, attitudes, and practices of
Hong Kong population towards human A/H7N9 influenza pandemic preparedness, China,
2014 Infectious Disease epidemiology. BMC Public Health. Published online 2015.
doi:10.1186/s12889-015-2245-9
125. Hamamura T, Park JH. Regional differences in pathogen prevalence and defensive
reactions to the “swine flu” outbreak among East Asians and Westerners. Evol Psychol.
Published online 2010. doi:10.1177/147470491000800315
126. Borkow G, Zhou SS, Page T, Gabbay J. A novel anti-influenza copper oxide containing
respiratory face mask. PLoS One. Published online 2010.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011295
127. Kim K-H, Song D-J, Yu M-H, et al. Hazard Classification of Household Chemical
Products in Korea according to the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and
labeling of Chemicals. Ann Occup Environ Med. Published online 2013.
doi:10.1186/2052-4374-25-11
128. The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. CuMask+.
129. Wilder-Smith A, Freedman DO. Isolation, quarantine, social distancing and community
containment: Pivotal role for old-style public health measures in the novel coronavirus
(2019-nCoV) outbreak. J Travel Med. Published online 2020. doi:10.1093/jtm/taaa020
130. Wong SYS, Kin On K, Chan FKL. What can countries learn from Hong Kong’s response
to the COVID-19 pandemic? Can Med Assoc J. Published online 2020.
doi:10.1503/cmaj.200563
131. Chan KH, Yuen KY. COVID-19 epidemic: disentangling the re-emerging controversy
about medical facemasks from an epidemiological perspective. Int J Epidemiol. Published
online 2020. doi:10.1093/ije/dyaa044
132. Servick K. Would everyone wearing face masks help us slow the pandemic? Science (80). Published online 2020. doi:10.1126/science.abb9371
133. Zhang H, Shaw R. Identifying Research Trends and Gaps in the Context of COVID-19.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health. Published online 2020. doi:10.3390/ijerph17103370

39

