medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Dynamics of COVID-19 under social distancing measures
are driven by transmission network structure
Anjalika Nande​1​, Ben Adlam​1​, Justin Sheen​2​, Michael Z. Levy​2​, Alison L. Hill​1,3
1​

Program for Evolutionary Dynamics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, 02138
Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Informatics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104
3​
Institute for Computational Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218

2​

Abstract
In the absence of pharmaceutical interventions, social distancing is being used worldwide to
curb the spread of COVID-19. The impact of these measures has been inconsistent, with some
regions rapidly nearing disease elimination and others seeing delayed peaks or nearly flat
epidemic curves. Here we build a stochastic epidemic model to examine the effects of
COVID-19 clinical progression and transmission network structure on the outcomes of social
distancing interventions. Our simulations show that long delays between the adoption of control
measures and observed declines in cases, hospitalizations, and deaths occur in many
scenarios. We find that the strength of within-household transmission is a critical determinant of
success, governing the timing and size of the epidemic peak, the rate of decline, individual risks
of infection, and the success of partial relaxation measures. The structure of residual external
connections, driven by workforce participation and essential businesses, interacts to determine
outcomes. We suggest limited conditions under which the formation of household “bubbles” can
be safe. These findings can improve future predictions of the timescale and efficacy of
interventions needed to control second waves of COVID-19 as well as other similar outbreaks,
and highlight the need for better quantification and control of household transmission.

Author Summary
Social distancing is the main tool used to control COVID-19, and involves reducing contacts that
could potentially transmit infection with strategies like school closures, work-from-home policies,
mask-wearing, or lockdowns. These measures have been applied around the world, but in
situations where they have suppressed infections, the effect has not been immediate or
consistent. In this study we use a mathematical model to simulate the spread and control of
COVID-19, tracking the different settings of person-to-person contact (e.g. household, school,
workplace) and the different clinical stages an infected individual may pass through before
recovery or death. We find that there are often long delays between when strong social
distancing policies are adopted and when cases, hospitalizations, and deaths peak and begin to

NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

1

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

decline. Moreover, we find that the amount of transmission that happens within versus outside
the household is critical to determining when social distancing can be effective and the delay
until the epidemic peak. We show how the interaction between unmitigated households spread
and residual external connections due to essential activities impacts individual risk and
population infection levels. These results can be used to better predict the impact of future
interventions to control COVID-19 or similar outbreaks

Introduction
In less than five months the novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, the causative agent of COVID-19,
has spread from an initial foci in Wuhan, China to nearly every corner of the globe. At the time
of writing, over 1 million deaths had been reported, which will likely make this emerging virus the
top infectious cause of death this year. Several clinical and epidemiological features of
COVID-19 have contributed to its disastrous effects worldwide. The overlap in symptoms with
many endemic and milder respiratory infections - such as influenza, parainfluenza, respiratory
syncytial virus, and seasonal coronaviruses - make syndromic identification of cases difficult.
The relatively high percentage of infected individuals who require hospitalization or critical care
compared to seasonal respiratory infections has put an unprecedented burden on the
healthcare systems of hard-hit regions. The important role of presymptomatic and asymptomatic
individuals in transmitting infection makes symptom-based isolation less effective . Uncertainty
about the case fatality risk from COVID-19 [1] and misguided comparisons to seasonal influenza
contributed to sluggish responses in many regions, in contrast to previous outbreaks of SARS
and MERS.
In the absence of either a vaccine or antiviral therapy, and given the continuing limitations in
testing capacity in most regions, the main tools implemented worldwide to control the spread of
COVID-19 have been “non-pharmaceutical interventions” including “social distancing”, isolation
of cases, and quarantine of contacts. All of these measures are crude attempts to prevent the
person-to-person contact that drives the transmission of respiratory infections, and have been
used since antiquity in attempts to control outbreaks of plague, smallpox, influenza, and other
infectious diseases [2,3]. Social distancing is a blanket term covering any measure that attempts
to reduce contacts between individuals, without regards to their infection status. Within two
weeks of identifying the original outbreak in Wuhan, a ​cordon sanitaire​ had been implemented
around the entire Hubei province, prohibiting travel in or out of the region and requiring
individuals to remain in their houses except to buy essential supplies. Elsewhere schools and
universities have been closed, international travel has been limited, restaurants and retailers
shuttered, mask-wearing encouraged or required, and stay-at-home orders put in place.
Mathematical models of COVID-19 transmission provided early support for the idea that social
distancing measures could “flatten the curve” and reduce the potential for COVID-19 cases to
overwhelm healthcare resources. An influential report from the Imperial College COVID-19
Modeling Team showed that suppression of the epidemic to levels low enough to avoid overflow

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

of healthcare capacity would require an “intensive intervention package” that combined school
closures, case isolation, and social distancing of the entire population, applied for the majority of
time over two years [4]. Kissler​ et al​ also came to the conclusion that large sustained
reductions in the basic reproductive ratio R​0​ (the average number of secondary infections
generated by an infected individual) would be needed, even after accounting for the potential
role of seasonality in transmission [5]. Many more forecasting models predicted dramatic
decreases in the burden of COVID-19 if interventions were enacted (e.g. [6,7]). Real-time and
retrospective analyses of the growth rate of cases and deaths have suggested that in some
settings the epidemic eventually slowed after the implementation of strong social distancing
measures (e.g. in Wuhan and other Chinese cities [8,9], in Hong Kong [10], across European
countries [11], French regions [12], or some US states [13,14]).
The observed dynamics of COVID-19 outbreaks following social distancing policies have been
inconsistent, unpredictable, and the source of much confusion and debate in the general public
and among epidemiologists. Declines in cases and deaths have not occurred uniformly across
regions and have often only occured after a long delay (​Figure 1​). The economic and social
costs of these measures are immense: unemployment has surged, stock markets have
plummeted, delivery of healthcare for non-COVID-19 conditions has been interrupted [15–19].
Social isolation also brings on or exacerbates mental health conditions. Weeks after
implementing strong interventions, many regions have continued to see increases in daily
diagnoses and deaths. Does this mean the interventions are not working? Since the political will
to sustain strict social distancing measures is waning in many places, it is important to
understand the expected timescale to judge success or failure. If stronger interventions - such
as “shelter-in-place” orders or institutional isolation of mild cases - are needed to slow spread,
when will we know this? What epidemiological and demographic features impact the timescale
for epidemic waning, and how can we better predict the required duration of these measures for
future outbreaks?
Social distancing measures reduce potentially-transmissive contacts occurring in schools,
workplaces, social settings, or casual encounters, but they generally do so by confining
individuals to their households without additional precautions. Thus, we would expect that the
impact of social distancing measures might depend on the relative contribution of
within-household transmission to disease spread, the distribution of household sizes, the
number of households containing at least one infected individual at the time an isolation
measure is enacted, and the amount of residual contact between households for the duration of
the intervention. What do we know about these factors for COVID-19 or respiratory infections
more generally, and how do they interact to determine epidemic dynamics after an intervention?
In this paper we examine the impact of COVID-19 clinical features and transmission network
structure on the timing of the epidemic peak and subsequent dynamics under social distancing
interventions. Using data from large-scale cohort studies, we parameterize a model tracking the
progression of COVID-19 infection through different clinical stages. We combine this with
data-driven transmission networks that explicitly consider household vs external contacts and
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

how they are differentially altered by social distancing measures. We consider various scenarios
for the efficacy of interventions in reducing contacts, heterogeneities in their adoption in different
demographic groups, the relative role of transmission in different settings, and the timing of
partial or complete relaxation of isolation measures. We evaluate both population-level
outcomes as well as determinants of individual risk of infection. Our results show that even
following the implementation of strong social distancing measures, the epidemic peak can occur
weeks to months later, and the decline in cases can be extremely slow. The efficacy of
within-household transmission plays a critical role in the timescale and overall impact of these
measures. These findings provide an impetus for continued adherence to social distancing
measures in the absence of immediate results, can inform planning for hospital capacity, and
suggest that retrospective efforts to assess the efficacy of different intervention policies should
account for these expected delays.

Methods
Modeling the spread and clinical progression of COVID-19
We modified the classic SEIR compartmental epidemiological model to describe the dynamics
of COVID-19 infection (​Supplementary Methods​, ​Figure 2A​). After infection, individuals pass
through an ~ 5 day incubation period before developing asymptomatic or mild infection, which
could include fever and cough or other symptoms. This stage lasts ~ 1 week and individuals are
infectious for this duration. A portion of individuals progress to “severe infection”, which is
typically characterized by pneumonia requiring hospitalization, and we assume averages 6
days. Some individuals progress further to “critical infection”, which requires ICU-level care that
often includes mechanical ventilation, and some of these individuals eventually die (after ~ 8
days of critical care), leading to an ~2% case fatality risk. At each stage, individuals who don’t
progress or die, recover and are assumed to be immune for the duration of the outbreak. The
duration of each stage of infection is assumed to be gamma-distributed with mean and variance
taken from the literature. Infectious individuals can transmit to any susceptible individuals with
whom they are in contact, with a constant rate per time for the duration of their infection. With
our baseline parameters, the doubling time of infection is ~ 4 days, the basic reproductive ratio
R​0​ is ~3, and the serial interval is ~8 days, in agreement with epidemiological studies of
COVID-19. A detailed description of the clinical definitions of different infection stages, the
model behavior, and the model parameters and references are given in the Methods.
We then simulate infection spreading stochastically through a fixed, weighted contact network
with one million nodes. The population size is chosen to represent a typical metropolitan area.
As a baseline scenario, we consider a simple approximately well-mixed population where
anyone can potentially transmit the virus to anyone else in the population. To more accurately
capture human contact patterns, and how they are altered by social distancing measures, we
constructed multi-layer networks describing connections within households and external
connections (​Supplementary Methods​, ​Figure 3A​). Each individual was assigned to a
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

household and connected to everyone in their house. Household size distributions were taken
from the 2010 United States census (average household size ​n​HH~2.5,
full distribution shown in
​
Figure 3B​). External connections were constructed by connecting individuals to people in other
households. The distribution of the number of external connections was taken from detailed
contact surveys that recorded daily interactions amenable to transmission of respiratory
infections (average ​n​EX~7.5,
standard deviation 2.5) [20,21]. As a baseline case we constructed
​
“two-layer” networks assuming these external connections were random, whereas later in the
paper we consider more complex and realistic “five-layer” network structures. While these data
sources inform the ​number​ of contacts, the probability of infection depends both on the number
of unique contacts and on the time spent together and the intensity of the contact, which can be
represented by weights in the network. We hypothesized that household and external contacts
could have different effective weights. For example, individuals may spend 8-10 hours a day
with coworkers or classmates, but only a few waking hours with household members, and so
external contact could have higher weights. Alternatively, individuals may have more intense
physical contact with household members, such as children or spouses with whom co-sleeping
can occur. Since these weights are unknown, we considered a range of scenarios for the
relative weights of household (​w​HH)​ and external (​w​EX)​ contacts, keeping the total transmission
intensity (basic reproductive ratio ​R​0​) constant. These scenarios result in different observed
values of the household “secondary attack rate” (the probability a single index individual infects
any given household contact) (​Figure 3K​). We also hypothesized that when individuals are
isolated in their homes as a result of social distancing measures (e.g. school closures or
work-from-home mandates), they may be spending significantly more time with household
members and thus have a higher transmission rate. We modeled this by allowing the weight of
household contacts to increase during an intervention.
We model the implementation of social distancing measures by reducing the weight of all
external contacts (or all contacts in the well-mixed model) by a fixed % that we term the
“intervention efficacy”. Alternatively, we could randomly remove a fixed % of contacts, but the
results are very similar (see ​Methods​). Our model is similar to other models that have been
used to describe the spread of COVID-19. A unique feature of our model is that it
simultaneously captures the clinical progression of COVID-19 (as opposed to simpler SEIR
models), a reasonable approximation of contact network structure (as opposed to well-mixed
models), and realistic distributions of the durations of states (as opposed to
continuous-transition models which assume exponentially-distributed durations, and lead to
unrealistically long tails in infection after strong interventions). We can simulate infections for the
duration of the epidemic in less than 1 minute on a single GPU, in populations of a million.

Results
Observed COVID-19 dynamics following social distancing interventions

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

To characterize the dynamics of COVID-19 following social distancing measures, we chose five
regions from around the world with large outbreaks: the city of Wuhan, China, the Lombardy
region of Italy, the Community of Madrid in Spain, New York City in the state of New York, USA,
and the county of Los Angeles, California, USA (​Figure 1​). These regions each implemented
strong “lockdown” measures (aka “stay-at-home” or “shelter-in-place” orders) within 3 weeks of
their first reported COVID-19 case and provided data not just on cases and deaths but also on
cases requiring hospitalization and ICU-level care (see ​Supplementary Methods​). In each
setting, there was a long delay between the implementation of social distancing and the peak
incidence of cases (1.5-3 weeks) and deaths (2-3 weeks), or peak occupancy in hospitals and
ICUs (~1 month). The timescale of the eventual decline in cases post-peak was much slower
than the initial increase in cases in all regions, with a half-life between 10 and 24 days in all
regions except Los Angeles, where the outbreak appears to have approximately plateaued but
not yet begun decreasing. The goal of this paper was to understand whether the clinical
progression of COVID-19 and transmission network structure could explain these types of
post-intervention dynamics.

Figure 1: ​COVID-19 dynamics before and after lockdown interventions in five example regions. A) The
city of Wuhan, China (8.5K km​2​, 11.1M ppl), B) The Lombardy region of Italy (23.8K km​2​, 10.1M ppl) C)
The autonomous Community of Madrid in Spain (8.0K km​2​, 6.6M ppl) D) New York City in the state of
New York, USA (1.2K km​2​, 8.2M ppl). E) The county of Los Angeles, California, USA (4.7K km​2​, 9.8M
ppl). “New cases” and “New deaths” are daily numbers of new reports, averaged over a 7 day window
centered on the current day. For Lombardy, New York, and Los Angeles, “Hospitalized” and “ICU” are the
total number of patients currently in regular hospital care or critical care, respectively. In Wuhan, the same
time series are the number of patients currently categorized as having “severe” or “critical” infection (using
the same definitions as in our model). In Madrid, due to data availability, these series are instead the daily
number of new admissions (with 7-day smoothing).

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Prolonged clinical progression of COVID-19 leads to delay until decline in cases and
deaths following an intervention
We first considered the role of the clinical features of COVID-19 alone, in the delay from
implementation to peak infections and deaths, by simulating our model in an unstructured
population. The intervention was implemented when cumulative reported cases were ~200 per
million and deaths ~5 per million (total infected ~1%), mirroring the timing of stay-at-home
orders across major US metropolitan areas (see ​Supplementary Methods​). While we expect
the number of new infections to begin decreasing immediately, newly infected individuals in the
“exposed class (E)” (incubation period) cannot generally be tracked, since they are
asymptomatic and not yet shedding enough virus to test positive. Instead, later stages of
infection are monitored.
We found that under a perfect intervention, we expect ~2 days delay until the peak prevalence
of mild infections, ~9 days for severe infections, and ~15 days for critical infections, suggesting
that the requirements for healthcare capacity may peak quite a bit after implementation (​Figure
2​). In the more realistic scenario where the intervention is imperfect (70% effective), these
timelines are significantly extended, for example to ~7, 17, and 30 days for mild, severe, and
critical infections respectively. In most regions, individuals are reported at the time of diagnosis,
and not tracked until recovery, and so case counts can only be used to track​ incidence​ rates,
not prevalence levels. We consider a region where infections are only counted upon
hospitalization (progression to severe class), and then find that peak incidence of cases occurs
7 and 11 days after an intervention that is 100% or 70% effective. Daily deaths peak much later
: after 18 days (100% effective) to 35 days (70% effective). Under our parameter values, a 50%
intervention “flattens the curve” but does not prevent spread, and incidence cases and deaths
don’t peak until 13 and 15 weeks after the intervention, respectively. The total percent of the
population infected over the course of the whole epidemic was reduced from ~92% to ~0.6%
with a 100% effective intervention, but only to 58%, 3%, or 0.65% with a 50, 70% or 90%
effective intervention.
The exact timings that we report here depend on the assumptions of our model, in particular,
the average duration of each stage of infection (see ​Supplementary Methods​ for details) as
well as on the epidemic growth rate pre-intervention (it takes longer for epidemics that were
growing faster to peak and begin declining). However, the qualitative finding that peaks in case
counts, hospitalizations, and deaths can be significantly delayed beyond when an intervention is
implemented is a general finding for models tracking the natural history of COVID-19. Note that
in our model, we assume that the intervention is adopted the same day it is instituted, whereas
in reality, there may be a further delay until individuals are able to comply with the intervention.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 2: Dynamics pre and post social distancing intervention in well-mixed populations.​ A)
Model of COVID-19 clinical progression and transmission. The model is described in the text and detailed
in the Methods. Social distancing interventions (red X) reduce the rate of transmission and the generation
of new infections. B-E) Simulated time course of the population level prevalence of each clinical stage of
infection under different intervention efficacies. The intervention was implemented on day 40. Solid line is
mean and shaded areas are 5th and 95th percentile. Black dotted line shows the time the intervention
began. F) Time to peak of different infection stages, measured as days post-intervention. The first three
quantities are peak prevalence levels (I​1​, I​2​, I​3​), while the latter two are peak daily incidence values. We
assume that cases are diagnosed only at the time of hospitalization. Daily incidence values were first
smoothed using moving averages over a 7 day window centered on the date of interest. Bars represent
5th and 95th percentile.

The relative contribution of household and external spread influences outcome of
interventions
We hypothesized that the continual spread of COVID-19 within households after the
implementation of social distancing measures could further delay peak cases and deaths, and
increase the number of people infected despite the intervention. Using our network-structured
model (see ​Methods​) for household and external contacts, we simulated the implementation of
interventions of increasing efficacy under different assumptions about the relative weight of the
household vs external contacts. In addition, we examined the impact that the increased time

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

spent with household members (and hence an increased transmission potential) after
stay-at-home policies begin could have on the outcome of an intervention and the timescale for
disease elimination (​Figure 3​).
With our baseline assumption that household and external contacts had equal weight, we
observed that cases declined rapidly under very strong interventions (​Figures 3E and H​), while
imperfect interventions (e.g. ~80%) often resulted in very gradual decreases in cases over many
months (​Figure 3F​). In both scenarios the eventual fraction of the population infected was
dramatically reduced compared to the no intervention case, but these long timescales likely
mean that costly social distancing policies cannot be maintained long enough for suppression of
the epidemic to occur. This slow decline could be further compromised if the risk of
transmission within a household increases under stay-at-home policies (​Figure 3I​). In this case
the epidemic could continue to increase for months post-intervention before eventually
declining, albeit still to a much lower final size than in the absence of interventions.
When the outcome of an intervention was measured by the total fraction of the population
infected over the course of the outbreak, we found that there was a surprisingly complex
relationship between the relative contribution of household and external contacts to
transmission, and the intervention success (​Figures 3G and J​). Keeping the total R​0​ constant,
social distancing interventions are most effective when either external contacts have very high
weights or when they have very low weights. In the former case (high external weight + low
household weight), most of the pre-intervention transmission comes from outside the
household, and the intervention is very effective at blocking this transmission (​Figure 3D,K​). At
the time the intervention is implemented, many households are “seeded” with infections that
originated outside the house (​Figure 3L​), but after the intervention, household transmission
alone is not effective enough to lead to a new generation of infections in most houses, without
seeding from the outside (i.e intervention efficacy <100%). When external contacts have low
weight, the intervention is highly effective but for a different reason. Most transmission is inside
the household and can continue post-intervention (​Figure 3D,K​), but very few households are
seeded with infections (​Figure 3L​). The weak inter-household contacts are further weakened by
the intervention and spillover between households is unlikely, meaning that the infection quickly
burns through susceptibles within a household then dies out.

9

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 3. Dynamics pre and post social distancing interventions in network-structured
populations with household and external transmission.​ A) Multi-layer network of transmission.
Individuals have contacts within their households and with others outside the household. Household and
external contacts may have different weights (e.g. different likelihood of transmission), due to for example
different levels of physical contact or time spent together per day. Social distancing interventions (red X)
remove or decrease the weight of external contacts. B) Distribution of household sizes. C) Distribution of
the # of contacts (degree) within the household and outside the household. D) The contribution of
household and external spread to the total R​0​ value as a function of the relative weight of external
contacts. E)-F) Simulated time course of different clinical stages of infection under an intervention with
efficacy of 100% (E) or 80% (F) at reducing external contacts, when household and external contacts
have equal weight. Black dotted line shows the time the intervention began. G) The role of the relative
importance of household vs external contacts in determining the outcome of the intervention, measured
by the size of the epidemic. Epidemic final size is defined as the percent of the population who have
recovered by day 300. H-J) Same as above but under the scenario where the weight of household
contacts doubles post-intervention (​wHH
​ ​ → 2​wHH
​ ,​ due to increased time spent in house). K) The household
secondary attack rate, defined as the probability of transmission per susceptible household member when
there is a single infected individual in the house, as a function of the relative weight of external contacts.
L) The percent of households which are “seeded” with infection at the time the intervention was
implemented (i.e. have at least one infected individual). In all scenarios the overall infection prevalence at
the time intervention was started was identical.

In the intermediate regime, where household and external contacts have approximately equal
weight, social distancing interventions are less effective, and are very sensitive to imperfect
efficacy. For example, when external contacts have ~1/3 the weight of household ones, each
10

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

type of contact contributes equally to the overall pre-intervention ​R0​ ​ (since there are ~3x the
number of external contacts as household ones). With a 100% effective intervention, the final
epidemic size is ~0.7%, but rises to ~7% with a 80% effective intervention (​Figure 3G)​ . The
​
combination of enough household spread (​R​0HH
>1​) to allow efficient transmission
​
post-intervention within “seeded” households and enough external spread (​R​0​EX​ >1)​ to seed
households before the intervention is implemented to allow post-intervention spillover of
infections to other households is the most difficult case for control. These effects are
exacerbated if we assume household transmission rates (contact weights) can increase
post-intervention (​Figure 3J​). For an 80% effective intervention, the final epidemic size can be
5-10 - fold higher than expected due to increased chance of within-household transmission. We
repeated these simulations with a hierarchically-clustered external layer (see ​Methods​) to check
the robustness of the trends to details in the large-scale clustering of the transmission network
(​Figure S1, S2​). We found the trends to be preserved, with the most noticeable difference being
in the number of houses “seeded” with infection at the time of intervention.
Residual household transmission can further delay time to see the impact of an
intervention
We found that the expected time to peak infections and deaths after a social distancing
intervention was implemented could be increased dramatically when we accounted for
household structure, and was sensitive to the relative importance of household and external
contacts before and after the intervention (​Figure 4​). Under a 100% effective intervention
(​Figure 4A​), the delays to peaks were driven mainly by the clinical progression alone, similar to
the case of the well-mixed population, but were slightly extended due to residual spread
restricted to a single household. In simulations it took around 2 weeks until peak hospitalizations
and 3 weeks to peak critical care cases or daily deaths. However, under an imperfect but still
strong intervention (e.g. 80% effective), the times to peak were much longer and sensitive to the
relative weights of the external and household contacts (​Figure 4B​). Delay to peak cases was
longest in the intermediate regime where external and household contribution to transmission
was approximately equal. For example, when external and household weights were equal, it
took an average of ~ 5.5 weeks to reach peak cases with mild symptoms, ~ 7 weeks until peak
cases hospitalized with severe infection, and ~ 8.5 weeks to the peak of cases in critical care.
The daily incidence of new deaths didn’t peak for ~ 10 weeks.
The delays in time to peak were less extreme if external contacts had very high or very low
weights relative to the weight of household contacts (​Figure 4B​). In the case of very high
external weight, most individuals were infected from contacts outside their household before the
intervention (​Figure 3L​). Household spread is relatively inefficient, and has only a minor
contribution to the baseline ​R0​ value
(​Figure 3D​). In most households, there is no further spread
​
after the intervention is implemented. As a result, the epidemic peaked sooner: peak daily
deaths occured an average of ~ 3 weeks post 100% effective intervention and ~ 5 weeks post
80% effective intervention. On the other hand, when external weight is a lot lower as compared
to the household, only a small fraction of households are seeded with infection by the time
11

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

intervention is started (​Figure 3L​). Intervention is very effective at suppressing external
transmission and so, even though household transmission continues during intervention it can
not spill over between households. This causes the epidemic to peak sooner as susceptibles in
households get infected quickly and then the infection dies out. On average, peak daily deaths
occurred ~ 3 weeks (100% effective intervention) and ~ 4 weeks (80% effective intervention)
post intervention.
These results were exacerbated if we assumed that the importance of household contacts
increased post-intervention (​Figure 4C​), due to increased time spent in close quarters. In that
case, peaks increased to up to ~ 6 months for cases in critical care and daily deaths under an
80% intervention. With higher household weights, the efficacy of spread within a household was
stronger, making new generations of infection post-intervention very likely to occur in
households with at least one case. Then, these household infections are more likely to spill over
into other households, even when most external contacts are eliminated by the intervention.
Together, these effects allow for multiple generations of transmission to persist even after a
strong intervention.

Figure 4: Time to epidemic peak after social distancing interventions depends on the relative roles
of household and external transmission.​ A-C) Time to peak of different infection stages, measured as
days post-intervention. A) Social distancing intervention with 100% efficacy at reducing external contacts
(or all contacts in the case of a well-mixed network). B) Social distancing intervention with 80% efficacy.
C) Social distancing intervention with 80% efficacy, and assuming that household weights double
post-intervention (​w​HH​ → 2​w​HH​, due to increased time spent in the home). The first three quantities are
peak prevalence levels (I​1​, I​2​, I​3​), while the latter two are daily incidence values. We assume that cases
are diagnosed only at the time of hospitalization. Daily incidence values were first smoothed using moving
averages over a 7 day window centered on the date of interest. Bars represent 5th and 95th percentile.
For each clinical stage included (each different color), the lighter-colored data point is the comparison to
the well-mixed population, then the other points are for decreasing contributions of external connections
and increasing role of household transmission.

12

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

In many regions around the world, the effect of social distancing interventions is monitored in
real-time using estimates of the time-dependent reproduction number ​R​t​ (e.g. [22]). We applied
standard procedures for calculating ​Rt​ ​ [23] to the incidence data from our simulations, and using
the time at which ​R​t​ first crossed the threshold of 1 as a measure of the delay, we found that the
trends agreed with those reported for the epidemic peak (​Figure S8​).
Clustered adoption of social distancing measures can further compromise efficacy
Our results so far have assumed that external contacts in the transmission network are random
connections between pairs of individuals in the population, and that a social distancing
intervention results in a uniform random reduction or deletion of these connections. In reality,
human contact networks tend to be highly structured, with groups of individuals with high levels
of interconnectedness and large variation between individuals in total contacts (e.g. [24,25]).
Moreover, we don’t necessarily expect adherence to social distancing measures to be random.
For certain occupations or in certain demographic groups, individuals are less likely to be able
to work-from-home or otherwise reduce contacts outside the home. This can lead to clusters of
individuals among whom contacts remain high despite interventions. We hypothesized that this
clustered adoption of social distancing measures could lead to more residual transmission,
longer times to peak cases and deaths, and longer times to eradicate infection from a given
region.
To examine these effects, we constructed more realistically-structured, age-segregated external
contact networks. The population was divided into four broad age groups: preschool-aged,
school-aged, working-aged and elderly. Based on large-scale contact surveys and other
modeling studies [20,21,25–27], we broke down external contacts into four different layers school, work, social and community (​Figure 5A​). Age groups determined network membership.
School and work layers consisted of connections between individuals only belonging to the
school-aged and working-aged groups respectively. Individuals belonging to all age groups
were part of the social and community layers. We used a variety of data sources to construct the
networks for each layer with degree distributions (both mean and variance in # of contacts) as
well as levels of clustering (aka transitivity, a measure of interconnectedness) that matched data
(see Methods). We assumed that during a social distancing measure, school contacts were
completely removed, and that work, social, and other contacts were reduced by an amount
equal to the intervention efficacy. For work contacts, we also considered the case where edges
weren’t removed at random, but instead, certain “workplaces” were completely dissolved,
whereas others remained (​Figure 5C​, top). With this implementation, the levels of clustering in
the external network was high both before and after an intervention. Other studies have shown
that such clustered adoption of preventive behavior can lead to lower than expected efficacy of
vaccines and mass drug administration [28–31].
We found that when the intervention efficacy was high, most outcomes were surprisingly not
worse under this clustered adoption (​Figure 5​). Time to peak cases, hospitalizations and deaths
13

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

were similar under random deletion of edges (​Figure 5B​,​ ​bottom) and under the correlated
deletion scheme (​Figure 5C​, bottom). However, we found that the time until infection was
eliminated from the population was much longer: increasing from ~ 180 days to ~ 220 days for
population sizes of a million. For a less effective intervention, the difference in outcomes for the
two deletion schemes was more prominent (​Figure S3​). Under clustered adoption, the epidemic
plateaued and took much longer to decline compared to the case of uniform adoption where
decline began immediately. We again performed a sensitivity analysis to check the robustness
of these findings to meso-scale clustering of contacts in the network (see Methods) and found
the trends very similar (​Figure S4​). These findings suggest that targeting demographic groups
like essential workers, where pockets of infection might persist, with more aggressive
cases-based measures and contact tracing may be necessary to reach elimination goals faster.

Figure 5: Clustered vs uniform adoption of social distancing measures. ​A) Schematic of the
multi-layer network created to more realistically capture non-household contacts and how they are altered
by social distancing measures. In each layer, the degree distribution and level of clustering were chosen
to match data. The “community” layer represents any other contact not fitting in the other four categories.
Colors of nodes represent four broad age groups that determine network membership and structure:
preschool-aged (pink), school-aged (purple), working-aged (blue) and elderly (green). B) - C) Simulated
time courses of infection in the presence of social distancing intervention with random (B) vs clustered (C)
adherence to measures. In both cases, all school connections were deleted post-intervention and 85% of
connections were uniformly deleted at random in the social and community layers. In B) 85% of work
connections were uniformly deleted whereas, in C) 85% of workplaces were dissolved, leading to clusters
of disconnected vs connected individuals in the work layer of the network. The effective intervention
efficacy for all layers combined was ~ 88% in both scenarios. Black dotted line shows the time the
intervention began.

Individual risk of infection depends on household size and occupation
So far our evaluations of social distancing measures have focused on population-level
outcomes such as the timing of the epidemic peak and the overall fraction of the population
14

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

infected. However, these findings mask significant heterogeneity in individual risk. From our
simulations, we extracted the individual probability of infection as a function of household size
(​Figure 6A​), as well as in relation to the external contacts maintained after an intervention
(​Figure 6B​). We found that the risk of infection increased dramatically with the household size:
with our baseline parameters, it ranged from <0.2% for individuals living alone to 5.4% for
households of size 7 (​Figure 6A​). These differences occurred independently of the relative
weight of household vs external contacts. The supra-linear increase in risk with household size
is driven by the fact that in larger households there is both more risk of seeding of infection from
outside, as well as more individuals to spread to within the household leading to less chance of
extinction of spread.

Figure 6: Individual risk of infection depends on household size and worker status. ​A) Risk of
infection versus household size in simulations. Risk of infection was calculated after 300 days, with 100%
intervention efficacy. Bar colors represent different relative weights of external contacts (compared to
household contacts). Dotted lines are the population level average infection levels for the same
scenarios. B) Risk of infection versus worker status. A “worker” is defined as someone with an occupation
in which they continue to work outside the home despite social distancing measures. Categories include
being a worker yourself (red), living in a household with at least one other individual who is working
(orange), or having no workers in the house (yellow). As a comparison the population average risk is
shown (dotted line). Interventions that reduce the overall number of people working outside the home by
70% and 85% are shown (in all cases all schools are assumed to be closed and the same percent of
social and community contacts are removed).

We also examined the increased risk faced by “essential workers”, or others who maintained
contacts in their “work” networks during the time social distancing measures were in place
(​Figure 6B​). Under more extreme distancing (~85% reduction in contacts), the relative risk of
infection among workers relative to the population average was 1.6, while for individuals not
working themselves but living in the same household as someone who was working was 1.4. In
comparison, individuals belonging to households with no workers had a relative risk of 0.8. For a
less effective intervention (~70%), these values were 1.6, 1.3 and 0.7 respectively. These

15

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

findings highlight the risk faced by communities in which larger households are common and/or
in which more individuals per household may maintain external connections despite social
distancing measures.
Expanding circles can be safe partial relaxation strategies only under certain conditions
As a step towards relaxing social distancing measures in settings where the incidence of cases
and deaths has stabilized or is declining, some regions are proposing partial relaxation
strategies whereby groups of households merge to form larger “expanded circles” or “bubbles”,
but still minimize external contacts [32,33]. Such multi-household groups could have enormous
social benefits, such as providing childcare relief and improving productivity of working parents,
and reducing the mental health toll of social isolation. To examine when this strategy could be
safely implemented without risking a rebound in cases, we randomly joined households 1, 2, or
3 months after the implementation of a strong social distancing measure (80 or 90% effective)
(​Figure 7​).
We found that these household-merging strategies could be safe only if a few criteria were met.
Firstly, they must be applied in the context of steadily declining cases and deaths (​Figures 7B
and D​). In situations where infection levels had stabilized but were barely declining, forming
bubbles always led to at least some resurgence of cases which returned to or exceeded peak
levels (​Figures 7A and C​). Secondly, household bubble formation should ideally be
accompanied by a further decrease in contacts outside the house (for example, only one
grocery trip per dual-family household instead of two) and a redistribution of the effective
number of household contacts instead of allowing them to double (for example, by spending
time with subsets of the dual household instead of all time as a complete group). Otherwise, a
previously declining epidemic could instead stabilize at a persistent level (​Figure 7B​), or an
otherwise stable epidemic could temporarily resurge (​Figure 7A​). When resurgence occurred it
took 1-4 weeks to see noticeable increases in hospitalizations or deaths. We did not find a
strong dependence on the timing of household bubble formation. As before, we also tested the
robustness of these results to details in the large-scale clustering of the network by using a
metapopulation model that incorporates the notion of “neighborhoods” (see Methods). We found
that the trends were unaffected independent of whether the merged households belonged to the
same (​Figure S6​) or different neighborhoods (​Figure S5​).
Clearly households with less external contacts would be at the least risk from merging with
others, and these policies should only be encouraged in regions where general social distancing
has clearly reduced the prevalence of infection. Similar to our findings in earlier sections, our
predictions are more optimistic when household and external contacts contribute less equally to
transmission.

16

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure 7: Effect of partially relaxing intervention by forming household bubbles. ​Some time after a
social distancing intervention was implemented, each household merges with another random household.
In each resulting two-household “bubble”, all individuals are connected to all other individuals. A)-D)
Simulated time courses of infection before and after social distancing interventions (with 80% vs 90%
intervention efficacy) and after partial-relaxation by household merging. Top row: External contacts of
individuals were unchanged after two households were merged, such that overall number of contacts
increased. Bottom row: External contacts for individuals were reduced after two households were merged,
such that overall number of contacts remained unchanged. In all cases, intervention was started 43 days
after the onset of the epidemic (first black dotted line) and was relaxed after two months (60 days, second
black dotted line).

Discussion
Here we show that the clinical and epidemiological features of COVID-19 interact to produce
long expected delays between the implementation of strong social distancing measures and
when their effects become apparent. Part of the delay is clinical. After infection, individuals
generally pass through an asymptomatic incubation period before entering a phase of mild or
moderate symptoms, and some fraction eventually require hospitalization. Documented deaths
often occur after extended stays in critical care wards. The progression from initial infection to a
reportable case (often at hospital admission) or death can be weeks, and is not interrupted by
current interventions. In addition, social distancing measures reduce transmission outside the
household, but in general they involve isolating individuals within their normal places of
residence and thus do not prevent household transmission. They may in fact amplify it, by
increasing the time household members spend together. If even a small fraction of households
have been “seeded” with infection at the time an intervention is implemented, cases may

17

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

continue to increase for multiple serial intervals. This residual transmission is exacerbated if
weak inter-household connections remain, and especially if there are clusters of individuals less
able to comply with social distancing measures, for example among communities with a high
prevalence of “essential workers”.
Our results show that it is very difficult for interventions which only target transmission outside
the house to effectively control the outbreak. Unless these interventions reduce the vast majority
of contacts, ongoing transmission in households combined with occasional spillover to other
households means that the epidemic may continue to increase long after social distancing
begins and when it turns around, declines in cases can be extremely slow. We found that the
relative contribution of household and external contacts to transmission was a critical
determinant of the overall outcome of social distancing interventions, and the timescale over
which effects could be observed. The number of contacts alone was not very informative for
predicting intervention efficacy. It is not possible to predict the effect of an intervention that
differentially affects household and external contacts by simply estimating the proportional
reduction in the total R​0​. For example, even if the component of R​0 ​from household transmission
alone is greater than 1, infection cannot continue if external connections are substantially
weakened. These findings highlight the need for more studies to determine the contribution of
different types of contacts to transmission.
The role of household transmission in the spread of COVID-19 is variable across settings.
Several studies with detailed contact tracing have attempted to estimate the household
“secondary attack rate”, i.e. the probability of transmission per susceptible household member
when there is a single infected individual in the house. In a large study in Shenzhen, China, Bi
et al estimated this rate at 11% [34]. In Guangzhou, China the estimate was 20% [35], in Beijing
23% [36], in Zhuhai 32% [37], in Seoul, South Korea 16% [38] and in Taiwan, around 5% [39].
In a small German town with a large outbreak due to a superspreading event at a carnival, the
household secondary attack rate was closer to 30% but decreased in larger households [40].
Liu et al considered a collection of known clusters involving close contacts in a single gathering
(not just household, often group meals), and estimated a 35% secondary attack rate. Lewis et al
find a rate of 28% in Wisconsin and Utah [41], while Grijalva et al found 53% in Wisconsin and
Tennessee [42]. A recent review by Madewell et al [43] reports values between 4-44%. Curmei
et al’s review [44] attempts to collect all these estimates and correct them upwards by
accounting for false negative rates of diagnostic tests and for asymptomatic infections, resulting
in estimates between ~10-55%. Given that the average household size is relatively small in all
these countries (~3 or less), these numbers suggest that infection from outside the house must
play a large role in order to explain the overall R​0​ values observed. By varying the relative
weight of household vs external contacts, our study examined a range of household secondary
attack rates from ~10% to ~65%. Many more studies have examined the role of household
transmission in influenza spread, but the results are also equivocal: a review by Tsang et al
found that household secondary attack rates varied from 1-40% across studies [45]. A massive
cohort study from Japan recently shone some light on this complexity; finding that the risk of

18

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

household influenza transmission was highly dependent on household structure and on the
familial relationship between the primary and secondary case [46].
The networks we use to simulate infection were parameterized based on detailed surveys that
used “contact diaries” to track the number of individuals someone interacted with on a randomly
chosen day [20,21]. Contacts were generally defined as physical contact or face-to-face
conversations, and were meant to capture interactions thought to be important for the spread of
droplet-borne respiratory infections like influenza and coronaviruses. Like others, the data we
use from these studies is the average number of daily contacts by age of each individual in the
pair. However, these surveys also collected information on the duration and frequency of
contacts, which could be used in the future to create dynamic networks with a more complex
distribution of weights for each types of contact. One limitation of these sorts of surveys is that
they are “ego-centric”, meaning that they only inform the distribution of the number of contacts
but not the higher order network structure, which can be important for infection spread [26,47].
When we constructed our multi-layer network of external contacts, we used additional
information from other studies to include clustering and modularity in our networks. Another
limitation is that certain contacts that might be relevant to respiratory infections may be missed
in surveys. For example, transmission via contaminated surfaces can occur between individuals
who have never directly interacted, as can transmission in group settings where air is shared
(e.g. in fitness classes [48] or at restaurants [49]).
There are multiple strategies to augment social distancing policies by reducing household
spread, and these have been implemented to different degrees in different countries. We have
not considered such combination policies in our analysis, but other models have explored them
in detail. Household spread would be reduced by earlier diagnoses of cases (as soon as
symptoms begin), proactive testing of exposed household members of cases, options for
out-of-home care for individuals with mild symptoms, or better education and assistance with
individuals caring for sick household members to avoid infection, for example via household use
of face masks and disinfectants [36]. Population-level contact tracing initiatives would obviously
also help [50,51]. Early and influential modeling studies that provided the impetus for
widespread social distancing policies around the world assumed these policies would be
accompanied by case-based interventions that would reduce household spread (e.g. [11,52]),
but these measures have not been uniformly adopted, and are still completely absent in most of
the United States.
Clearly a major determinant of the efficacy of social distancing policies for COVID-19 is the
fractional reduction in contacts, but quantifying this value is difficult. A variety of data sources
can provide some information. Surveys conducted in Wuhan and Shanghai, China comparing
contacts before and after COVID-19 lockdowns found that the average number of daily contacts
was reduced from ~14 in Wuhan and ~20 in Shanghai to ~2, suggesting a more than ~95%
reduction in external contacts [53]. In the US, nationally-representative polls in late March/early
April found that around three quarters of households were self-isolating [54], and estimated a
mean reduction in contacts around 80% [55,56]. Since contact surveys are rare, measures of
19

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

reductions in human mobility have been used as a proxy for contact rate reductions. Google [57]
and Apple [58] provide reports on mobility changes based on user locations sourced from their
smartphone mapping apps, as does Cuebeq [59]. Transit, a live-tracking and
schedule-aggregating application for public transit, reports changes in service use [60], and
SafeGraph publishes changes in foot traffic to different classes of locations [61].
Different measures of mobility often give very different estimates for the efficacy of social
distancing interventions. For example, Klein et al found peak US national average reductions in
both the radius of mobility and the number of events where device users came within near
proximity of each other were about ~50%, whereas communing volume was reduced by ~75%
[62,63]. For the same time period, Apple reported ~50% reductions in direction requests, Transit
reported ~70% reduction in transit use, Google reported ~40% reductions in visits to retail
locations and ~50% in visits to workplaces, and SafeGraph reported an ~80% reduction in foot
traffic at bars but only a 20% reduction to grocery stores. Together these results suggest that
our simulations assuming ~80% reduction in external contacts - which still often only results in
mediocre outcomes - are likely overestimates, if anything, of reality. Wellenius et al attempted to
infer the association between these mobility reductions and the particular social distancing
policies that caused them. Using Google data they concluded that in the US, initial emergency
declarations lead to ~10% reductions, that each additional policy led to another ~20% reduction,
and that “shelter-in-place” orders resulted in additional ~30% reductions [64]. By comparing
mobility changes to estimates of R​0​ from case counts in countries around the world, Bergman et
al estimated that each ~10% reduction in mobility resulted in an ~0.05 reduction in R​0​ [65].
Interestingly, they also found two other results in agreement with our findings here: there was a
long delay between reductions in mobility and reductions in inferred R​0 ​in many regions, and, the
association between reductions in mobility and R​0 ​was weaker in regions who implemented
large scale contact tracing, which likely reduces household transmission.
Our results highlight the importance of residual contacts between households that remain
despite social distancing measures. Many of these contacts are likely to be driven by
individuals who must continue to work. Our own analysis of occupations held by residents of
Philadelphia, USA, population ~1.5 million, suggested that ~30% of workers had jobs that fell
into categories flagged as “essential”. A review by Lan et al of case reports within the first
month of the outbreak in multiple countries found that about 15% of these cases were clearly
work-related, and that even earlier in the outbreak, this was as high as 50% [66]. A report
released by the UK Office of National Statistics found COVID-19 related deaths were much
higher in certain occupational groups (e.g. relative risk of 4.5 for male security guards and 2 for
female care workers), and the UK Biobank found an 8x higher rate of COVID-19 diagnoses in
healthcare workers compared to the general population. Major clusters of infection have
occurred in workplaces as varied as call centers [38] and meatpacking plants [67]. The results
of our modeling show how risks to essential workers spill over to others, increasing the
individual infection risk for workers’ household members and increasing the persistence time of
epidemics in the community at large. Given the limited apparent ability to reduce workplace
contacts and transmission, reducing household transmission or other external contacts may be
20

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

even more important. Another strategy we have not considered is selective restructuring of
contact networks to increase clustering and decrease mean path length, so that transmission
risk is minimized without further reducing contacts [68].
Separate assumptions of our modeling approach could lead our predictions to be slightly
pessimistic. We assume a baseline value of R​0​ ~ 3, whereas some other studies have used
values between 1.9 - 2.7 [4–6,51,69]. There are several reasons why we believe those
estimates are likely a little too low. Firstly, they tended to assume very short serial intervals and
infectious periods, whereas other studies have estimated longer serial intervals [34,70–72],
particularly in the absence of quick isolation of mild cases, which is more likely to reflect what is
going on in most of the world outside of east Asia. Secondly, those estimates often fit to cases
counts that were doubling every 5-6 days, whereas in many settings doubling times were closer
to 3 days early in the outbreak [73–76]. Finally, nearly all previous estimates of R​0​ fit a
randomly-mixing population (with or without age structure), whereas in our highly structured
network population, higher R​0​ values are needed to achieve the same doubling time. R​0​ values
as high as 3-6 have been estimated using rigorous model-fitting methods [9,52,72]. With lower
R​0 ​values, any estimates of the % reduction in external contacts needed to achieve a certain
rate of reduction of cases and deaths would be reduced. However, our main qualitative results
about delays to epidemic peak and the complex role of household transmission hold.
Our results are not sensitive to our assumptions about the fraction of cases that progress to
more serious clinical stages nor to the case fatality risk. However, our estimates for the timing of
peak values do depend on the distribution of delays we assume, for example between symptom
onset and hospitalization, or between ICU admission and death. There is variability in the
estimates of these values across studies (see Supplementary Methods), and these values likely
differ by country, depending on the standard of care and the underlying health of the population.
While we have considered wide intervals for the interpatient variation in these durations, we
have not propagated uncertainty in the distribution of these values. We hope that by providing
our code, researchers who are interested in specific contexts where these values may differ
significantly can explore those scenarios. There are other factors which influence the delay
between implementation of social distancing measures and peak cases and deaths that we
have not included in our model. One factor is reporting delays, which may be especially long for
deaths in certain regions. Another factor is that there could be a delay between implementation
of distancing measures and adoption by a majority of the population.
By including more details of transmission network structure, we are able to examine effects that
would not be apparent in well-mixed epidemic models. However, our population structure is still
simplistic in many senses. For example, we do not explicitly model the dynamics of certain
institutions that have been particularly hard-hit by COVID-19, such as retirement homes and
long-term care facilities [77], prisons [78,79], and homeless shelters [80]. Understanding the
unique contact networks, transmission risks, host susceptibility, and mortality risks in these
populations is an important area for future research. We also do not consider the potential for
hospital-acquired transmission and the role of healthcare workers. Doctors, nurses, and other
21

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

health professionals are reported to make up 5-10% of cases in some regions, and while
increased testing is likely one factor driving these rates, it is clear that there are also unique
risks to this profession.
Strong social distancing measures tend to be economically costly and in most regions of the
world these measures were relaxed to some extent after a few months. In this study we
examined a particular partial relaxation strategy in which households form “bubbles” with other
households. We predicted that widespread adoption of these bubbles should only occur in the
context of decreasing incidence and compensatory reductions in external contacts, in order to
maintain epidemic control. Here we imagine that household bubbles are formed voluntarily for
social reasons, but households may also be forced to “double-up” when one household
experiences eviction from their current residence. The economic recession in the US has led to
massive increases in households at risk of eviction, and separate work using a similar model
found that evictions could result in substantial increases in cases across cities if the current
eviction bans expire [81]. Other modeling studies have explored the impact of generalized
relaxation of social distancing on second-wave scenarios [82–85]. Although not the primary
focus of this work, when we simulate generalized relaxation we find that cases always begin to
increase almost immediately. This is in contrast to the months-long delays between relaxation of
interventions and resurgences of cases observed in many parts of Europe and North America in
summer through fall 2020. In reality other factors not included in our model are likely to play a
role in observed delays post-relaxation, such as a delayed behavioral response to relaxation
policies, shifting age distributions of cases, repeated stochastic re-introductions and extinctions,
and seasonality. We did observe variable delays until deaths and hospitalizations began to
increase again in our simulations, which was explained by the clinical progression times and the
degree of relaxation (Figure S7).
Many studies are now attempting to estimate the degree to which different social distancing
measures (e.g. school closures, stay-at-home policies) reduce the reproductive ratio or the
exponential growth rate of cases. Our results point out a few challenges to these efforts. The
long delays we describe in this paper mean that methods that fit simple growth functions to data
and look for changes in their values may have trouble identifying effects. If there are a series of
interventions that tend to be implemented in similar orders or at similar intervals across settings,
and the goal is to estimate the effect of each (e.g. [11,86]), then the delays we describe here
could lead to falsely attributing the effect of one intervention to another that occurs later (e.g.
see [8] and comments in response). Some of these problems can be avoided by explicit use of
mathematical models that take into account the prolonged clinical progression of COVID-19
(e.g. [12,87]), which is the first order cause of these delays. However, our results show that
transmission network structure also plays an important role. Importantly, the amount by which
overall transmission is reduced by social distancing measures and the delay until effects are
seen depends on the relative role of household vs external transmission, which is unknown and
may be different by setting.

22

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

References
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

Levin AT, Hanage WP, Owusu-Boaitey N, Cochran KB, Walsh SP, Meyerowitz-Katz G.
Assessing the Age Specificity of Infection Fatality Rates for COVID-19: Systematic Review,
Meta-Analysis, and Public Policy Implications. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.07.23.20160895.
doi:10.1101/2020.07.23.20160895
Tognotti E. Lessons from the History of Quarantine, from Plague to Influenza A - Volume
19, Number 2—February 2013 - Emerging Infectious Diseases journal - CDC. [cited 14
Nov 2020]. doi:10.3201/eid1902.120312
Markel H, Lipman HB, Navarro JA, Sloan A, Michalsen JR, Stern AM, et al.
Nonpharmaceutical interventions implemented by US cities during the 1918-1919 influenza
pandemic. JAMA. 2007;298: 644–654. doi:10.1001/jama.298.6.644
Ferguson NM, Laydon D, Nedjati-Gilani G, Imai N, Ainslie K, Baguelin M, et al. Impact of
non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) to reduce COVID- 19 mortality and healthcare
demand. 2020; 20.
Kissler SM, Tedijanto C, Goldstein E, Grad YH, Lipsitch M. Projecting the transmission
dynamics of SARS-CoV-2 through the postpandemic period. Science. 2020 [cited 16 Apr
2020]. doi:10.1126/science.abb5793
Davies NG, Kucharski AJ, Eggo RM, Gimma A, Edmunds WJ, Jombart T, et al. Effects of
non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 cases, deaths, and demand for hospital
services in the UK: a modelling study. Lancet Public Health. 2020;5: e375–e385.
doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30133-X
Pei S, Shaman J. Initial Simulation of SARS-CoV2 Spread and Intervention Effects in the
Continental US. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.03.21.20040303. doi:10.1101/2020.03.21.20040303
Pan A, Liu L, Wang C, Guo H, Hao X, Wang Q, et al. Association of Public Health
Interventions With the Epidemiology of the COVID-19 Outbreak in Wuhan, China. JAMA.
2020 [cited 24 Apr 2020]. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.6130
Tian H, Liu Y, Li Y, Wu C-H, Chen B, Kraemer MUG, et al. An investigation of transmission
control measures during the first 50 days of the COVID-19 epidemic in China. Science.
2020;368: 638–642. doi:10.1126/science.abb6105
Cowling BJ, Ali ST, Ng TWY, Tsang TK, Li JCM, Fong MW, et al. Impact assessment of
non-pharmaceutical interventions against coronavirus disease 2019 and influenza in Hong
Kong: an observational study. Lancet Public Health. 2020;5: e279–e288.
doi:10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30090-6
Flaxman S, Mishra S, Gandy A, Unwin HJT, Mellan TA, Coupland H, et al. Estimating the
effects of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 in Europe. Nature. 2020.
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2405-7
Prague M, Wittkop L, Clairon Q, Dutartre D, Thiebaut R, Hejblum BP. Population modeling
of early COVID-19 epidemic dynamics in French regions and estimation of the lockdown
impact on infection rate. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.04.21.20073536.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.21.20073536
Imperial College COVID-19 Response Team. State-level tracking of COVID-19 in the
United States. Imperial College London; 2020 May. Report No.: 23. Available:
http://www.imperial.ac.uk/medicine/departments/school-public-health/infectious-disease-ep
idemiology/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/covid-19/report-23-united-states/
Pei S, Kandula S, Shaman J. Differential Effects of Intervention Timing on COVID-19
23

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

15.

16.

17.

18.
19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.
25.

26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

Spread in the United States. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.05.15.20103655.
doi:10.1101/2020.05.15.20103655
International Labour Organization. ILO Monitor: COVID-19 and the world of work. Sixth
edition. 2020 Sep. Available:
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/@dgreports/@dcomm/documents/briefingnote/w
cms_755910.pdf
International Monetary Fund. World Economic Outlook Update, June 2020: A Crisis Like
No Other, An Uncertain Recovery. 2020 Jun. Available:
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO/Issues/2020/06/24/WEOUpdateJune2020
Palomino JC, Rodríguez JG, Sebastian R. Wage inequality and poverty effects of
lockdown and social distancing in Europe. Eur Econ Rev. 2020;129: 103564.
doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2020.103564
Parker K, Minkin R, Bennett J. Economic Fallout From COVID-19 Continues To Hit
Lower-Income Americans the Hardest. Pew Research Center; 2020 Sep p. 21.
Barach P, Fisher SD, Adams MJ, Burstein GR, Brophy PD, Kuo DZ, et al. Disruption of
healthcare: Will the COVID pandemic worsen non-COVID outcomes and disease
outbreaks? Prog Pediatr Cardiol. 2020; 101254. doi:10.1016/j.ppedcard.2020.101254
Mossong J, Hens N, Jit M, Beutels P, Auranen K, Mikolajczyk R, et al. Social Contacts and
Mixing Patterns Relevant to the Spread of Infectious Diseases. PLOS Med. 2008;5: e74.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0050074
Prem K, Cook AR, Jit M. Projecting social contact matrices in 152 countries using contact
surveys and demographic data. PLOS Comput Biol. 2017;13: e1005697.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005697
Huisman J, Scire J, Angst D, Neher R, Bonhoeffer S, Stadler T. COVID-19 Re. In: A
method to monitor the effective reproductive number of SARS-CoV-2 [Internet]. 2020 [cited
14 Nov 2020]. Available: https://ibz-shiny.ethz.ch/covid-19-re/
Thompson RN, Stockwin JE, van Gaalen RD, Polonsky JA, Kamvar ZN, Demarsh PA, et
al. Improved inference of time-varying reproduction numbers during infectious disease
outbreaks. Epidemics. 2019;29: 100356. doi:10.1016/j.epidem.2019.100356
Christakis NA, Fowler JH. The spread of obesity in a large social network over 32 years. N
Engl J Med. 2007;357: 370.
Potter GE, Smieszek T, Sailer K. Modeling workplace contact networks: The effects of
organizational structure, architecture, and reporting errors on epidemic predictions. Netw
Sci Camb Univ Press. 2015;3: 298–325. doi:10.1017/nws.2015.22
Liu Q-H, Ajelli M, Aleta A, Merler S, Moreno Y, Vespignani A. Measurability of the epidemic
reproduction number in data-driven contact networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2018;115:
12680–12685. doi:10.1073/pnas.1811115115
Wrzus C, Hänel M, Wagner J, Neyer FJ. Social network changes and life events across
the life span: A meta-analysis. Psychol Bull. 2013;139: 53–80. doi:10.1037/a0028601
Salathé M, Bonhoeffer S. The effect of opinion clustering on disease outbreaks. J R Soc
Interface. 2008;5: 1505.
Kuylen E, Willem L, Broeckhove J, Beutels P, Hens N. Clustering of susceptible individuals
within households can drive measles outbreaks: an individual-based model exploration. Sci
Rep. 2020;10: 19645. doi:10.1038/s41598-020-76746-3
Dyson L, Stolk WA, Farrell SH, Hollingsworth TD. Measuring and modelling the effects of
systematic non-adherence to mass drug administration. Epidemics. 2017;18: 56–66.
doi:10.1016/j.epidem.2017.02.002
Parker DM, Tun STT, White LJ, Kajeechiwa L, Thwin MM, Landier J, et al. Potential herd
24

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.

37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.
45.
46.

47.

protection against Plasmodium falciparum infections conferred by mass antimalarial drug
administrations. eLife. 2019;8: e41023. doi:10.7554/eLife.41023
Roberts M. Coronavirus bubbles: Who is in yours? BBC News. 14 May 2020. Available:
https://www.bbc.com/news/health-52637354. Accessed 1 Jun 2020.
Coletta A. Canadian provinces allow locked-down households to pair up — threatening
hurt feelings all around. Washington Post. 8 May 2020. Available:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/the_americas/coronavirus-canada-new-brunswicknewfoundland-double-bubble/2020/05/07/78e08960-8eec-11ea-9322-a29e75effc93_story.
html. Accessed 1 Jun 2020.
Bi Q, Wu Y, Mei S, Ye C, Zou X, Zhang Z, et al. Epidemiology and transmission of
COVID-19 in 391 cases and 1286 of their close contacts in Shenzhen, China: a
retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30287-5
Jing Q-L, Liu M-J, Zhang Z-B, Fang L-Q, Yuan J, Zhang A-R, et al. Household secondary
attack rate of COVID-19 and associated determinants in Guangzhou, China: a
retrospective cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30471-0
Wang Y, Tian H, Zhang L, Zhang M, Guo D, Wu W, et al. Reduction of secondary
transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in households by face mask use, disinfection and social
distancing: a cohort study in Beijing, China. BMJ Glob Health. 2020;5: e002794.
doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2020-002794
Wu J, Huang Y, Tu C, Bi C, Chen Z, Luo L, et al. Household Transmission of
SARS-CoV-2, Zhuhai, China, 2020. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 [cited 9 Aug 2020].
doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa557
Park SY, Kim Y-M, Yi S, Lee S, Na B-J, Kim CB, et al. Coronavirus Disease Outbreak in
Call Center, South Korea. Emerg Infect Dis J. 2020;26. doi:10.3201/eid2608.201274
Cheng H-Y, Jian S-W, Liu D-P, Ng T-C, Huang W-T, Lin H-H. Contact Tracing Assessment
of COVID-19 Transmission Dynamics in Taiwan and Risk at Different Exposure Periods
Before and After Symptom Onset. JAMA Intern Med. 2020 [cited 28 May 2020].
doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2020.2020
Streeck H, Schulte B, Kuemmerer B, Richter E, Hoeller T, Fuhrmann C, et al. Infection
fatality rate of SARS-CoV-2 infection in a German community with a super-spreading
event. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.05.04.20090076. doi:10.1101/2020.05.04.20090076
Lewis NM, Chu VT, Ye D, Conners EE, Gharpure R, Laws RL, et al. Household
Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. [cited 23 Aug 2020].
doi:10.1093/cid/ciaa1166
Grijalva CG. Transmission of SARS-COV-2 Infections in Households — Tennessee and
Wisconsin, April–September 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69.
doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6944e1
Madewell ZJ, Yang Y, Longini IM, Halloran ME, Dean NE. Household transmission of
SARS-CoV-2: a systematic review and meta-analysis of secondary attack rate. medRxiv.
2020; 2020.07.29.20164590. doi:10.1101/2020.07.29.20164590
Curmei M, Ilyas A, Evans O, Steinhardt J. Estimating Household Transmission of
SARS-CoV-2. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.05.23.20111559. doi:10.1101/2020.05.23.20111559
Tsang TK, Lau LLH, Cauchemez S, Cowling BJ. Household Transmission of Influenza
Virus. Trends Microbiol. 2016;24: 123–133. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.10.012
Endo A, Uchida M, Kucharski AJ, Funk S. Fine-scale family structure shapes influenza
transmission risk in households: Insights from primary schools in Matsumoto city, 2014/15.
PLOS Comput Biol. 2019;15: e1007589. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007589
Miller JC. Spread of infectious disease through clustered populations. J R Soc Interface.
25

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

48.
49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.

65.

2009;6: 1121–1134. doi:10.1098/rsif.2008.0524
Jang S, Han SH, Rhee J-Y. Cluster of Coronavirus Disease Associated with Fitness Dance
Classes, South Korea. Emerg Infect Dis J. 2020;26. doi:10.3201/eid2608.200633
Lu J, Gu J, Li K, Xu C, Su W, Lai Z, et al. COVID-19 Outbreak Associated with Air
Conditioning in Restaurant, Guangzhou, China, 2020. Emerg Infect Dis J. 2020;26.
doi:10.3201/eid2607.200764
Peak CM, Kahn R, Grad YH, Childs LM, Li R, Lipsitch M, et al. Individual quarantine
versus active monitoring of contacts for the mitigation of COVID-19: a modelling study.
Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30361-3
Ferretti L, Wymant C, Kendall M, Zhao L, Nurtay A, Abeler-Dörner L, et al. Quantifying
SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital contact tracing. Science.
2020 [cited 22 Apr 2020]. doi:10.1126/science.abb6936
Sanche S, Lin YT, Xu C, Romero-Severson E, Hengartner N, Ke R. High Contagiousness
and Rapid Spread of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2. Emerg Infect Dis
J. 2020;26. doi:10.3201/eid2607.200282
Zhang J, Litvinova M, Liang Y, Wang Y, Wang W, Zhao S, et al. Changes in contact
patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID-19 outbreak in China. Science. 2020 [cited 28
May 2020]. doi:10.1126/science.abb8001
Gallup, Inc. Three in Four in U.S. Have Self-Isolated in Their Household. In: Gallup.com
[Internet]. 8 Apr 2020 [cited 31 May 2020]. Available:
https://news.gallup.com/poll/307760/three-four-self-isolated-household.aspx
Gallup, Inc. Americans’ Social Contacts During the COVID-19 Pandemic. In: Gallup.com
[Internet]. 21 Apr 2020 [cited 31 May 2020]. Available:
https://news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/308444/americans-social-contacts-during-covid-pan
demic.aspx
Feehan D, Mahmud A. Quantifying population contact patterns in the United States during
the COVID-19 pandemic. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.04.13.20064014.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.13.20064014
COVID-19 Community Mobility Report. In: Google [Internet]. [cited 1 Jun 2020]. Available:
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility?hl=en
COVID‑19 - Mobility Trends Reports. In: Apple [Internet]. [cited 1 Jun 2020]. Available:
https://www.apple.com/covid19/mobility
Kunkel C. COVID-19 Mobility Insights. In: Cuebiq [Internet]. [cited 14 Apr 2020]. Available:
https://www.cuebiq.com/visitation-insights-covid19/
How coronavirus is disrupting public transit. In: Transit App [Internet]. [cited 1 Jun 2020].
Available: https://transitapp.com/coronavirus
U.S. Consumer Activity During COVID-19 Pandemic. In: SafeGraph [Internet]. [cited 1 Jun
2020]. Available: https://safegraph.com/dashboard/
Klein B, LaRock T, McCabe S, Torres L, Privitera F, Lake B, et al. Reshaping a nation:
Mobility, commuting, and contact patterns during the COVID-19 outbreak. : 17.
COVID-19 Mobility United States. In: Gleam Project [Internet]. [cited 1 Jun 2020].
Available: https://covid19.gleamproject.org/mobility
Wellenius GA, Vispute S, Espinosa V, Fabrikant A, Tsai TC, Hennessy J, et al. Impacts of
State-Level Policies on Social Distancing in the United States Using Aggregated Mobility
Data during the COVID-19 Pandemic. ArXiv200410172 Q-Bio. 2020 [cited 23 May 2020].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.10172
Bergman NK, Fishman R. Mobility Levels and Covid-19 Transmission Rates. medRxiv.
2020; 2020.05.06.20093039. doi:10.1101/2020.05.06.20093039
26

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

66. Lan F-Y, Wei C-F, Hsu Y-T, Christiani DC, Kales SN. Work-related Covid-19 transmission.
medRxiv. 2020; 2020.04.08.20058297. doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20058297
67. Dyal JW. COVID-19 Among Workers in Meat and Poultry Processing Facilities ― 19
States, April 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2020;69.
doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm6918e3
68. Block P, Hoffman M, Raabe IJ, Dowd JB, Rahal C, Kashyap R, et al. Social network-based
distancing strategies to flatten the COVID 19 curve in a post-lockdown world.
ArXiv200407052 Phys Q-Bio Stat. 2020 [cited 20 May 2020]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.07052
69. Wu JT, Leung K, Bushman M, Kishore N, Niehus R, de Salazar PM, et al. Estimating
clinical severity of COVID-19 from the transmission dynamics in Wuhan, China. Nat Med.
2020; 1–5. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0822-7
70. Lavezzo E, Franchin E, Ciavarella C, Cuomo-Dannenburg G, Barzon L, Del Vecchio C, et
al. Suppression of a SARS-CoV-2 outbreak in the Italian municipality of Vo’. Nature. 2020.
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2488-1
71. Li Q, Guan X, Wu P, Wang X, Zhou L, Tong Y, et al. Early Transmission Dynamics in
Wuhan, China, of Novel Coronavirus–Infected Pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 2020;0: null.
doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2001316
72. Ali ST, Wang L, Lau EHY, Xu X-K, Du Z, Wu Y, et al. Serial interval of SARS-CoV-2 was
shortened over time by nonpharmaceutical interventions. Science. 2020 [cited 9 Aug
2020]. doi:10.1126/science.abc9004
73. Ke R, Sanche S, Romero-Severson E, Hengartner N. Fast spread of COVID-19 in Europe
and the US suggests the necessity of early, strong and comprehensive interventions.
medRxiv. 2020; 2020.04.04.20050427. doi:10.1101/2020.04.04.20050427
74. Abbott S. Temporal variation in transmission during the COVID-19 outbreak. In: CMMID
Repository [Internet]. 2 Mar 2020 [cited 9 Mar 2020]. Available:
https://cmmid.github.io/topics/covid19/current-patterns-transmission/global-time-varying-tra
nsmission.html
75. Romero-Severson EO, Hengartner N, Meadors G, Ke R. Change in global transmission
rates of COVID-19 through May 6 2020. PLOS ONE. 2020;15: e0236776.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0236776
76. Hsiang S, Allen D, Annan-Phan S, Bell K, Bolliger I, Chong T, et al. The effect of
large-scale anti-contagion policies on the COVID-19 pandemic. Nature. 2020;584:
262–267. doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2404-8
77. Gmehlin CG, Munoz-Price LS. Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in long-term care
facilities: A review of epidemiology, clinical presentations, and containment interventions.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol. 2020; 1–6. doi:10.1017/ice.2020.1292
78. The Marshall Project. A State-by-State Look at Coronavirus in Prisons. The Marshall
Project; 2020 Oct. Available:
https://www.themarshallproject.org/2020/05/01/a-state-by-state-look-at-coronavirus-in-pris
ons
79. Lofgren E, Lum K, Horowitz A, Madubuonwu B, Fefferman N. The Epidemiological
Implications of Incarceration Dynamics in Jails for Community, Corrections Officer, and
Incarcerated Population Risks from COVID-19. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.04.08.20058842.
doi:10.1101/2020.04.08.20058842
80. Lewer D, Braithwaite I, Bullock M, Eyre MT, White PJ, Aldridge RW, et al. COVID-19
among people experiencing homelessness in England: a modelling study. Lancet Respir
Med. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30396-9
27

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

81. Sheen J, Nande A, Walters EL, Adlam B, Gheorghe A, Shinnick J, et al. The effect of
eviction moratoriums on the transmission of SARS-CoV-2. medRxiv. 2020;
2020.10.27.20220897. doi:10.1101/2020.10.27.20220897
82. Aleta A, Martín-Corral D, Pastore y Piontti A, Ajelli M, Litvinova M, Chinazzi M, et al.
Modelling the impact of testing, contact tracing and household quarantine on second
waves of COVID-19. Nat Hum Behav. 2020; 1–8. doi:10.1038/s41562-020-0931-9
83. Panovska-Griffiths J, Kerr CC, Stuart RM, Mistry D, Klein DJ, Viner RM, et al. Determining
the optimal strategy for reopening schools, the impact of test and trace interventions, and
the risk of occurrence of a second COVID-19 epidemic wave in the UK: a modelling study.
Lancet Child Adolesc Health. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S2352-4642(20)30250-9
84. Leung K, Wu JT, Liu D, Leung GM. First-wave COVID-19 transmissibility and severity in
China outside Hubei after control measures, and second-wave scenario planning: a
modelling impact assessment. The Lancet. 2020;395: 1382–1393.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30746-7
85. Reiner RC, Barber RM, Collins JK, Zheng P, Adolph C, Albright J, et al. Modeling
COVID-19 scenarios for the United States. Nat Med. 2020; 1–12.
doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1132-9
86. Banholzer N, Weenen E van, Kratzwald B, Seeliger A, Tschernutter D, Bottrighi P, et al.
Impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions on documented cases of COVID-19. medRxiv.
2020; 2020.04.16.20062141. doi:10.1101/2020.04.16.20062141
87. Kohanovski I, Obolski U, Ram Y. Inferring the effective start dates of non-pharmaceutical
interventions during COVID-19 outbreaks. medRxiv. 2020; 2020.05.24.20092817.
doi:10.1101/2020.05.24.20092817
88. Wu Z, McGoogan JM. Characteristics of and Important Lessons From the Coronavirus
Disease 2019 (COVID-19) Outbreak in China: Summary of a Report of 72 314 Cases From
the Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. JAMA. 2020 [cited 26 Feb 2020].
doi:10.1001/jama.2020.2648
89. Gao Z, Xu Y, Sun C, Wang X, Guo Y, Qiu S, et al. A systematic review of asymptomatic
infections with COVID-19. J Microbiol Immunol Infect. 2020 [cited 3 Jun 2020].
doi:10.1016/j.jmii.2020.05.001
90. Lauer SA, Grantz KH, Bi Q, Jones FK, Zheng Q, Meredith HR, et al. The Incubation Period
of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) From Publicly Reported Confirmed Cases:
Estimation and Application. Ann Intern Med. 2020;172: 577. doi:10.7326/M20-0504
91. Tindale LC, Stockdale JE, Coombe M, Garlock ES, Lau WYV, Saraswat M, et al. Evidence
for transmission of COVID-19 prior to symptom onset. Lipsitch M, editor. eLife. 2020;9:
e57149. doi:10.7554/eLife.57149
92. Zhou F, Yu T, Du R, Fan G, Liu Y, Liu Z, et al. Clinical course and risk factors for mortality
of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China: a retrospective cohort study. The
Lancet. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3
93. Yang X, Yu Y, Xu J, Shu H, Xia J, Liu H, et al. Clinical course and outcomes of critically ill
patients with SARS-CoV-2 pneumonia in Wuhan, China: a single-centered, retrospective,
observational study. Lancet Respir Med. 2020;0. doi:10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30079-5
94. Wölfel R, Corman VM, Guggemos W, Seilmaier M, Zange S, Müller MA, et al. Virological
assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature. 2020;581: 465–469.
doi:10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
95. Grasselli G, Zangrillo A, Zanella A, Antonelli M, Cabrini L, Castelli A, et al. Baseline
Characteristics and Outcomes of 1591 Patients Infected With SARS-CoV-2 Admitted to
ICUs of the Lombardy Region, Italy. JAMA. 2020;323: 1574–1581.
28

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

96.

97.
98.

99.

100.

101.

102.
103.

104.

doi:10.1001/jama.2020.5394
Verity R, Okell LC, Dorigatti I, Winskill P, Whittaker C, Imai N, et al. Estimates of the
severity of coronavirus disease 2019: a model-based analysis. Lancet Infect Dis. 2020;0.
doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30243-7
Guan W, Ni Z, Hu Y, Liang W, Ou C, He J, et al. Clinical Characteristics of Coronavirus
Disease 2019 in China. N Engl J Med. 2020;0: null. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2002032
Lewnard JA, Liu VX, Jackson ML, Schmidt MA, Jewell BL, Flores JP, et al. Incidence,
clinical outcomes, and transmission dynamics of severe coronavirus disease 2019 in
California and Washington: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2020;369.
doi:10.1136/bmj.m1923
Argenziano MG, Bruce SL, Slater CL, Tiao JR, Baldwin MR, Barr RG, et al.
Characterization and clinical course of 1000 patients with coronavirus disease 2019 in New
York: retrospective case series. BMJ. 2020;369: m1996. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1996
He X, Lau EHY, Wu P, Deng X, Wang J, Hao X, et al. Temporal dynamics in viral shedding
and transmissibility of COVID-19. Nat Med. 2020;26: 672–675.
doi:10.1038/s41591-020-0869-5
Watts DJ, Muhamad R, Medina DC, Dodds PS. Multiscale, resurgent epidemics in a
hierarchical metapopulation model. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005;102: 11157–11162.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0501226102
Rader B, Scarpino SV, Nande A, Hill AL, Adlam B, Reiner RC, et al. Crowding and the
shape of COVID-19 epidemics. Nat Med. 2020; 1–6. doi:10.1038/s41591-020-1104-0
Ball F, Britton T, Sirl D. A network with tunable clustering, degree correlation and degree
distribution, and an epidemic thereon. J Math Biol. 2012;66: 979–1019.
doi:10.1007/s00285-012-0609-7
Li R, Rivers C, Tan Q, Murray MB, Toner E, Lipsitch M. Estimated Demand for US Hospital
Inpatient and Intensive Care Unit Beds for Patients With COVID-19 Based on
Comparisons With Wuhan and Guangzhou, China. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3:
e208297–e208297. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.8297

Acknowledgments: ​This work was supported by grants from the US National Institutes of
Health DP5OD019851 (ALH), R01AI146129 (MZL), and R01AI101229 (MZL). We thank
Julianna Shinnick for help in data collection and attendees at the HIV Dynamics & Evolution
Conference for helpful feedback.

29

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Methods
Model of COVID-19 spread and clinical progression
We use a compartmental epidemiological model, based on the classic SEIR model, to describe the
spread and clinical progression of COVID-19 (​Figure 2​). The basic model structure is inspired by
many studies on the natural clinical progression of COVID-19 infection. Infected individuals do not
immediately develop severe symptoms, but instead pass through milder phases of infection first. For
a nice summary, see Wu and McGoogan [88]. Susceptible (S) individuals who become infected start
out in an exposed class E, where they are asymptomatic and do not transmit infection. Progression
from the exposed stage to the infected stage I, where the individual is symptomatic and infectious,
occurs after an average duration of ​TE​ ​days. The clinical descriptions of the different stages of
infection are given below. Infected individuals begin with ​mild​ infection (I​1​) that lasts on average ​T1​
days, from which a fraction (​f1​​ )progress to ​severe​ infection (I​2​) as opposed to recovering. Severe
infection progresses to a ​critical​ stage (I​3​) in a portion (e​f2​ ​) of individuals and resolves in the rest,
after an average duration ​T​2​. A fraction (​f​3​) of individuals with critical infection die, while the
remainder recover. The average duration of critical infection is ​T3​ ​ ​days. Recovered individuals are
tracked by class R and are assumed to be protected from re-infection for the duration of the
epidemic. Individuals may transmit the infection at any stage, though with different rates. The
transmission rate in stage ​i​, β​i​.
The clinical definitions of the infection stages are as follows
●

●

●

Mild infection - These individuals have symptoms like fever and cough and may have mild
pneumonia. Hospitalization is not required (though in many countries such individuals are
also hospitalized)
Severe infection - These individuals have more severe pneumonia that leads to dyspnea,
respiratory frequency <30/min, blood oxygen saturation <93%, partial pressure of arterial
oxygen to fraction of inspired oxygen ratio <300, and/or lung infiltrates >50% within 24 to 48
hours. Hospitalization and supplemental oxygen are generally required.
Critical infection - These individuals experience respiratory failure, septic shock, and/or
multiple organ dysfunction or failure. Treatment in an ICU, often with mechanical ventilation,
is required.

A summary of the variable definitions:
● S: Susceptible individuals
● E: Exposed individuals - infected but not yet infectious or symptomatic
● I​i​: Infected individuals in severity class ​i​. Severity increases with ​i​ and we assume individuals
must pass through all previous classes
○ I​1​: Mild infection
○ I​2​: Severe infection
○ I​3​: Critical infection
● R: Individuals who have recovered from disease and are now immune
● D: Dead individuals

30

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

●

N=S+E+I​1​+I​2​+I​3​+R+D Total population size (constant)

To describe the average time course in a large, well-mixed population, the model can be
represented by the following set of differential equations:

The basic reproductive ratio R​0​ of this model is:

R​0​ =
​ ​ N β​1 ​T​1​ ​+​ N f​1 ​β​2 ​T​2​ ​+​ N f​2 ​β​3 ​T​3
Our model makes several assumptions with regards to the clinical and epidemiological dynamics of
COVID-19. We do not explicitly track asymptomatic infections, which have been estimated to be
around 20% of infections [34] (but estimates range from 1% to 50%, reviewed in [89]). However, in
our model asymptomatic infections can be considered to be part of the “mild infections”
compartment. There is significant evidence that asymptomatic individuals are infectious, and with
this assumption their infectiousness would be equal to those with mild infection. For simplicity we
assume that critical infection always occurs after passing through a stage of severe infection, while
in reality there appears to be some individuals who progress directly from mild to critical infection.
Similarly, we assume that only individuals who have progressed to critical infection die, though there
is now some evidence that death can occur unexpectedly in individuals who are not already
hospitalized. We do not think that any of these assumptions affect the main conclusions of our
paper, which does not focus on hospital resource use or morbidity/mortality estimates. In general our
model allows for individuals at all stages of infection to transmit to others. However, for this paper we
have assumed that only individuals with mild infection can transmit. We think it’s likely that an
individual is most infectious during this stage, when they would still be in the community and feeling
well enough to interact with others. We thus ignore transmission from hospitalized patients to their
healthcare providers (​β​2​=​β3​​ =0). We make the standard SEIR model assumption that the time until an
infected individual experiences symptoms is the same as the time until they become infectious,
whereas it has now been shown for COVID-19 that there is significant transmission risk starting ~1
day before symptom onset. While this disease feature is important for studies that examine symptom
based case detection/isolation, for simplicity we have ignored this feature in our model, which
doesn’t focus on these issues. The serial interval produced by our model parameters agrees with
observed values, and so we believe our timescales for infections spread are realistic. We do not
explicitly consider age-dependent rates of infection or progression to more serious stages.

31

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

The differential equation version of our model is available as an online simulation tool in which users
can explore the effects of these assumptions of model structure as well as parameter values on
model outputs​: ​https://alhill.shinyapps.io/COVID19seir/

Stochastic network implementation
To avoid the assumptions inherent in formulating an epidemiological model using standard
differential equations (e.g. assuming a randomly-mixing population, deterministic dynamics, and
exponentially-distributed durations of each infection stage), we implement the model as a
stochastic process simulated on a transmission network.
We believe that this implementation is important for our research questions, for a few main
reasons. Firstly, respiratory infections are spread by close physical contact that occurs in highly
structured contact networks, which impact the growth rate of outbreaks, the relationship
between an individual’s inherent infectiousness and the basic reproductive ratio R​0​, the
variability in secondary infections between individuals, and the effects of control measures on
spread. Secondly, typical differential equation models implicitly assume that the durations of
infection stages are extremely long-tailed, which can lead to unrealistic conclusions about the
timescale of the epidemic response to control measures as well as to the relationship between
the early growth rate, serial interval or generation time, and R​0​. Finally, we believe it is important
to model the uncertainty in epidemic trajectories that arises from the inherent stochasticity of
transmission.
In our stochastic formulation, we assumed that the duration of each stage of infection was
gamma-distributed, with both the mean and variance taken from the literature. Individuals were
connected with a fixed, weighted contact network that determined the potential paths of
transmission. The network is represented as a sparse matrix to save memory (a list of the index
of each node in an edge, along with the edge weight). The model was implemented with a
discrete time stochastic process that tracked the state of each individual and the time since they
first entered that state. The model was implemented in Python using JAX, a framework for
generating high-performance code optimized to run on GPUs. Our code was entirely run in the
cloud on Google Colab. The code is available at :
https://github.com/alsnhll/COVID19NetworkSimulations
Model parameters
We estimated the distribution of the duration of each stage of infection from the literature. For
the incubation period, we used an estimate of 5 ± 4 days from [34,90], which is consistent with
most other estimates. The duration of mild infection, which we assume is roughly equal to the
infectious period, can be estimated from a few different sources: ​a) the duration of mild
symptoms, b) the time from symptom onset to hospitalization (e.g. time to progress to severe stage),
or c) the duration of viral shedding via sputum or throat swabs, d) inferred from both the incubation
period and the “serial interval” between symptom onset in an index case and a secondary case they

32

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

infect. Considering (d), we took an estimate of the serial interval from Bi et al ​[34]​, who​ used a large
cohort of transmission pairs and reported values separately for situations where the index case
was not rapidly isolated or hospitalized during mild infection. Similar values were found in
[69–72]. Some other studies have estimated smaller values (e.g. [51]), likely due to rapid
isolation of symptomatic cases in Asia [70]. This value implies an infectious period of 6 ± 2 days.

This is relatively consistent with estimates of the time from symptom onset to hospitalization
[52,91–93], and is roughly equivalent to the time at which average viral loads drop 4-5 orders of
magnitude from peak values [94].
The duration of severe infection in our model is equivalent to the time from hospital admission to
recovery for individuals who did not progress to the critical stage, or the time from hospital
admission to ICU admission (since critical cases require ICU-level care). Since it is hard to find
direct estimates of this duration, we instead used estimates of the total time from symptom
onset to ICU-admission (e.g. combined length of mild + severe infection) [92,93], and subtracted
the inferred duration of mild infection. This led to an estimate of 6 ± 4.5 days. We estimated the
duration of critical infection (the length of ICU stay) directly from cohort studies to be 8 +/- 6
days [92,95]. With these estimates, we verified that the total time from symptom onset to
death/recovery agreed with data (~20 ± 10 days) [69,92,96]. Note that we assumed that the
duration of each stage of infection was independent of the previous stage and was also
independent of the eventual outcome.
In each stage of infection, an individual can either progress to the next stage or recover, and the
probability of each was also estimated from the literature [8,88,97]. These large clinical cohort
studies estimated that ~ 20% of infections required hospitalization (i.e. progress to severe
stage), ~5% require ICU care (i.e. progress to critical stage), and an overall case fatality risk of
2%. This leads to probabilities of progression of 0.2 from I​1​ ​→​ I​2​, 0.25 from I​2​→​ I​3​, and 0.4 from I​3
→​ D. However, there is significant uncertainty in these values. More recent estimates suggest
the rates of progression to more serious stages of infection might be lower after correcting for
asymptomatic/undiagnosed cases in China [96], but in contrast, recent studies from the US
suggest higher rates of ICU admission and death among hospitalized patients compared to in
Asia [98,99]. Since the results of our paper focus on the timing of the peaks of different infection
stages but not on the prevalence at these peaks, they are not sensitive to these assumptions.
We chose a value of the transmission rate ​β ​such that the early epidemic doubling time was ~ 4
days (growth rate r = 0.17/day) and the basic reproductive rate R​0​ = 3. While some studies have
estimated R​0​ values as low as 2, these have generally used estimates based only on the serial
interval which are mathematically problematic, used short estimates of the serial interval that are
influenced by rapid case isolation in Asia as opposed to longer values found in other studies
that correct for this, and fit to longer doubling times that what was observed early in the
outbreak in the US and Europe. For a simple unweighted network, we estimate ​β using the
formula ​R0​ ​= ​β​T1​ ​ ​(​n -​ 1) where, ​n​ is the mean degree of the network and​ T​1​ ​is the average
duration of mild infections. This relationship is modified for the weighted two-layer network,

33

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

R0 = β T 1 (wHH nHH + wEX nEX − (wHH f HH + wEX f EX ))
where, f HH =

wHH nHH
wHH nHH +wEX nEX

and f EX = 1 − f HH with the weight and mean degree of the household

(external) layer given by wHH ( wEX ) and nHH ( nEX ). As this equation suggests, the rate of
infection is constant per time per contact for a given contact type, and hence would be
described as “density-dependent” transmission.
The time at which we implemented interventions in our simulations was chosen to occur at a
realistic time in the epidemic relative to real responses to COVID-19. To estimate this time for a
typical US metro area, we downloaded case and death counts for each US county and
aggregated them into the top 50 largest metro areas. Then we collected the time that
stay-at-home orders were implemented in each of these regions, and looked at the median
cumulative case and death counts by that day, and chose our intervention time to match those
values. We found that there were on average around 200 cases per million inhabitants at time of
stay at home intervention (range [30,1000]), and ~5 [0-20] deaths per million. We assumed that
reported “cases” are hospitalized individuals only (cumulative I​2​). These values were recreated
in our simulation in well-mixed populations on Day 40, which we used as the intervention time.
At this time, ~0.5% of the population had ever been infected (including E, I​1​, I​2​, I​3​, R, and D).
Since the median day shelter-in-place orders were implemented across these metros was April
1, Day 0 in our simulation corresponds to ~ Feb 20. For simulations in other networks, we kept
R​0​ constant but due to the population structure, the exponential growth rate of the epidemic
varied between different values of the household and external contact structure. Thus for each
structure we chose slightly different intervention start times to keep the infection prevalence
consistent across comparisons. The start times varied from Day 43 (when ​wEX
​ ​ /​wHH
​ ​ = 3, 1), Day
45 (when ​w​EX​ /​wHH
​ ​ = 1/3) to Day 55 (when ​w​EX​ /​w​HH​ = 1/9).

34

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 1: Model parameters for duration of each stage of infection
Duration (days)
Infection stage

Symbol

Mean

STD

Source

Exposed (incubation
period)

E

TE​

5

4

[34,90]

Mild infection

I​1

T1​

6

2

Estimated to agree with serial
interval and [52,91–94,100]

Severe infection

I​2

T2​

6

4.5

Estimated to agree with time to
ICU admission

Critical infection

I​3

T3​

8

6

Estimated to agree with [92,95]
and time to recovery/death

Serial interval

8

4.5

Derived from above, agrees with
[34,69–72]

Hospitalization (avg, w
or w/o ICU stay)

8

6

Derived from above

Hospital (incl. ICU stay)

14

7.5

Derived from above

Symptom onset to ICU
admission

12

5

[92,93]

Symptom onset to
death or recovery

20

10

[69,92,96]

35

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Table 2: Model parameters for probability of progressing from each stage of infection

Probability of progression
Infection stage

Symbol

Value

Source

Exposed (incubation period)

E

1

Mild infection

I​1

f1​

0.2

[8,88,97]

Severe infection

I​2

f2​

0.25

[8,88,97]

Critical infection

I​3

f3​

0.4

[8,88,97]

Well-mixed network structure
We approximated a well-mixed population by randomly connecting each individual to 100 other
individuals in the population. While a truly “well-mixed” network would connect every one to
everyone else, with the large population sizes we use (10​6​), this would require huge amounts of
memory and negate the computational efficiency of using sparse matrices to represent the
networks. Since in reality each individual will only transmit to a few others before recovering,
any uniform random network with a large degree is a good approximation to a fully-connected
network.
Two-layer household network structure
Construction:​ We constructed a weighted two-layer network, consisting of a layer for
within-household connections and another for external connections. Individuals were first
assigned households using the distribution of household sizes in the United States (data
obtained from the 2010 census, mean household size ​n​HH ~ 2.5 ). All individuals in a household

were connected to each other. Each individual was then assigned random external contacts.
The degree distribution for external connections was obtained from contact survey data that
recorded daily interactions of individuals [20,21]. This data was originally collected for a subset
of countries and then projected to other countries using a wide range of demographic data. The
contacts are age structured and include the type, duration, location and frequency of the
contact. These surveys were designed to capture interactions relevant to the spread of
respiratory diseases, and include interactions consisting of either physical contact or close
face-to-face conversations. From this data, we obtained daily non-household contacts by
summing ‘work’, ‘school’ and ‘other’ contacts. For the United States there were on average ​nEX
​
~ 7.5 ± 2 (mean ± standard deviation) daily non-household contacts, equivalent to 3x
household contacts. The variance was obtained by the variance in the mean across all age
groups. We assigned external degrees to individuals following a binomial distribution with this

36

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

mean and standard deviation. This assignment was done randomly and did not depend upon
the size of the person’s household. The network layer was created by giving ‘stubs’ to
individuals equal to their external degrees. These stubs were then randomly paired between
individuals in the population to create connections. In addition to the number of contacts, the
probability of infection also depends upon the duration and intensity of the contact. We assigned
weights (​w​HH,​ ​wEX
​ ​) to the two layers of the network to account for this. We considered different
scenarios (keeping R​0​ fixed) where, ​wHH
​ = 1 and varied ​w​EX​ = 3, 1, 1/3, 1/9 to reflect the
relative importance between household and external contacts.

In order to investigate the robustness of our results with respect to details in the large-scale
clustering of the network, we also constructed a hierarchically structured external layer using
ideas from nested metapopulation models [101,102]. Individuals were assigned to
‘neighborhoods’ of size 10,000 (there are 100 such neighborhoods for the population size of 1
million) and as an extreme case 90% of their external connections were forced to be within the
same neighborhood with ​nEX
​ ​ ~ 7.5 ± 2 as before.
Intervention:​ Intervention, corresponding to social distancing measures, was modeled by
reducing the weight of the external layer, ​w’​EX = (1 − ε) w​EX ​where, ε (0 ≤ ε ≤ 1) is the

‘intervention efficacy’. When we are in the parameter regime where the probability an individual
infects any given external contact over the duration of their infectious period is significantly less
than one (i.e. R​0​EX ​< n
​ EX
​ ),
​ reducing the weight of external contacts is equivalent to randomly
removing external contacts (i.e. ​n’​EX = (1 − ε) n​EX​). Only in the regime where the transmission rate
per contact is so high that R​0​EX​ is limited only by the number of contacts would these two
alternative methods of implementing social distancing lead to different results. Household
contacts were either unaffected (​w’HH
​ ​ = w​HH​) or doubled (​w’HH
​ ​ = 2 w​HH)​ during intervention, to
represent the increased time spent with household members.

Partial relaxation of intervention​: We modeled a scenario of partial relaxation of social distancing
measures in which every household could “merge” with another household. This relaxation
altered the household layer so that all households in the network were paired with another
random household and the two were merged to create a fully-connected joint household (​n’​HH
~ 5 ). We considered two scenarios for how the external layer changed during partial relaxation
of intervention. In the baseline scenario, the external layer was the same as during intervention.
In a second scenario, the number of external contacts per individual was reduced so that the
average number of total contacts was the same before and after merging (​n’EX
​ = nEX
​ ​- n​HH​). This
partial relaxation was only conducted for the scenario where household and external
connections had the same weight (​w​HH = 1 and ​wEX
​ = 1 ).

Individual probability of infection as a function of household size: ​We computed the individual
probability of infection retrospectively, after the epidemic had died out, for the case of a 100%
effective intervention. We counted the number of individuals who were ever infected by the end
of the epidemic and calculated the corresponding distribution of their household sizes. This is a

37

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

conditional probability that gives the probability of household size, given that an individual was
infected P(HH size|inf). The probability of infection given household size was then calculated
using Bayes’ rule, P(inf|HH size) = P(HH size|inf) * P(inf)/P(HH size) where, P(inf) is the
fraction of the total population that was infected during the epidemic and P(HH size) is the
distribution of the household sizes in the population. The probability was averaged over 10
iterations of the simulation.
Five-layer network structure
We constructed a non-weighted 5-layer (1 household and 4 external) network for an
age-structured population with realistically structured external layers. The population was
divided into four age groups: preschool aged (ages 0-5), school-aged (ages 5-19), working-aged
(ages 19-64) and elderly (ages 65+). The distribution of ages in the United States was obtained
from the 2018 World Bank Age Structure data which consists of the population divided into
5-year age groups. In addition to the broad age groups, we also kept track of the 5-year age
group that an individual belonged to. The contact survey data [21] used to construct the 2-layer
network was also predominantly used here to determine the statistical properties of the layers.
Household layer​: The household layer was constructed in the same manner as in the 2-layer
network. Individuals were assigned to fully-connected households using the distribution of
household sizes in the United States from the 2010 census data (mean household size, ​n​HH
~ 2.5 ).
School layer​ : The school layer contained connections between the school-aged age group in
the population. This external layer was constructed using the technique described by​ ​Ball et al
[103], where a network layer with a given degree distribution and correlations among
connections (i.e. “clustering” or “transitivity”) can be constructed. The degree distribution in this
layer was obtained from the school contact survey data [21], which estimated that the
school-going population in the United States, on average, had ​n​SCHOOL​ ~ 7.3 ± 1.8

school-related contacts daily. The variance was obtained by the variance in the mean across
the school-aged (5-19) age groups. Individuals were assigned degrees randomly from a
binomial distribution with this mean and standard deviation. The age-structure of contacts at
school suggests a significant level of clustering by age group. To create correlated connections,
the method of Ball et al requires two additional parameters: The number of groups n to divide
the population into, and r , which is roughly the extent to which individuals within the same
group are connected. r = 1 corresponds to individuals being connected only within their group
whereas r = 0 implies completely random connections without any correlation with members of
their own group. Averaged over the school age groups (5-19), we found that ~ 57% of school
contacts for an individual belonged to their own age group. Since there are three 5-year age
groups in our school-aged population, we divided our population into those three groups ( n = 3
) and chose r = 0.57 .

38

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Work layer​ : The work layer consisted of connections between the working-aged group in the
population. This layer was constructed similarly to the school layer. We obtained the mean and
standard deviation in number of daily work contacts from the contact survey data ( 5.0 ± 2.3 ).
The variance was obtained by the variance in the mean across working-aged (20-64) age
groups. Individuals were randomly assigned a work-place degree from a binomial distribution
with the mean and standard deviation. Then we used a separate study by Potter et al that
mapped real work-place networks to estimate the level of clustering (transitivity), at ~0.1 [15].
Note that Potter et estimated a higher degree, since their network contained ​total​ contacts in a
work network and not just the daily contacts as given by the contact survey data, but the
coefficient of variation is similar. We again used the Ball et al technique [103] to create
clustering in the network. High transitivity can be achieved by choosing appropriate correlation
parameters n and r . We assumed this clustering arose from the fact that people belonging to
the same work-place have a higher chance of being connected to each other. According to
NAICS (North American Industry Classification System), ~ 80% of businesses in the United
States have ≤ 10 employees and so for the sake of simplicity, we assigned each individual to a
‘work-place’ of size ten ( n =

# of working individuals
10

). We picked r = 0.8 ​in order to have a high level

of transitivity ( ~ 0.12 ) while also ensuring inter work-place connections.

Friend (social contacts) layer​: The friend layer represents social contacts of people, their ‘friend
circles’. Individuals were assigned to fully-connected friend groups, where friend groups
consisted of people belonging to the same age group (preschool, school, working, elderly). The
distribution of sizes of these friend groups were obtained from Wrzus et al [27], which is a
meta-analysis of the effects of age on social networks. From their data, we estimated that the
mean sizes of friend groups for individuals less than 20 years of age is ~ 10 , that for the
working age population ~ 7 and ~ 5 for the elderly. These constitute ​total s​ ocial contacts for

the individuals and not just their daily interactions as given by the contact survey data. The
‘other’ category in the contact survey data [21] gives the number of daily interactions that an
individual has that are not within the household, at school or at the work-place. In our network,
the friend layer and the community layer together constitute this ‘other’ category. According to
the data, averaged over the age groups, there are ~ 4.3 ± 1.9 such interactions for an
individual in the United States. The variance was obtained by the variance in the mean across
all age groups. Since the total social contacts are much higher than this daily value, we scaled
the sizes of the friend groups (​n​FRIEND​ → nFRIEND
​
/4 ) to reflect daily social contacts. The scaling

factor was chosen to ensure that the community layer didn’t end up being too sparse. We chose
to do this instead of creating a weighted network for the sake of simplicity. The friend group
sizes were drawn using the negative binomial distribution to account for the large variance
(estimated variance post scaling: 6.25, 2.5, 1.75 for the three age-groups) seen in the data.
Community layer​: This layer constitutes the additional random contacts an individual has during
the course of their day. As mentioned previously, together with the social layer this constitutes
the ‘other’ category in the contact survey data. We chose the average degree for this layer,
nCOMM
​
~ 1.72 ± 0.76 such that the combined degree for the two layers matches what is seen in
39

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

the data. We used a binomial distribution and assigned degrees randomly to the individuals.
This layer was constructed in the same manner as the external layer in the 2-layer network. It
amounts to using the Ball et al​ ​[103] technique with n = 1 and r = 0.
Sensitivity analysis:​ We introduced the idea of “neighborhood” clustering to check the
robustness of the results to clustering of contacts at an intermediate-scale between households
and the city as a whole. As in the 2 layer network, individuals were assigned to neighborhoods
of size 10,000. School and community layer contacts for individuals were predominantly within
their neighborhood. The community layer was created by enforcing 90% ( r = 0.9 ) of the
connections to be within the same neighborhood ( n = 100 ) with ​nCOMM
​
~ 1.72 ± 0.76 .

School-aged individuals from each neighborhood, belonging to the same 5 year age group,
were assigned to schools of size 500 (~ average size of public schools in the US according to
the 2017 data from the National Center for Education Statistics). The degree distribution of the
school contacts was the same as before, ​nSCHOOL
​
​ ~ 7.3 ± 1.8 but all school contacts for an
individual were restricted to their own school ( n =

# school−aged
500

, r = 1 ).

Intervention ​: The social distancing intervention was modeled by deleting a certain percentage
of external connections. School connections were always completely deleted during
intervention, whereas social and community connections were deleted depending upon what we
termed as the ‘efficacy’ of intervention. For example, 85% efficacy corresponds to deleting 85%
of contacts in these layers. We considered two scenarios for the effect of intervention on the
work-layer. In one case, similar to the social and community layer, a percentage of work
contacts was deleted depending upon the intervention efficacy. Random deletion of connections
leads to a large reduction in the transitivity of the work layer, from ~ 0.12 to ~ 0.02 . In the
second case, the effect of intervention was modeled as a clustered deletion of workplaces
instead. For example, 85% intervention efficacy corresponds to 85% of workplaces being
dissolved. Clustered deletion still maintains a high level of transitivity ~ 0.10 in the work layer.
Note as all school connections were completely deleted during intervention, the total effective
efficacy of intervention was a bit higher than that for the social, community and work layers. For
example, 85% efficacy in these external layers corresponds to a total efficacy of 88% .
Probability of infection for an individual working during intervention​: We calculated the
probability of infection for two intervention efficacies (85%, 70%) at day 300 after the start of the
outbreak. We first obtained the fraction of the infected people (at day 300) who were still
working during the intervention. This gives the conditional probability that an individual was
working during intervention given that they were infected, P(working|inf). We calculated the
probability of infection given that an individual was working during intervention using Bayes’
rule, P(inf|working) = P(working|inf) * P(inf)/P(working) where, P(inf) is the fraction of the total
population that was infected by day 300 of the epidemic and P(working) is the fraction of the
total population that was working during intervention. The probability was averaged over 10
iterations of the simulation.

40

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Probability of infection for an individual living with working household members during
intervention​: This was also calculated at day 300 of the epidemic for the two intervention
efficacies and, averaged over 10 iterations of the simulation. We obtained the fraction of the
infected people (at day 300) who had at least 1 household member who was working during
intervention. This corresponds to the probability that an infected individual had at least one
working household member during intervention, P(HH working|inf). As before, the probability of
infection given that an individual was living with working household members during intervention
was then calculated using Bayes’ rule, P(inf| HH working) = P(HH working|inf) * P(inf)/P(HH
working) where, P(inf) is the fraction of the total population that was infected by day 300 of the
epidemic and P(HH working) is the fraction of the total population that had at least one working
household member during the intervention.
Probability of infection for a non-working individual with no working household members during
intervention​: This was calculated in the same way as the other probabilities. We obtained the
fraction of the infected people (at day 300) who were not working and had no working
household member, P(HH not working|inf). As before, the required probability was then
calculated using Bayes’ rule, P(inf| HH not working) = P(HH not working|inf) * P(inf)/P(HH not
working) where, P(inf) is the fraction of the total population that was infected by day 300 of the
epidemic and P(HH not working) is the fraction of the total population that was not working and
had no working household members during the epidemic.
COVID-19 Data
Wuhan, China​: Data from Wuhan, China was obtained from the two daily situation reports
published each day: ​http://wjw.wuhan.gov.cn/ztzl_28/fk/yqtb/index_11.shtml​. We extracted new
cases, new deaths, the number of individuals currently hospitalized with severe infection (which
we took as a proxy for “hospitalized”) and the number of individuals currently hospitalized with
“critical” infection (which we took as a proxy for individuals in the ICU). Data was already
digitized by Li et al [104] for January and February
(​https://github.com/c2-d2/COVID-19-wuhan-guangzhou-data​); we added data into March. For
some dates the numbers of severe and critical cases were only reported for the entire province
of Hubei, and in those instances, following Li et al, we assumed the proportion of those
attributable to the city of Wuhan was equal to the proportion of currently active cases occurring
in Wuhan. The vast majority of the Hubei outbreak took place in Wuhan.
Lombardy, Italy​: Data on daily new cases and deaths as well as current patients hospitalized or
in ICU for the Lombardy region of Italy was downloaded from Github repository maintained by
the Department of Civil Protection in Italy : ​https://github.com/pcm-dpc/COVID-19
`
Madrid, Spain​: Data for daily new cases, daily deaths, daily new hospital admissions, and daily
new ICU admissions were obtained from an online application maintained by the National
Center for Epidemiology, using data from the Ministry of Health:

41

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

https://cnecovid.isciii.es/covid19/​. In the “documentation and data” section of the application
there is a link to a .csv file with all the data used in the web app.
New York City, New York, USA​: Daily new cases and deaths were downloaded from the Github
repository of the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene:
https://github.com/nychealth/coronavirus-data​. Number of currently individuals hospitalized or in
ICU by date was obtained from the Github repository for digital news platform The City, who
obtains this data directly from the New York state governor’s office:
https://github.com/thecityny/covid-19-nyc-data
Los Angeles County, California, USA:​ Daily new cases and deaths were obtained from the
Github repository maintained by the Los Angeles Times newspaper:
https://github.com/datadesk/california-coronavirus-data​. The number of individuals currently in
the hospital or ICU was obtained from the California Health & Human Services Open Data
Portal:
https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/california-covid-19-hospital-data-and-case-statistics/resource/6
cd8d424-dfaa-4bdd-9410-a3d656e1176e?view_id=b23b0158-a85d-4bf2-95b1-96f7556f7342

42

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Supplementary Figures

Figure S1: Creating hierarchical structuring in transmission networks via “neighborhoods”. ​A)
Schematic of the construction of the networks neighborhood clustering. Each household belongs to a
mutually-exclusive “neighborhood”, and external connections are preferentially created within the same
neighborhood. B-C) Visualizations of connections in the external layer of the two-layer transmission
network with and without neighborhood clustering​. ​ For ease of visualization, this is plotted for a
population size of 1000 with 10 “neighborhoods” (node color) of size 100. In the real simulations, the
population size is 10​6​ with 100 neighborhoods of size 10,000. A) The external layer consists of random
connections between individuals, irrespective of their neighborhoods. B) 90% of external connections are
preferentially attached to individuals within their own neighborhood, creating more intermediate-scale
clustering in the network.

43

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S2. Dynamics pre and post social distancing interventions in network-structured
populations with household and external transmission, with neighborhood clustering.​ A)
Multi-layer network of transmission. Individuals have contacts within their households and with others
outside the household, which preferentially occur within a local neighborhood (Figure S1). Household and
external contacts may have different weights (e.g. different likelihood of transmission), due to for example
different levels of physical contact or time spent together per day. Social distancing interventions (red X)
remove or decrease the weight of external contacts. B) Distribution of household sizes. C) Distribution of
the # of contacts (degree) within the household and outside the household. D) The contribution of
household and external spread to the total R​0​ value as a function of the relative weight of external
contacts. E)-F) Simulated time course of different clinical stages of infection under an intervention with
efficacy of 100% (E) or 80% (F) at reducing external contacts, when household and external contacts
have equal weight. Black dotted line shows the time the intervention began. G) The role of the relative
importance of household vs external contacts in determining the outcome of the intervention, measured
by the size of the epidemic. Epidemic final size is defined as the percent of the population who have
recovered by day 300. H-J) Same as above but under the scenario where the weight of household
contacts doubles post-intervention (​w​HH​ → 2​w​HH​, due to increased time spent in house). K) The household
secondary attack rate, defined as the probability of transmission per susceptible household member when
there is a single infected individual in the house, as a function of the relative weight of external contacts.
L) The percent of households which are “seeded” with infection at the time the intervention was
implemented (i.e. have at least one infected individual). In all scenarios the overall infection prevalence at
the time intervention was started was identical.

44

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S3: Clustered vs uniform adoption of social distancing measures, with lower efficacy. ​A)
Schematic of the multi-layer network created to more realistically capture non-household contacts and
how they are altered by social distancing measures. In each layer, the degree distribution and level of
clustering were chosen to match data. The “community” layer represents any other contact not fitting in
the other four categories. Colors of nodes represent four broad age groups that determine network
membership and structure: preschool-aged (pink), school-aged (purple), working-aged (blue) and elderly
(green). B) - C) Simulated time courses of infection in the presence of social distancing intervention with
random (B) vs clustered (C) adherence to measures. In both cases, all school connections were deleted
post-intervention and 70% of connections were uniformly deleted at random in the social and community
layers. In B) 70% of work connections were uniformly deleted whereas, in C) 70% of workplaces were
dissolved, leading to clusters of disconnected vs connected individuals in the work layer of the network.
The effective intervention efficacy for all layers combined was ~ 75% in both scenarios. Black dotted line
shows the time the intervention began.

45

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S4: Clustered vs uniform adoption of social distancing measures, with neighborhood
clustering. ​A) Schematic of the multi-layer network created to more realistically capture non-household
contacts and how they are altered by social distancing measures. In each layer, the degree distribution
and level of clustering were chosen to match data. The “community” layer represents any other contact
not fitting in the other four categories. Colors of nodes represent four broad age groups that determine
network membership and structure: preschool-aged (pink), school-aged (purple), working-aged (blue) and
elderly (green). Community and school connections occurred within local neighborhoods. B) - E)
Simulated time courses of infection in the presence of social distancing intervention with random (B,D) vs
clustered (C,E) adherence to measures. In both cases, all school connections were deleted
post-intervention and 85% (top) or 70% (bottom) of connections were uniformly deleted at random in the
social and community layers. In B) 85% (top) or 70% (bottom) of work connections were uniformly deleted
whereas, in C) 85% (top) or 70% (bottom) of workplaces were dissolved, leading to clusters of
disconnected vs connected individuals in the work layer of the network. The effective intervention efficacy
for all layers combined was ~ 88% (top) or ~75% (bottom) in both scenarios. Black dotted line shows the
time the intervention began.

46

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S5: Effect of partially relaxing intervention by forming household bubbles, with
neighborhood clustering. ​Some time after a social distancing intervention was implemented, each
household merges with another random household irrespective of their “neighborhood”. In each resulting
two-household “bubble”, all individuals are connected to all other individuals. A)-D) Simulated time
courses of infection before and after social distancing interventions (with 80% vs 90% intervention
efficacy) and after partial-relaxation by household merging. Top row: External contacts of individuals were
unchanged after two households were merged, such that overall number of contacts increased. Bottom
row: External contacts for individuals were reduced after two households were merged, such that overall
number of contacts remained unchanged. In all cases, intervention was started 43 days after the onset of
the epidemic (first black dotted line) and was relaxed after two months (60 days, second black dotted
line).

47

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S6: Effect of partially relaxing intervention by forming household bubbles, with
neighborhood clustering. ​Some time after a social distancing intervention was implemented, each
household merges with another household from their own “neighborhood”. In each resulting
two-household “bubble”, all individuals are connected to all other individuals. A)-D) Simulated time
courses of infection before and after social distancing interventions (with 80% vs 90% intervention
efficacy) and after partial-relaxation by household merging. Top row: External contacts of individuals were
unchanged after two households were merged, such that overall number of contacts increased. Bottom
row: External contacts for individuals were reduced after two households were merged, such that overall
number of contacts remained unchanged. In all cases, intervention was started 43 days after the onset of
the epidemic (first black dotted line) and was relaxed after two months (60 days, second black dotted
line).

48

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S7. Effects of generalized relaxation of social distancing measures​. Simulated time course of
different clinical stages of infection under an initial intervention that reduces contacts (first black dashed
line) and subsequent relaxation of that intervention (second black dashed line). Plots show daily incidence
as a fraction of the total population. Solid line is mean and shaded areas are 5th and 95th percentile.
Results are shown for different values of the efficacy of the initial intervention, efficacy during relaxation,
and the timing of relaxation. The efficacy of the initial intervention and relaxation are defined as the %
reduction in external contacts. In all plots, household and external contacts have equal weight. Plot
annotations report the median time post-relaxation until different metrics of disease burden begin to
increase - the daily incidence of new cases, current hospitalizations, or daily deaths. If deaths go to zero
under an intervention, we instead report median time post-intervention to first death.

49

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20121673; this version posted January 15, 2021. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY 4.0 International license .

Figure S8. Time-varying effective reproduction number under social distancing.​ Top row: Simulated
time course of different clinical stages of infection under an intervention (first black dashed line) that
reduces external contacts by 80%, for different values of the relative weight of external contacts. Plots
show daily incidence (for a total population of 1 million). Solid line is mean and shaded areas are 5th and
95th percentile of 100 simulations. Second row: Effective reproduction number (​Rt​ )​ over time calculated
using the daily incidence of new infections (I​1​) for each simulation, calculated using the EpiEstim method
with a 7-day window. The ​R​t​ value plotted for day t is calculated using timepoints before t only. Third row:
Same but using the daily incidence of new hospitalizations (I​2​). Bottom row: The first timepoint after the
intervention that ​Rt​ ​ <1. Dots show the median and bars represent 5th and 95th percentiles.

50

