medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A high-throughput strategy for COVID-19 testing based on
next-generation sequencing
Jian Huang*, Lan Zhao
Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612,
USA
*

Corresponding author: jian_huang@rush.edu

Abstract
COVID-19 testing as sufficient as needed is essential for healthcare workers, patients,
and authorities to make informed decisions to confront and eventually defeat severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Currently, diagnosis of COVID-19
relies on quantitative reverse-transcription PCR, which is low-throughput, laborious, and
often false-negative, making it overwhelmingly challenging to meet testing needs even in
industrialized countries. Here we propose a new strategy, which employs a modified
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay, a simple procedure requiring no
sophisticated instruments, to index and amplify viral genes from individual specimens, of
which the products are readily available for construction of multiplexed libraries for nextgeneration sequencing. Our strategy would allow precise diagnosis of thousands of
specimens in 1-2 days with significantly lower operating expenses. Furthermore, this
strategy will make it possible for patients to collect, process, and mail their own samples
to facilities for a quick, reliable diagnosis at a population scale.

1
NOTE: This preprint reports new research that has not been certified by peer review and should not be used to guide clinical practice.

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

With exponential spread of COVID-19 over every continent except Antarctica, it
is fundamentally urgent to ramp up testing capacity for detection of severe acute
respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), especially in developing countries
which may become new epicenters but have already had their resources stretched to the
limit.1 Therefore, it is imperative to develop a sensitive, fast, and cost-effective testing
strategy to help win this extremely costly war against the coronavirus.
Here we propose a new strategy for high-throughput testing of COVID-19,
through combining isothermal amplification and next-generation sequencing.
Specifically, we conducted a loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay,2 in
which viral RNA can be reverse transcribed and amplified at a single temperature (65 °C)
in the same vessel, thus greatly reducing the need for sophisticated instruments, as well as
minimizing laborious liquid handling that is prone to errors and contaminations. LAMP
generates stem-loop DNA of varied sizes from hundreds to thousands of bases (Figure 1),
thus they are not directly suitable for downstream applications including sequencing. To
overcome this, we introduced recognition sites for PstI and HindIII, both robust,
inexpensive restriction enzymes, into the primers of FIP and BIP respectively (Figures 1
and 2), which enabled us to fragment the LAMP products into short (~150 bp) pieces,
thus amenable for adapter ligation and sequencing. We also introduced randomized bases
into the primers of FIP, to test whether the addition of nucleotide barcodes impedes
LAMP reactions. Our results showed that additions of restriction sites and barcodes in the
FIP and BIP primers did not negatively affect amplification (Figure 3), while they offer
advantages including barcoding individual samples and fragmenting products in a
controlled manner by restriction digestion. Sanger sequencing of LAMP products

2

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

digested by PstI and HindIII with the FIP or BIP primer confirmed that these short
fragments are quite homogeneous target sequences as expected (Figure 3), confirming
that LAMP is specific and efficient to amplify traces of viral genes for sequencing.
Moreover, if individual samples are indexed by FIP/BIP primers with distinct barcodes
(for example, seven-nucleotide barcodes can index over 16,000 specimens theoretically),
the opportunity knocks that next-generation sequencing can be applied for a massively
parallel detection of COVID-19 in population.
In summary, we propose that this new testing strategy for SARS-CoV-2 or any
other genetic materials can be implemented as follows. Extracted individual RNA (or
swab diluent if reaction is further optimized) will be added to the LAMP reaction for
reverse transcription and amplification with indexed primers at 65°C for 30 minutes.
Then, LAMP products from thousands of specimens will be pooled for fragmentation by
restriction digestion, and then ligated to adapters for deep sequencing. Computerized
analyses of sequencing results will associate positive specimens with individual patients
through the nucleotide barcodes. The complete process will take 1-2 days by 1-2 workers,
while fulfilling diagnostic need of thousands of patients with much lower expense
compared to current COVID-19 RT-PCR test.
Discussions
In this study, we introduced restriction sites and barcodes into the LAMP primers,
and found that additions of these elements did not negatively affect LAMP efficiency,
and the elements were retained in the LAMP products. Sanger sequencing of the LAMP
product fragmented by restriction enzymes showed that the LAMP products are quite
homogeneous, despite their varying lengths from hundreds to thousands of bases. Thus,
3

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

our results suggested a potential of LAMP to be used a method to amplify viral genes for
NGS. As NGS provides precise sequence information, it eliminates ambiguity caused by
nonspecific amplifications in PCR or nonspecific interactions in other diagnostic tests.
Moreover, NGS offers a massively parallel capacity to analyze thousands of specimens
during a single sequencing run. For high-throughput detection of viral infection in
population, the key would be adoption of individual barcode sequences in the LAMP
primers. The array of barcoded LAMP reactions can be manufactured in 96-well, 384well, or any convenient formats. With isothermal amplification and simple handling,
hundreds to thousands of specimens can be processed by a worker in a day, which can
also be easily automated.
The introduction of restriction sites in the LAMP primers can ensure the
fragmentation of LAMP products in a non-randomized manner, and facilitate adapter
ligation for NGS by generating sticky ends of the DNA. Nevertheless, barcoded LAMP
products can be also randomly fragmented, repaired, and ligated to adapters for NGS
using available commercial kits, while possibly possessing lower ligation efficiency and
requiring higher sequencing coverage.
In conclusion, our study suggested a great potential of barcoded LAMP reaction
to conveniently generate a multiplexed library for NGS, in order to detect COVID-19 in
population in a high-throughput manner. It can be even anticipated that patients can
collect their own specimens3 and process LAMP reactions at home, which are then
mailed to facilities to get fast, reliable test results to help them, healthcare workers, and
governments to make informed decisions in the fight against SARS-CoV-2 or any other
emerging microbes.
4

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Materials and Methods
LAMP reactions
LAMP reactions were performed using the WarmStart LAMP Kit (DNA & RNA) (New
England Biolabs, E1700S) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The primer
sequences for LAMP reaction were designed using PrimerExplorer V5
(https://primerexplorer.jp) to target the same area in the N gene of SARS-CoV-2 targeted
by the CDC-designed N2 RT-PCR assay, with the introduction of PstI or HindIII sites
and randomized six bases (Supplemental Figure 1). The positive control for the N gene of
SARS-CoV-2 (Catalog # 10006625) were purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies.
Specifically, the final concentrations for the LAMP primers were as follows: FIP and
BIP, 1.6 µM; F3 and B3, 0.2 µM; LF and LB, 0.4 µM. The reactions were incubated at
65 °C for 30 minutes, and then at 85 °C for 5 minutes to inactivate the enzymes.
Restriction digestion
After LAMP reactions were completed, 3 µL LAMP products were used for PstI and/or
HindIII digestion in a 10 µL volume at 37 °C for 30 minutes. Buffer 3.1 and 0.5 µL of
PstI and/or HindIII (New England Biolabs) were used. The digested DNA were analyzed
by electrophoresis and gel purified for Sanger sequencing with FIP, BIP, LF, or LB
primers. They can be also used to ligate adapters for deep sequencing.

5

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

Acknowledgements
We declare no competing interests. This work was supported by the National Institutes of
Health Grants R01AR070222.

References
1.

Global coalition to accelerate COVID-19 clinical research in resource-limited

settings. Lancet 2020; 395(10233): 1322-5.
2.

Notomi T, Okayama H, Masubuchi H, et al. Loop-mediated isothermal

amplification of DNA. Nucleic Acids Res 2000; 28(12): E63.
3.

Tu YP, Jennings R, Hart B, et al. Swabs Collected by Patients or Health Care

Workers for SARS-CoV-2 Testing. The New England journal of medicine 2020.

6

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A
3'

F2c

F2
5'

F1c

Target DNA

F1

B1

B2

B1c

F1c

5'
3'

Introduced
restriction site and
barcode sequence

B2c
3'
B2

Primer FIP

B1c

5'

Primer BIP

B

1

Figure 1

2

3

4

1

Loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) can generate

individually-barcoded DNA for high-throughput testing based on next-generation
sequencing (NGS). (A) Introduction of restriction sites and barcode sequences in the
LAMP primer, which does not interfere the reaction but can facilitate population-scale
detection of SARS-CoV-2. The structures of the primers are shown as boxed. (B)
Schematic of a typical LAMP product. After digested by restriction enzymes, four types
of short DNA are released as indicated, which are largely identical and retain the
barcodes in two types, suitable for multiplexed NGS library construction.

7

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A
F3

F2

cacaagctttcggcagacgtggtccagaacaaacccaaggaaattttggggaccaggaactaatcagacaaggaactgattacaaacattggccgcaaattgcac 105
B1c

LF
LB

F1c

aatttgcccccagcgcttcagcgttcttcggaatgtcgcgcattggcatggaagtcacaccttcgggaacgtggttgacctacacaggtgccatcaaattggatg 210
B2

B3

B
Primer

Sequence (5‘ to 3‘)

F3

CACAAGCTTTCGGCAGAC

B3

CATCCAATTTGATGGCACC

FIP

CGGCCAATGTTTGTAATCAGTTCCT CTGCAG NNNNNN GGTCCAGAACAAACCCAA

BIP

CGTTCTTCGGAATGTCGCGC AAGCTT GTAGGTCAACCACGTTCC

LF

TTCCTGGTCCCCAAAATTTCC

LB

ATTGGCATGGAAGTCACACC

Figure 2

(PstI site: CTGCAG; NNNNN: barcodes)

(HindIII site: AAGCTT)

Schematic of LAMP primer design (A) and primer sequences (B)

targeting the N gene of SARS-CoV-2. Note the restriction sites in the sequences of FIP
and BIP and barcode sequence in FIP.

8

medRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.12.20129718; this version posted June 19, 2020. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted medRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity.
It is made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license .

A

B

copies/µL 200

40

10

2

0

C

uncut PstI HindIII double
Reverse complement of
B2 sequence

Figure 3

Residual
HindIII site

LAMP with barcoded primers is efficient, sensitive and faithful to

amplify the targeted sequence. (A) Primers with barcodes and restriction sites amplify the
targeted sequence efficiently. (B) Introduction of restriction sites in the primers facilitates
fragmentation of LAMP products. Note that digestion by both enzymes generates DNA
half the size of those digested by only PstI or HindIII, as expected. (C) Sanger
sequencing of the LAMP products digested by PstI and HindIII by the primer FIP
confirms that LAMP products are mostly identical to the targeted sequences while
retaining the restriction sites.

9

