"x"
"1" "Mechanisms of Stratification  in  In-Person Instruction  in the Wake of COVID-19"
"2" "Jessica McCrory Calarco, Indiana University, Department of Sociology email:  jcalarco@indiana.edu"
"3" "Max Coleman, Indiana University, Department of Sociology"
"4" "Andrew Halpern-Manners, Indiana University, Department of Sociology"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "In this  mixed-methods  study, we ask why participation in in-person instruction during the COVID-19 pandemic varied by race/ethnicity and SES.  We consider three possible mechanisms—stratified access to in-person instruction, stratified risks related to in-person instruction, and stratified parental availability to support  remote learning .  We  use data from a national online survey fielded through Ipsos in December 2020  with a  probability sample of 2,016 US parents with at least one child under 18.  We analyze both closed-ended and open-ended questions regarding parents’ decisions about school-age children’s participation in in-person instruction during the 2020-2021 school year. After accounting for differences in access, risk, and parental availability, we  found  no significant racial/ethnic or SES differences in parents’ likelihood of choosing in-person instruction. Instead, access, risk, and parental availability were strongly predictive of these decisions.  Our qualitative analyses  further clarified how  access, risk, and  parental availability influenced families’ decisions regarding in-person school .  Families with limited availability tended to choose in-person instruction because of the challenges of combining remote learning with full-time employment.  Meanwhile, families who had high-risk family members and lived in communities with high rates of viral transmission tended to choose remote or homeschooling, particularly if they also had a family member who could provide support at home.  We  discuss the implications of these findings for efforts to understand and address the inequalities in students’ and families’ outcomes in the wake of COVID-19 , concluding that families’ decisions were driven  largely by pandemic and pre-pandemic inequalities  in families’ lives."
"7" "Key Words"
"8" "Education; COVID-19; Families; Decision-Making; Inequality; Race/Ethnicity; Socioeconomic Status"
"9" "Introduction"
"10" "The COVID-19 pandemic  stratified  student instruction in K-12 schools   ( Belsha  et al. 2020; Saavedra et al. 2020; Smith and Reeves 2020) .   During the  first half of the  2020-2021 school year, white students and higher-SES students were  disproportionately receiving  in-person instruction , while other students were disproportionately learning from home   (Saavedra et al. 2020; USDOE 2021) .  Those patterns could be seen both nationally and within large school districts like the New York City Public Schools  (Shapiro 2020) .  Why did pandemic instruction vary  by race/ethnicity and SES ? Media reports have linked  variation  to  Black-white  inequalities in families’ trust in public schools  (Shapiro, Green, and Kim 2021) .  Such arguments  are consistent with decades of scholarship highlighting strained relations between schools and families from systematically marginalized groups  (Cucchiara 2013; Lewis and Diamond 2015; Lewis-McCoy 2014; Posey-Maddox 2014; Shedd 2015; Tyson 2011) . An additional possibility, however, is that pandemic and pre-pandemic inequalities left families facing stratified access to in-person instruction, stratified risks  related to  in-person instruction, a n d stratified parental availability to support children’s learning at home.  Building  on other analyses of  instructional  stratification  during the pandemic   (Camp and Zamarro 2021; Collins et al. 2021; Saavedra et al. 2020) , we  consider how these three mechanisms— access, risk, and parental availability —explain  racial/ethnic and SES  stratification in students’ participation in in-person school."
"11" "Our analyses are based on   data from  a national  online  survey of US parents , which we fielded in December 2020 .  The   survey  includes   a probability sample of  2,016 US parents with at least one child under the age of 18.  Parents  of school-age children  answered questions about their  schooling decisions for their youngest school-age child . We used these responses to determine whether families had access to in-person instruction and, if so, whether their child was receiving in-person instruction. We also  analyzed parents’  open-ended  responses  to examine  how  they   made decisions about instruction  during the 2020-2021 school year."
"12" "Identifying  the factors  that stratified   pandemic  instruction   is necessary both for clarifying the heated debates around in-person instruction and for understanding how   pandemic instruction   impacted  students, families, and schools.  S cholars have suggested that  remote instruction   limit ed  students’ learning   ( Engzell , Frey, and  Verhagen  2020;  Kuhfeld  et al. 2020;  Sabates , Carter, and Stern 2021) .   Those consequences, however, may depend on whether families preferred remote instruction or whether they were forced to keep their children home.  In  terms of family outcomes, research has  also  linked remote instruction to declines in women’s labor force participation  (Collins et al. 2021) .  Once again, however, the consequences of  school closures may be different for families who  chose  in-person instruction than for those  whose only option was remote .   Finally , in terms of schools,  district leaders have faced substantial and  competing pressures  regarding instruction, and their decisions have consequences for the future funding of schools  (Goldstein and Shapiro 2020) .  Thus, as  many schools plan to reopen for the 2021-2022 school year, clarifying why  parents choose in-person instruction  c an help schools identify strategies for regaining the trust of families who  opted out of in-person school ."
"13" "Background"
"14" "Access to In-Person Schooling"
"15" "U.S. schools are highly segregated by race/ethnicity and SES  (Bischoff 2008; Bischoff and Owens 2019; Owens 2016; Trounstine 2018) , and  access  to in-person schooling during the COVID-19 pandemic was  similarly  segregated  (Belsha et al. 2020; Camp and Zamarro 2021; Saavedra et al. 2020; Smith and Reeves 2020; USDOE 2021) .  This variation in access  reflected, in part,  the pandemic’s disproportionate impact on lower-SES communities and communities of color  (Garcia et al. 2020; McClure et al. 2020; Pirtle 2020; Pirtle and Wright 2021) . It  also   stemmed  from political  (Bischoff 2008;  Gramlich  2020; Trounstine 2018)  and economic  (Bischoff and Owens 2019; Gamoran and An 2016)  divisions between lower-SES and higher-SES communities and between white communities and communities of color,  which  shaped  pressures  on  schools  to   provide  in-person instruction  and  their  resources  for implementing safety protocols recommended for in-person school .  Private schools, which disproportionately serve higher-SES and white communities  (NCES 2020) , were also particularly likely to offer in-person instruction during the first half of the 2020-2021 school year  (Miller 2020) , which contributed to inequalities in access, as well   (Camp and Zamarro 2021) ."
"16" "Preliminary reports have   shown that inequalities  in access explain a large portion or the racial/ethnic differences in students’ participation in in-person school  (Camp and Zamarro 2021) . Building on these  results , we expect to find that SES-based  inequalities in access will also help to explain  why higher-SES students disproportionately returned to in-person school."
"17" "Parents’ Preferences for In-Person Schooling: The Role of Risk and Availability"
"18" "Access alone, however,  is  unlikely to fully account for racial/ethnic and SES inequalities in students’ participation in in-person school.  Research has shown that, even in districts offering in-person instruction, large numbers of students—disproportionately students of color and students from low-income families—chose remote learning  (Saavedra et al. 2020; Shapiro 2020) .  W hy  have  lower-SES families and families of color been less likely to  opt for  in-person instruction   when given the choice between in-person and remote school ?   Preliminary evidence  points  to two  potentially relevant factors: risk and parental availability."
"19" "First, lower-SES families and families of color  may have disproportionately chosen  remote  instruction because  in-person instruction  represented a bigger  health  risk to their families and communities. Because of systemic racism , socioeconomic inequalities, and their impact on working conditions, housing conditions, and access to healthcare, communities of color and low-income communities faced particularly high rates of COVID-related illness and death  (Bambra et al. 2020; Garcia et al. 2020; McClure et al. 2020; Pirtle 2020; Pirtle and Wright 2021) . Preliminary studies have  linked  variation  in exposure to racial/ethnic variation in parents’ decisions regarding in-person school  (Camp and Zamarro 2021) . Essentially — and because COVID-19 has had a bigger impact on their families and communities — low-income parents and parents of color may  have been  more concerned than other parents  about the health and safety of a return to in-person schooling  (Gilbert et al. 2020; Limbers 2021; Saavedra et al. 2020) .  Those concerns, in turn, may have led  lower-SES families and families of color  to disproportionately choose remote instruction over in-person school."
"20" "Second, lower-SES families and families of color  may have disproportionately chosen remote  instruction because COVID-related economic changes left them with more time available to support their children’s learning at home. Pandemic job losses disproportionately impacted women of color and low-SES women  ( Boesch  and  Phadke  2021; Moen,  Pedtke , and Flood 2020) , meaning that those families may  have disproportionately had  a parent available to support at-home learning. Even before the pandemic, mothers of color (particularly Latina and  Asian-American/Pacific Islander [AAPI]  mothers), foreign-born mothers, and mothers with lower levels of education were more likely to be stay-at-home parents  (Cohn, Livingston, and Wang 2014) , which may also have influenced their decision about whether to keep children home. Meanwhile, high-SES white parents may have been more likely to remain employed full-time during the pandemic. Research has shown, in turn, that combining full-time paid work and full-time parenting has serious consequences for parents’ (and especially mothers’) careers, relationships, and wellbeing  (Calarco et al. 2020; Collins et al. 2020, 2021;  Garbe  et al. 2020;  Lyttelton , Zang, and  Musick  2020;  Prados  and  Zamarro  2020) . Thus, we might expect that higher-SES white parents have been more likely to choose in-person instruction, in part, because paid work demands limit ed   their availability  to support children’s  at-home learning . 1"
"21" "Of course, parents  were  not the only people  supporting  children’s learning  during the pandemic . Rather,  full-time employed parents  may have called on  family members, paid teachers/tutors,  or even  pandemic “pods”  to provide that support instead   (Zimmerman 2020) . Here, the relationship to patterns  of stratification is less clear. Pre-pandemic, lower-SES  families and families of color were more likely t o rely  on extended family members as childcare providers  (Posadas and Vidal-Fernandez 2013) , and they may have continued to do so during the pandemic . Given the risks of COVID-19 to the elderly  (Nepomuceno et al. 2020) ,  these families may have been particularly  reluctant to send children  to in-person school .  At the same time, higher-SES families were more likely to be  using  paid teachers/tutors  before the pandemic  (Davies 2004; Park et al. 2016) .  If higher-SES families continued or pursued  such  arrangements during the pandemic,   that may have made it  easier  to keep their children at home."
"22" "Hypotheses"
"23" "The findings described above suggest the  following hypotheses:"
"24" "Hypothesis 1:   Lower-SES families and families of color  were less  likely to have a child receiving in-person instruction, in part, because their children  were   less  likely to  attend  schools offering in-person instruction."
"25" "Hypothesis 2:  Lower-SES families and families of color  were less  likely to have a child receiving in-person instruction, in part, because (1)  their families and communities  were  at greater risk of COVID-19 infection , and (2) they  were  more likely to have  a parent/guardian  available to provide support with remote learning."
"26" "Quantitative  Data  and Methods"
"27" "We use data from the Institutions Trust and Decisions (ITD) Study, a novel, nationally representative, online survey which was administered from November 30 through December 30, 2020, and which  includes data from 2,016 US parents with children under the age of 18.  Participants were recruited through Ipsos’s  iSay  panels.  iSay  panel members are invited, by email and mobile platforms, to take surveys in exchange for points which can be redeemed for incentives. Recruitment quotas (based on gender, race/ethnicity, marital status, educational attainment, income, employment status, and region) were used to recruit a probability sample that roughly corresponds with the demographics of U.S. parents with  school aged children .  Approximately 10,000 panelists were invited to participate in the survey.  3,834 panelists clicked the link to begin the survey. Of these, 1,135 were excluded because they did not meet the selection criteria (agreeing to participate, having a child under age 18, and being at least 18 years of age) or because the quotas had been met. An additional 233 respondents clicked the link  but did not complete   the  survey and  were  thereby also excluded from the analysis . Post-stratification weights were used to adjust for extraneous differences between the sample margins and population control totals obtained from the American Community Survey (ACS). Weighted and unweighted estimates from our regression models tended to vary only slightly, but  the  unweighted estimates  (which we present below)  were more efficient (Winship and  Radbill  1994)."
"28" "Surveys asked parents to name and discuss their youngest school-age child. 1,786 parents named a school-age child. We exclude parents who indicated that their youngest school-age child was  neither  homeschooling  n or enrolled in a school (n   = 25). We also exclude parents who indicated that their youngest school-age child was already homeschooling  pre- pandemic (n =  80 ). Of those remaining,  1,668  (99 percent) provided complete data on all variables used in this analysis. Given the extremely low level of item non-response, we use listwise deletion throughout our analysis."
"29" "Because of our  sampling  strategy, our data on school decisions overrepresent younger school-age children. Of the parents in our sample whose youngest school-age child was enrolled in a K-12 school (traditional, hybrid, or remote), approximately 40% reported that their youngest school-age child was eight years old or younger. By contrast, approximately 30% reported that their youngest school-age  child was nine to twelve years old, and 30% reported that their youngest school-age child was thirteen years old or older. To account for these discrepancies, all regression models adjust for the age of the named child."
"30" "Measures"
"31" "Dependent Variables"
"32" "Our primary dependent variable measure s  parents’ reports of their children’s instructional mode at the time of the survey (December 2020)."
"33" "Type of Instruction  Received . First, we determined the type of instruction the focal child was receiving in December 2020. We include in our analyses those who indicated that their child was receiving traditional in-person instruction, hybrid instruction, remote instruction, or homeschooling.  We then combine d  these responses into a binary variable distinguishing  in-person instruction  (traditional or hybrid) from  non – in-person instruction  (remote instruction  or  homeschooling).   Supplementary analyses ,  included in Appendix A,  retain ed  distinctions between instructional modalities  and produced results  similar to those we report below ."
"34" "Primary Independent Variables"
"35" "Our primary independent variables measure the race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status of respondents and their access to in-person instruction."
"36" "Parent’s Racial/Ethnic Origins . We include a five-category measure of the focal parent’s racial/ethnic background. These categories include: (1) Asian American/Pacific Islander (AAPI), (2) Black, (3) Hispanic or  Latino/a  (including those who also identify as AAPI, Black, white, another  racial/ethnic  origin , or who  identify multiple races/ethnicities ), (4) white, and (5) those who identify with another race or ethnic origin, including multi-racial respondents  who do not identify as  Latino/a ."
"37" "Parents’  Socioeconomic Status .  We use parents’ education as a proxy for SES ,  given that workers without bachelor’s degrees had the highest risk of unemployment during the pandemic and were also the workers least likely to be able to work from home  ( Blustein  and Guarino 2020; Dey et al. 2020;  Lyttelton  et al. 2020) .  We include a binary measure indicating whether the focal parent or the child’s other parent completed a bachelor’s degree  (1 = yes, “higher-SES”); 0 = no, “lower-SES”) . In supplementary analyses, we used a binary measure indicating whether the focal parent completed a bachelor’s degree. The results   were substantively similar to those reported below."
"38" "Access to In-Person Instruction . Next, we determined whether the focal child had access to  traditional ,  hybrid , or remote-only  instruction in December 2020. We made these determinations in two ways. For parents who had a child enrolled in a school, we used their response to a question about whether their child had the option of receiving in-person instruction (either traditional or hybrid) from that school. For parents whose child was homeschooling (n = 280), we determined whether the family’s local public school district was offering in-person instruction (either traditional or hybrid)  in December 2020  to children of the focal child’s age. First, we used respondents’ zip codes and geolocation data, along with the website greatschools.org, to identify the local public school the focal child would be eligible to attend. Next, we used a variety of methods to gather information about that school’s opening status in December 2020. Our procedures closely followed those used by Collins et al. (2021),  including  searches of school websites and social media posts and reviews of local newspaper articles for verification. Using these data, we created a variable  indicating  whether the focal child had access to  traditional ,  hybrid , or  remote-only instruction . We also created a simplified binary variable indicating whether the focal child had access to  in-person instruction  or  remote-only instruction ."
"39" "Measures of Risk and  Parental  Availability"
"40" "To consider possible explanations for racial/ethnic and socioeconomic variation in families’  participation   in  in-person schooling, we created variables  indexing   families’ risk and  parental  availability .  Our risk variables include measures of COVID-19’s impact on parents’ communities and social networks. Our availability variables include measures of parents’ occupational status and job loss during the pandemic."
"41" "State and County  Prevalence of COVID-19 . We used survey metadata to geolocate respondents within counties and states. We then linked respondents’ records to cumulative county- and state-level COVID-19  confirmed  case counts, as obtained from Johns Hopkins University’s COVID-19 Data Repository  (Dong, Du, and Gardner 2020) . Case counts reflect total confirmed cases as of December 2020, when our survey period closed. In our analysis, we express counts on a per capita basis to adjust for differences in population size across jurisdictions."
"42" "Families’ Experience with COVID-related Illness and Death . Respondents were asked about their families’ experiences with COVID-related illness and death. We recoded these responses into a binary variable indicating whether the respondent, a household member, another family member, and/or close friend(s) had been hospitalized or died from COVID-19 (1 = yes; 0 = no)."
"43" "Parents’  Availability to Support Remote Learning . We also include a set of variables that may have influenced whether  parents were  available to provide support with learning  at home .  These variables  included an indicator of whether either the focal parent or the focal child’s other parent was not employed full-time at the time of the survey (1 = yes; 0 = no) and an indicator of whether the focal parent lost their job during the pandemic (1 = yes; 0 = no).  Given research showing that parents of very young children have experienced heighted challenges during the pandemic  (Collins et al. 2020) , we also include a binary indicator of whether parents have a child who is not yet school-age (1 = yes; 0 = no)."
"44" "Families’ Access to Outside Support . Given that parents may have had outside support with remote learning, we also include a set of binary indicators to this effect. That includes   an indicator of whether the parent formed or joined a pandemic “pod” at any point during the pandemic (1 = yes; 0 = no); an indicator of whether the parent hired a paid tutor / teacher during the pandemic (1 = yes; 0 = no); and an indicator of whether the parent asked an extended family member to provide support with remote learning or childcare during the pandemic (1 = yes; 0 = no)."
"45" "Additional Measures"
"46" "Finally, we  include other variables that may have been related to families’ access to and decisions regarding in-person instruction. Th ese  included some community-level variables as well as some parent -  and child-level factors."
"47" "Local Political Conditions . We linked respondents’ records to county-level (and in the case of Alaska, district-level) data on the 2020 presidential election. Vote totals—describing President Trump’s share of the two-party   vote—were scraped from results published by news outlets in the aftermath of the election and then attached to our survey data using geographic identifiers  (McGovern 2020) . Vote totals are expressed in percentage terms."
"48" "Parent Background Factors .   We  created several  measures of parents’ background characteristics , including  logged family income (expressed continuously using midpoints taken from a 16-category measure);  respondent’s gender (man; woman; or other/nonbinary); respondent’s marital status (married/cohabiting vs. all other); and respondent’s political affiliation  (1 = Democrat or leaning Democrat; 2 = Republican or leaning Republican; and 3 = independent or other party)."
"49" "Child Background Factors . We  also include child background factors  that may have influenced the family’s need for support with remote learning, including the age (continuous) and gender (boy; girl;  other/nonbinary) of the  parent’s youngest  school-age child.  In s upplemental analyses  we experimented with a  binary indicator of the child’s disability status, but this variable did not significantly predict either access to or decisions regarding in-person instruction, so we  elected not to use it in our main analysis."
"50" "Open-Ended Responses"
"51" "Parents were asked: “ In a few sentences, please explain how you and your family decided whether, where, and how  [the focal child]  would receive instruction during the current school year. ” 1,45 3  parents provided interpretable answers to this question. We coded these responses for evidence of  three  key themes, which we outline below.  These themes were non-exclusive, meaning that each response could receive more than one code , and some responses did not align with any of these themes . To check for reliability, we randomly selected 200  responses  to recode independent of the initial coding, and the resulting discrepancies (N=7) were  resolved ."
"52" "Choice : Whether parents mentioned that they did (1) or did not (2) have a choice regarding their child’s mode of instruction, or whether choice was not mentioned (0)."
"53" "Risks : Whether parents perceived the risks of in-person schooling as manageable (1) or unmanageable (2), or whether this was not mentioned (0)."
"54" "Availability : Whether parents described themselves or someone else being available (1) or unavailable (2) to support their child with at-home learning, or whether this was not mentioned (0)."
"55" "We then grouped coded responses by (1) access to in-person instruction (in-person versus remote-only), (2) mode of instruction for those with access to in-person instruction (in-person versus remote/homeschooling), and (3) parent’s race /ethnicity  and SES (high-SES white parents, high-SES parents of color, low-SES white parents, and low-SES parents of color).  As a final step, we  read the coded open-ended responses in each of the resulting twelve groups and wrote analytic memos describing the coding patterns in each of these groups and identifying outlier cases  (Hammersley and Atkinson 1995) ."
"56" "Regression Analyses"
"57" "In  the first part of our analysis , we  examine racial/ethnic and socioeconomic  stratification  in instruction. We  regress  an indicator of whether the focal child was receiving in-person instruction  onto  parent’s  race/ethnicity,  parents’  education, an d an  interaction between the two , with controls for the child’s age. Next, to determine how differences in access contribute to variation  in  in-person instruction, we refit our baseline model after restricting our sample to only those parents whose youngest school-age child had access to in-person instruction  at the time of the survey  (traditional or hybrid).  We also include an indicator for type of access: traditional vs. hybrid.  Finally, we consider how risk   and availability may  have   contributed  to racial/ethnic and socioeconomic variation in families’ decisions regarding in-person instruction over and above access. To do so, we add the full set of covariates described above to our “access only” model.  Binary outcomes (traditional or hybrid versus otherwise) were modeled using logistic regression . Supplementary analyses with  multinomial outcomes (traditional versus hybrid versus remote versus homeschool) were modeled using multinomial logistic regression.  All estimates are presented in the probability metric (predicted probabilities and average marginal effects) to aid interpretation and facilitate comparisons across differently specified models."
"58" "Quantitative Findings"
"59" "Stratification in In-Person Instruction"
"60" "We begin by examining variation in students’ participation in in-person (traditional or hybrid) versus non – in-person instruction (remote or homeschooling). Figure 1 shows parents’ predicted probabilities of reporting that their youngest school-age child was receiving in-person instruction in December 2020 for  ten different race/ethnicity by SES groups.  The plot on the left provides predicted probabilities for all students; the plot on the right is restricted to students who had access to in-person instruction.    Significant differences (at the p < .05 level) within racial/ethnic groups by SES are indicated with solid circles.   All models condition  on  the child’s age ."
"61" "[FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]"
"62" "Participation in in-person instruction varied by race/ethnicity and SES  (the left panel) , though not all differences were statistically significant. There were, for example, no significant differences between Black parents’ and white parents’ predicted probabilities of participating in in-person instruction after conditioning on SES  (parents’ education) .  Compared to   Latino/a  parents ,   predicted probabilities of in-person instruction were 10  percentage points  higher among  Black parents (p<0.05) and  9  percentage points  higher among  white parents (p<0.01).  Compared to   AAPI  parents , predicted probabilities of in-person instruction were also 20  percentage points  higher  among Black  parents  (p<0. 0 01),  20  percentage points  higher among  white  parents  (p<0.0 0 1), and  11  percentage points  higher among  Latino/a  parents (p<0.05)."
"63" "High-SES  Black parents  (i.e., those  in families  where at least one parent had a  bachelor’s degree )  had the highest predicted probability of participation in-person instruction (0.60), which was significantly different than the predicted probability among  lower-SES  Black parents (0.40;  p <0.01).  High-SES w hite parents had the next highest predicted probability of participation in in-person instruction (0.54).  Latino/a  parents had more moderate levels of participation in in-person instruction (0.44 among  high-SES families ; 0.37 among  lower-SES families ), as did parents from other/multiracial groups (0.33 among  high-SES families ; 0.43 among  lower-SES families ).  AAPI  parents had the lowest predicted probabilities of participation in in-person instruction (0.36 among  high-SES families ; 0.23 among  lower-SES families )."
"64" "How do racial/ethnic and SES differences in families’ access to in-person instruction contribute to differences in students’ participation in in-person instruction?  The right panel of Figure 1 includes these results. After accounting for differences in access,  the  only  differences between groups  that remained statistically significant were  between white parents and  AAPI  parents (0.15 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.05)  and between  high-SES and low-SES families  (0.06 difference; p<0.05)."
"65" "Among parents with access to in-person instruction, most chose the in-person option rather than keeping their children at home.  High-SES white  (0.66) and Black (0.65)  parents  had the highest predicted probabilities of participation in in-person instruction, but these probabilities were not significantly greater than those for  lower-SES  white (0.61) and Black (0.5 1 )  parents .  Latino/a  parents had more moderate levels of participation in in-person instruction (0.60 among  high-SES families ; 0.56 among  lower-SES families ), as did parents from other/multiracial groups (0.53 among  high-SES families ; 0.61 among  lower-SES families ). Meanwhile,  AAPI  parents had the lowest predicted probabilities of participation in in-person instruction (0.56 among  high-SES families ; 0.40 among  lower-SES families ). Notably,  lower-SES  AAPI  parents were the only group more likely to choose remote/homeschooling than in-person instruction, conditioning on access."
"66" "Explaining Stratification  in  In-Person Instruction: The Role of Risk and Availability"
"67" "Do  risk and  parental  availability further explain  the  racial/ethnic and SES-based differences described above ?  Table  2  presents predicted probabilities of participation in in-person instruction, conditioning on access to in-person instruction and the full set of controls, with p values for differences by  SES ( parents’ education )  within each racial/ethnic group. Table  3  then compares predicted probabilities of participation in-person instruction across racial/ethnic groups, by  SES , and based on other factors included in the models, again conditioning on access, with p values for differences between groups."
"68" "[TABLES 2 AND 3 ABOUT HERE]"
"69" "Our fully specified models reveal that  accounting for  differences in risk and availability  rendered all remaining  racial/ethnic and SES differences in students’ participation in in-person schooling statistically insignificant.  This finding likely reflects the fact that  risk and availability  varied  systematically across racial/ethnic and SES groups .  In supplementary analyses, we  examin ed  differences in risk and  parental  availability for our ten race/ethnicity-by-SES groups.  Black parents and lower-SES parents were significantly more likely than white parents and higher-SES parents to report that they or someone in their network was hospitalized or died from COVID-19. County and state COVID rates, however, were more similar across groups, with the exception of AAPI families, who were s ignificantly  less likely than other parents to live in states and counties with high rates of COVID infections .  With respect to availability, we  found that   lower-SES parents were significantly more likely than higher-SES parents to  lose  their job during the pandemic, and that lower-SES parents and AAPI and other/multiracial parents were disproportionately likely to be in a household where at least one parent was not working for pay full-time."
"70" "Our fully specified models also show how risk   and availability are related to parents’ decisions regarding in-person instruction. In terms of risk, we find that greater risk, especially at the local level, is associated with a greater likelihood of avoiding in-person instruction. Parents living in counties with more COVID-19 cases per capita  were  significantly less likely to choose in-person instruction (+1SD = -0.05 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.05). By contrast, parents living in states with more COVID-19 cases per capita  were  significantly  more  likely to choose in-person instruction (+1SD = 0.04 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.05) .  In terms of individual-level risk, parents who report COVID-19 hospitalizations or deaths in their networks are not significantly different from those who have not experienced those illnesses/deaths in their decisions regarding in-person instruction."
"71" "In terms of availability, we find that families with more limited availability to support at-home learning were generally more likely to choose in-person instruction. Parents who did not lose their job during the pandemic were significantly more likely than parents who did lose their job to choose in-person instruction (0.12 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.05). Similarly, parents in families where all parents were employed full-time were significantly more likely to choose in-person instruction than parents in families where at least one parent was not employed full-time (0.09 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.01).  Supplementary analyses revealed that , among parents who were employed pre-pandemic,  job losses were particularly common among  lower-SES Latina mothers (45%), lower-SES multiracial/other-race mothers (24%), higher-SES Black mothers (20%), lower-SES white mothers (16%), and lower-SES Latino fathers (16%).  A mong all other racial/ethnic and SES groups,  7 % or  less of  parents who were employed pre-pandemic lost their jobs."
"72" "In terms of outside support,  parents  with support from  a pandemic “pod” were significantly less likely than parents  without  “pod s ” to choose in-person instruction (-0.08 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.05).  Supplementary analyses revealed that,  compared to lower-SES parents, and accounting for racial/ethnic differences, higher-SES parents were significantly more likely to  have  pandemic “pod s .” After conditioning on SES,  there were no significant racial/ethnic differences in pod  support . Lower-SES white families  had  the lowest rate  of pod access  (8%); the highest rates  of pod  support  were among higher-SES white (15%), Black (16%), and Latino/a parents (16%) ."
"73" "In our fully-specified models, most other community-level and family-level factors were not associated with differences in parents’ decisions regarding in-person instruction. That said, we did find marginally significant differences based on income and parents’ political affiliations. Higher-income families were more likely to choose in-person instruction (+1SD = 0.03 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.10). Compared to Democrats, Republican parents were also more likely to choose in-person instruction (0.06 difference in predicted probabilities; p<0.10)."
"74" "Qualitative Elaborations"
"75" "Our quantitative findings revealed that, after accounting for differences in access, risk, and parental availability, high-SES white, Black, Latino/a, and AAPI parents chose in-person instruction at fairly similar rates (0.63, 0.65, 0.58, and 0.55 predicted probabilities), and that lower-SES white, Black, Latino/a, and (to a lesser extent) AAPI parents chose in-person instruction at roughly equal rates, as well (0.61, 0.54, 0.60, and 0.46 predicted probabilities). Not surprisingly, then, our qualitative analyses revealed that parents from different racial/ethnic and SES groups considered access, risk, and parental availability in similar ways when making decisions about in-person versus remote school."
"76" "Parents without Access to In-Person Instruction"
"77" "C onsidering those parents whose schools offered only remote instruction, we found that risk and availability played key roles in determining whether parents were frustrated or satisfied with remote-only instruction."
"78" "Frustration with Remote-Only Instruction . Parents with limited availability (i.e., those employed full-time) often expressed frustration with remote-only instruction. That was particularly true if they did not have outside support with remote learning and if their children were young enough to need considerable hands-on support. Because high-SES white parents were the most likely to have limited availability, such comments were common among that group. Yet, parents from other racial/ethnic and SES groups who had limited availability expressed similar sentiments."
"79" "“With them at home, [I] cannot get [a] job.”  [#1159; high-SES AAPI mother in California whose kindergartner and fourth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; bachelor’s degree; married; Independent; left her full-time job in procurement because of the pandemic;  2019 household income  $50,000-$59,999]"
"80" "“We have no choice and it’s very frustrating.” [#985; high-SES white father in Indiana whose ninth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; bachelor’s degree; not married/cohabiting; Independent; full-time broker; $60,000-$74,999]"
"81" "“ We are going with the same school he went with last year for elementary. The only difference is the fact that we didn't want remote. We had no choice. ” [#2682; lower-SES Latino father in Kansas whose first-grader’s school  was offering only remote instruction;  some college;  married; Republican; full-time optician; $30,000-$39,999 ]"
"82" "“The kids need to be back in school. Period.” [#1085; lower-SES AAPI father in California whose tenth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; associate’s degree; married; Independent near Republican; was working full-time as a software tester pre-pandemic but reduced hours to part-time because of remote learning; $75,000-$99,999]"
"83" "“ We couldn’t afford private school ,  so we chose public in - person ,  but they have since switched to remote .” [#629; high-SES white mother in California whose fifth- grader’s  and eighth-grader’s schools were only offering remote instruction; master’s degree; married; Democrat; full-time teacher; $150,000-$199, 999 ]"
"84" "Satisfaction  with Remote-Only Instruction . Some parents, by contrast, expressed satisfaction with remote-only instruction, often noting the potential risks of in-person school. This satisfaction was particularly common among parents whose families had someone available (a parent, other family member, paid teacher, or pandemic pod) to support remote learning or whose children were old enough to learn at home without adult support. As a result, many of these comments came from lower-SES parents and parents of color; yet, high-SES white parents with availability to support remote learning  often  expressed  similar views."
"85" "“ Her school is only offering remote learning and we agree that is the safest choice. ” [#1304; lower-SES white mother in Vermont whose fourth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; associate’s degree; married; Independent; homemaker; $25,000-$29,999]"
"86" "“ We saw how virus was killing people and didn’t want to risk anyone’s life in danger due to virus and thus decided this .”  [#98; high-SES AAPI mother in California whose kindergartner’s school was offering only  remote instruction; bachelor’s degree; married; Independent near Democrat; homemaker; $40,000-$49,999]"
"87" "“[Our daughter]  opted for remote instruction at her high school because she was afraid of catching COVID and spreading it to her elderly grandparents .” [#1029; high-SES white father in New Jersey whose tenth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; bachelor’s degree; married; Republican; employed full-time in finance; $200,000-$299,999; asked a family member for support with remote learning]"
"88" "“ I  [would]  rather school at home because  I  don ’ t want him get t ing sick .” [# 564 ; lower-SES Latina mother in  Michigan whose second-grader and seventh-grader’s schools were offering only remote instruction; did not complete high school; married; Independent; lost her part-time job during the pandemic; less than $15,000; formed a pandemic “pod”]"
"89" "“ His school is excellent making sure he is on top with his school and so are we keep on top making sure he is doing his work .” [#187; lower-SES Black mother in  Virginia  whose eleventh- and twelfth-grader’s school was offering only remote instruction; high school graduate; married; Democrat; homemaker; $75,000-$99,999; formed a pandemic “pod”]"
"90" "Parents with Access: Choosing In-Person"
"91" "Next, we found that risk and availability played a key role in parents’  reasons  for choosing in-person schooling  when given the option ."
"92" "Choosing In-Person for Risk-Reasons.  Many parents who chose in-person instruction linked those decisions to the low rates of infection in their communities and/or to the steps local schools were taking to keep children safe. These comments were particularly common among high-SES white parents who chose in-person instruction , but  other parents who chose in-person instruction often  offered   similar  reasons."
"93" "“ We live in a very remote town in SE Alaska, in the last 9 months we have had 9 cases of covid, and have a strict city wide (and school wide) mask mandate. We are a very low risk community. We kept our kids at home for the first quarter (even though our school opened in-person) and we felt comfortable enough to send them in person starting second quarter. ”  [#1673; high-SES white mother in Alaska who chose traditional instruction for her second-grader; some college; married; Democrat; full-time innkeeper; $60,000-$74,999]"
"94" "“All the precautions the school made to make it safe, like everyone wear a mask, created additional lunch periods so kids will be 6 feet apart, the school provided water bottles to be filled at home and brought to school, school also provided the masks, Lysol wipes and spacing in the classrooms.”  [#1830;  lower-SES Black mother in Texas who chose traditional instruction for her first-grader;  high school degree; divorced; Democrat; retired; $40,000-$49,999]"
"95" "“We followed the recommendations of his school and the school system.  We may not agree with all of their decisions, but we feel they have the children's and the teachers’ best interest in mind.” [#557; higher -SES Black father in Georgia ,  who chose hybrid instruction for  his seventh-grader ; bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat; full-time software engineer ; $100,000-$149,999 ]"
"96" "“We decided on the traditional school setting because we had confidence that the school [our son] attends and specifically his classroom were doing everything possible to ensure that the children were in a safe environment at school. Also, it would have been difficult coordinating virtual schooling with me and my wife’s individual schedules.” [#2351; high-SES white father in Virginia who chose traditional instruction for his second-grader; bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat; full-time benefits specialist; $40,000-$49,999]"
"97" "Choosing In-Person for Availability Reasons.  Like this last father, and even if they had concerns about the safety of in-person schooling, many parents who chose in-person instruction described doing so because of their limited availability to support remote learning. That limited availability reflected either the challenges of combining full-time paid work and full-time parenting or the challenges of supporting multiple children learning at home. Such responses were common not only among higher-SES white parents who chose in-person instruction but also among in-person parents from other racial/ethnic and SES groups."
"98" "“We decided to continue with the status quo of in person learning because we couldn’t take time off to care for her during the day.”  [#128; higher-SES  AAPI/Latino father in New York who chose traditional  instruction for his first-grader ; bachelor’s degree; married;  I ndependent; full-time social worker ; $40,000-$49,999 ]"
"99" "“We [were] going to do virtual at first but didn’t have any one to help with it. So we decided to just send him to school.”  [ #475;  lower-SES Black father in Virginia who chose traditional instruction for his sixth- grader;  high school diploma;  not married/cohabiting ; Independent; full-time caterer ; $20,000-$24,999]"
"100" "“Both us parents still have to work full time so either we have had to take unpaid time off or  take them to work. Their social well-being is challenged .”   [ #2163;  lower-SES Latino father in California who chose hybrid for his third-grader and seventh-grader;  associate’s degree; divorced; Democrat; full-time zookeeper ; $50,000-$59,999 ]"
"101" "“ I am a single working mother and I needed my son to be in school so that I can work and provide for the family. I do not have the luxury of homeschooling. ”  [#654; high-SES white mother in Maine who chose traditional instruction for her first-grader; bachelor’s degree; not married/cohabiting; Democrat; full-time assistant teacher; $50,000-$59,999]"
"102" "“ I knew that he would not do well with remote learning ,  because the school will give him what I cannot.  Also, me not working is not an option as a single mom. All I can do is pray for the best. ” [#255; lower-SES Black mother in Louisiana who chose traditional instruction for her third-grader; associate’s degree; not married/cohabiting; Democrat; full-time paralegal ; $20,000-$24,999 ]"
"103" "“Schooling my 3 children remotely was extremely difficult for me. I was running very low on patience, they were frustrated most of the time, and [my kindergartner] was often bored as he is very energetic. It was also very difficult for him to focus on the virtual class for much longer than an hour, so he was learning very little. Despite the risks of in-person instruction, we knew he would learn a lot more and enjoy his days much more going to school in person. He would also be attending the same school and have the same Kinder teacher that his siblings did, so we knew he would feel fairly at ease.”  [#1477; higher-SES Latina mother in California who chose traditional instruction for her kindergartner, third-grader, and fourth-grader; bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat; homemaker; $150,000-$199, 999 ]"
"104" "Parents with Access: Choosing Remote/Homeschooling"
"105" "Among parents who chose remote instruction or homeschooling over in-person school, risk and availability were also common themes."
"106" "Choosing  Remote  for Risk-Reasons.  Across racial/ethnic and SES groups, parents who chose remote or homeschooling often linked those decisions to the risks of in-person instruction. That included risks  related to high rates of COVID-19 transmission in their communities and risks related to having a family member at high - risk for complications from COVID-19."
"107" "“It was really just based on purely covid 19.  [My son’s] immune system is weak, he had issues at birth with his breathing and was on an apnea monitor for the first year of his life.  He later developed Kawasaki Disease when he was 8 years old and that's when his physician said that he has and likely will always have a weak immune system.” [#1217; lower -SES white  mother   in  Georgia, who chose homeschooling over traditional  for her eight-grader;  some college; married; Democrat ; left her job as an assistant store manager during the pandemic; $30,000-$39,999 ]"
"108" "“ [My daughter] is high risk for the coronavirus do to her having Cerebral Palsy.  This virus causes clotting concerns as well as neurological issues.  We were and still are not changing her health for an education. Luckily I am a certified teacher birth through 6 t h grade and can educate her on my own.”  [#1635; high-SES white mother in Florida, who chose remote over traditional for her kindergartner;  bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat;  left her job as a  preschool teacher  during the pandemic; $60,000-$74,000 ]"
"109" "“We decided because we have older relatives who [my son] is around a lot and we know if he gets [sick] at school he passes it on so it’s better for him to stay home and not give that risk.”  [#2572; higher-SES Black/Latina mother in Illinois who chose remote over hybrid for her third-grader; bachelor’s degree; in a relationship but not cohabiting; Democrat; full-time store manager; $40,000-$49,999 in 2019; formed a pandemic “pod” and hired a private teacher or tutor for support with remote learning]"
"110" "“ Safety of the child was the top priority during the pandemic .” [#1588; higher-SES AAPI mother in Pennsylvania who chose remote over hybrid for her first-grader; bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat; part-time sales associate; $50,000-$59,999]"
"111" "“I am disabled so I was already home during the day. Allowing her to attend school in person was not an option to me. I'm high-risk and she has a baby sister. I don't know what I would do if anyone in my immediate family got sick. That was more important than any difficulty we would confront during remote learning.” [ #2678; l ower-SES Latina mother in Ohio, who chose remote over traditional  for her third-grader ; some college; married; Independent; not working for pay; $100,000-$149, 999 ]"
"112" "Choosing  Remote  for  Availability  Reasons.  Like this last mother, many parents who chose remote or homeschooling also linked those decisions to their family’s ability to support children’s learning at  home. In some cases, that support came from a parent. In other cases, that support came from another family member or from a private tutor or learning pod. Those comments, in turn, came from parents across different racial/ethnic and SES groups."
"113" "“ I am a certified teacher and felt comfortable homeschooling  [my daughter] . We chose this option because our local school was beginning the year with hybrid learning coming off full time online learning from the end of last school year. Homeschooling allows more consistent instruction, more individualized curriculum and safer environment. ”   [#888; high-SES white mother in Washington who chose homeschool over traditional for her second-grader; master’s degree; married; independent; part-time math instructor; $100,000-$149,999]"
"114" "“I am willing to stay home to protect [my daughter] from the pandemic.”  [#1076; lower-SES Black mother in California, who chose remote over hybrid for her first-grader; associate’s degree; married; Democrat; homemaker and part-time student; less than $15,000]"
"115" "“ It was decided that he would stay with family when learning as it would make it harder to contract coronavirus. ” [#60; lower-SES Latina mother in Texas, who chose remote over traditional for her kindergartner; high school degree; not in a relationship and never married; Independent; full-time clerk; less than $15,000; asked a family member for support with remote learning]"
"116" "“ There is  [a]  private instructor help [ ing ]  him to finish homework .” [#2992; higher-SES AAPI father in New Jersey, who chose remote over hybrid for his eighth-grader; bachelor’s degree; married; Democrat; full-time IT manager; $100,000-$149,999; hired a private teacher/tutor for support with remote learning]"
"117" "Taken together, our qualitative analyses echo in our quantitative analyses in suggesting that racial/ethnic and SES variations in families’ decisions about in-person schooling during the pandemic were driven largely by inequalities in their circumstances. That included inequalities in access to in-person schooling, inequalities in the risks in-person schooling created for their families, and inequalities in their availability to support their children’s learning at home. Families with limited availability tended to choose in-person instruction and express frustrations when their schools did not provide that option. Meanwhile, families who had high-risk family members and lived in communities with high rates of viral  transmission tended to choose remote or homeschooling and to express satisfaction when their children’s schools offered remote-only instruction."
"118" "Discussion"
"119" "The COVID-19 pandemic stratified school-based instruction  ( Belsha  et al. 2020; Saavedra et al. 2020; Smith and Reeves 2020) , leaving white and higher-SES  students  disproportionately receiving in-person instruction and students of color and lower-SES students disproportionate ly  learning from home  (USDOE 2021) .  W e find that these patterns of stratification can be explained by inequalities in families’ access to in-person instruction ,  in the risks associated with in-person instruction ,  and in families’ availability to support their children’s learning at home.  Compared to lower-SES parents and parents of color, higher-SES parents and white parents were more likely to have access to in-person instruction, less likely to face high rates of COVID-19 infection in their communities and social networks, and less likely to have lost their jobs during the pandemic  (Boesch and Phadke 2021; Camp and Zamarro 2021; Moen, Pedtke, and Flood 2020; Pirtle 2020; Pirtle and Wright 2021; Saavedra et al. 2020) ."
"120" "Given those inequalities ,  and  after accounting for differences in access, risk, and parental availability, we find no significant differences between white, Black, Latino/a, and AAPI parents or between high-SES and low-SES parents in their likelihood of choosing in-person school. Our qualitative analyses also provide further evidence of these  mechanisms . We find  that  full-time employed parents, regardless of race/ethnicity and SES, often chose in-person instruction to alleviate the stress of combining full-time parenting and full-time paid work,  even if they were concerned about the risks of in-person schooling. Meanwhile,  parents with high-risk family members often chose remote instruction, particularly when they or another adult  (e.g., an extended family member, paid teacher/tutor, or pandemic pod)  was available to provide support with remote learning.  In some cases, however, parents  (especially mothers) with high-risk family members  did leave their jobs to facilitate keeping their children at home."
"121" "Clarifying  the Source of  Stratification in In-Person Instruction"
"122" "From a policy perspective, our study helps to clarify the nature and extent of racial/ethnic divisions in parents’ decisions regarding in-person school. Some large, urban districts like the New York City Public Schools saw large Black-white differences in families’ school decisions  (Shapiro 2020) . Based on those patterns, policymakers and activists have treated in-person schooling as a racially divisive issue. As our analyses reveal, however, the story of in-person schooling cannot simply be summarized in terms of a Black-white divide.  Conditioning on SES , white parents and Black parents were roughly equally likely to have children participating in in-person instruction, and they were roughly equally likely to choose in-person instruction when given the choice between in-person and remote school. In fact, high-SES Black parents were the group most likely to say that their youngest school-age child was receiving in-person instruction (0.60 predicted probability). High-SES Black parents were also just as likely as high-SES white parents to choose in-person instruction when they were given the choice between in-person and remote, and that was true even in our minimally specified models (0.65 vs. 0.66 predicted probabilities). By contrast, lower-SES Black parents were substantially less likely to report that their children were enrolled in in-person instruction (0.40) and to choose in-person schooling when given the option (0.51)."
"123" "Such findings indicate that the Black-white instructional differences observed in cities like New York  (Shapiro 2020)  may reflect, at least in part, the deep socioeconomic disparities between Black and white families in those cities. As research has shown, cities like New York are not only racially segregated but also deeply segregated by socioeconomic status  ( Cucchiara  2013; Duncan and Murnane 2014; Hunter and Robinson 2018; Owens 2016; Reardon and Bischoff 2011; Shedd 2015) . That segregation concentrates lower-SES students (and especially lower-SES students of color) in schools with limited resources  (Darling-Hammond 2013; Duncan and Murnane 2011; Owens 2016;  Wodtke , Harding, and  Elwert  2011) . During the pandemic, that segregation has also concentrated lower-SES families (especially lower-SES families of color) in areas with high exposure to COVID-19 and limited resources for addressing health disparities  (Garcia et al. 2020; McClure et al. 2020; Pirtle 2020; Pirtle and Wright 2021; Sewell 2016) . As our qualitative data reveal, those increased risks, especially in the context of  limited resources for school  safety measures, seem to have led lower-SES parents of color to disproportionately chose remote instruction or homeschooling over in-person school."
"124" "Of course, this does not mean that socioeconomic inequalities mattered more than racial inequalities for families’ access to and decisions regarding in-person schooling. Rather, our results highlight the importance of recognizing how racism contributes to the socioeconomic marginalization of people of color and how lower-SES people of color are multiply marginalized, not only by the public school system but also by other U.S. institutions  (Elliott and Bowen 2018; Elliott and Reid 2019; Hunter and Robinson 2016; Pager and Shepherd 2008; Phelan and Link 2015) . As one  lower-SES  Black father  in North Carolina  wrote ,  explaining why he  chose  remote instruction over hybrid for his 2nd-grader: “ Because the coronavirus is eth n ically cleansing black and brown people. Republicans like it that way. Less people can vote. Another form of voter suppression. ” [#2367]"
"125" "The Consequences of Pandemic Inequalities"
"126" "To that end, our research highlights the need to focus on how students, families, and schools have been  unequally impacted by the pandem ic , and not just on how  stratification in instruction  may  amplify  longstanding inequalities in schools   ( Engzell  et al. 2020;  Kuhfeld  et al. 2020;  Sabates  et al. 2021) ."
"127" "We find, for example, that stratification in  pandemic  instruction  was inextricably linked to longstanding health inequalities and to the pandemic’s disproportionate impact on low-SES families and families of color ( Camp and  Zamarro  2021;  Phelan  et al.  2010;  Pirtle 2020;  Pirtle and Wright 2021 ).     Our quantitative analyses showed that families  living in communities hit hardest by COVID-19 were less likely  to choose in-person instruction when given that option . 2   Meanwhile,  our  open-ended responses revealed that  many lower-SES parents and parents of color  avoided in-person instruction because they had household members at high risk of complications from COVID-19.   Children living in  communities hit hard by the pandemic , those living with high-risk family members, and those who lost loved ones  to COVID-19 have  likely experienced substantial stress and trauma—trauma that may impact how they engage and perform in school (Fletcher et al. 2013;  Grinage  2019). Thus, e fforts to understand the consequences of remote instruction must account for the differential  health  risks  and consequences  that families and children have faced."
"128" "We also find a  clear  link between stratified instruction and inequalities in families’ availability to support children’s learning at home. Prior research has highlighted the challenges that families (especially mothers) have faced in combining pandemic parenting and paid work  (Carlson, Petts, and Pepin 2020; Collins et al. 2021;  Landivar  et al. 2020;  Lyttelton  et al. 2020; Moen et al. 2020; Petts, Carlson, and Pepin 2021;  Prados  and  Zamarro  2020;  Ruppanner  et al. 2021) . Building on those findings,  our  quantitative  analyses show that  parents who did not lose their jobs during the pandemic and parents in households where all parents were employed full-time during the pandemic were significantly and substantially more likely than other parents to choose in-person instruction. Echoing these findings, our qualitative analyses reveal that  parental availability was  a key factor for many parents. That included the higher-SES parents and white parents who were disproportionately likely to remain employed full-time during the pandemic  ( Boesch  and  Phadke  2021; Moen et al. 2020) , but it also included many lower-SES parents and parents of color who remained employed full-time. Our open-ended responses also highlighted the frustrations of many full-time employed parents whose schools remained remote-only during the pandemic and  were  unable to  secure   outside  support.  These extended school closures even pushed some parents (especially mothers) out of the workforce ( see also  Collins et al. 2021).  Given these findings, it is important to consider the support children had at home during the pandemic when  examining the consequences of a shift to remote school.  Prior research has highlighted the importance of adult support for students’ success in school  (Calarco 2020; Davies 2004; Haley-Lock and Posey-Maddox 2016; Muller 1995; Park et al. 2016; Posadas and Vidal-Fernandez 2013) , and  students without that support may have had a much more difficult time with remote instruction than students who had access to parental or other forms of support."
"129" "Conclusions"
"130" "In sum, this study suggests that racial/ethnic and SES variations in families’ decisions about pandemic instruction were driven largely by  pandemic and pre-pandemic inequalities that left families facing stratified access to in-person instruction, stratified risks related to in-person instruction, and stratified parental availability to support children’s learning at home.  Families with limited availability tended to choose in-person instruction  because of the challenges of combining paid work and remote learning . Meanwhile, families who had high-risk family members and lived in communities with high rates of viral transmission tended to  choose remote instruction or homeschooling, particularly if they also had someone available to provide support with remote learning.   Such findings suggest that unless out-of-school inequalities  in families’ employment and health risk status  are addressed, parents may remain divided in their trust of and demand for in-person school , even after the pandemic ends."
"131" "References"
"132" "Bambra, Clare, Ryan Riordan, John Ford, and Fiona Matthews. 2020. “The COVID-19 Pandemic and Health Inequalities.”  J Epidemiol Community Health  74(11):964–68."
"133" "Barrios, John M., and Yael Hochberg. 2020.  Risk Perception Through the Lens of Politics in the Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic .  Working Paper . 27008. National Bureau of Economic Research."
"134" "Belsha , Kalyn, Michael  Rubinkam , Gabrielle  LeMarr   LeMee , and Larry Fenn. 2020. “A Nationwide Divide: Hispanic and Black Students More Likely than White Students to Start the Year Online.”  Chalkbeat . Retrieved March 10, 2021 (https://www.chalkbeat.org/2020/9/11/21431146/hispanic-and-black-students-more-likely-than-white-students-to-start-the-school-year-online)."
"135" "Bischoff, Kendra. 2008. “School District Fragmentation and Racial Residential Segregation: How Do Boundaries Matter?”  Urban Affairs Review  44(2):182–217."
"136" "Bischoff, Kendra, and Ann Owens. 2019. “The Segregation of Opportunity: Social and Financial Resources in the Educational Contexts of Lower- and Higher-Income Children, 1990–2014.”  Demography  56(5):1635–64.  doi : 10.1007/s13524-019-00817-y."
"137" "Blustein , David L., and Paige A. Guarino. 2020. “Work and Unemployment in the Time of COVID-19: The Existential Experience of Loss and Fear.”  Journal of Humanistic Psychology  60(5):702–9."
"138" "Boesch , Diana, and Shilpa  Phadke . 2021.  When Women Lose All the Jobs: Essential Actions for a Gender-Equitable Recovery . Center for American Progress."
"139" "Calarco, Jessica McCrory. 2020. “Avoiding Us versus Them: How Schools’ Dependence on Privileged ‘Helicopter’ Parents Influences Enforcement of Rules.”  American Sociological Review  85(2):223–46."
"140" "Calarco, Jessica McCrory, Elizabeth Anderson, Emily Victoria Meanwell, and Amelia Knopf. 2020.  “Let’s Not Pretend It’s Fun”: How COVID-19-Related School and Childcare Closures Are Damaging Mothers’ Well-Being .  preprint .  SocArXiv ."
"141" "Camera, Lauren. 2020. “Schools Need $245 Billion From Federal Government to Reopen Safely | Education News | US News.”  U.S. News & World Reports ."
"142" "Camp, Andrew and  Gema   Zamarro . 2021.  Determinants of Ethnic Differences in School Modality Choices during the COVID-19 Crisis . Preprint. Annenberg Institute at Brown University.  https://www.edworkingpapers.com/ai21-374"
"143" "Carlson, Daniel L., Richard Petts, and Joanna R. Pepin. 2020.  US Couples’ Divisions of Housework and Childcare during COVID-19 Pandemic .  preprint .  SocArXiv ."
"144" "Chingos , Matthew, and  Blagg , Kristen. 2017.  Making Sense of State School Funding Policy . Urban Institute."
"145" "Cohn,  D’Vera , Gretchen Livingston, and Wendy Wang. 2014. “Stay-at-Home Moms by Demographic Group.”  Pew Research Center’s Social & Demographic Trends Project . Retrieved May 2, 2021 (https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2014/04/08/chapter-2-stay-at-home-mothers-by-demographic-group/)."
"146" "Collins, Caitlyn, Liana Christin  Landivar , Leah  Ruppanner , and William J. Scarborough. 2020. “COVID-19 and the Gender Gap in Work Hours.”  Gender, Work & Organization  n/a(n/a)."
"147" "Collins, Caitlyn, Leah  Ruppanner , Liana Christin  Landivar , and William Scarborough. 2021. “The Gendered Consequences of a Weak Infrastructure of Care: School Reopening Plans and Parents’ Employment During the COVID-19 Pandemic.”"
"148" "Cucchiara , Maia Bloomfield. 2013.  Marketing Schools, Marketing Cities . University of Chicago Press."
"149" "Darling-Hammond, Linda. 2013. “Inequality and School Resources: What It Will Take to Close the Opportunity Gap.” Pp. 77–97 in  Closing the Opportunity Gap: What America Must Do to Give Every Child an Even Chance , edited by P. L. Carter and K. G.  Welner . Oxford University Press."
"150" "Davies, Scott. 2004. “School Choice by Default? Understanding the Demand for Private Tutoring in Canada.”  American Journal of Education  110(3):233–55."
"151" "DeAngelis, Corey, and Christos  Makridis . 2020.  Are School Reopening Decisions Related to Union Influence?   SSRN Scholarly Paper . ID 3684867. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network."
"152" "Dey, Matthew, Hazel  Frazis , Rachel Krantz-Kent, Mark A. Loewenstein, and  Hugette  Sun. 2020.  Ability to Work from Home: Evidence from Two Surveys and Implications for the Labor Market in the COVID-19 Pandemic . U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics."
"153" "Dong,  Ensheng ,  Hongru  Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020. “An Interactive Web-Based Dashboard to Track COVID-19 in Real Time.”  The Lancet Infectious Diseases  20(5):533–34."
"154" "Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane. 2011.  Whither Opportunity?: Rising Inequality, Schools, and Children’s Life Chances . Russell Sage Foundation."
"155" "Duncan, Greg J., and Richard J. Murnane. 2014. “Growing Income Inequality Threatens American Education.”  Phi Delta  Kappan  95(6):8–14."
"156" "EdWeek . 2020. “Map: Coronavirus and School Closures - Education Week.”  Education Week , March 6."
"157" "Elliott,  Sinikka , and Sarah Bowen. 2018. “Defending Motherhood: Morality, Responsibility, and Double Binds in Feeding Children.”  Journal of Marriage and Family  80(2):499–520."
"158" "Elliott,  Sinikka , and Megan Reid. 2019. “Low-Income Black Mothers Parenting Adolescents in the Mass Incarceration Era: The Long Reach of Criminalization.”  American Sociological Review  84(2):197–219."
"159" "Engzell , Per, Arun Frey, and Mark D.  Verhagen . 2020.  Learning Inequality During the Covid-19 Pandemic .  SocArXiv . ve4z7. Center for Open Science."
"160" "Fletcher, Jason, Marsha  Mailick ,  Jieun  Song, and Barbara Wolfe. 2013. “A Sibling Death in the Family: Common and Consequential,”  Demography  50(3):803-826."
"161" "Frankenberg, Erica. 2009. “Splintering School Districts: Understanding the Link between Segregation and Fragmentation.”  Law & Social Inquiry  34(4):869–909."
"162" "Gamoran, Adam, and Brian P. An. 2016. “Effects of School Segregation and School Resources in a Changing Policy Context.”  Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis  38(1):43–64."
"163" "Garbe , Amber, Uzeyir  Ogurlu , Nikki Logan, and Perry Cook. 2020. “Parents’ Experiences with Remote Education during COVID-19 School Closures.”  American Journal of Qualitative Research  4(3):45–65."
"164" "Garcia, Marc A., Patricia A. Homan, Catherine García, and Tyson H. Brown. 2020. “The Color of COVID-19: Structural Racism and the Pandemic’s Disproportionate Impact on Older Racial and Ethnic Minorities.”  The Journals of Gerontology ."
"165" "Gilbert, Leah K., Tara W.  Strine , Leigh E.  Szucs , Tamara N. Crawford, Sharyn E. Parks, Danielle T.  Barradas , Rashid  Njai , and Jean Y. Ko. 2020. “Racial and Ethnic Differences in Parental Attitudes and Concerns About School Reopening During the COVID-19 Pandemic — United States, July 2020.”  MMWR. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report  69."
"166" "Goldstein, Dana, and Eliza Shapiro. 2020. “‘I Don’t Want to Go Back’: Many Teachers Are Fearful and Angry Over Pressure to Return.”  The New York Times , July 11."
"167" "Gramlich , John. 2020. “What the 2020 Electorate Looks like by Party, Race and Ethnicity, Age, Education and Religion.”  Pew Research Center ."
"168" "Grinage , Justin. 2019. “ Endless Mourning: Racial Melancholia, Black Grief, and the Transformative Possibilities For Racial Justice in Education ,”  Harvard Educational Review  89(2):227-250."
"169" "Haley-Lock, A., and L. Posey-Maddox. 2016. “Fitting It All in: How Mothers’ Employment Shapes Their School Engagement.”  Community, Work & Family  19(3):302–21."
"170" "Hammersley, Martyn, and Paul Atkinson. 1995.  Ethnography: Principles in Practice . Psychology Press."
"171" "Hemphill, Annie A., and Bradley D.  Marianno . 2021. “Teachers’ Unions, Collective Bargaining, and the Response to COVID-19.”  Education Finance and Policy  16(1):170–82."
"172" "Holme , Jennifer J., and Kara S. Finnigan. 2013. “School Diversity, School District Fragmentation and Metropolitan Policy.”  Teachers College Record  29."
"173" "Hunter, Marcus Anthony, and  Zandria  Robinson. 2018.  Chocolate Cities: The Black Map of American Life . Univ of California Press."
"174" "Hunter, Marcus Anthony, and  Zandria  F. Robinson. 2016. “The Sociology of Urban Black America.”  Annual Review of Sociology  42:385–405."
"175" "Kuhfeld , Megan, James  Soland , Beth  Tarasawa , Angela Johnson, Erik  Ruzek , and Jing Liu. 2020. “Projecting the Potential Impact of COVID-19 School Closures on Academic Achievement.”  Educational Researcher  49(8):549–65."
"176" "Landivar , Liana Christin, Leah  Ruppanner , William J. Scarborough, and Caitlyn Collins. 2020. “Early Signs Indicate That COVID-19 Is Exacerbating Gender Inequality in the Labor Force.”  Socius  6:2378023120947997."
"177" "Leachman , Michael, Kathleen Masterson, and Eric Figueroa. 2017.  A Punishing Decade for School Funding . Washington, DC: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities."
"178" "Limbers, Christine A. 2021. “Factors Associated with Caregiver Preferences for Children’s Return to School during the COVID-19 Pandemic.”  Journal of School Health  91(1):3–8."
"179" "Lyttelton , Thomas, Emma Zang, and Kelly  Musick . 2020.  Gender Differences in Telecommuting and Implications for Inequality at Home and Work .  SSRN Scholarly Paper . ID 3645561. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network."
"180" "McClure, Elizabeth S., Pavithra Vasudevan,  Zinzi  Bailey,  Snehal  Patel, and Whitney R. Robinson. 2020. “Racial Capitalism Within Public Health—How Occupational Settings Drive COVID-19 Disparities.”  American Journal of Epidemiology  189(11):1244–53."
"181" "McGovern, Tony. 2020. “US County Level Election Results.”  GitHub . Retrieved March 19, 2021 (https://github.com/tonmcg)."
"182" "Miller, Claire Cain. 2020. “In the Same Towns, Private Schools Are Reopening While Public Schools Are Not.”  The New York Times , July 16."
"183" "Moen, Phyllis, Joseph H.  Pedtke , and Sarah Flood. 2020. “Disparate Disruptions: Intersectional COVID-19 Employment Effects by Age, Gender, Education, and Race/Ethnicity.”  Work, Aging and Retirement ."
"184" "Muller, Chandra. 1995. “Maternal Employment, Parent Involvement, and Mathematics Achievement among Adolescents.”  Journal of Marriage and Family  57(1):85–100."
"185" "Murray, Brittany, Thurston  Domina , Linda  Renzulli , and Rebecca Boylan. 2019. “Civil Society Goes to School: Parent-Teacher Associations and the Equality of Educational Opportunity.”  RSF: The Russell Sage Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences  5(3):41–63."
"186" "NCES. 2020. “Public and Private School Comparison.”  National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved March 12, 2021 (https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=55)."
"187" "Nepomuceno,  Marília  R., Enrique Acosta, Diego  Alburez -Gutierrez, José Manuel  Aburto , Alain Gagnon, and  Cássio  M.  Turra . 2020. “Besides Population Age Structure, Health and Other Demographic Factors Can Contribute to Understanding the COVID-19 Burden.”  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  117(25):13881–83."
"188" "Owens, Ann. 2016. “Inequality in Children’s Contexts: Income Segregation of Households with and without Children.”  American Sociological Review  81(3):549–74."
"189" "Pager,  Devah , and Hana Shepherd. 2008. “The Sociology of Discrimination: Racial Discrimination in Employment, Housing, Credit, and Consumer Markets.”  Annual Review of Sociology  34(1):181–209."
"190" "Park,  Hyunjoon , Claudia Buchmann,  Jaesung  Choi, and Joseph J. Merry. 2016. “Learning Beyond the School Walls: Trends and Implications.”  Annual Review of Sociology  42(1):231–52."
"191" "Petts, Richard J., Daniel L. Carlson, and Joanna R. Pepin. 2021. “A Gendered Pandemic: Childcare, Homeschooling, and Parents’ Employment during COVID-19.”  Gender, Work & Organization"
"192" "Phelan, Jo C., and Bruce G. Link. 2015. “Is Racism a Fundamental Cause of Inequalities in Health?”  Annual Review of Sociology  41:311–30."
"193" "Phelan, Jo C., Bruce G. Link, and Parisa  Tehranifar . 2010. “Social Conditions as Fundamental Causes of Health Inequalities: Theory, Evidence, and Policy Implications.”  Journal of Health and Social Behavior  51(1_suppl):S28–40."
"194" "Pirtle, Whitney N. Laster. 2020. “Racial Capitalism: A Fundamental Cause of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic Inequities in the United States.”  Health Education & Behavior ."
"195" "Pirtle, Whitney N. Laster, and  Tashelle  Wright. 2021. “Structural Gendered Racism Revealed in Pandemic Times: Intersectional Approaches to Understanding Race and Gender Health Inequities in COVID-19.”  Gender & Society  08912432211001302."
"196" "Posadas, Josefina, and Marian Vidal-Fernandez. 2013. “Grandparents’ Childcare and Female Labor Force Participation.”  IZA Journal of Labor Policy  2(1):14."
"197" "Posey-Maddox, Linn. 2014.  When Middle-Class Parents Choose Urban Schools: Class, Race, and the Challenge of Equity in Public Education . University of Chicago Press."
"198" "Prados , María, and  Gema   Zamarro . 2020.  Gender Differences in Couples’ Division of Childcare, Work and Mental Health During COVID-19 .  SSRN Scholarly Paper . ID 3667803. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network."
"199" "Reardon, Sean F., and Kendra Bischoff. 2011. “Income Inequality and Income Segregation.”  American Journal of Sociology  116(4):1092–1153."
"200" "Rose, Heather, and Jon  Sonstelie . 2010. “School Board Politics, School District Size, and the Bargaining Power of Teachers’ Unions.”  Journal of Urban Economics  67(3):438–50."
"201" "Ruppanner , Leah, Xiao Tan, William Scarborough, Liana Christin  Landivar , and Caitlyn Collins. 2021. “Shifting Inequalities? Parents’ Sleep, Anxiety, and Calm during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Australia and the United States.”  Men and Masculinities  1097184X21990737."
"202" "Saavedra, Anna, Amie Rapaport, Morgan  Polikoff , Daniel Silver, Shira  Haderlein , and Marshall Garland. 2020. “Evidence of COVID-19’s Impact on K-12 Education Points to Critical Areas of Intervention.”  USC Schaeffer ."
"203" "Sabates , Ricardo, Emma Carter, and Jonathan M. B. Stern. 2021. “Using Educational Transitions to Estimate Learning Loss Due to COVID-19 School Closures: The Case of Complementary Basic Education in Ghana.”  International Journal of Educational Development  82:102377."
"204" "Schieman , Scott, Leah  Ruppanner , and Melissa A.  Milkie . 2018. “Who Helps with Homework? Parenting Inequality and Relationship Quality Among Employed Mothers and Fathers.”  Journal of Family and Economic Issues  39(1):49–65."
"205" "Sewell, Abigail A. 2016. “The Racism-Race Reification Process: A  Mesolevel  Political Economic Framework for Understanding Racial Health Disparities.”  Sociology of Race and Ethnicity  2(4):402–32."
"206" "Shapiro, Eliza. 2020. “12,000 More White Children Return to N.Y.C. Schools Than Black Children.”  The New York Times , December 8."
"207" "Shedd, Carla. 2015.  Unequal City: Race, Schools, and Perceptions of Injustice . 1 edition. New York: Russell Sage Foundation."
"208" "Smith, Ember, and Richard V. Reeves. 2020. “Students of Color Most Likely to Be Learning Online: Districts Must Work Even Harder on Race Equity.”  Brookings ."
"209" "Strunk, Katharine O., and Jason A. Grissom. 2010. “Do Strong Unions Shape District Policies?: Collective Bargaining, Teacher Contract Restrictiveness, and the Political Power of Teachers’ Unions.”  Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis  32(3):389–406."
"210" "Trounstine, Jessica. 2018.  Segregation by Design: Local Politics and Inequality in American Cities . Cambridge University Press."
"211" "USDOE. 2020.  Secretary DeVos Makes Available Over $13 Billion in Emergency Coronavirus Relief to Support Continued Education for K-12 Students . US Department of Education."
"212" "USDOE, US Department of Education. 2021. “Monthly School Survey Dashboard.”  Institute of Education Sciences . Retrieved March 24, 2021 (https://ies.ed.gov/schoolsurvey/)."
"213" "Wodtke , Geoffrey T., David J. Harding, and Felix  Elwert . 2011. “Neighborhood Effects in Temporal Perspective: The Impact of Long-Term Exposure to Concentrated Disadvantage on High School Graduation.”  American Sociological Review  76(5):713–36.."
"214" "Zimmer, Ron, and John T. Jones. 2005. “Unintended Consequence of Centralized Public School Funding in Michigan Education.”  Southern Economic Journal  71(3):534–44."
"215" "Notes"
"216" "1  This would also be consistent with pre-pandemic research showing that parents with more intensive paid work schedules (and especially full-time employed mothers) experience challenges helping their children with homework and with schooling more generally (Calarco 2020; Haley-Lock and Posey-Maddox 2016; Muller 1995;  Schieman ,  Ruppanner , and  Milkie  2018)."
"217" "2  After accounting for county COVID rates, we found that parents in states with higher COVID rates were actually more likely to choose in-person school. This suggests that parents if parents saw that their county was doing better than the rest of the state, they may have had more confidence in their local government and in the safety of their local schools."
"218" "Tables and Figures"
"219" "Table 1:  Descriptive Statistics"
"220" "Table 1: Descriptive Statistics (N = 1668)"
"221" "Mean/ Prop."
"222" "SD"
"223" "Svy . Mean"
"224" "Svy . SD"
"225" "Instructional mode of youngest child"
"226" "Traditional"
"227" ".26"
"228" ".26"
"229" "Hybrid"
"230" ".20"
"231" ".18"
"232" "Remote"
"233" ".42"
"234" ".44"
"235" "Homeschool"
"236" ".12"
"237" ".12"
"238" "In-person option?"
"239" "Yes, traditional"
"240" ".42"
"241" ".42"
"242" "Yes, hybrid"
"243" ".34"
"244" ".32"
"245" "Remote only"
"246" ".24"
"247" ".26"
"248" "Race/ethnicity of respondent"
"249" "AAPI alone"
"250" ".08"
"251" ".07"
"252" "Black alone"
"253" ".11"
"254" ".11"
"255" "Hispanic"
"256" ".22"
"257" ".23"
"258" "White alone"
"259" ".56"
"260" ".57"
"261" "Other/Mixed"
"262" ".03"
"263" ".03"
"264" "Bachelor's degree  (at least one parent/guardian)"
"265" ".51"
"266" ".45"
"267" "Age of youngest school-aged child"
"268" "9.65"
"269" "3.95"
"270" "9.76"
"271" "3.90"
"272" "Gender of respondent"
"273" "Woman"
"274" ".50"
"275" ".52"
"276" "Man"
"277" ".49"
"278" ".48"
"279" "Nonbinary/Other"
"280" ".00"
"281" ".00"
"282" "Married or cohabitating"
"283" ".78"
"284" ".82"
"285" "Lost job during pandemic"
"286" ".07"
"287" ".10"
"288" "Covid-19: State cases per capita"
"289" ".04"
"290" ".01"
"291" ".04"
"292" ".01"
"293" "Covid-19: County cases per capita"
"294" ".04"
"295" ".02"
"296" ".04"
"297" ".02"
"298" "Party"
"299" "Democrat or Democrat-leaning"
"300" ".52"
"301" ".50"
"302" "Republican or Republican-leaning"
"303" ".29"
"304" ".29"
"305" "Independent or Other"
"306" ".19"
"307" ".21"
"308" "Trump percentage of two-party 2020 presidential vote (county)"
"309" "44.59"
"310" "17.05"
"311" "44.54"
"312" "17.18"
"313" "Gender of youngest school-aged child"
"314" "Girl"
"315" ".43"
"316" ".42"
"317" "Boy"
"318" ".56"
"319" ".57"
"320" "Nonbinary/ Other"
"321" ".01"
"322" ".01"
"323" "Family income"
"324" "88072.18"
"325" "68246.74"
"326" "82988.06"
"327" "67012.52"
"328" "Learning support"
"329" "Formed a pandemic pod"
"330" ".14"
"331" ".12"
"332" "Hired help"
"333" ".12"
"334" ".10"
"335" "Asked extended family for help"
"336" ".16"
"337" ".14"
"338" "Covid-19 hospitalization or death in parent's network"
"339" ".18"
"340" ".17"
"341" "At least one parent/guardian not working full-time"
"342" ".44"
"343" ".49"
"344" "At least one child younger than school-age"
"345" ".23"
"346" ".21"
"347" "Table 2:  Among Students with an In-Person Option: Predicted Probability of Choosing In-Person School by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"348" "Race/Ethnicity"
"349" "BA+ vs. <BA"
"350" "In Person (Traditional or Hybrid)"
"351" "Other (Remote or Homeschool)"
"352" "Difference (p-value)"
"353" "1"
"354" "Asian/Pacific Islander alone"
"355" "<BA"
"356" "0.40"
"357" "0.60"
"358" "0.179"
"359" "2"
"360" "Asian/Pacific Islander alone"
"361" "BA+"
"362" "0.56"
"363" "0.44"
"364" "3"
"365" "Black alone"
"366" "<BA"
"367" "0.51"
"368" "0.49"
"369" "0.083"
"370" "4"
"371" "Black alone"
"372" "BA+"
"373" "0.65"
"374" "0.35"
"375" "5"
"376" "Hispanic"
"377" "<BA"
"378" "0.56"
"379" "0.44"
"380" "0.478"
"381" "6"
"382" "Hispanic"
"383" "BA+"
"384" "0.60"
"385" "0.40"
"386" "7"
"387" "White alone"
"388" "<BA"
"389" "0.61"
"390" "0.39"
"391" "0.191"
"392" "8"
"393" "White alone"
"394" "BA+"
"395" "0.66"
"396" "0.34"
"397" "9"
"398" "Other/Mixed"
"399" "<BA"
"400" "0.61"
"401" "0.39"
"402" "0.632"
"403" "10"
"404" "Other/Mixed"
"405" "BA+"
"406" "0.53"
"407" "0.47"
"408" "Table 3: Among Students with an In-Person Option: Change in Predicted Probability of Choosing In-Person School, by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"409" "Change"
"410" "p-value"
"411" "Race/Ethnicity"
"412" "Black alone vs AAPI alone"
"413" "0.10"
"414" "0.15"
"415" "Race/Ethnicity"
"416" "Hispanic vs AAPI alone"
"417" "0.10"
"418" "0.14"
"419" "Race/Ethnicity"
"420" "White alone vs AAPI alone"
"421" "0.15"
"422" "0.01"
"423" "Race/Ethnicity"
"424" "Other/Mixed vs AAPI alone"
"425" "0.09"
"426" "0.38"
"427" "Race/Ethnicity"
"428" "Hispanic vs Black alone"
"429" "-0.01"
"430" "0.89"
"431" "Race/Ethnicity"
"432" "White alone vs Black alone"
"433" "0.05"
"434" "0.31"
"435" "Race/Ethnicity"
"436" "Other/Mixed vs Black alone"
"437" "-0.01"
"438" "0.88"
"439" "Race/Ethnicity"
"440" "White alone vs Hispanic"
"441" "0.05"
"442" "0.13"
"443" "Race/Ethnicity"
"444" "Other/Mixed vs Hispanic"
"445" "-0.01"
"446" "0.94"
"447" "Race/Ethnicity"
"448" "Other/Mixed vs White alone"
"449" "-0.06"
"450" "0.48"
"451" "Table 4: Among Students with an In-Person Option: Change in Predicted Probability of Choosing In-Person School, by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"452" "Race/Ethnicity"
"453" "BA+ vs. <BA"
"454" "In Person (Traditional or Hybrid)"
"455" "Other (Remote or Homeschool)"
"456" "Difference (p-value)"
"457" "1"
"458" "Asian/Pacific Islander alone"
"459" "<BA"
"460" "0.46"
"461" "0.54"
"462" "0.449"
"463" "2"
"464" "Asian/Pacific Islander alone"
"465" "BA+"
"466" "0.55"
"467" "0.45"
"468" "3"
"469" "Black alone"
"470" "<BA"
"471" "0.54"
"472" "0.46"
"473" "0.228"
"474" "4"
"475" "Black alone"
"476" "BA+"
"477" "0.65"
"478" "0.35"
"479" "5"
"480" "Hispanic"
"481" "<BA"
"482" "0.60"
"483" "0.40"
"484" "0.645"
"485" "6"
"486" "Hispanic"
"487" "BA+"
"488" "0.58"
"489" "0.42"
"490" "7"
"491" "White alone"
"492" "<BA"
"493" "0.61"
"494" "0.39"
"495" "0.557"
"496" "8"
"497" "White alone"
"498" "BA+"
"499" "0.63"
"500" "0.37"
"501" "9"
"502" "Other/Mixed"
"503" "<BA"
"504" "0.64"
"505" "0.36"
"506" "0.525"
"507" "10"
"508" "Other/Mixed"
"509" "BA+"
"510" "0.54"
"511" "0.46"
"512" "Table 5:  Among Students with an In-Person Option: Change in Predicted Probability of Choosing In-Person School,   by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education [All Covariates Included]"
"513" "Change"
"514" "p-value"
"515" "Race/Ethnicity"
"516" "Black alone vs AAPI alone"
"517" "0.09"
"518" "0.21"
"519" "Hispanic vs AAPI alone"
"520" "0.08"
"521" "0.21"
"522" "White alone vs AAPI alone"
"523" "0.12"
"524" "0.06"
"525" "Other/Mixed vs AAPI alone"
"526" "0.08"
"527" "0.41"
"528" "Hispanic vs Black alone"
"529" "-0.01"
"530" "0.88"
"531" "White alone vs Black alone"
"532" "0.03"
"533" "0.60"
"534" "Other/Mixed vs Black alone"
"535" "-0.01"
"536" "0.93"
"537" "White alone vs Hispanic"
"538" "0.03"
"539" "0.36"
"540" "Other/Mixed vs Hispanic"
"541" "0.00"
"542" "1.00"
"543" "Other/Mixed vs White alone"
"544" "-0.03"
"545" "0.70"
"546" "Education"
"547" "BA+ vs <BA"
"548" "0.02"
"549" "0.48"
"550" "Age of youngest school-aged child"
"551" "+1 SD"
"552" "-0.01"
"553" "0.71"
"554" "Type of in-person option"
"555" "Hybrid vs Traditional"
"556" "-0.03"
"557" "0.22"
"558" "Respondent Gender"
"559" "Man vs Woman"
"560" "0.04"
"561" "0.20"
"562" "Nonbinary/Other vs Woman"
"563" "-0.13"
"564" "0.56"
"565" "Nonbinary/Other vs Man"
"566" "-0.17"
"567" "0.46"
"568" "Married/Cohabitating"
"569" "Yes vs No"
"570" "-0.04"
"571" "0.25"
"572" "Lost job during pandemic"
"573" "Yes vs No"
"574" "-0.12"
"575" "0.04"
"576" "COVID-19: State Cases Per Capita"
"577" "+1 SD"
"578" "0.04"
"579" "0.02"
"580" "COVID-19: County Cases Per Capita"
"581" "+1 SD"
"582" "-0.05"
"583" "0.02"
"584" "Party"
"585" "Republican vs Democrat"
"586" "0.06"
"587" "0.09"
"588" "Independent or Other vs Democrat"
"589" "0.01"
"590" "0.78"
"591" "Independent or Other vs Republican"
"592" "-0.04"
"593" "0.29"
"594" "Trump percentage of two-party  2020 presidential vote (county)"
"595" "+1 SD"
"596" "0.00"
"597" "0.82"
"598" "Gender of youngest school-aged child"
"599" "Boy vs Girl"
"600" "-0.01"
"601" "0.76"
"602" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Girl"
"603" "0.06"
"604" "0.60"
"605" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Boy"
"606" "0.07"
"607" "0.55"
"608" "2019 Income (logged)"
"609" "+1 SD"
"610" "0.03"
"611" "0.07"
"612" "Formed a pandemic pod"
"613" "Yes vs No"
"614" "-0.08"
"615" "0.04"
"616" "Hired help"
"617" "Yes vs No"
"618" "0.04"
"619" "0.35"
"620" "Asked extended family for help"
"621" "Yes vs No"
"622" "0.01"
"623" "0.86"
"624" "Covid-19 hospitalization or death in parent's network"
"625" "Yes vs No"
"626" "-0.04"
"627" "0.29"
"628" "At least one parent/guardian not working full-time"
"629" "Yes vs No"
"630" "-0.09"
"631" "0.00"
"632" "At least one child younger than school-age"
"633" "Yes vs No"
"634" "-0.02"
"635" "0.52"
"636" "Appendix A"
"637" "Table A1.  Predicted Probabilities of  Access to  Traditional, Hybrid, and Remote-Only Instruction , by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"638" "Race/Ethnicity"
"639" "BA+ vs. <BA"
"640" "Traditional"
"641" "Hybrid"
"642" "Remote Only"
"643" "1"
"644" "Asian American/Pacific Islander alone"
"645" "<BA"
"646" "0.34"
"647" "0.40"
"648" "0.26"
"649" "2"
"650" "Asian American/Pacific Islander alone"
"651" "BA+"
"652" "0.37"
"653" "0.30"
"654" "0.32"
"655" "3"
"656" "Black alone"
"657" "<BA"
"658" "0.50"
"659" "0.33"
"660" "0.17"
"661" "4"
"662" "Black alone"
"663" "BA+"
"664" "0.50"
"665" "0.43"
"666" "0.07"
"667" "5"
"668" "Hispanic"
"669" "<BA"
"670" "0.42"
"671" "0.30"
"672" "0.27"
"673" "6"
"674" "Hispanic"
"675" "BA+"
"676" "0.30"
"677" "0.43"
"678" "0.27"
"679" "7"
"680" "White alone"
"681" "<BA"
"682" "0.37"
"683" "0.40"
"684" "0.23"
"685" "8"
"686" "White alone"
"687" "BA+"
"688" "0.53"
"689" "0.32"
"690" "0.14"
"691" "9"
"692" "Other/Mixed"
"693" "<BA"
"694" "0.43"
"695" "0.24"
"696" "0.33"
"697" "10"
"698" "Other/Mixed"
"699" "BA+"
"700" "0.34"
"701" "0.31"
"702" "0.36"
"703" "Table A2.  Group Comparisons of Predicted Probabilities of  Access to  Traditional, Hybrid, and Remote Instruction , by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"704" "Traditional"
"705" "Hybrid"
"706" "Remote"
"707" "Race/Ethnicity"
"708" "Black alone vs AAPI alone"
"709" "0.14"
"710" "0.02"
"711" "-0.16"
"712" "Race/Ethnicity"
"713" "p-value"
"714" "0.03"
"715" "0.76"
"716" "0.00"
"717" "Race/Ethnicity"
"718" "Hispanic vs AAPI alone"
"719" "0.01"
"720" "0.01"
"721" "-0.02"
"722" "Race/Ethnicity"
"723" "p-value"
"724" "0.88"
"725" "0.86"
"726" "0.71"
"727" "Race/Ethnicity"
"728" "White alone vs AAPI alone"
"729" "0.09"
"730" "0.01"
"731" "-0.10"
"732" "Race/Ethnicity"
"733" "p-value"
"734" "0.08"
"735" "0.85"
"736" "0.03"
"737" "Race/Ethnicity"
"738" "Other/Mixed vs AAPI alone"
"739" "0.03"
"740" "-0.08"
"741" "0.05"
"742" "Race/Ethnicity"
"743" "p-value"
"744" "0.73"
"745" "0.34"
"746" "0.54"
"747" "Race/Ethnicity"
"748" "Hispanic vs Black alone"
"749" "-0.13"
"750" "-0.01"
"751" "0.14"
"752" "Race/Ethnicity"
"753" "p-value"
"754" "0.01"
"755" "0.84"
"756" "0.00"
"757" "Race/Ethnicity"
"758" "White alone vs Black alone"
"759" "-0.05"
"760" "-0.01"
"761" "0.06"
"762" "Race/Ethnicity"
"763" "p-value"
"764" "0.26"
"765" "0.83"
"766" "0.03"
"767" "Race/Ethnicity"
"768" "Other/Mixed vs Black alone"
"769" "-0.11"
"770" "-0.10"
"771" "0.21"
"772" "Race/Ethnicity"
"773" "p-value"
"774" "0.20"
"775" "0.22"
"776" "0.00"
"777" "Race/Ethnicity"
"778" "White alone vs Hispanic"
"779" "0.08"
"780" "0.00"
"781" "-0.08"
"782" "Race/Ethnicity"
"783" "p-value"
"784" "0.01"
"785" "0.99"
"786" "0.01"
"787" "Race/Ethnicity"
"788" "Other/Mixed vs Hispanic"
"789" "0.02"
"790" "-0.09"
"791" "0.07"
"792" "Race/Ethnicity"
"793" "p-value"
"794" "0.78"
"795" "0.23"
"796" "0.36"
"797" "Race/Ethnicity"
"798" "Other/Mixed vs White alone"
"799" "-0.06"
"800" "-0.09"
"801" "0.15"
"802" "Race/Ethnicity"
"803" "p-value"
"804" "0.47"
"805" "0.21"
"806" "0.04"
"807" "Education"
"808" "BA+ vs <BA"
"809" "0.06"
"810" "-0.01"
"811" "-0.05"
"812" "Education"
"813" "p-value"
"814" "0.02"
"815" "0.71"
"816" "0.02"
"817" "Table A3. P redicted Probabilities of P articipation in Traditional, Hybrid, and Remote Instruction , by  Parent’s  Race/Ethnicity and Education"
"818" "Race/Ethnicity"
"819" "BA+ vs. <BA"
"820" "Receiving traditional"
"821" "Remote, traditional option"
"822" "Receiving hybrid"
"823" "Remote, hybrid option"
"824" "1"
"825" "Asian American/Pacific Islander alone"
"826" "<BA"
"827" "0.18"
"828" "0.27"
"829" "0.26"
"830" "0.29"
"831" "2"
"832" "Asian American/Pacific Islander alone"
"833" "BA+"
"834" "0.38"
"835" "0.16"
"836" "0.24"
"837" "0.22"
"838" "3"
"839" "Black alone"
"840" "<BA"
"841" "0.37"
"842" "0.23"
"843" "0.24"
"844" "0.15"
"845" "4"
"846" "Black alone"
"847" "BA+"
"848" "0.41"
"849" "0.14"
"850" "0.25"
"851" "0.21"
"852" "5"
"853" "Hispanic"
"854" "<BA"
"855" "0.35"
"856" "0.22"
"857" "0.30"
"858" "0.14"
"859" "6"
"860" "Hispanic"
"861" "BA+"
"862" "0.25"
"863" "0.17"
"864" "0.35"
"865" "0.23"
"866" "7"
"867" "White alone"
"868" "<BA"
"869" "0.35"
"870" "0.12"
"871" "0.32"
"872" "0.20"
"873" "8"
"874" "White alone"
"875" "BA+"
"876" "0.46"
"877" "0.17"
"878" "0.25"
"879" "0.13"
"880" "9"
"881" "Other/Mixed"
"882" "<BA"
"883" "0.56"
"884" "0.11"
"885" "0.28"
"886" "0.06"
"887" "10"
"888" "Other/Mixed"
"889" "BA+"
"890" "0.17"
"891" "0.34"
"892" "0.40"
"893" "0.08"
"894" "Table A4.  Group Comparisons of Predicted Probabilities of  Participation in Traditional, Hybrid, and Remote Instruction, by Parent’s Race/Ethnicity and Education ( All Covariates Included )"
"895" "Receiving traditional"
"896" "Remote, traditional option"
"897" "Receiving hybrid"
"898" "Remote, hybrid option"
"899" "Race/Ethnicity"
"900" "Black alone vs AAPI alone"
"901" "0.11"
"902" "-0.03"
"903" "0.00"
"904" "-0.08"
"905" "Hispanic vs AAPI alone"
"906" "0.02"
"907" "-0.02"
"908" "0.08"
"909" "-0.08"
"910" "White alone vs AAPI alone"
"911" "0.13*"
"912" "-0.07"
"913" "0.04"
"914" "-0.09+"
"915" "Other/Mixed vs AAPI alone"
"916" "0.09"
"917" "0.00"
"918" "0.09"
"919" "-0.19**"
"920" "Hispanic vs Black alone"
"921" "-0.09"
"922" "0.01"
"923" "0.08"
"924" "0.00"
"925" "White alone vs Black alone"
"926" "0.02"
"927" "-0.04"
"928" "0.04"
"929" "-0.01"
"930" "Other/Mixed vs Black alone"
"931" "-0.01"
"932" "0.03"
"933" "0.10"
"934" "-0.11+"
"935" "White alone vs Hispanic"
"936" "0.11**"
"937" "-0.05+"
"938" "-0.04"
"939" "-0.01"
"940" "Other/Mixed vs Hispanic"
"941" "0.07"
"942" "0.02"
"943" "0.02"
"944" "-0.11*"
"945" "Other/Mixed vs White alone"
"946" "-0.03"
"947" "0.07"
"948" "0.06"
"949" "-0.10+"
"950" "Education"
"951" "BA+ vs <BA"
"952" "0.05"
"953" "0.00"
"954" "-0.03"
"955" "-0.02"
"956" "Age of youngest school-aged child"
"957" "+1 SD"
"958" "-0.03*"
"959" "-0.02"
"960" "0.01"
"961" "0.04***"
"962" "Respondent Gender"
"963" "Man vs Woman"
"964" "0.03"
"965" "-0.07**"
"966" "0.02"
"967" "0.02"
"968" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Woman"
"969" "-0.14"
"970" "-0.21***"
"971" "0.03"
"972" "0.32"
"973" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Man"
"974" "-0.17"
"975" "-0.14"
"976" "0.00"
"977" "0.30"
"978" "Married/Cohabitating"
"979" "Yes vs No"
"980" "0.02"
"981" "0.05+"
"982" "-0.05"
"983" "-0.02"
"984" "Lost job during pandemic"
"985" "Yes vs No"
"986" "-0.15**"
"987" "0.06"
"988" "0.05"
"989" "0.04"
"990" "Covid-19: State Cases Per Capita"
"991" "+1 SD"
"992" "0.09***"
"993" "0.01"
"994" "-0.05**"
"995" "-0.05***"
"996" "Covid-19: County Cases Per Capita"
"997" "+1 SD"
"998" "-0.06**"
"999" "0.02"
"1000" "0.01"
"1001" "0.03"
"1002" "Party"
"1003" "Republican vs Democrat"
"1004" "0.01"
"1005" "0.00"
"1006" "0.02"
"1007" "-0.03"
"1008" "Independent or Other vs Democrat"
"1009" "0.05"
"1010" "-0.05+"
"1011" "-0.01"
"1012" "0.01"
"1013" "Independent or Other vs Republican"
"1014" "0.04"
"1015" "-0.05"
"1016" "-0.04"
"1017" "0.05"
"1018" "Trump percentage of two-party  2020 presidential vote (county)"
"1019" "+1 SD"
"1020" "0.01"
"1021" "-0.02"
"1022" "0.01"
"1023" "0.00"
"1024" "Gender of youngest school-aged child"
"1025" "Boy vs Girl"
"1026" "-0.01"
"1027" "0.01"
"1028" "0.01"
"1029" "-0.01"
"1030" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Girl"
"1031" "-0.07"
"1032" "0.04"
"1033" "0.10"
"1034" "-0.06"
"1035" "Nonbinary/Trans/Other vs Boy"
"1036" "-0.05"
"1037" "0.02"
"1038" "0.09"
"1039" "-0.06"
"1040" "Income (logged)"
"1041" "+1 SD"
"1042" "-0.02"
"1043" "-0.01"
"1044" "0.05*"
"1045" "-0.02"
"1046" "Employment status currently"
"1047" "Employed PT vs Employed FT/Self-employed"
"1048" "0.01"
"1049" "0.02"
"1050" "-0.03"
"1051" "0.01"
"1052" "Unemployed/Furloughed vs Employed FT/Self-employed "
"1053" "0.06"
"1054" "0.02"
"1055" "-0.11"
"1056" "0.03"
"1057" "Not employed, not looking for work (incl. retired/student/disabled) vs Employed FT/Self-employed"
"1058" "0.12+"
"1059" "0.01"
"1060" "-0.11*"
"1061" "-0.02"
"1062" "Unemployed/Furloughed vs Employed PT "
"1063" "0.06"
"1064" "0.00"
"1065" "-0.08"
"1066" "0.02"
"1067" "Not employed, not looking for work (incl. retired/student/disabled) vs Employed PT "
"1068" "0.12*"
"1069" "-0.01"
"1070" "-0.09+"
"1071" "-0.02"
"1072" "Not employed, not looking for work (incl. retired/student/disabled) vs Unemployed/Furloughed "
"1073" "0.06"
"1074" "-0.01"
"1075" "-0.01"
"1076" "-0.04"
"1077" "Parent has at-home learning support"
"1078" "Yes vs No"
"1079" "0.00"
"1080" "-0.03"
"1081" "0.02"
"1082" "0.02"
"1083" "Covid-19 hospitalization or death in parent's network"
"1084" "Yes vs No"
"1085" "-0.07+"
"1086" "0.06+"
"1087" "0.04"
"1088" "-0.03"
"1089" "At least one parent/guardian not working full-time"
"1090" "Yes vs No"
"1091" "-0.12*"
"1092" "0.02"
"1093" "0.06"
"1094" "0.04"
"1095" "At least one child younger than school-age"
"1096" "Yes vs No"
"1097" "0.02"
"1098" "0.02"
"1099" "-0.03"
"1100" "0.00"
"1101" "p <0.1 +   p< 0.05 *   p<0.01 **   p<0.001*** "
