Biosecurity, crisis management, automation technologies, and economic performance of
travel, tourism and hospitality companies – a conceptual framework

Stanislav Ivanov
Professor, Varna University of Management, 13A Oborishte Str., 9000 Varna, Bulgaria, tel:
+359 52 300 680, e-mail: stanislav.ivanov@vumk.eu . Personal website:
http://www.stanislavivanov.com

Craig Webster
Associate Professor, Department of Management, Miller College of Business, Ball State
University, Muncie, Indiana, USA, e-mail: cwebster3@bsu.edu

Elitza Stoilova
CEO, Umni.co, Sofia, Bulgaria, e-mail: e.stoilova@umni.bg

Daniel Slobodskoy
CEO, Sezam24.com - Booking Analytics company, Prague, Czechia, e-mail:
dan@bookinganalytics.com

Abstract:
The COVID-19 pandemic of 2020 will have a significant influence on travel, tourism, and
hospitality globally. With a massive reduction in tourism globally because of the health crisis,
the industry will have to plan recovery and rebuilding of the industry with greater
consideration of the biosecurity of customers. A critical element in the reorganisation of the
industry will involve the increased incorporation of automation technologies. This paper
adopts a supply-side perspective and elaborates on the opportunities that automation
technologies provide to travel, tourism, and hospitality companies to mitigate the negative
impacts of biosecurity threats on their economic performance. It discusses the costs and
benefits of the incorporation of increased levels of automation, especially in regards to the
benefits of the safety and health of the consumer. It elaborates on how the current pandemic
would stimulate the adoption of automation technologies. Finally, the paper discusses how
this fits into the business models of tourism-related industries and outlines the micro- and
macroeconomic implications of the greater incorporation of automation into the industry.

1

Key words: COVID-19, Service automation, Artificial intelligence, Service robots,
Pandemic, Crisis management, Economic performance, Biosecurity

Corresponding author: Stanislav Ivanov

Acknowledgements: none

Declarations of interest: Elitza Stoilova and Daniel Slobodskoy are CEOs of companies
that provide automation solutions for tourism and hospitality companies (chatbots and selfcheck-in kiosks)

Financial Disclosure statement: no funding was received

Citation: Ivanov, S., Webster, C., Stoilova, E., & Slobodskoy, D. (2020). Biosecurity, crisis
management, automation technologies, and economic performance of travel, tourism and
hospitality companies – a conceptual framework. Tourism Economics (in press). doi:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1354816620946541

2

Biosecurity, crisis management, automation technologies, and economic performance of
travel, tourism and hospitality companies – a conceptual framework

1. Introduction
In December 2019, a new coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes COVID-19 disease was
transferred from bats to humans in Wuhan, China (Chen & Li, 2020; Guo et al., 2020; Jamal
& Budke, 2020). It soon spread globally, with 11,388,558 registered cases of infection and
533,638 casualties as of July 5th, 2020. On March 11th, 2020, the World Health Organisation
declared COVID-19 a pandemic. Currently, the case-fatality rate is evaluated at 2.3% (Chen
& Li, 2020), but the measure is dynamic as more people get tested for the virus.
Governments responded to this biosecurity threat with a series of sweeping actions – travel
bans; closure of hotels, restaurants, pubs, schools, universities, shopping malls, visitor
attractions, museums, garden, stadiums, and other places where people congregate; denied
entry of travellers from particular countries; compulsory quarantine for people who had
visited particular countries or with COVID-19 symptoms; partial or complete lockdowns and
curfews as ways to slow down the spread of the virus. Governments’ actions disturbed the
normal business process. Many companies, whose business models allowed it, moved their
operations online and their employees worked from home. The ‘home office’ concept became
widespread.

In unprecedented moves mega-events were either cancelled or postponed. The Olympic
games, UEFA’s EURO 2020 football championship, the ITB travel fair in Berlin, and
thousands of other games, events, conferences, and exhibitions fell victim to the pandemic.
Many manufacturing and service companies (including airlines, hotels, restaurants, event
organisers, and other companies from travel, tourism, and hospitality (TTH)) were forced to
stop their operations. In the early stage of governments’ responses to the pandemic, ceasing
operations was a result of either a direct government order to close (e.g. hotels, restaurants,
pubs), the disappearance of demand due to travel bans (e.g. airlines), a voluntary action due to
precautionary measures to protect the health of the employees, or it was a forced decision due
to disruptions in the supply chain. In the later stage of governments’ responses, complete
lockdowns were imposed. As an economic consequence of these virus containment measures,
millions of employees were sent home on paid or unpaid leave, or were laid off (Hanson,
2020; Pandey, 2020); while companies struggled to stay liquid and pay their debts due to the
3

evaporated demand for their products or services. Of course, some companies such as
manufacturers of medical equipment, pharmaceuticals, online entertainment,
telecommunications, etc. experienced a drastic increase in demand. However, as a whole,
governments’ actions caused justified concerns about their economic repercussions. To
mitigate the negative consequences of the virus containment actions, many governments
introduced various economic stimuli for businesses and households – postponing payments on
taxes, mortgages, or utilities; state-guaranteed loans at low or no interest; payment of part of
the salaries by the government instead of the employers; direct cash stipend for households in
the form of cheques; and many others. Despite these compensating economic stimuli, the
COVID-19 pandemic resulted in a recession and the default of many companies, especially
those with limited liquidity that do not have sufficient available funds to finance their
business during the period of no or limited demand. The collapse of airlines such as Flybe,
Avianca, and Virgin Australia and the rent-a-car company Hertz are notable examples
(Tucker, 2020).

The biosecurity threat created by the new coronavirus and the negative consequences of
lockdowns on TTH companies and employees raises the question of what TTH companies
could do to mitigate them (Hudson, 2020). Previous studies on crisis management at the
corporate level have identified actions such as requesting cash payments, payments in foreign
currency, laying off employees, paying later to suppliers, cutting costs, increased marketing
efforts, etc. (Ivanov, Idzhylova, & Webster, 2016; Scott, Laws, & Prideaux, 2008), but
automation technologies can be added in the crisis management arsenal of companies as well.
The COVID-19 pandemic forced hospitals and companies to use robots and other automation
technologies to fight the pandemic (Yang et al., 2020), including companies in travel, tourism,
and hospitality (Wolfe, 2020). Robots can be used for physical distancing (Seyitoğlu &
Ivanov, 2020), and their adoption by TTH companies is expected to increase as a result of the
pandemic (Zeng, Chen & Lew, 2020).

In the light of the above discussion, this conceptual paper adopts a supply-side perspective
and elaborates on the opportunities that automation technologies provide to TTH companies
to mitigate the negative impacts of biosecurity threats on their economic performance. More
specifically, the paper aims to: a) develop a conceptual framework on the influence of
biosecurity threats on the economic performance of TTH companies; b) critically evaluate the
differential effect of biosecurity threats on the economic performance of TTH companies with
4

and without automation technologies; c) identify the ways automation technologies could help
TTH companies to mitigate the negative impacts of biosecurity threats on their economic
performance; d) assess the opportunities that biosecurity threats provide for the accelerated
introduction of automation technologies by travel, tourism, and hospitality companies.

2. Literature review
2.1. Biosecurity and tourism
Biosecurity has not been a very widely studied topic in the field of tourism, although there
have been a few events in the last two decades (e.g. SARS, Ebola, and H1N1 swine flu) that
exposed tourism’s vulnerability to biosecurity threats. The SARS outbreak of 2002- 2003 was
a major impetus to the study of the field of biosecurity and tourism. A flurry of scholarly
works came out of that experience, linking how destinations were impacted by the SARS
outbreak and how they reacted to ensure recovery (Cooper, 2005; Hung, et al., 2018;
McKercher, 2004; Zeng, et al. 2005). There is also an occasional reference to other viral
outbreaks (Ebola, H1N1 swine flu, MERS) and discussions of how these viruses have
threatened or impacted upon the tourism industry, and what can be done to recover following
such outbreaks (Hall, 2010, 2011, 2015a, 2015b, 2020; Hall & James, 2011; Hall, Scott &
Gössling, 2020; Hung et al., 2018; Joo et al., 2019; Maphanga & Henama, 2019; Novelli et
al., 2018). One of the major concerns is that diseases can cross borders and that this is a threat
to public health as well as tourists and tourism professionals (Jamal and Budke, 2020;
Hanrahan and Melly, 2019; Sönmez et al., 2019). Another strain of research has focussed
upon the problems of managing biosecurity and ecotourism, and the impacts of the spread of
diseases and invasive species upon animals and plants (Hall, 2003, 2005, 2007; Hall and
Baird, 2013; Hall et al., 2010).

All-in-all, this literature on biosecurity threats and tourism is underdeveloped and the
experiences in 2019 and 2020 will lead to a great deal of research on the topic. The consensus
is that globalisation of travel has caused an increase in contacts that threaten the people,
animals, and the plant life in different destinations. Furthermore, the research on the topic
shows that the impact of a virus, such as Ebola or SARS, has more than just a short-term
impact upon tourism flows, a major concern for destination management organisations and
TTH companies. Another critical element of this research is that real thinking and planning
must be done to ensure that there are preventative plans put into place in TTH companies and
destinations to prevent major impacts from biosecurity threats.
5

2.2. Crisis management in tourism
Tourism is a part of the economy that is easily vulnerable to perceptions of risk on the part of
consumers and as such, there is a significant body of literature that deals with how tourism
reacts to crisis and rebounds from a crisis that can be caused by various political, social,
ecological, and economic shocks. The most thoroughly studied shocks are political issues
such as political instability, military conflicts, terrorism, and other violent/political events.
Llorca‐Vivero (2008) and Neumayer (2004) find that poor human rights practices, terrorism,
and political conflicts in a destination hurt tourism flows. These results are confirmed by other
studies as well (see, for example, Araña and León, 2008; Björk and Kauppinen-Räisänen,
2011; Causevic and Lynch, 2013; Larsen et al., 2011; Saha & Yap, 2014; Wolff & Larsen,
2014). There is a more general crisis management literature that pertains to the TTH industry
(see, for example, Aimable & Rosselló, 2009; Boukas & Ziakas, 2013, Boukas & Ziakas,
2014; Machado, 2012; Paraskevas et al., 2013; Ritchie et al., 2014; Scott et al., 2008; Som et
al., 2014) which recognises that various shocks help to shape the TTH industry, and focuses
upon recovery by destinations. Some of the research outlines the strategies that destinations
can take to counteract the negative image that a destination may take during a particular crisis
or in response to specific shocks (Avraham, 2015; Allan and Alkushman, 2019; de Sausmarez
2013), while other studies deal with how countries implement national strategies to recover
from economic shocks that negatively impact upon tourism flows (Mair et al., 2016; Meng et
al. 2010, Purwomarwanto & Ramachandran, 2015). The consensus is that a rapid and positive
response to a negative shock can quickly mitigate a substantial shock to tourism flows at a
destination (see, for example, Webster et al., 2016) and such a response seems to be best
coordinated by a national tourism organisation or destination marketing organisation, as the
case may be.

One of the least researched elements from the crisis literature is the particular strategies that
TTH firms and managers have to make to survive a crisis or recover following a crisis (Alegre
& Sard, 2015; Jallat & Shultz, 2010). The Crimean Crisis (2013-2014) was a background in
which a great deal was learned about how TTH managers found practical ways to navigate the
difficulties of the political and economic shocks that followed the crisis (Ivanov, Idzhylova, &
Webster, 2016; Ivanov, Gavrilina, Webster, & Ralko, 2017; Ivanov, Sypchenko, & Webster,
2017; Webster et al., 2017). These practical ways included laying off labour, insisting on
payment in different currencies, delaying payments to suppliers, cutting costs, increased
6

marketing efforts to attract more tourists and other methods that would ensure that the
enterprise would continue post-crisis. However, automation technologies provide additional
opportunities as a potential solution to crises faced by TTH companies.

2.3. Automation technologies in tourism
Automation technologies include a vast array of technologies used to produce products and
deliver services instead of human employees such as industrial robots (Ben-Ari & Mondada,
2018; Cubero, 2007; Miller & Miller, 2017), social and service robots (van Doorn et al.,
2017; Kanda & Ishiguro, 2016; Murphy et al., 2017; Nørskov, 2016; Royakkers, & van Est,
2016; Wirtz et al., 2018), autonomous vehicles (Maurer et al., 2016), artificial intelligence
(Ertel, 2017; Huang & Rust, 2018; Russell & Norvig, 2016), chatbots (Følstad et al., 2020;
Galitsky, 2019; Hill, Ford, & Farreras, 2015), automated trading algorithms (Chan, 2017),
self-service kiosks (Vakulenko, Hellström, & Oghazi, 2018), wearable and implanted
technologies (Bhunia, Majerus, & Sawan, 2015; Delabrida Silva, Rabelo Oliveira, &
Loureiro, 2018; Dey et al., 2019; Velez, & Miyandoab, 2019), additive manufacturing (3D
printing) (Dietrich, Kenworthy, & Cudney, 2019; Niaki & Nonino, 2018; Singh & Davim,
2019), face recognition technologies (Datta, Datta,, & Banerjee, 2015; Li & Jain, 2011),
voice-activated technologies (Hoy, 2019), Internet of Things (Sendler, 2018), etc. Their
common characteristic is that a process is implemented, a product is produced, or a service is
delivered by a machine or an autonomous agent without the involvement of human
employees. That is why automation technologies are not accepted unambiguously by
customers, employees, managers, public authorities, and societies as a whole. From the one
side, automation technologies are praised for improving the quality and decreasing costs of
goods and services, increasing the capacity and productivity of companies, improving the
health and quality of life of people, creating new business models (Brynjolfsson & McAfee,
2014; LaGrandeur & Hughes, 2017; Makridakis, 2017; Schwab, 2016; Talwar et al., 2017).
On the other side, automation technologies have received much criticism in terms of job
losses and technological unemployment due to replacement of human employees (Leonhard,
2016; McClure, 2018; Spencer, 2018), privacy issues (Berle, 2020; Klitou, 2014;
Przegalinska, 2019), or aggravating economic and social inequality (Ernst, Merola, &
Samaan, 2019).

Within travel, tourism, and hospitality, companies use automation for various front-of-house
processes with and for back-of-house processes without customer participation (Collins et al.,
7

2017; Ivanov & Webster, 2019a; Ivanov, Webster, & Berezina, 2017; Tussyadiah, 2020).
Robots, for example, are used for the provision of information and room service delivery in
hotels (Lukanova & Ilieva, 2019; Tussyadiah & Miller, 2019), as curators and guides in
museums (Virto & López, 2019), as self-driving taxis in destinations (Tussyadiah, Zach, &
Wang, 2017) or as hosts and waiters in restaurants (Berezina, Ciftci, & Cobanoglu, 2019) or
during events (Ogle & Lamb, 2019). Automated pricing systems with artificial intelligence
amend the prices of hotel accommodation and flight tickets based on changes in occupancy,
demand, and competitors’ actions (Pekgün et al., 2013). Boarding gates and passport control
at airports use face recognition technology to identify passengers (del Rio et al., 2016).
Chatbots maintain the communications and relationships between companies and their
customers (Buhalis & Yen, 2020; Nica, Tazl, & Wotawa, 2018). Voice-activated technologies
are being installed in hotel rooms (Bittendorfer et al., 2019). Fast food restaurants install selfservice kiosks to sell burgers, while airports and hotels – for self-check-in (Kaushik, Agrawal,
& Rahman, 2015; Liu & Hung, 2019; Wei, Torres & Hua, 2016). Tourism and hospitality
companies use automation technologies not only to streamline operations, cut costs, and be
more price-competitive (Ivanov, 2019); but also to create new experiences (Tung & Au,
2018). Each automation technology has its advantages and disadvantages per se. That is why
TTH companies need to implement cost-benefit analysis before deciding on investing in
automation (Ivanov & Webster, 2018).

As a whole, tourists seem quite receptive to automation technologies (Zhong et al., 2020;
Webster & Ivanov, 2020a). Tourists are more likely to have a positive attitude towards such
technologies if they are trustworthy, free of risk, competent, and easy to use (Kaushik,
Agrawal, & Rahman, 2015). However, similar to automation technologies in general, prior
studies have shown that tourists are not uniform in their acceptance of automation
technologies in tourism and various segments exist with quite diverse attitudes towards them
(Webster & Ivanov, 2019). Some customers accept automation due to its convenience and
cost advantage, while others oppose automation because of its dehumanising effect and lack
of empathy in the service process. And it is not only the tourists who may resist automation,
but the employees as well who are afraid for their jobs (Li, Bonn, & Ye, 2019). Automation
technologies, especially chatbots, self-service kiosks, and service robots, create a
technological shield between a TTH company and its customers, between employees and
customers, and between customers themselves. Such distancing and lack of emotional

8

involvement may frustrate tourists and inhibit their use of automation technologies (Ivanov,
2019).

From a research perspective, numerous technology acceptance studies have been implemented
to evaluate the acceptance of different automation technologies by users in travel, tourism,
and hospitality based on variations of the Technology Acceptance Model (Davis, 1989;
Venkatesh & Davis, 2000; Venkatesh & Bala, 2008) and the Unified Theory of Acceptance
and Use of Technology (Venkatesh, Thong, & Xu, 2003; Venkatesh et al., 2012) – e.g.
Kaushik, Agrawal, & Rahman (2015), Kim & Qu (2014), Lu, Cai, & Gursoy (2019), Lin, Chi,
& Gursoy (2019), Morosan (2012), Stock & Merkle (2017) and many others. Studies consider
ease of use, hedonic motivation, social influence, performance expectancy, habit, and other
factors from the technology acceptance frameworks, but as far as we are familiar with, no
empirical study has incorporated biosecurity and health threats such as contamination or
infection in the acceptance model – a situation that needs be changed due to the Covid-19
pandemic.

3. Relationships between biosecurity, crisis management, automation technologies and
economic performance of TTH companies
3.1. Conceptual framework
Figure 1 presents the conceptual framework of the relationships between biosecurity, crisis
management, automation technologies, and economic performance of TTH companies. This
paragraph provides a brief general overview of the framework, which is later elaborated in
greater detail in the other paragraphs of this section.

INSERT FIGURE 1 AROUND HERE

From a crisis management perspective, the biosecurity threat of a virus is characterised by a
specific rate of infection, mortality rate, and geographic spread. High infection and mortality
rates force governments to take measures to curb the spread of the virus – travel bans, border
closures, lockdowns, the introduction of medical / health / hygiene requirements for
companies, compulsory quarantine of travellers, vaccination of the population, temporary
closure of the facilities of TTH companies, etc. When the spread of the threat crosses
international borders, the governments’ actions may need to be coordinated to be efficient.
The pandemic and the governments’ actions decrease tourism demand thus leading to lower
9

(if any) revenue for TTH companies. The stricter health and hygiene requirements add costs
(e.g. for cleaning, sanitation, equipment). At the same time, governments’ actions decrease
the capacity of TTH companies who have to serve fewer customers. On the one hand, the
lower capacity decreases the total variable costs due to fewer served customers. On the other
hand, the fixed costs do not change or may even increase (e.g. higher insurance premiums for
employees and customers), and they are distributed among fewer customers; hence, the fixed
costs per served customer increase, and with these, the total costs per served customer
increase as well, forcing companies to look for ways to decrease fixed costs or to push prices
up. The lower revenue and higher costs influence negatively the profitability of companies
and their cash flow. The lack of or very low cash inflow from sales, and the continuing cash
outflow to finance fixed costs (e.g. salaries, loan payments, etc.) puts TTH companies into a
liquidity trap. If the biosecurity threat continues for a period longer than their cash reserves
would allow them to finance their operations, the TTH companies would not have sufficient
financial resources to stay liquid and will need to declare a default. As part of their crisis
management, TTH can undertake various actions – borrow additional money, lay off
personnel, outsource some of the activities, apply for governmental support, invest in
automation technologies, or other relevant actions. Automation technologies cause some cash
outflows (e.g. purchase, installation, lease payment), but they decrease other cash outflows
(e.g. salaries) and may generate cash inflows (e.g. sales generated by chatbots). They also
allow TTH companies to serve the same or more customers with fewer employees, thus
increasing the service capacity of the company and productivity of the employees.
Automation technologies decrease the need to lay off staff, thus minimising potential
corporate reputation losses. Finally, the biosecurity threat caused by the virus, the
governments’ actions, and the changes in the demand they induce, create a favourable
environment for the adoption of automation technologies by TTH companies.

The following paragraphs in this section delve deeper into relationships in the conceptual
framework and focus on the role automation technologies as a crisis management instrument
to mitigate the negative economic consequences of biosecurity threats and improve the
economic performance of TTH companies.

3.2. Differential economic impact of viral epidemics on travel, tourism and
hospitality companies

10

Undoubtedly, the drained tourism demand during viral epidemics due to tourists’ fear, direct
travel bans, lockdowns, forced closure of travel, tourism, and hospitality facilities (airports,
hotels, restaurants, pubs, museums, visitor attractions, stadiums, sports halls, parks, and
gardens, etc.) and other measures imposed by governments, has a significant negative impact
on companies in the sector. However, this impact is different depending on the degree of
automation of processes within a particular TTH company. A TTH company with a high level
of automation has fewer human employees compared to a company with low or no
automation that serves the same number of customers; hence, it has lower labour costs. From
an accounting and financial point of view, salaries, insurances, and social security payments
of human employees are fixed costs (McLaney & Atrill, 2008); thus companies with more
human employees have higher fixed costs.

Companies with high fixed costs depend more on fluctuations in demand because they cannot
easily decrease costs when demand shrinks. Therefore, in case of a sharp and prolonged drop
in demand, such as that observed during viral epidemics, these companies would quickly go
into the red. Theoretically, they have several options to choose from to stay afloat: use price
to stimulate demand (e.g. discounts), use non-price related instruments to stimulate demand
(e.g. HB at the price of BB, free spa facilities), increased marketing communication activities,
take loans, or cut fixed and variable costs. However, practically, during viral epidemics
stimulating demand might not be viable regardless of the instrument used (price- or non-price
related tools, marketing communications), because of objective reasons – travel is limited,
tourists fear for their health, and postpone or cancel trips. Loans to maintain liquidity and
solvency are a good option, but they would increase the indebtedness of the company and its
future fixed costs (for repayment of principal and interest). That is why companies with high
fixed costs would not have a choice but to try to cut their fixed costs and probably some of the
variable costs. Cutting fixed costs through lay-offs is an obvious and easily justifiable solution
due to decreased business. Considering the high share of labour costs in the total costs of
hotels and other TTH companies (Mandelbaum, 2016), laying off employees provides a quick
and significant reduction in total costs. This is exactly the decision many TTH companies
took during the Covid-19 outbreak in 2020 (Hanson, 2020; Pandey, 2020). At the same time,
firing too many employees during an epidemic creates potential problems for the companies
after the crisis: most importantly, they will need to compete for new employees not only with
other TTH companies but with companies from other sectors of the economy as well which
might have experienced a similar drop in demand and might have laid off staff too.
11

Furthermore, laid-off skilled and trained employees might not be willing to return to the same
employers because they did not feel supported during the crisis. Hence, such companies will
suffer reputation losses for putting profit before humans.

For TTH companies with high levels of automation, the situation is different. They have low
fixed costs and can endure greater variations in demand compared to companies with high
fixed costs. This means that when they face a sharp and prolonged drop in demand during
epidemics, they do not need to lay off many if any employees. For example, a hotel will selfcheck-in kiosks could afford to work with fewer receptionists compared to a hotel without
such self-service technology. In periods of high demand, both human employees and kiosks
serve guests. When demand decreases, customers would be served mostly by human
employees. Hence, the service’s capacity is flexible and can be changed easily (turning on/off
the kiosks). In extreme cases, a property (hostel or limited-service hotel) can be nearly
completely automated (Höykinpuro, 2015; Kim & Kim, 2018) and only one full-time
employee (possibly the owner) could take care for the marketing, housekeeping, and
maintenance. If a highly automated hotel closes during an epidemic, its owner would need to
pay the salaries, insurance, and social security payments for fewer employees than hotels with
no automation and could afford to do it for a longer period (it is another question whether the
owner would do it). Therefore, automation technologies decrease the cash outflow of the
company and help it remain liquid. Another advantage of highly automated properties during
viral pandemics is that their owners would not need to deal with rigid labour laws and
negative publicity when they fire numerous employees, so such a downturn would not
negatively hurt the company’s reputation in terms of corporate social responsibility.

Outsourcing indeed provides some alternative to automation technologies. Through
outsourcing some of the labour costs can be transformed into variable per unit costs - e.g.
outsourcing room cleaning or laundry (Penninga & Chibili, 2016). In case of decreased
demand, the TTH company can decrease its purchases of outsourced services. Outsourcing
would not; however, provide sufficient flexibility when demand is increasing, because the
TTH company would compete with other companies in the same and other sectors who are
likely to experience increased demand as well. Automation technologies, on the other side,
provide operational flexibility in both directions – during demand increases and decreases.
Nevertheless, outsourcing and automation technologies can be applied simultaneously (e.g. an
automated hotel that outsources the housekeeping activities) in order to decrease fixed costs
12

even further, improve the financial resilience of the company, and minimise the potential
negative impacts of lockdowns.

3.3. Mitigating the negative impact of viral epidemics through automation technologies
Automation technologies provide TTH companies with significant opportunities to mitigate
the negative impacts of viral epidemics. Of course, they cannot eliminate the risks completely,
but they can soften their consequences.

First, as discussed in Section 3.2, automation technologies decrease the fixed costs of TTH
and the cash outflow. Even if a company leases (rents) rather than owns the technology (i.e.
Technology-as-a-service. Robot-as-a-service, Kiosk-as-a-service, Chatbot-as-a-service, etc.),
the monthly lease payments for automation technologies would be lower than the monthly
labour costs for human employees replaced by technology because otherwise, it would not be
financially reasonable to adopt automation technologies at all at first place (Ivanov &
Webster, 2019b). This makes companies with a high level of automation more resilient and
flexible to changes in demand before, during, and after the crisis.

Second, automation technologies are a useful tool to enforce physical distancing during an
epidemic (Seyitoğlu & Ivanov, 2020). As advised by the World Health Organisation (2020)
physical distancing is an effective way to curb the spread of a virus. When people stay a
couple of metres away from each other, the number of infected people decreases dramatically.
Through automation technologies such as room service and cleaning robots, food/parcel
delivery robots, self-service kiosks, autonomous vehicles, delivery drones, and chatbots, the
physical human contact is eliminated and with it – the threat of infection. In the case of an
infected guest that needs to stay under quarantine in a hotel’s room, robots can be used to
deliver food, linen, and other items, without risking the health and safety of the staff. In this
situation, the technology shield that automation creates is an advantage (see Section 2.3). Of
course, the kiosks and robots need to be cleaned regularly to avoid infections, but TTH
companies need to follow the sanitary guidelines anyway regardless of whether they use
automation technologies or not. The early experience with the Covid-19 pandemic confirmed
that robots could be effectively and efficiently used for disinfection, cleaning, item delivery,
and for provision of information to people about the pandemic (Demaitre, 2020; Yang et al.,
2020).

13

Third, in the case of post-viral tourism, when people are more concerned about infections and
biosecurity threats, automation technologies provide an additional source of competitive
advantage for TTH companies that adopt them. Many customers and employees might feel
more secure if their contacts with other human beings are minimised. Furthermore,
automation technologies (e.g. chatbots, mobile, wearable or implanted devices) might be used
to inform guests and employees that the environment is safe and other people around them are
not likely to be infected. Such technologies were introduced in March 2020 to track the
people during the Covid-19 pandemic (Hui, 2020; Servick, 2020). Additionally, some
restaurants introduced face recognition technology for measuring the temperature of
customers and employees, and for contactless payments (Wolfe, 2020), while hotels
introduced virus-killing robots to clean rooms (Rosen, 2020).

3.4. COVID-19 as a driver of automation and robotisation in post-viral tourism
While previous virus outbreaks either never reached pandemic status (SARS in 2003, MERS
in 2014), or happened before the automation technologies available to TTH companies were
well developed (H1N1 swine flu in 2009) or even existed (Spanish flu in 1918), the COVID19 pandemic happened in a different technological context. The TTH companies currently
have access to a wide variety of automation technologies (see Section 2.3) which could be
used to mitigate the consequences of the pandemic. That is why, COVID-19 pandemic may
have a positive stimulus for the adoption of automation technologies by TTH companies
(Zeng, Chen & Lew, 2020).
First, COVID-19 may change the habits of travellers (Gössling, Scott & Hall, 2020). The
emotional and financial impact on people’s lifestyle during the COVID-19 health and
economic crisis may imprint upon some habits, behaviours, and expectations in travellers in
the post-viral world. For example, there may be an indication that the crisis may have a
longer-standing impact upon the perception of destinations that are central to the outbreak of
the pandemic similar to the experiences of those hot spots during the SARS outbreak (Cooper,
2005). But some of the habits and thinking may become a bit more ingrained in the consumers
as habits put into place by the isolation of people during the pandemic. Months of selfisolation marked emotionally with fears, confusion, and even paranoia, on one side, and a
change of the daily habits and behaviour (staying at and working from home, slowing down
but consuming more digital products and communicating through digital tools), on the other
side, have forced companies and consumers to accept digitisation and automation concepts
14

that at other time they would feel uncomfortable, unacceptable, uninteresting or unnecessary.
The automation of various parts of the daily routine in quarantine (kids and parents learning
online, robots sanitising offices and delivering orders, drones walking dogs, business
meetings in chat rooms, live online concerts and theatrical performances, online virtual tours
of museums) will likely leave an imprint upon life after the crisis and this may influence
perceptions of automation since a generalised perception towards technologies impacts a great
deal upon specific uses of automation in travel, tourism, and hospitality (Webster & Ivanov,
2019).

Physical distancing, avoidance of handshakes, increased physical distance between people,
avoidance of cash payments and hand-to-hand transfer of items (bank cards, documents,
goods, etc.) will stay long enough to force further digitalisation of communication and
automation of routine tasks. Substitutes to personal travel, personal contact, and tasks
performed personally will be welcomed especially if they meet the budget restrictions of the
travellers and the businesses. Virtual tours in museums and other attractions have already
become popular during the pandemic (Willingham, 2020). Travellers might also prefer to
interact physically with technologies (free of biological viruses, but prone to computer
viruses) rather than humans as a way to minimise their health risks. Such preferences would
boost further the development and usage of robots, virtual / augmented / mixed reality
technologies (Israel, Tscheulin & Zerres, 2019), chatbots, kiosks, voice-activated
technologies, and other automation technologies. In extreme cases, people may connect to
robot avatars located in destinations they would like to visit distantly instead of travelling
there in person (Bremner, Koschate, & Levine, 2016). Robot avatars create new business
opportunities for destinations because they may be visited remotely by ‘avatar tourists’ who
may otherwise not be able or may not wish to visit the destination due to financial, visa, time,
or health concerns. Of course, avatar tourists would not spend money in the destination for
accommodation, food, transport, souvenirs, etc., but they would spend money rental time for
robot avatars and digital goods – e.g. photos, video, virtual food / clothes / souvenirs, etc.

Second, the COVID-19 pandemic depleted the financial resources of TTH companies, and
many airlines, hotels, restaurants, and travel agencies, among others, were forced to lay off
employees. As discussed in Section 3.2. when the pandemic subsides and the tourism market
rebounds, it may turn out that TTH companies would find it challenging to hire back the
employees they fired during the pandemic, especially given the demographic challenges of
15

employers in developed countries due to low birth rates (Webster, 2019). Many employees
may not want to go back to the employers who laid them off. Others may prefer to work in
industries that are unlikely to experience the massive shock that tourism suffered. Immigrant
workers may not be able to obtain work visas easily or they may be subject to compulsory
quarantine when they enter the country. Thus, the labour supply in tourism and hospitality
may actually shrink in the post-viral world, something that demographics predict (Webster &
Ivanov, 2020b). The competition between TTH companies and other companies may put
many TTH companies in a situation of not being able to find human employees for their job
positions. Automation technologies come in handy because through their adoption and the
reorganisation of operational processes, TTH companies may decrease their need for human
employees. Self-service kiosks, delivery drones, room service robots, cooking robots, or
chatbots might be a forced investment for companies due to the lack of sufficient human
personnel.

Third, the COVID-19 pandemic would force owners and managers of surviving TTH
companies to search more aggressively to decrease the fixed costs of their companies.
Although they had not considered automation and business process reengineering as
appropriate options before the pandemic, the economic realities during the crisis may
persuade them otherwise. Banks may impose stricter liquidity requirements for loans to TTH
companies to avoid potential defaults during crises. This would put further pressure on TTH
companies to decrease fixed costs. Moreover, the decreasing costs of automation technologies
would make them more affordable and more price competitive compared to human labour,
especially in developed economies. Existing business models, based on automation
technologies may become economically feasible and proliferate, while new ones may appear
– e.g. restaurants using delivery robots / drones, robot avatars, chat-bot based city guides, etc.

Fourth, COVID-19 challenged the corporate social responsibility claims of TTH companies.
Large hotel corporations were among the first to announce lay-offs based on booking
forecasts. Reputation losses were inevitable during the crisis considering the speed by which
it unfolded. In this regard, TTH companies may consider automation technologies as a way to
minimise dependence on human labour, and potential future lay-offs and negative word of
mouth.

16

Fifth, legislation in the post-viral world may force TTH companies to consider physical
distancing or use biometric technologies for measuring the health status of employees and
tourists. We can expect that health and safety measures will be added to legislation in most
countries following the pandemic. Hotels, restaurants, airports, and other TTH companies
may be required to use technologies to check the health status of their customers in real-time.
The health and safety measures will likely add to the cost of running a business for those in
the TTH industry. The cost of hiring humans and keeping with the new health and safety
codes may encourage automation of many tasks.

Last but not least, COVID-19 would raise the biosecurity awareness of TTH owners,
managers, and employees. As such, those working in the industry may be increasingly
cautious of biosecurity risks and may take a more proactive approach. Like with the
experience of SARS (Mair et al., 2016), the COVID-19 pandemic may encourage more
proactive thinking and planning with regards to biosecurity. Such proactive planning will
likely encourage a rethinking of protocols to be put into place to limit interactions from
humans and incorporate more automation to prevent outbreaks of the magnitude of the
outbreak of 2020.

4. Conclusion
4.1. Contribution
This paper investigated the role of automation technologies to mitigate the impacts of
biosecurity threats on travel, tourism, and hospitality companies. The paper showed that
automation technologies help companies through decreasing fixed costs, creating a
technological shield that facilitates physical distancing, and providing a competitive
advantage over non-automated companies.

4.2. Microeconomic implications
COVID-19 pandemic may transform tourism (Brouder, 2020; Galvani, Lew, & Perez, 2020;
Hall, Scott & Gössling, 2020; Hudson, 2020). The human touch era might be over. Until now
the ‘high touch’ was opposed to and often dominated the ‘high tech’ in service design
thinking (Benckendorff, Moscardo, & Murphy, 2005; Naisbitt, Naisbitt, & Philips, 2001). The
‘high tech’ element of the service was considered as an instrument to deliver ‘high touch’
tourist experience (Brochado, Rita, & Margarido, 2016; Neuhofer, Buhalis, & Ladkin, 2013).
Post-viral tourism changes this paradigm and requires more active adoption of automation
17

technologies by TTH companies regardless of whether managers, employees, and tourists
want it or not (Seyitoğlu & Ivanov, 2020; Zeng, Chen & Lew, 2020). From a managerial point
of view, automation technologies decrease the fixed costs of companies and make them more
resilient to sudden and prolonged drops in demand; they create effective and efficient physical
distancing, so vital during viral epidemics, and protect the health and wellbeing of both the
employees and the guests. They also provide greater flexibility regarding service capacity.
Therefore, TTH companies would need to consider investments in such technologies – selfservice kiosks, room service delivery robots, chatbots, face recognition technologies, voiceactivated technologies, etc. Of course, not all automation technologies need to be adopted –
some technologies might be too expensive for the company (e.g. an autonomous vehicle for a
small restaurant), others – not relevant (face recognition technology for an online travel
agency that does not have direct physical contact with customers), while third may require a
larger scale of operations to be economically efficient (e.g. room service delivery robots).
From an economic perspective, TTH companies need to consider what would be appropriate
for their market segments depending on their market positioning, size, type of process to be
automated, the characteristics of specific technologies, and external environmental factors,
especially legislation and competition (Tornatzky & Fleisher, 1990). A detailed cost-benefit
analysis needs to be implemented, with special attention to the biosecurity protection that the
specific technological solution provides. Initial investments in automation might be very high
and some of the technological solutions might require not only the purchase/lease of
equipment but a redesign of the facilities as well (Ivanov & Webster, 2017). Nevertheless,
such investment will repay in the long term through lower fixed costs and lower losses during
forced closures of facilities. TTH companies with high automation might save money on
insurance premiums and potential liability and indemnity claims for damages on the life or the
health of personnel and/or customers because the biosecurity risk would be lower compared to
companies with little or no automation. Therefore, in the long run, from a biosecurity
perspective, the use of automation technologies may serve the interests of customers,
employees, managers, and owners/shareholders.

Additionally, the use of automation technologies will improve the competitiveness of those
TTH companies that adopt them because their business model based on the active use of
automation in the service delivery will appeal to tourists with high health and safety concerns.
However, when the use of automation is widespread in the TTH industry, tourists will
perceive them as the industry standard, the ‘new technological normal’, and they may lose
18

their appeal as a source of competitive advantage because the majority of TTH companies and
destinations will adopt them (due to legal requirements or perceived economic benefits).
Therefore, automation technologies alone cannot be a sustainable source of competitive
advantage for TTH companies and destinations, but they can complement other sources such
as unique tourism experiences (Tung & Au, 2018).

Furthermore, the investment in automation, although it will decrease the costs of running the
business in the long run, may increase the costs and prices of TTH services in the short run.
Three factors play a major role here given the size of tourism demand and the amount of
investments of TTH companies in automation technologies: a) the tasks that automation
technologies are used for; b) TTH companies’ decreased physical service capacity due to the
legal requirements for physical distancing; and c) the total physical service capacity of the
surviving firms in the industry. When TTH companies invest in automation technologies that
create new tasks for new processes that were not existent before the pandemic (e.g. for
measuring the temperature of tourists and employees), the investment in automation is not
likely to lead to labour cost saving (Ivanov, 2020). Hence, the costs of TTH companies will
increase and they would have stimuli to push prices up. If, on the other hand, technology
automates partially or completely tasks that were performed by human employees before the
pandemic, they have a substitution effect on labour and lead to labour costs savings (Ivanov &
Webster, 2019b, 2019c), thus lower the pressure on prices. The decreased physical service
capacity of TTH companies (fewer rooms available to tourists in hotels, fewer seats in
restaurants / bars / trains / airplanes, fewer served passengers at airports, etc.) means that
companies need to increase prices to generate sufficient revenue to pay back their investments
in automation. Of course, the competition will have a deterring effect on price increases but
this effect will depend on the total service capacity of the surviving firms. It is evident that
COVID-19 is a major disruptor of tourism and many TTH companies already went into
default and many others will likely do so. Some hoteliers in seaside and urban destinations in
Europe even decided not to operate during the 2020 Summer season. This means that the
available physical service capacities in destinations (e.g. rooms in hotels, seats in restaurants)
decrease and the firms surviving the crisis will face fewer rivals in the short run, hence
alleviating the downward pressure on prices. However, considering that the majority of TTH
companies (airports, hotels, restaurants, event centres, etc.) face the same pressure of the
lower physical service capacity and that companies will have to invest first in technologies
that protect the health of tourists and employees rather than replace labour, the investment in
19

automation technologies will likely increase costs and prices in the short run. Later on, when
companies reorganise and automate their business processes, their fixed costs will decrease.

4.3. Macroeconomic implications
The major impact that the COVID-19 pandemic is that it will be a major impetus to the
industry to automate. However, there will be resistance to the increased use of automation
because of the political costs. The TTH industry will see the benefits of having automation
and not being dependent upon a workforce that may get ill, pass on illness to other people,
and require additional payments if the government stipulates that employers give extra
considerations to employees in a crisis. However, governments will be concerned with the
undermining of the tax base. Since governments are dependent on tax revenues linked with
labour (e.g. income taxes, social security payments), they will likely resist the implementation
of automation that replaces human labour. Besides being taxpayers, TTH employees are
voters, hence politicians are not likely to support actions that would hurt the interests of their
voters and risk losing elections. The government may create regulations, restrictions, and
mandates making it more difficult for the industry to automate. But the TTH industry will
likely be able to resist these since the demographics (at least in developed countries) favour
automation due to low birthrates (Webster & Ivanov, 2020b). The government’s insistence on
using human labour will likely be more successful in countries in which there is a growing
workforce and the cost of labour is still low, relative to developed economies. Additionally,
governments will stimulate the adoption of automation technologies that relate to the
protection of employees’ and tourists’ health (e.g. technologies for face recognition and
measuring the body temperature). The implementation of such technologies may be viewed as
analogous to airport security technologies following the 9/11 attacks. While consumer safety
will be a recurring theme of policy discussions, there will be discussions of tradeoffs and
safety of the new technologies, similar to the discussions about the use of security
technologies implemented in airports (see, for example, Mehta and Smith-Bindman, 2011;
Moulder, 2012; Accardo and Chaudhry, 2014).

One of the major macroeconomic side-effects of the use of automation technologies by TTH
companies to mitigate the negative effects of biological threats is that automation
technologies will serve as substitutes for immigrant labour. The closure of borders and the
compulsory quarantine for people coming from specific countries means that TTH companies
cannot rely on foreign labour and may prefer to use local employees and/or automation
20

technologies. In the long run, this leads to a decrease of the country’s dependency on
immigrant labour, fewer outflows from the economy in the form of transfers of foreign
residents to their home countries, thus improving the balance of payments. At the same time,
the import of automation technologies for the needs of the local TTH industry will worsen the
balance of payments.

4.4. Future research agenda
The relationship between biosecurity, crisis management, automation technologies, and the
economic performance of TTH companies needs greater attention from researchers. Below we
formulate a few specific research questions based on the conceptual framework developed in
the paper (Figure 1) that may guide future research in the field of tourism economics:

RQ1: Do biosecurity threats play a role in the acceptance of automation technologies by
tourists, managers, and employees?
RQ2: Do automation technologies improve the competitiveness of TTH companies during and
after viral pandemics?
RQ3: Do automation technologies improve the competitiveness of tourist destinations during
and after viral pandemics?
RQ4: Do viral pandemics like Covid-19 stimulate automation of TTH services?
RQ5: What is the impact of automation technologies on the actual financial performance of
TTH companies during viral pandemics?
RQ6: Does the adoption of automation technologies by TTH companies to mitigate
biosecurity threats decrease the use of immigrant labour by them? Are automation
technologies a substitute for immigrant labour?
RQ7: What is the impact of automation technologies on the prices of TTH services?
RQ8: How do automation technologies help TTH companies reorganise their service delivery
systems to mitigate the impacts of biosecurity threats?
RQ9: Do automation technologies help TTH companies be more productive in the post-viral
world?

There have always been and there will always be viral pandemics, although we would all
hope that the COVID-19 experience would be a one-off experience. TTH companies will
need to adapt to survive and automation technologies are one of the tools that will help them
do so.
21

References:
Accardo, J. and Chaudhry, M. A. (2014) Radiation exposure and privacy concerns
surrounding full-body scanners in airports. Journal of Radiation Research and Applied
Sciences, 7(2), 198-200.
Aimable, E., & Rosselló, J. (2009). The short-term impact of 9/11 on European airlines
demand. European Journal of Tourism Research, 2(2), 145-161
Alegre, J. & Sard, M. (2015). When demand drops and prices rise. Tourist packages in the
Balearic Islands during the economic crisis. Tourism Management, 46, 375-385.
Allan, M., & Alkushman, S. (2019) Exploring the impacts of the Arab Spring on tourism in
Jordan: Perspectives of the public and private sector. e-Review of Tourism Research
14(4), 332-351.
Araña, J. E., & León, C. J. (2008). The impact of terrorism on tourism demand. Annals of
Tourism Research, 35(2), 299–315.
Avraham, E. (2015). Destination image repair during crisis: Attracting tourism during the
Arab spring uprisings. Tourism Management, 47, 224-232.
Ben-Ari, M., & Mondada, F. (2018). Elements of robotics. Cham: Springer International
Publishing.
Berezina, K., Ciftci, O. & Cobanoglu, C. (2019). Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service
Automation in Restaurants. In Ivanov, S. and Webster, C. (Eds.) Robots, Artificial
Intelligence, and Service Automation in Travel, Tourism and Hospitality, Emerald
Publishing Limited, pp. 185-219.
Benckendorff, P., Moscardo, G., & Murphy, L. (2005). High tech versus high touch: Visitor
responses to the use of technology in tourist attractions. Tourism Recreation
Research, 30(3), 37-47.
Berle, I. (2020). Face Recognition Technology: Compulsory Visibility and Its Impact on
Privacy and the Confidentiality of Personal Identifiable Images. Springer Nature.
Bhunia, S., Majerus, S., & Sawan, M. (Eds.). (2015). Implantable biomedical microsystems:
design principles and applications. Elsevier.
Bittendorfer, T., Bunt, J., Grunder, L., Riedel, D., Magnus, B., Salzlecher, T. (2019).
Technology in tourism: How voice assistants influence the hospitality industry. In
Maurer, C. & Siller, H. (Eds.). ISCONTOUR 2019 Tourism Research Perspectives:
Proceedings of the International Student Conference in Tourism Research, Norderstedt,
BoD – Books on Demand, pp. 328-338.
22

Björk, P., & Kauppinen-Räisänen, H. (2011). The impact of perceived risk on information
search: A study of Finnish tourists. Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism,
11(3), 306-323.
Boukas, N., & Ziakas, V. (2013). Impacts of the global economic crisis on Cyprus tourism
and policy responses. International Journal of Tourism Research, 15(4), 329-345.
Boukas, N., & Ziakas, V. (2014). A chaos theory perspective of destination crisis and
sustainable tourism development in islands: the case of Cyprus. Tourism Planning and
Development, 11(2), 191-209.
Bremner, P., Koschate, M., Levine, M. (2016). Humanoid robot avatars: An 'in the wild'
usability study. Proceedings of the 25th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication, RO-MAN 2016, 26-31 August 2016, New York, pp.
624-629
Brochado, A., Rita, P., & Margarido, A. (2016). High tech meets high touch in upscale hotels.
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology, 7(4), 347-365.
Brouder, P. (2020). Reset redux: possible evolutionary pathways towards the transformation
of tourism in a COVID-19 world. Tourism Geographies (in press), 1-7.
Brynjolfsson, E., & McAfee, A. (2014). The second machine age: Work, progress, and
prosperity in a time of brilliant technologies. WW Norton & Company.
Buhalis, D., & Yen, E. C. S. (2020). Exploring the use of chatbots in hotels: technology
providers’ perspective. In Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism
2020 (pp. 231-242). Springer, Cham.
Causevic, S., & Lynch, P. (2013). Political (in)stability and its influence on tourism
development. Tourism Management, 34, 145–157.
Chan, E. P. (2017). Machine trading: Deploying computer algorithms to conquer the markets.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Chen, Y, & Li, L. (2020). SARS-CoV-2: virus dynamics and host response. The Lancet:
Infectious Diseases. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30235-8
Collins, G. R., Cobanoglu, C., Bilgihan, A., & Berezina, K. (2017). Hospitality information
technology: Learning how to use it. (8th ed.). Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing
Co. Chapter 12: Automation and Robotics in the Hospitality Industry (pp. 413-449).
Cooper, C. (2005). Japanese tourism and the SARS epidemic of 2003. Journal of Travel &
Tourism Marketing, 19(2/3), 117-131, doi: 10.1300/J073v19n02_10.
Cubero, S. (Eds) (2007). Industrial robotics: theory, modelling and control. Mammendorf:
pro literature Verlag Robert Mayer-Scholz.
23

Datta, A. K., Datta, M., & Banerjee, P. K. (2015). Face detection and recognition: theory and
practice. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. MIS Quarterly, 13(3), 319-340.
de Sausmarez, N. (2013). Challenges to Kenyan tourism since 2008: crisis management from
the Kenyan tour operator perspective. Current Issues in Tourism, 16(7-8), 792-809.
del Rio, J. S., Moctezuma, D., Conde, C., de Diego, I. M., & Cabello, E. (2016). Automated
border control e-gates and facial recognition systems. Computers & Security, 62, 49-72.
Delabrida Silva, S. E., Rabelo Oliveira, R. A., & Loureiro, A. A. F. (Eds.). (2018). Examining
developments and applications of wearable devices in modern society. Hershey, PA:
IGI Global.
Demaitre, E. (2020, March 18). COVID-19 pandemic prompts more robot usage worldwide.
The Robot Report. Retrieved 24th March 2020 from
https://www.therobotreport.com/covid-19-pandemic-prompts-more-robot-usageworldwide/
Dey, N., Ashour, A. S., Fong, S. J., & Bhatt, C. (Eds.). (2019). Wearable and Implantable
Medical Devices: Applications and Challenges. London: Academic Press.
Dietrich, D. M., Kenworthy, M., & Cudney, E. A. (2019). Additive Manufacturing Change
Management: Best Practices. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Ernst, E., Merola, R., & Samaan, D. (2019). Economics of Artificial Intelligence: Implications
for the Future of Work. IZA Journal of Labor Policy, 9(1), 20190004.
doi: https://doi.org/10.2478/izajolp-2019-0004
Ertel, W. (2017). Introduction to artificial intelligence. 2nd ed. Cham: Springer.
Følstad, A., Araujo, T., Papadopoulos, S., Law, E. L. C., Granmo, O. C., Luger, E., &
Brandtzaeg, P. B. (Eds.) (2020). Chatbot Research and Design. Proceedings of the
Third International Workshop, CONVERSATIONS 2019, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, November 19–20, 2019, Revised Selected Papers. Cham, Springer.
Galitsky, B. (2019). Developing Enterprise Chatbots. Learning Linguistic Structures. Cham:
Springer.
Galvani, A., Lew, A. A., & Perez, M. S. (2020). COVID-19 is expanding global
consciousness and the sustainability of travel and tourism. Tourism Geographies (in
press), 1-10.
Gössling, S., Scott, D., & Hall, C. M. (2020). Pandemics, tourism and global change: a rapid
assessment of COVID-19. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 1-20.
24

Guo, Y. R., Cao, Q. D., Hong, Z. S., Tan, Y. Y., Chen, S. D., Jin, H. J., Tan, K. S., Wang. D.
Y., & Yan, Y. (2020). The origin, transmission and clinical therapies on coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak–an update on the status. Military Medical Research,
7(1), 1-10.
Hall, C. M. (2003). Biosecurity and wine tourism: Is a vineyard a farm? Journal of Wine
Research, 14(2-3), 121-126.
Hall, C. M. (2005). Biosecurity and wine tourism. Tourism Management, 26, 931-938.
Hall, C. M. (2007). Biosecurity and ecotourism. In J. Higham (Ed.) Critical Issues in
Ecotourism. Oxford: Elsevier, pp.102-116.
Hall, C. M. (2010). Tourism and environmental change in polar regions: Impacts, climate
change and biological invasion. In C.M. Hall and J. Saarinen (Eds.) Tourism and
Change in Polar Regions: Climate, Environments and Experiences. London: Routledge,
pp. 42-70.
Hall, C. M. (2011). Biosecurity, tourism and mobility: Institutional arrangements for
managing biological invasions. Journal of Policy Research in Tourism, Leisure and
Events, 3(3), 256-280.
Hall, C. M. (2015). The coming perfect storm: Medical tourism as a biosecurity issue. In N.
Lunt, D. Horsfall & J. Hanefeld (Eds.) Handbook on Medical Tourism and Patient
Mobility. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp. 193-204.
Hall, C. M. (2015). Tourism and biological exchange and invasions: A missing dimension in
sustainable tourism? Tourism Recreation Research, 40(1), 81-94.
Hall, C. M. (2020). Biological invasion, biosecurity, tourism and globalisation. In D. Timothy
(Ed.). Handbook of Globalization and Tourism. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
<https://doi.org/10.4337/9781786431295.00019> pp. 114-125.
Hall, C. M. & Baird, T. (2013). Ecotourism, biological invasions and biosecurity. In R.
Ballantyne & J. Packer (Eds.) The International Handbook of Ecotourism. Aldershot:
Ashgate Publishing, pp. 66-78.
Hall, C.M. & James, M. (2011). Medical tourism: Emerging biosecurity and nosocomial
issues. Tourism Review, 66(1/2), 118-126.
Hall, C. M., James. M. & Wilson, S. (2010). Biodiversity, biosecurity, and cruising in the
Arctic and sub-Arctic. Journal of Heritage Tourism, 5(4), 351-364.
Hall, C. M., Scott, D., & Gössling, S. (2020). Pandemics, transformations and tourism: be
careful what you wish for. Tourism Geographies, 1-22.

25

Hanrahan, J., & Melly, D. (2019). Biosecurity risk and tourist communication in Ireland,
European Journal of Tourism Research, 22, 45-61.
Hanson, J. (2020, March 23). Huge hotel job losses reported due to COVID-19. Retrieved 26th
March 2020 from https://www.law360.com/health/articles/1256131/huge-hotel-joblosses-reported-due-to-covid-19
Hill, J., Ford, W. R., & Farreras, I. G. (2015). Real conversations with artificial intelligence:
A comparison between human–human online conversations and human–chatbot
conversations. Computers in Human Behavior, 49, 245-250.
Hoy, M. B. (2018). Alexa, Siri, Cortana, and more: an introduction to voice assistants.
Medical Reference Services Quarterly, 37(1), 81-88.
Höykinpuro, R. (2015). Front stage with no front-stage employees: customer perceptions of
self-service hotels. In Ropo, A., Salovaara, P., Sauer, E., & De Paoli, D. (Eds.).
(2015). Leadership in spaces and places. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, pp.
163-180.
Huang, M. H., & Rust, R. T. (2018). Artificial intelligence in service. Journal of Service
Research, 21(2), 155-172.
Hudson, S. (2020). COVID-19 and Travel. Impacts, responses and outcomes. Goodfellow
Publishers.
Hui, M. (2020, March 20). Hong Kong is using tracker wristbands to geofence people under
coronavirus quarantine. Retrieved 24th March 2020 from https://qz.com/1822215/hongkong-uses-tracking-wristbands-for-coronavirus-quarantine/
Hung, K. K., Mark, C. K., Yeung, M. P., Chan, E. Y., & Graham, C. A. (2018). The role of
the hotel industry in the response to emerging epidemics: a case study of SARS in 2003
and H1N1 swine flu in 2009 in Hong Kong. Globalization and Health, 14(1), 117.
Israel, K., Tscheulin, D., & Zerres, C. (2019). Virtual reality in the hotel industry: assessing
the acceptance of immersive hotel presentation. European Journal of Tourism
Research, 21, 5-22.
Ivanov, S. (2020). The impact of automation on tourism and hospitality jobs. Information
Technology & Tourism 22(2), 205-215.
Ivanov, S. (2019). Ultimate transformation: How will automation technologies disrupt the
travel, tourism and hospitality industries? Zeitschrift für Tourismuswissenschaft 11(1),
25–43.

26

Ivanov, S., Gavrilina, M., Webster, C., & Ralko, V. (2017). Impacts of political instability on
the tourism industry in Ukraine. Journal of Policy Research in Tourism, Leisure and
Events, 9(1), 100-127.
Ivanov, S., Idzhylova, K., & Webster, C. (2016). Impacts of the entry of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea into the Russian Federation on its tourism industry: An exploratory
study. Tourism Management, 54, 162-169.
Ivanov, S., Sypchenko, L., & Webster, C. (2017). International sanctions and Russia’s hotel
industry: the impact on business and coping mechanisms of hoteliers. Tourism Planning
& Development, 14(3), 430-441.
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2017). Designing robot-friendly hospitality facilities. Proceedings
of the Scientific Conference “Tourism. Innovations. Strategies”, 13-14 October 2017,
Bourgas, Bulgaria, pp. 74-81.
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2018). Adoption of robots, artificial intelligence and service
automation by travel, tourism and hospitality companies – a cost-benefit analysis. In
Marinov, V., Vodenska, M., Assenova, M. & Dogramadjieva E. (Eds) Traditions and
Innovations in Contemporary Tourism, Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp. 190-203.
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (Eds.) (2019a). Robots, Artificial Intelligence and Service
Automation in Travel, Tourism and Hospitality. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing.
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2019b). Economic Fundamentals of the Use of Robots, Artificial
Intelligence and Service Automation in Travel, Tourism and Hospitality. In Ivanov, S.,
& Webster, C. (Eds.) Robots, Artificial Intelligence and Service Automation in Travel,
Tourism and Hospitality. Bingley, UK: Emerald Publishing, pp. 39-55.
Ivanov, S., & Webster, C. (2019c) Robots in tourism: a research agenda for tourism
economics. Tourism Economics (in press). https://doi.org/10.1177/1354816619879583
Ivanov, S., Webster, C. & Berezina, K. (2017). Adoption of robots and service automation by
tourism and hospitality companies. Revista Turismo & Desenvolvimento, 27/28, 15011517.
Jallat, F., & Shultz, C. J. (2010). Lebanon: From cataclysm to opportunity—Crisis
management lessons for MNCs in the tourism sector of the Middle East. Journal of
World Business, 46(4), 476-486.
Jamal, T., & Budke, C. (2020). Tourism in a world with pandemics. Journal of Tourism
Futures. Online: https://doi.org/10.1108/JTF-02-2020-0014

27

Joo, H., Maskery, B. A., Berro, A. D., Rotz, L. D., Lee, Y. K., & Brown, C. M. (2019).
Economic impact of the 2015 MERS outbreak on the Republic of Korea’s tourismrelated industries. Health Security, 17(2), 100–108. doi:10.1089/hs.2018.0115.
Kanda, T., & Ishiguro, H. (2016). Human-robot interaction in social robotics. Boca Raton:
CRC Press.
Kaushik, A. K., Agrawal, A. K., & Rahman, Z. (2015). Tourist behaviour towards self-service
hotel technology adoption: Trust and subjective norm as key antecedents. Tourism
Management Perspectives, 16, 278-289.
Kim, H., & Kim, B. G. (2018). A qualitative approach to automated motels: a rising issue in
South Korea. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 30(7),
2622-2636.
Kim, M., & Qu, H. (2014). Travelers' behavioral intention toward hotel self-service kiosks
usage. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 26(2), 225245.
Klitou, D. (2014). Privacy-invading technologies and privacy by design. Safeguarding
Privacy, Liberty and Security in the 21st Century. The Hague: T. M. C. Asser Press.
LaGrandeur, K. and Hughes, J. J. (Eds.) (2017). Surviving the Machine Age. Intelligent
Technology and the Transformation of Human Work. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Larsen, S., Brun, W., Øgaard, T., & Selstad, L. (2011). Effects of sudden and dramatic events
on travel desire and risk judgments. Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism,
11(3), 268-285.
Leonhard, G. (2016). Technology vs. Humanity. London: Fast Future Publishing.
Li, J. J., Bonn, M. A., & Ye, B. H. (2019). Hotel employee's artificial intelligence and
robotics awareness and its impact on turnover intention: The moderating roles of
perceived organizational support and competitive psychological climate. Tourism
Management, 73, 172-181.
Li, S. Z., & Jain, A. K. (Eds.) (2011). Handbook of Face Recognition. New York: Springer.
Lin, H., Chi, O. H., & Gursoy, D. (2019). Antecedents of customers’ acceptance of artificially
intelligent robotic device use in hospitality services. Journal of Hospitality Marketing &
Management, 1–20. doi:10.1080/19368623.2020.1685053
Liu, C., & Hung, K. (2019). Understanding Self-service Technology in Hotels in China:
Technology Affordances and Constraints. In Pesonen, J. & Neidhardt, J. (Eds.)
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2019, Proceedings of the

28

International Conference in Nicosia, Cyprus, 30.01-01.02.2019, pp. 225-236. Cham,
Springer.
Llorca‐Vivero, R. (2008). Terrorism and international tourism: New evidence. Defence and
Peace Economics, 19(2), 169-188.
Lu, L., Cai, R., & Gursoy, D. (2019). Developing and validating a service robot integration
willingness scale. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 80, 36-51.
Lukanova, G., & Ilieva, G. (2019). Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service Automation in
Hotels. In Ivanov, S. and Webster, C. (Eds.) Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service
Automation in Travel, Tourism and Hospitality, Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 157183.
Machado, L.P. (2012). The consequences of natural disasters in touristic destinations: The
case of Madeira Island – Portugal. Tourism and Hospitality Research, 12(1), 50-56.
Mair, J., Ritchie, B.W. and Walters, G. (2016). Towards a research agenda for post-disaster
and post-crisis recovery strategies for tourist destinations: a narrative review. Current
Issues in Tourism, 19(1), 1-26, doi: 10.1080/13683500.2014.932758.
Makridakis, S. (2017). The Forthcoming Artificial Intelligence (AI) Revolution: Its Impact on
Society and Firms. Futures, 90, 46-60.
Mandelbaum, R. (2016, November 21). An examination of hotel labor costs. Hotel
Management. Retrieved 25th March 2020 from
https://www.hotelmanagement.net/operate/examination-hotel-labor-costs
Maphanga, P.M., & Henama, U.S. (2019). The tourism impact of ebola in Africa: lessons on
crisis management. African Journal of Hospitality, Tourism and Leisure, 8(3), article 59
Maurer, M., Gerdes, J. C., Lenz, B., & Winner, H. (Eds.) (2016). Autonomous driving:
technical, legal and social aspects. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Open.
McClure, P. K. (2018). “You’re fired,” says the robot: The rise of automation in the
workplace, technophobes, and fears of unemployment. Social Science Computer
Review, 36(2), 139-156. https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439317698637
McKercher, B., & Chon, K. (2004). The over-reaction to SARS and the collapse of Asian
tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 31(3), 716-719.
Meng, X., Siriwardana, M., Dollery, B., & Mounter, S. (2010). The impact of the 2008 world
financial crisis on tourism and the Singapore economy and policy responses: A CGE
analysis. International Journal of Trade, Economics and Finance, 1(1), 46-53.
Mehta, P. and Smith-Bindman., R. (2011) Airport full-body screening: what is the risk?
Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(12), 1112-1115.Miller, M. R., & Miller, R. (2017).
29

Robots and Robotics: Principles, Systems, and Industrial Applications. McGraw-Hill
Education.
Morosan, C. (2012). Theoretical and empirical considerations of guests’ perceptions of
biometric systems in hotels: Extending the technology acceptance model. Journal of
Hospitality & Tourism Research, 36(1), 52-84.
Moulder, J. E. (2012) Risks of exposure to ionizing and millimeter-wave radiation from
airport whole-body scanners. Radiation Research, 177(6), 723-726.
Murphy, J., Hofacker, C., & Gretzel, U. (2017). Dawning of the Age of Robots in Hospitality
and Tourism: Challenges for Teaching and Research. European Journal of Tourism
Research, 15, 104–111.
Naisbitt, J., Naisbitt, D., & Philips, D. (2001). High tech high touch: technology and our
accelerated search for meaning. London: Nicolas Brealey Publishing.
McLaney, E., & Atrill, P. (2008). Accounting: An Introduction. 4th ed. Harlow: Prentice Hall.
Neuhofer, B., Buhalis, D., & Ladkin, A. (2013). High tech for high touch experiences: A case
study from the hospitality industry. In Information and Communication Technologies in
Tourism 2013 (pp. 290-301). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Neumayer, E. (2004). The impact of political violence on tourism: Dynamic cross-national
estimation. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 48(2), 259-281.
Niaki, M. K., & Nonino, F. (2018). The management of additive manufacturing: enhancing
business value. Cham: Springer.
Nica, I., Tazl, O. A., & Wotawa, F. (2018). Chatbot-based tourist recommendations using
model-based reasoning. In Felfernig, A., Tiihonen, J., Hotz, L., & Stettinger, M. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 20th International Configuration Workshop, 27-28 September 2018,
Graz, Austria, pp. 25-30.
Nørskov, M. (2016). Social Robots: Boundaries, Potential, Challenges. London and New
York: Routledge.
Novelli, M., Gussing Burgess, L., Jones, A., Ritchie, B.W. (2018). ‘No ebola…still doomed’
– the ebola-induced tourism crisis. Annals of Tourism Research, 70, 76-87.
Ogle, A., & Lamb, D. (2019). The Role of Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service
Automation in Events. In Ivanov, S. and Webster, C. (Eds.) Robots, Artificial
Intelligence, and Service Automation in Travel, Tourism and Hospitality, Emerald
Publishing Limited, pp. 255-269.

30

Pandey, A. (2020, March 25). Coronavirus sledgehammers global job markets. Deutsche
Welle. Retrieved 25th March 2020 from https://www.dw.com/en/coronavirussledgehammers-global-job-markets/a-52905245
Paraskevas, A., Altinay, L., McLean, J., & Cooper, C. (2013). Crisis knowledge in tourism:
types, flows and governance. Annals in Tourism Research, 41, 130-152.
Pekgün, P., Menich, R. P., Acharya, S., Finch, P. G., Deschamps, F., Mallery, K., Van Sistine,
J., Christianson, K., & Fuller, J. (2013). Carlson Rezidor hotel group maximizes
revenue through improved demand management and price optimization. Interfaces,
43(1), 21-36.
Penninga, S., & Chibili, M. N. (2016). The Rooms Department. In Chilibi, M. N. (Ed.) (2016)
Modern hotel operations management. Groningen: Noordhoff Uitgevers.
Przegalinska, A. (2019). Wearable technologies in organizations: Privacy, efficiency and
autonomy in work. Palgrave Macmillan.
Purwomarwanto, Y. L., & Ramachandran, J. (2015). Performance of tourism sector with
regard to the global crisis: a comparative study between Indonesia, Malaysia, and
Singapore. The Journal of Developing Areas, 49(4), 325.
Ritchie, B.W., Crotts, J.C., Zehrer, A., & Volsky, G.T. (2014). Understanding the effects of a
tourism crisis: The impact of the BP oil spill on regional lodging demand. Journal of
Travel Research, 53(1), 12-25.
Rosen, S. (2020, March 27). You can stay at a hotel that uses virus-killing robots to clean its
rooms. Retrieved 28th March 2020 from https://thepointsguy.com/news/virus-killingrobot-hotel/
Royakkers, L., & van Est, R. (2016). Just ordinary robots: automation from love to war. Boca
Raton: CRC Press.
Russell, S. J., & Norvig, P. (2016). Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. Harlow:
Pearson Education Limited.
Saha, S., & Yap, G. (2014). The moderation effects of political instability and terrorism on
tourism development: A cross-country panel analysis. Journal of Travel Research,
53(4), 509-521.
Schwab, K. (2016). The Fourth Industrial Revolution. Cologny/Geneva: World Economic
Forum.
Scott, N., Laws, E., & Prideaux, B. (2008). Tourism crises and marketing recovery strategies.
Journal of Travel & Tourism Marketing, 23(2-4), 1-13.

31

Sendler, U. (Ed.). (2018). The Internet of Things: Industrie 4.0 Unleashed. Berlin: Springer
Vieweg.
Servick, K. (2020, March 22). Cellphone tracking could help stem the spread of coronavirus.
Is privacy the price? Science. Retrieved 24th March 2020 from
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/03/cellphone-tracking-could-help-stem-spreadcoronavirus-privacy-price
Seyitoğlu, F., & Ivanov, S. (2020). Service robots as a tool for physical distancing in tourism.
Current Issues in Tourism (in press). Doi:
https://doi.org/10.1080/13683500.2020.1774518
Singh, R., & Davim, J. P. (Eds.). (2019). Additive Manufacturing: Applications and
Innovations. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
Som, A. P. M., Ooi, C.-A., & Hooy, C.-W. (2014). Crisis typologies and tourism demand.
Anatolia, 25(2), 302-304.
Sönmez, S., Wiitala, J., & Apostolopoulos, Y. (2019). How complex travel, tourism, and
transportation networks influence infectious disease movement in a borderless world. In
Dallen, J.T. (Ed.) Handbook of Globalization and Tourism. Edward Elgar Publishing:
Cheltenham, UK, pp. 76-88.
Spencer, D. (2018). Fear and hope in an age of mass automation: Debating the future of work.
New Technology, Work, and Employment, 33(1), 1-12.
Stock, R. M., & Merkle, M. (2017). A service Robot Acceptance Model: User acceptance of
humanoid robots during service encounters. Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops
(PerCom Workshops), 13-17 March 2017, Kona, Hi, USA.
doi:10.1109/percomw.2017.7917585
Talwar, R., Wells, S., Whittington, Al, Koury, A., & Romero, M. (2017). The future
reinvented. Reimagining life, society, and business. London: Fast Future Publishing.
Tornatzky, L. G., & Fleischer, M. (1990). The Process of Technological Innovation.
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Tucker, H. (2020). Coronavirus Bankruptcy Tracker: These Major Companies Are Failing
Amid the Shutdown. Forbes. Retrieved from
https://www.forbes.com/sites/hanktucker/2020/05/03/coronavirus-bankruptcy-trackerthese-major-companies-are-failing-amid-the-shutdown/

32

Tung, V. W. S., & Au, N. (2018). Exploring customer experiences with robotics in
hospitality. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 30(7),
2680-2697, doi: https://doi.org/10.1108/IJCHM-06-2017-0322
Tussyadiah, I. (2020). A review of research into automation in tourism: Launching the Annals
of Tourism Research Curated Collection on Artificial Intelligence and Robotics in
Tourism. Annals of Tourism Research, 81, 102883.
Tussyadiah, I., & Miller, G. (2019). Nudged by a robot: Responses to agency and feedback.
Annals of Tourism Research, 78, 102752.
Tussyadiah, I., Zach, F. K. & Wang, J. (2017). Attitudes Toward Autonomous on Demand
Mobility System: The Case of Self-Driving Taxi. In Schegg, R. & Strangl, B. (Eds.)
Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2017. Proceedings of the
International Conference in Rome, Italy, January 24–26, 2017, pp. 755-766. Cham:
Springer.
Vakulenko, Y., Hellström, D., & Oghazi, P. (2018). Customer value in self-service kiosks: a
systematic literature review. International Journal of Retail & Distribution
Management, 46(5), 507-527.
van Doorn, J., Mende, M., Noble, S. M., Hulland, J., Ostrom, A. L., Grewal, D., & Petersen,
J. A. (2017). Domo Arigato Mr. Roboto Emergence of Automated Social Presence in
Organizational Frontlines and Customers’ Service Experiences. Journal of Service
Research, 20(1), 43-58.
Velez, F. J., & Miyandoab, F. D. (Eds.). (2019). Wearable technologies and wireless body
sensor networks for healthcare. London: The Institution of Engineering and
Technology.
Venkatesh, V., & Bala, H. (2008). Technology Acceptance Model 3 and a Research Agenda
on Interventions. Decision Sciences, 39 (2), 273–315.
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology acceptance
model: Four longitudinal field studies. Management Science, 46(2), 186-204.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M., Davis, G. & and Davis, F. (2003). User acceptance of information
technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 425-478.
Venkatesh, V., Thong, J. & Xu, X. (2012). Consumer acceptance and use of information
technology: extending the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology. MIS
Quarterly, 36(1), 157-178. 31.
Virto, N. & López, M. (2019). Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service Automation to the
Core: Remastering Experiences at Museums. In Ivanov, S. and Webster, C. (Eds.)
33

Robots, Artificial Intelligence, and Service Automation in Travel, Tourism and
Hospitality, Emerald Publishing Limited, pp. 239-253.
Webster, C. (2019). Halfway there: the transition from 1968 to 2068 in tourism and
hospitality. Zeitschrift für Tourismuswissenschaft, 11(1), 5-23.
Webster, C. & Ivanov, S. (2019). What do people think robots should do in hospitality and
tourism? Preliminary findings from a global study of market segments. Proceedings of
the AIRSI2019 Conference “Artificial Intelligence & Robotics in Service Interactions:
trends, benefits, and challenges”, 8-9th July 2019, Zaragoza, Spain, pp. 55-71.
Webster, C. & Ivanov, S. (2020a). Robots in travel, tourism and hospitality: Key findings
from a global study. Varna: Zangador. Retrieved from:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3542208
Webster, C., & Ivanov, S. (2020b). Demographic Change as a Driver for Tourism
Automation. Journal of Tourism Futures (in press). Doi: 10.1108/JTF-10-2019-0109.
Webster, C., Ivanov, S., Gavrilina, M., Idzhylova, K., & Sypchenko, L. (2017) Hotel
Industry’s Reactions to the Crimea Crisis. e-Review of Tourism Research, 14(1-2), 5771.
Webster, C., Yen, C. L. A., & Hji-Avgoustis, S. (2016). RFRA and the hospitality industry in
Indiana: political shocks and empirical impacts on Indianapolis’ hospitality and tourism
industry. International Journal of Tourism Cities, 2(3), 221-231.
Wei, W., Torres, E., & Hua, N. (2016). Improving consumer commitment through the
integration of self-service technologies: a transcendent consumer experience
perspective. International Journal of Hospitality Management, 59, 105-115.
Willingham, AJ. (2020) All the virtual concerts, plays, museums and other culture you can
enjoy from home. 27th March 2020. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/style/article/what-todo-at-home-streaming-art-museums-concerts-coronavirus-trnd/index.html
Wirtz, J., Patterson, P., Kunz, W., Gruber, T., Lu, V. N., Paluch, S., & Martins, A. (2018).
Brave New World: Service Robots in the Frontline. Journal of Service
Management, 29(5), 907-931.
Wolfe, A. (2020, March 24). Cali Group Expands Use of Facial Recognition Tech.
Hospitality Technology. Retrieved from https://hospitalitytech.com/cali-group-expandsuse-facial-recognition-tech
Wolff, K., & Larsen, S. (2014). Can terrorism make us feel safer? Risk perceptions and
worries before and after the July 22nd attacks. Annals of Tourism Research, 44, 200–
209.
34

World Health Organisation (2020). Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) advice for the public.
Retrieved 25th March 2020 from https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novelcoronavirus-2019/advice-for-public
Yang, G.-Z., Nelson, B. J., Murphy, R. R., Choset, H., Christensen, H., Collins, S. H., Dario,
P., Goldberg, K., Ikuta, K., Jacobstein, N., Kragic, D., Taylor, R. H., & McNutt, M.
(2020). Combating COVID-19—The role of robotics in managing public health and
infectious diseases. Science Robotics, 5(40), eabb5589. DOI:
10.1126/scirobotics.abb5589
Zeng, B., Carter, R.W., & De Lacy, T. (2005). Short-term perturbations and tourism effects:
the case of SARS in China. Current Issues in Tourism, 8(4), 306-322.
Zeng, Z., Chen, P. J., & Lew, A. A. (2020). From high-touch to high-tech: COVID-19 drives
robotics adoption. Tourism Geographies (in press), 1-11.
Zhong, L., Sun, S., Law, R., & Zhang, X. (2020). Impact of robot hotel service on consumers’
purchase intention: a control experiment. Asia Pacific Journal of Tourism Research, 119. https://doi.org/10.1080/10941665.2020.1726421

35

Virus

Government actions

 Rate of infection
 Mortality rate
 Geographic spread









Travel bans
Border closures
Lockdown
Temporary closure of TTH companies
Medical / health / hygiene requirements
Compulsory quarantine of travellers
Compulsory vaccinations

―

―

┼

Supply

Demand









Number of tourists
Length of stay
Lead period
Willingness to pay
Party size
Transportation mode
Motivation
Health concerns

―

―

―
Capacity

Revenues

┼/―

Costs
―

┼/―

―

―
―

―

Profitability

Liquidity

Cash flow

―
┼

―
Default

┼

┼/―

┼

┼

Investment in automation technologies
―
Corporate
reputation

―

Staff layoffs

Temporary closure of operations

Loans

Outsourcing

Apply for government support

Other

Corporate solutions
Figure 1. Conceptual framework
Note: ┼ positive relationship, ― negative relationship
36

