"x"
"1" "“Saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and safeguarding nature”:   risk-based  w ildlife trade  policy  for  sustainable development  outcomes  post- COVID-19"
"2" "Hollie Booth 1* , Melissa Arias 1 , Stephanie Brittain 1 , Daniel W. S. Challender 1 , Munib Khanyari 1,2,3 , Timothy Kupier 1 , Yuhan Li 1 ,4 , Alegria Olmedo 1 , Rodrigo Oyan e del 1 , Tom Pienkowski 1 , EJ Milner-Gulland 1"
"3" "Interdisciplinary Centre for Conservation Science, Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, 11a Mansfield Road, Oxford, OX1 3SZ, UK."
"4" "Nature Conservation Foundation, 3076/5, IV Cross  Gokulam  Park, Mysore 570002, India"
"5" "Department of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol, 24 Tyndall Avenue, BS8 1TH, UK."
"6" "School of Geography and Environment, University of Oxford ,  S outh  Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3QY , UK"
"7" "*   Corresponding Author :   hollie.booth@zoo.ox.ac.uk"
"8" "Abstract"
"9" "The COVID ‐ 19 pandemic has caused huge loss of life, and immense social and economic harm. Wildlife trade has become central to discourse on COVID-19, zoonotic pandemics, and related policy responses, which must focus on “saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and safeguarding nature”.  Proposed policy responses have included  extreme  measures  such as banning all use and trade of wildlife , or blanket measures for entire Classes . However,  different trades  pose  varying degrees  of risk for zoonotic pandemics ,  while  some  trades also  play  critical  roles in delivering other  key  aspects of sustainable development, particularly related to poverty  and  hunger  alleviation , decent work, responsible consumption and production, and life on land and below water. Here we describe how wildlife trade contributes to the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in diverse ways, with synergies and trade-offs within and between the SDGs. In doing so, we show that  prohibition s   could result in severe trade-offs against some SDGs,  with  limited benefits for public health via pandemic prevention. This complexity necessitates context-specific  policies , with multi-sector decision-making that goes beyond simple top-down solutions. We encourage decision-makers to  adopt a risk-based approach to wildlife trade policy post-COVID-19, with policies formulate d  via participatory, evidence-based approaches, which explicitly acknowledge uncertainty, complexity ,  and conflicting values across different  components  of the SDGs .  This  should  help to  ensure that  future  use  and trade  of wildlife is  safe,  environmentally-sustainable and socially-just."
"10" "Key words:  COVID-19; public health; sustainable development goals; policy; multi-sector , livelihoods, wildlife trade"
"11" "Introduction"
"12" "Background"
"13" "The COVID ‐ 19 pandemic has caused a worldwide state of emergency, with immense human suffering, loss of life, and socio-economic instability. Several early cases of COVID ‐ 19 were traced to a wet market in Wuhan, China, which traded domestic and wild animals  (Wu, Chen, & Chan, 2020) . These early cases raised concerns about the role of wildlife trade in the emergence of COVID-19 and zoonotic diseases more broadly.   A wide range of policy responses have been suggested. Extreme ones include calls to ban use and trade of wildlife entirely  (Singh Khadka, 2020) , or blanket global measures for entire Classes o f  wildlife, in the belief that this will protect public health,  while also  improv ing  animal welfare and deliver ing  conservation goals  (The Lion Coalition, 2020; Walzer, 2020) .  Others have called for more balanced or targeted approaches, directed towards critical control points in the supply chain, or specific species which are more likely to harbor zoonotic viruses  (Petrovan et al., 2020; Roe & Lee, 2021) ."
"14" "Some governments  have acted  decisively  to implement  new policy  measures.  For example,   China's top legislature   adopted  a decision  to “thoroughly ban the illegal trading of wildlife and eliminate the consumption of wild animals to safeguard people's lives and health” . This decision covers all terrestrial wild animals ;  fish, wild plants, amphibians and reptiles, and animal products for non-edible use remain exempt  from this  measure ,   with use  regulated under  other  instruments   (Koh, Li, & Lee, 2021; Y. Li, 2020) .  Vietnam  temporarily  banned import s  of wildlife and wildlife products  (with some exemptions for various non-edible products) , and called for enforcement of existing laws to eliminate advertising, buying, selling and consum ption of  illegal wildlife  product s   (Prime Minister of Vietnam, 2020) . Similarly,  a resolution was passed in Bolivia re-stating bans on wildlife trade and consumption as a matter of public health  (Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Agua, 2020) .   In Gabon, a more targeted approach has been adopted, via a ban on  c onsumption of bats and pangolins  (AFP, 2020) ."
"15" "However,  while bats have been identified as a likely primary reservoir of COVID-19,  evidence that  the pandemic  emerged  due to   wildlife trade remains inconclusive  (Andersen, Rambaut, Lipkin, Holmes, &  Garry, 2020; C. Huang et al., 2020; Shereen, Khan, Kazmi, Bashir, & Siddique, 2020) . Moreover, wildlife trade can both help and hinder the delivery of a broad range of health, livelihood and nature conservation outcomes, underpinning multiple UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). While saving lives through pandemic prevention is  undoubtedly  a  top  policy priority, silver - bullet approaches such as blanket bans fail to acknowledge the heterogeneous public health risks present across species and contexts , and  the diverse roles of wildlife trade in delivering sustainable development outcomes  (Challender, Harrop, & MacMillan, 2015; UNEP and ILRI, 2020; Wang et al., 2020) .  These  top-down approaches  also fail to  account for the complexity, uncertainty and plurality of values associated with wildlife trade, with non-compliance and the emergence of illicit markets potentially undermining such approaches  (Bonwitt et al., 2018; Fournie et al., 2013; Zhu & Zhu, 2020) ."
"16" "Instead, policy responses to the pandemic  should  focus  holistically  on “saving lives, protecting livelihoods, and safeguarding nature” (IPBES 2020), all of which are fundamental to delivering the SDGs. To broaden the discourse, we describe how wildlife trade affects sustainable development in diverse, complex and dynamic ways, with synergies, trade-offs and feedbacks within and between the SDGs. Based on this, we argue that a  risk-based  multi-sector approach to wildlife trade policy  post-COVID-19  can support health, livelihoods, and the conservation of nature. We suggest how decision-makers might evaluate these trade-offs and synergies for different species and contexts  in order to formulate risk-based policies   through six illustrative  case stud ies . Finally, we offer some general principles and processes for using such evaluations in decision-making in the face of uncertaint y , complexit y  and plurality of values. Overall, we encourage decision-makers to think more holistically and participatorily about wildlife trade,  and  to  adopt   risk-based  policies which  minimise  public health risks, while enhancing benefits across other dimensions of  wildlife trade for  sustainable development."
"17" "The Diverse Roles of Wildlife Trade in meeting  the  Sustainable Development Goals"
"18" "Wildlife trade is the sale or exchange of wild animals, fungi and plants, and their derivatives  (Broad, Mulliken, & Roe, 2002) . It  is extremely diverse and dynamic,  encompass ing  a wide range of species, actors and supply chains at various scopes and scales, with different markets varying in their legality,  sustainability and social legitimacy  (’t Sas-Rolfes et al., 2019) .  For example, local trade of wild fungi  in  Ozumba ,  Mexico ,   is  safe, sustainable,   contributes to local  livelihoods ,  and maintains traditional ethnobiological knowledge   (Pérez-Moreno, Martínez-Reyes, Yescas-Pérez, Delgado-Alvarado, & Xoconostle-Cázares, 2008)   and  game ranching makes a significant contribution to South Africa’s GDP, and can incentivise  land and wildlife  stewardship  (Pienaar, Rubino, Saayman, & van der Merwe, 2017) .  In contrast, international trade in sea cucumbers is driving stock collapse s ,  which is undermining coastal livelihoods and associated with  illegal fishing activities  (González-Wangüemert, Domínguez-Godino, & Cánovas, 2018; Purcell et al., 2013) .   Similarly, high-value trade in pangolin  parts has depleted some populations in Asia, with much trafficking attention now focused on Africa  (Challender, Heinrich, Shepherd, & Katsis, 2020) .  With this diversity, wildlife trade has direct positive and negative contributions  to t he ‘5Ps’ of the SDGs  ( People, Prosperity, Peace, Partnerships and Planet ) ,  and indirect contributions via  SDG interactions,  feedbacks and policy interventions  (Figure 1) ."
"19" "“Saving lives, protecting livelihoods”: direct contributions towards SDGs for People and Prosperity"
"20" "The hunting, transportation and consumption of some wild animals can increase the risk of zoonosis emergence, and thus hinder progress towards good health and well-being (SDG 3)  (Swift, Hunter, Lees, & Bell, 2007; UNEP and ILRI, 2020) .  Zoonotic pandemics  c an cost   billions or even  trillions  of dollars in economic and social burden , also hindering progress towards no poverty and decent work (SDGs 1 and 8).   F or example, in the  2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa ,  over 11,000 people lost their lives  with a  total economic burden  estimated at US$ 53 billion   (Huber, Finelli, & Stevens, 2018) , while  the economic opportunity costs of the COVID-19 pandemic  could amount to $10trn in forgone G ross  D omestic  P roduct (GDP)  over 2020-21   (The Economist, 2021) .  Overexploitation also undermines progress towards responsible consumption and production (SDG 12) and can create poverty traps, thus weakening the capacity of ecosystems to support good health, well-being and poverty alleviation (SDGs 1 and 3)  (Pienkowski, Dickens, Sun, & Carrasco, 2017) ."
"21" "Conversely , wildlife  trade also  support s  the diets and livelihoods of  hundreds of  millions of people, helping to deliver no poverty, zero hunger and decent work and economic growth (SDGs 1, 3 and 8,  respectively)  (Roe et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020) .  For example, American bullfrog ( Lithobates   catesbeianus ) is a common delicacy in China, with a farming industry  valued  at around US$ 120 million  per year , which employed 24,000 people in 2016  (Chinese Academy of Engineering, 2017) .   In some cases, wildlife trade chains primarily involve female traders  – for example,  in Ghana, bushmeat  wholesalers and market traders in urban areas   are all women  (Mendelson, Cowlishaw, & Rowcliffe, 2003)  -  and these livelihood opportunities create  important contributions  to  gender equality (SDG 5). Wildlife trade also has socio-cultural significance in rural and urban contexts worldwide  (Alves & Rosa, 2013) , such that restricting access to wildlife can harm social justice, particularly amongst indigenous and  marginalised  communities, thus hindering progress towards reduced inequalities (SDG 10), peace, justice and strong institutions (SDG 16) and partnerships for the goals (SDG 17)  (Antunes et al., 2019) .  Alternatively , sustainable wildlife management, which is developed and implemented  under good governance conditions and  through fair participatory process es , can  have positive impacts on security  and support SDGs 16 and 17  (Cooney, Roe, Dublin, & Booker, 2018; Roe & Booker, 2019)  (Figure 1)."
"22" "“Safeguarding nature”: Direct contributions towards SDGs for Planet"
"23" "Wildlife trade  can both help and hinder  the protection of   life below water (SDG 14) and on land (SDG 15). For example, n early three-quarters of threatened or near-threatened species are being over-exploited for trade  and/ or subsistence  purposes  (Maxwell, Fuller, Brooks, & Watson, 2016) , representing a leading global threat to biodiversity  (Tilman et al., 2017) . For several  C ritically  E ndangered taxa, such as rhinos, pangolins   and wedgefish ,  trade-driven overexploitation represents the greatest threat to their survival  (Challender et al., 2020; Kyne et al., 2019; Maxwell et al., 2016) . Capture and trade can also harm the welfare of individual wild animals, particularly the live animal trade, which can cause high stress and  mortality   (Baker et al., 2013) ."
"24" "Conversely ,   well-managed, sustainable  trade can   have benefits for biodiversity   (Heid & Márquez-Ramos, 2020; McRae et al., 2020) .  For example,  regulated trade in vicu ñ a wool  fibre  in Bolivia allowed the recovery of the species from near - extinction, with direct benefits  from  harvesting  for  local communities and  an estimated contribution of US$ 3.2 million to the  national econom y  per annum   (Cooney, 2019) .  Similarly, c arefully -managed trade of saltwater crocodiles has aided population recovery in Australia , with population density at least doubling since the introduction of an egg harvesting initiative (which also provides U S $  515,000  per year  in income to Aboriginal communities  (CITES & Livelihoods, 2019b; Fukuda et al., 2011) ;  regulated hunting of bighorn sheep in  the USA and Mexico  has helped once - dwindling populations   to recover  at least three-fold ,  whilst   fund ing   conservation of associated ecosystems   (Hurley, Brewer, & Thornton, 2015) ; and game ranching in South Africa incentivises private land stewardship  (Pienaar et al., 2017)  (Figure 1) , all  of which  pos e  little-to-no public health risk .   In general ,   wildlife trade policies  that incentivi s e sustainable use  typically  have more immediate positive effects  on wildlife populations than outright trade bans   (Heid & Márquez-Ramos, 2020) ."
"25" "Indirect impacts on the SDGs through  interactions, policy interventions  and feedbacks"
"26" "The  above  examples  also indicate  interactions between the SDGs, such as  trade-offs  and feedbacks , which  aris e  from wildlife trade .   SDGs can interact in many ways , with potential cascading effects   (Nilsson et al., 2018; Nilsson, Griggs, & Visbeck, 2016) , and those  which are most pertinent to COVID-19 and wildlife trade relate to counteracting interactions between food security, public health and life on land. For example,   while  trade  and consumption of horseshoe bats  may provide nutritional benefits for some  people ,  they can also pose wide-spread  public health risks  (Mickleburgh, Waylen, & Racey, 2009; Wong et al., 2019) , creating  a trade-off between SDGs 2 and 3, and within SDG 3. In other cases, the substitution of wildlife with domestic livestock could drive agricultural expansion, and exacerbate anthropogenic drivers of zoonosis emergence  (Allen et al., 2017) , thus hindering progress toward improved health, responsible consumption, and life on land (SDGs 3, 12 and 15). Conversely,  these interactions can also be reinforcing. For example,  sustainable use of wild-sourced natural resources may  contribute to food security (SDG 2), and  reduce land use change and carbon emissions from commercial agriculture ,  thus contributing to life on land (SDG 15)  with potential synergies for climate action (SDG 13) (Figure 1)."
"27" "Wildlife trade policy interventions can also create feedbacks and unintended consequences for the SDGs.    For instance, restricting wildlife trade can have conservation benefits (SDGs 14 and 15), but may harm food security, health and well-being (SDGs 2 and 3)  (Bonwitt et al., 2018; Larrosa, Carrasco, & Milner- Gulland, 2016; Short et al., 2019) .  Overly stringent or socially-illegitimate regulation can also lead to non-compliance  and black markets , which  can  erode security and institutions (SDG 16)  (Bonwitt et al., 2018; Oyanedel, Gelcich, & Milner ‐ Gulland, 2020) , and can backfire leading to further declines  in populations of threatened species   (Leader-Williams, 2003) ."
"28" "Overall, wildlife trade and its contributions to society are complex, uncertain and divergent. Designing policy interventions in response to COVID-19 therefore requires a holistic multi-sector approach, which explicitly acknowledges trade-offs, feedbacks and pluralistic values, and seeks to  minimise  direct public health risks from zoonoses, whilst  optimising  benefits across other SDGs."
"29" "Fig ure  1.  Illustrative e xamples of   some general  positive (green) and negative (red) contributions of  wildlife trade  to the  Sustainable Development Goals  (SDGs) . Direct contributions are denoted  by arrows in the  centre   of the diagram,   while  interactions  between the SDGs  are denoted by arrows around the  outside   (with  trade-offs  in red  and synergies  in green) .   This diagram is illustrative only; it is not intended to provide a complete review of all types of wild uses and trades, and their contributions and interactions."
"30" "A  way forward :  data and process for holistic policy responses"
"31" "Minimising  disease risk whilst delivering other SDGs requires that policy responses explicitly acknowledge the broader socio-ecological context of wildlife trade  (Bonwitt et al., 2018; Eskew & Carlson, 2020; Zhu & Zhu, 2020) . The nature and magnitude of the costs and benefits of wildlife trade will depend on the species and context.  As such, considering the range of  costs ,  benefits  and associated risks   in an integrated way could   help to formulate robust policy responses   that  minimise  the risk of future pandemics ,  contribute  positively to  SDG outcomes,   and  identify   pinch  points for targeting  management  interventions . We illustrate this through six case studies, and then offer some general suggestions regarding data, principles and process."
"32" "Case study examples"
"33" "We first explore how  direct and indirect contributions to  relevant SDGs   might be explicitly considered in decision - making for different species and contexts , based on  qualitative assessments for six case study examples   (Table 1 , Figure 2 ).  We selected these case studies to represent a range of geographic and taxonomic diversity, and a plurality of costs and benefits across the 5Ps of the SDGs ; and because published dat a  is available on  implications  of trade for at least three of the  5 Ps of SDGs ."
"34" "For each case study, we  provide a  qualitative  judgement of the positive  contributions  (benefits) and negative contributions  (cost) of each type of wildlife  trade  to the SDGs .   These  are categorized as high, moderate or low , according to available data on: the extent of the contribution, the  intensity  of the contribution ,  and its perceived likelihood of occurrence, as per common risk assessment processes used in animal and human health  (Beauvais, Zuther, Villeneuve, Kock, & Guitian, 2018; Narrod, Zinsstag, & Tiongco, 2012) .  To acknowledge uncertainty, we also offer a  qualitative  judgement, where :  low uncertainty corresponds to  robust  and complete data available , with  strong  consistent  evidence provided in multiple references ;  moderate uncertainty corresponds to  some data available , but with few references and/or some inconsistencies; high uncertainty corresponds to  scarce or no data available , with anecdotal  evidence  and/or highly inconsistent conclusions  (Beauvais et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2020) .  W e emphasize that the se  case studies are   not  based on exhaustive  literature  reviews , expert  and stakeholder consultation ,  or comprehensive quantitative data ,   nor  are the case studies fully  representative of the wide range of  species,  geographies  and contexts   in  which  wildlife trade takes place. R ather they are illustrative examples of the types of issues and data that should be considered within real-world decision contexts.  We  encourage researchers and decision-makers to use all available data , values   and  expertise to  consider the range of costs and benefits within  their  own decision-making  cont exts,  and  to transparently define and disclose their own  evaluation  criteria  and associated  thresholds  when conducting context-specific risk assessments for policy formulation."
"35" "T rade in horseshoe bats ( Rhinolophidae )   in South China  currently  poses a high public health risk  in terms of extent, severity and likelihood   (Han, Kramer, & Drake, 2016; Wong et al., 2019)   and  creates  p otential negative impacts for bat populations and habitats (SDG 15,  Zhang  et al. , 2009) .  These high potential downside costs may outweigh socio-economic benefits: while bats are consumed as supplements in some rural diets (SDG 2), often consumption is not targeted  (Mickleburgh et al., 2009) , making this benefit limited in terms of extent and intensity  (Figure 2a) . Thus, a ban on all trade and consumption of bats in South China may be appropriate, though enforcement challenges and the  input and  values  of rural communities would need to be carefully  and explicitly  considered (Table 1 , Figure 2 b ). Similarly, the high public health risks and limited benefits of great ape trade indicate that bans may be an appropriate pathway to simultaneously protect health (SDG 3) and life on land (SDG 15 ) ,  (Keita, Hamad, & Bittar, 2014; Plumptre, Robbins, & Williamson, 2019) . However,   it is already illegal to hunt and trade great apes in most of their range states,  so  interventions may need to focus on implementation of existing regulations, or additional regulation with a public health lens,  considering  the concerns of affected residents and lessons from previous interventions (e.g.  Bonwitt   et al ., 2018)."
"36" "In contrast, trade in Bighorn sheep ( Ovis canadensis )  in North  America  and  rays ( Batoidea ) in The Gambia do not pose immediate public health concerns  in terms of extent and severity of disease outbreak . However, the se  trade s  provide significant benefits in terms of food security (SDG 2) and livelihoods (SDGs 1 and 8), though careful  management  is  needed  to ensure utilisation is compatible with responsible consumption and production (SDG 12), and life below water (SDG 14) and on land (SDG  15,  (Hurley et al., 2015; Moore, Séret, & Armstrong, 2019) . Trade in other species, such as live waterfowl (Anseriformes) traded in live bird markets in Egypt, represents a moderate public health risk (SDG 3) .   (Influenza A (H5N1 ) ) is pathogenic with a high likelihood of transmission from animal-to-animal and animal-to-human, however   human-to-human transmission  is limited , such that the  pandemic potential and thus  extent of the cost is likely to be limited) . However, this trade also provides myriad benefits for people, as a source of protein ,  income  and cultural value  (SDGs 1 and 2)  (Kayed et al., 2019)  (Figure 2c) . In this context, a regulated trade may be most appropriate, with  strict hygiene standards, routine surveillance,  and  no flock mixing   (Fournie et al., 2013) . Evidence from live bird markets in Vietnam suggests that regulated trade may be more effective at  minimising  public health risks and preventing illegal or illicit trade than poorly enforced bans  (Fournie et al., 2013) , thus  creating  a better delivery mechanism for protecting health (SDG 3) and peace, justice, and strong institutions (SDG 16)  (Table 1, Figure 2 d ) ."
"37" "More detailed background information for each of these case studies is available in the SI . W e  e mphasise  that these worked   examples are  qualitative assessments  to illustrate the  plurality of values, context and uncertainties, and   do not  serve as formal policy recommendations."
"38" "Table 1.  Evaluating t he diverse costs and benefits of wildlife trade  across the SDGs .  Costs highlighted in shades of  orange , benefits highlighted in shades of green [d arker  colour  = higher  cost ( orange ) or benefit (green)]. Uncertainty represented by question marks [ ? = low uncertainty, ?? = moderate uncertainty, ??? = high uncertainty],  based on  a review of key literature and  available data.  CR =  C ritically  E ndangered, EN =  E ndangered, LC =  L east  C oncern, based on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species.  A-to-H = Animal to human, H-to-H = human to human.   * P olicy options are greatly simplified for this exercise."
"39" "Species and context"
"40" "People"
"41" "(SDGs 1,2,3,5)"
"42" "Prosperity"
"43" "(SDGs 8 and 10)"
"44" "Planet"
"45" "(SDGs 12,13,14,15)"
"46" "Peace and Partnerships"
"47" "(SDGs 16,17)"
"48" "Feasibility  of regulation &  i mplementation issues"
"49" "Policy options"
"50" "Key refs"
"51" "Negative contributions"
"52" "Positive contributions"
"53" "Negative contributions"
"54" "Positive contributions"
"55" "Negative contributions"
"56" "Positive contributions"
"57" "Negative contributions"
"58" "Positive contributions"
"59" "Great Apes  ( Gorilla  sp.,  Pan   sp )  wild-caught  and locally consumed or traded in  DR Congo"
"60" "High cost"
"61" "(?)"
"62" "Low benefit (??)"
"63" "Moderate cost (?)"
"64" "No benefit"
"65" "(?)"
"66" "High cost"
"67" "(?)"
"68" "No benefit (??)"
"69" "High cost"
"70" "(?)"
"71" "No benefit (??)"
"72" "It is already illegal to hunt and trade Great Apes in DR Congo,  but it  continues in some areas. Political instability and limited capacity hamper enforcement."
"73" "Strengthen implementation of existing conservation regulations, with additional focus on public health."
"74" "(Blomley et al., 2010; Keita et al., 2014; Plumptre et al., 2019)"
"75" "Reservoir and source of Ebola, SIVs and Hep B, with pandemic risk. Although rare,  A-to-H and H-to-H  transmission of pathogens can cost billions of dollars in economic and social burden."
"76" "Although illegal, great ape meat is consumed in DRC. However, consumption is mostly opportunistic and not a frequent or significant component of people’s diets."
"77" "Over-exploitation of great ape populations can undermine economic prospects of high-value ape-watching tourism."
"78" "Trade of great apes provides benefits  to  small groups of hunters and traffickers, though it has no scalable or sustainable economic prospects."
"79" "Eastern gorillas are CR  and  declining,   c himpanzees are EN and declining. Both threatened by hunting and trapping, primarily by armed groups , and   z oonoses from  humans ."
"80" "No evidence that consumptive use of great apes is linked to conservation benefits."
"81" "Hunting and trapping of gorillas is linked to armed groups and exacerbated by conflict ."
"82" "No evidence that consumptive use of great apes is linked to benefits for peace and partnerships . Tackling illegal hunting by armed groups may promote peace and security."
"83" "Horseshoe bats  ( Rhinolophidae )"
"84" "wild-caught  and sold in  South China Wet Markets"
"85" "High cost"
"86" "(?)"
"87" "Moderate benefit (???)"
"88" "No cost"
"89" "(??)"
"90" "Low benefit"
"91" "(???)"
"92" "Moderate cost (???)"
"93" "No benefit (??)"
"94" "No cost"
"95" "(??)"
"96" "No benefit (??)"
"97" "Enforcement and awareness challenges, especially in remote rural areas where subsistence consumption may occur.  Difficulties in bat identification."
"98" "Ban trade and consumption of horseshoe bats.  Provide training and guides on  visual  horseshoe bat identification , and/or handheld DNA barcoding technology for government officials and traders."
"99" "Zhang  et al.,  2009; Han  et al.  2016; Wong  et al.,  2019"
"100" "Host coronaviruses, links to SARS in humans. Wet markets can lead to concentrated interactions between bats, other live animals and humans."
"101" "Consumption may supplement some rural diets, but horseshoe bats are usually only one of many species traded and consumed."
"102" "No evidence that bat trade has direct negative impacts on prosperity."
"103" "Harvesting and trade of bats may provide employment opportunities in some rural communities."
"104" "Harvesting for consumption and trade may contribute to population declines, though rates of decline are uncertain and other threats likely more severe."
"105" "No evidence that consumptive use of bats is linked to conservation benefits."
"106" "No evidence that bat trade plays a role in peace and partnerships."
"107" "No evidence that bat trade plays a role in peace and partnerships , though important to include rural communities in management decisions."
"108" "Waterfowl"
"109" "(Anseriforme s )  wild-caught, peri-domestic and farmed , and sold in  live bird markets  (LBMs) in  Egypt"
"110" "Moderate cost (?)"
"111" "Moderate benefit (?)"
"112" "No cost"
"113" "(??)"
"114" "Moderate benefit (?)"
"115" "Low cost"
"116" "(??)"
"117" "Low benefit (?? ? )"
"118" "No cost"
"119" "(??)"
"120" "Moderate benefit (?)"
"121" "Insufficient slaughterhouses and   infra - structure. Many traditional LBMs with minimal standards  create   monitoring and enforcement challenge."
"122" "Regulate markets   with strict hygiene standards, routine surveillance, and no flock mixing between species and wild and farmed.  Invest in  improving slaughterhouses and infrastructure."
"123" "Kayed   et al.,  2019"
"124" "Reservoirs of H5N1, and traded in LBMs. H5N1 is pathogenic and LBMs create risk of  A-to-A  and  A- to-H , though  H-to-H  transmission is rare ."
"125" "Poultry meat trade in Egypt depends mainly on LMBs. Industry provides a source of employment,  and an important protein source.  Cultural preferences ."
"126" "No evidence that waterfowl trade has direct negative impacts on prosperity."
"127" "Many people employed in LBM industry."
"128" "Anseriform  species in Egypt’s live bird trade are not threatened with extinction, however there may be welfare  issues for traded individuals."
"129" "Evidence from other places / species (e.g. wild turkeys)  that  well-managed wild bird  harvesting  can  be sustainable  and   could  reduce pressure to expand poultry farm s."
"130" "No evidence that  waterfowl  trade  disrupts  peace and partnerships."
"131" "I mportant to include affected people in management decisions , given socio-cultural preferences."
"132" "American bullfrog  ( Lithobates   catesbeianus )  farmed  and sold in  China"
"133" "Low cost"
"134" "(?)"
"135" "High benefit (?)"
"136" "No cost"
"137" "(??)"
"138" "High benefit (?)"
"139" "Low cost"
"140" "(? ? ?)"
"141" "Low benefit (??)"
"142" "No cost"
"143" "(??)"
"144" "No cost"
"145" "(??)"
"146" "Many farms, challenges identifying species and farmed vs. wild-caught frogs."
"147" "Species-specific trade regulations with strict farming, processing and biosecurity standards. Certification for farm ed  frogs;  quotas for wild-source d   frogs , with separate transport and sale  routes."
"148" "Feng  et al. , 2007; Kolby  et al. , 2014; Liu  et al. , 2015; Chinese Academy of Engineering, 2017"
"149" "Known diseases are bacterial and treatable, with non-severe symptoms.  R isks of antibiotic overuse in farms, and bacterial contamination  in  processing."
"150" "Frogs are commonly farmed and traded for food and medicinal uses. Breeding industry employs ~1 million people and is an important livelihood source."
"151" "No evidence that  frog  trade has direct negative impacts on prosperity ."
"152" "Bullfrog breeding alone employs ~24,000 people, while the whole frog breeding industry employs ~1 million people in a ~US$7.15 billion business."
"153" "Farming may enable laundering of threatened, wild-sourced species .  Trade may increase spread of amphibian diseases (e.g.  Batrachochytrium   dendrobatidis ) ."
"154" "American bullfrogs can be sustainably farmed, and farming could reduce pressure on wild-source d  species"
"155" "No evidence that  frog  trade  disrupts  peace and partnerships."
"156" "No evidence that  frog  trade  benefits  peace and partnerships , though important to include rural communities in management decisions."
"157" "Bighorn Sheep  ( Ovis canadensis )  wild-caught  and consumed in  North/ Central America  (US, Canada, Mexico)"
"158" "Low cost"
"159" "(?)"
"160" "High benefit (?)"
"161" "No cost"
"162" "(?)"
"163" "Moderate  benefit (?)"
"164" "Low cost (?)"
"165" "High benefit (?)"
"166" "No cost"
"167" "(??)"
"168" "Moderate benefit (?)"
"169" "Setting, managing and enforcing permit systems can be challenging, with overharvesting in some areas. Managing interactions with livestock in areas of potential overlap."
"170" "S ustainability and welfare standards,  with hygiene  protocols for handling and transport of trophies and meat."
"171" "(Callan, Bunch, Workman, & Mock, 1991; CITES & Livelihoods, 2019a; Hurley et al., 2015)"
"172" "Associated diseases  are  bacterial and treatable, with limited  A-to-H and H-to-H transmission."
"173" "Profits from hunting permits and sale of young are retained by local and indigenous communities, and re-invested in community development projects."
"174" "No evidence that  big horn hunting and trade has direct negative impacts on prosperity."
"175" "Hunting and range management c reates employment for people a nd  park staff , including rural  and indigenous  communities, in key bighorn habitats."
"176" "Small risk of overexploitation  if  poor ly  manage d , however population s   are  stable due to strong socio-economic benefits for sustainable use."
"177" "LC species ,  stable population s .  Income   from hunting   supports range mgmt., with  population increases and  wider ecosystem benefits."
"178" "No evidence that  bighorn  trade  disrupts  peace and partnerships."
"179" "Hun ting and range management has fostered participation and partnerships for rural and indigenous groups, and equitable management of land tenure."
"180" "Rays  (Batoidea)  wild-caught  and locally consumed/ traded in The Gambia"
"181" "Low cost"
"182" "(?)"
"183" "High benefit (?)"
"184" "Moderate cost (?)"
"185" "High benefit (?)"
"186" "Moderate cost (?)"
"187" "Low benefit (???)"
"188" "No cost"
"189" "(??)"
"190" "No cost"
"191" "(??)"
"192" "Limited monitoring and enforcement capacity , can be challenging to identify species in derivative products such as meat."
"193" "Fisheries and trade  management , such as quotas,  needed for sustainability.  Can be supported by visual and/or genetic identification techniques."
"194" "Boylan, 2011; Moore  et al.,  2019"
"195" "Few  zoonotic diseases  in fish , bacterial  with no   H-to-H transmission."
"196" "Elasmobranch  use  important for food security  in coastal communities."
"197" "Overexploitation  undermines long-term prospects of fishing industry."
"198" "Fisheries"
"199" "and processing contribute to  employment in coastal areas ."
"200" "Rhinobatidae"
"201" "and  Glaucostegidae  are CR and overexploited."
"202" "Well-managed fisheries could theoretically create incentives for sustainable use."
"203" "No evidence that  batoidea   trade  disrupts  peace and partnerships."
"204" "No evidence that  batoidea  trade  benefits  peace and partnerships , though important to include coastal communities in management."
"205" "Fig ure   2 .  Examples of   current positive (green) and negative (red) contributions of   horseshoe bat (a) and waterfowl (c)  trade  to the  SDGs , and how context and species-specific policy responses could  improve delivery of SDG outcomes (b, d) .  Thickness of lines represents the relative size of the costs/benefits , based on  the   qualitative  assessment  conducted by the  authors   in Table 1 ."
"206" "P rocess  considerations"
"207" "Given the plurality of values associated with different types of wildlife trade, iterative and participatory  approaches  will be needed to identify  the most suitable and effective  policy options.  We offer  a  general  process , which  could be applied in the planning stages of a Plan-Do-Check-Act or adaptive management approach. Steps in this process include :  defining the problem,  gathering data, assessing synergies and trade-offs, acknowledging uncertainty  and  incorporating feasibility ; all of which would inform a decision, followed by implementation, monitoring and adaption (Figure 3).   This   entire  process can be strengthened  by  participation of policy-affected people ,   with  expert elicitation  methods ,  and application of integrated frameworks to draw together disparate data ,  and  transparently communicate value judgements, risk and uncertainty  (Milner-Gulland & Shea, 2017; Shea et al., 2020)  (Figure 3) ."
"208" "Figure 3. A general process and key considerations for  developing risk-based wildlife trade policy for sustainable development outcomes"
"209" "Defining the problem"
"210" "As per the ‘species and context’ column in Table 1, any decision-making process should first c larify the taxa in question, the scope of the policy-decision and  the  socio-economic context .   This will aid with identifying  policy-affect ed  people   and stakeholders  to include in the process, and the plurality of values that should be considered.   The taxa in question could be considered as a broad taxonomic group, where  biological characteristics, trade dynamics and public health risks are relatively homogenous (e.g.  Batoidea, Table 1), or  as  a single species  (e.g.  Ovis canadensis , Table 1 ) ,  where  necessary due to exceptional characteristics and context. The scope should also take in to account the market dynamics and governance context."
"211" "This may need to be informed by a prioritization exercise, to create a shortlist of which taxa, geographic regions and/or markets warrant policy reform, which can be informed by available literature on hotspots, anthropogenic drivers and  animal hosts of zoonotic diseases (e.g. see Allen et al. (2017) and Han et al. (2016))."
"212" "Gathering data"
"213" "As  per  Table 1  ( and the SI ) ,  a  range of different data sets   can be used  to evaluate the  costs and benefits of wildlife trade  for  the  SDGs."
"214" "Where available, quantitative data can be used .   For example, risks for  health and well-being (SDG 3)  could be measured  through  estimated disability-adjusted life years (DALY) lost as a result of a pandemic  (Narrod et al., 2012) , or the total estimated economic and social burden attributed to a zoonotic outbreak. For example,  in  the case of great apes, Huber et al. (2018) estimated that the total mortality and economic burden attributed to the  2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa  at  11,000  los t  lives  and US$ 53 billion  (Table 1, SI). Similarly,  in  the case of coronaviruses in horseshoe bats, the current COVID-19 pandemic has led to an estimated 2 million lives lost worldwide (at the time of writing), and an estimated US$ 10 trillion in foregone GDP  (The Economist, 2021) .   Likewise, other costs and benefits for people, such as poverty, hunger and inequality (SDGs 1, 2, 5 and 10) can be measured through both subjective and objective measures of well-being attributed to wildlife use  (Milner-Gulland et al., 2014) .  Again, this can be measured in dollar values, such as the total income derived from the trade and total number of people employed (e.g. the  American bullfrog  case study, Table 1, SI), or in terms of  contributions to  DALY, such as  via   benefit of wildlife consumption to childhood nutrition  (Golden, Fernald, Brashares, Rasolofoniaina, & Kremen, 2011) ."
"215" "The costs and benefits for  life  on earth and life below water (SDGs 14 and 15) can be measured in terms of extinction risk or rate of population change at the species level,  as attributed to wildlife trade and associated policy responses (e.g. see the Bighorn sheep case study, Table 1, SI),  or in terms of welfare-adjusted life years (WALY) for individual animals  (Ripple et al., 2016; Teng et al., 2018)"
"216" "In other cases, it may be more appropriate to use semi-quantitative or qualitative data, such as expert and stakeholder judgements. Such approaches are particularly useful in data-limited risk assessments  (Beauvais et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2020) , for consensus-building when integrating perspectives and evidence from diverse sources and stakeholders  (Booy et al., 2017) , and for accounting for risk and uncertainty  (Shea et al., 2020) .  Importantly, c onsultati ve processes   not only  help to obtain data, but also weigh  priorities , explore the feasibility of management options,  s et s ocietal thresholds and the burden of proof needed for policy (in)action ,  engage diverse stakeholders and address inequalities   (Booy et al., 2017; Defries & Nagendra, 2017) ; all of which will be needed to turn evidence in to action ."
"217" "As  well as indicating the direction and magnitude of costs and benefits, uncertainty and data gaps should be  explicitly  acknowledged. When using qualitative data, this could include  qualitative  judgements of uncertainty (as in Table 1). In quantitative assessments, uncertainty can be communicated using iterative or statistical methods, such as Value of Information Analysis , which is  used to  value the contributions of different types of research exercise in terms of expected reduced uncertainties  (Runge, Converse, & Lyons, 2011) ."
"218" "Data gathering may be an iterative process, wherein available data is collated, data gaps are identified, and further research and/or expert and stakeholder consultation is conducted to fill data gaps. This can  also  be supported by  a  participatory process ,  and  adoption of an  integrated framework  to collate and assess data  (Booth et al., 2020; Booy et al., 2017; H.-Y. Li et al., 2020) ."
"219" "Assessing s ynergies and trade-offs"
"220" "As we have highlighted , it is  not only  important to consider the direct impacts of wildlife trade on public health and the SDGs, but also interactions and feedbacks. For example,  bat trade may provide nutritional benefits for some  people , but  pose  risks of zoonotic  disease  outbreaks for others   (Mickleburgh et al., 2009; Wong et al., 2019) ;  while a ban on wild-sourced wildfowl, to protect wild populations from overexploitation, could drive  expansion of higher-risk illicit markets  (Fournie et al., 2013) , or  agricultural expansion  of  poultry farms ,  which  exacerbate other anthropogenic drivers of biodiversity loss and zoonosis emergence  (Allen et al., 2017; Tilman et al., 2017)  (Figure 2).  F rameworks  and methods  are available for  exploring   interactions  between the  SDGs , which have already been applied to other complex socio-ecological systems   ( e.g.  Nash et al., 2020; Nilsson, Griggs, & Visbeck, 2016) ,  and could easily  be a pplied   to  wildlife trade decision-making .  A highly quantitative approach to assessing synergies and trade-offs could  involve assessing all positive and negative contributions of wildlife trade to the SDGs in terms of expected  DALYs, and conducting a cost-benefit analysis  (Narrod et al., 2012) . However, this may be unfeasible in many cases, due to data limitations; and risks being and overly reductive, where certain values cannot be accounted for  within this metric . Instead, a more realistic and inclusive approach could be an integrated framework with a simple  high-to-low or traffic light categorization system , with qualitative or  semi-quantitative assessments of  the magnitudes of different costs and benefits (as outlined in Table 1), and various weightings applied to each category of cost/benefit based on uncertainties, risks and value judgements. Combining these different assessments and their weightings can then help to build consensus and make an informed judgement,  even where the metrics for different costs and benefits are diverse and difficult to compare   (Beauvais et al., 2018; Booth et al., 2020; H.-Y. Li et al., 2020) ."
"221" "Acknowledging uncertainty  and setting thresholds"
"222" "Rigorously evaluating all costs and benefits may be challenging, particularly in data-limited contexts. Pre-defining the burden of proof, and acceptable levels of uncertainty for action or inaction, can help with iterative and adaptive decision-making. When establishing the burden of proof, a “do no harm” precautionary approach should be adopted as best practice  (Cooney & Dickson, 2012) . However, in many cases it will not be possible to  identify optimal solutions which  do no harm across all  SDGs . Rather,  it  may be necessary to  identify step-by-step solutions which are most acceptable to stakeholders in a given time or context (Head, 2008).  Decisions may also entail moral dilemmas, such as weighing-up human disease risk against animal extinction risk, or human disease risk now against human disease risk in the future. This is particularly difficult in the face of uncertainty, such as cases where the likelihood of a pandemic is deemed very low, but its scope and severity are hypothetically large. In these situations, harm  minimisation  may be more pragmatic. Decision-makers may wish to set thresholds of ‘permissible harm’ in each  SDG , based on priorities and societal perspectives. If certain thresholds are reached – such as an unacceptable risk to human health, or an unacceptable cost to the economy – then that  issue  takes precedent above others. Thresholds of permissibility will be shaped by culture and social norms, and should therefore be adapted to each decision context ,  and transparently communicated. Methods from multi-criteria decision analysis , which help to  explicitly evaluate multiple conflicting criteria in decision - making   ( e.g.  Huang, Keisler, & Linkov, 2011; Runge, Converse, & Lyons, 2011) , could  help to evaluate multiple conflicting  values and objectives  regarding wildlife trade policy , and identify thresholds for permissible costs  under different SDGs ."
"223" "In many  cases, there may also be a pressing need for management action, yet insufficient time or resources to collect detailed information, creating trade-offs between knowing and doi ng  (Knight & Cowling, 2010) .  Decision-makers must strike a balance between reactionary crisis-driven interventions, which may be suitable in the short-term, though can lead to perverse outcomes in the medium-term  (Bonwitt et al., 2018) ,  and evidence-based preventative measures, which lead to better outcomes in the long-term. The adage ‘hard cases make bad law’ should be considered here; i.e. the extreme case of COVID-19 may be a poor basis for a general law covering a wider-range of less extreme wildlife trade scenarios.  ‘ Wicked problems ’ such as this  call for adaptive management rather than definitive top-down technical solutions,  so  that policy interventions can be updated as feedbacks play out and knowledge of the system expands  (Defries & Nagendra, 2017; Head, 2008) ."
"224" "Incorporating feasibility"
"225" "Policy formulation should also consider costs and feasibility of implementation, based on resources for monitoring and enforcement, and legitimacy  of new measures  as felt by  the stakeholders most likely to be affected   (Bonwitt et al., 2018; Challender et al., 2015; Oyanedel et al., 2020) .   S ee ‘implementation issues’ outlined in Table 1.  Lack of capacity and political will within government agencies can undermine laws ,  and is a commonly cited reason for the failure of many existing wildlife trade regulations  (Dellas & Pattberg, 2013) . As such, new  policies   may  require investment in implementing agencies, to support monitoring and enforcement. Limited resources for implementation further  emphasises  the need for risk-based problem-oriented approaches, with enforcement resources directed towards critical control points  (Krumkamp et al., 2009) . Interventions must consider the needs and preferences of affected people, the underlying drivers of wildlife use and trade, and the legitimacy of any new regulations. Failure to do so is not only unethical but may result in misguided policy responses that  do not  address the root causes of  unsustainable wildlife trade  and zoonoses emergence, resulting in non-compliance, with even greater risks to wildlife and public health (e.g. Fournier  et al.  2012, Oyanedel  et al ., 2020,  Bonwitt   et al.  2018). Social research may help to identify and reduce drivers of non-compliance  with  wildlife laws or key barriers to behaviour change  (Travers et al., 2019) ."
"226" "Making  decisions; implement, monitor, adapt"
"227" "﻿ Finally, all information and options need to be drawn together to make  a policy decision, which is likely to deliver the greatest overall benefits to the SDGs. If a participatory process and an integrated  decision  framework have been applied throughout,  these tools  can  facilitate consensus and/or informed judgement on which to base a final decision  (see below) .  If the burden of proof has not been met, it may be necessary to iterate the process, with further research and deliberation."
"228" "﻿ Once a  policy  decision has been made,  a range of instruments and interventions   will be required for implementation, such as investments in monitoring and enforcement, infrastructure and technology, or training and incentives.  Monitoring  of SDG outcomes after the policy intervention will help to determine its impact, and inform adaptive management."
"229" "Participatory processes"
"230" "Past  experiences with previous complex, uncertain and divergent public policy problems suggest that the process is equally if not more important than the evidence-base  (Booy et al., 2017; Defries & Nagendra, 2017; Head, 2008) .  P articipatory processes  can help to collate and  evaluate  data on the range of costs and benefits of wildlife trade across multiple SDGs and for multiple sectors of society.  G roup - based  deliberation can also support valuation of costs and benefits, and co-learning amongst different groups  (Kenter, Hyde, Christie, & Fazey, 2011; Shea et al., 2020) , thus  facilitat ing  multi-sector decision-making amongst local and national governments ,  inter-governmental platforms  and policy-affected-people .  Participatory processes for designing wildlife trade interventions can also build legitimacy and foster support for policy decisions, thus improving  implementation, uptake and compliance  (Roe & Booker, 2019; Weber et al., 2015) ."
"231" "Integrated frameworks"
"232" "All of the above could be supported by integrated frameworks, which can help to  draw together and evaluate disparate data;  facilitate multi-sector engagement ; highlight information gaps, uncertainties and value judgments; and thus, guide transparent evidence-based decisions and collective action.  For example, integrated frameworks  have  previously  been used for risk management in  human and animal health  (Beauvais et al., 2018; Narrod et al., 2012) , wildlife  policy and management   (Booth et al., 2020; Booy et al., 2017)  and interfaces between the two  (Coker et al., 2011) . Existing frameworks are also available for mapping interactions between SDGs, which are intuitive, broadly replicable and  could  be  easily  adapted to a wildlife trade context  (Nash et al., 2020; Nilsson et al., 2018, 2016) .  For example,  Nilsson et al. (2016) offer a simple semi-quantitative scale for exploring the  influence o f one SDG on another, while Nash et al. (2020) suggest extensions to the current SDG assessment framework to better acknowledge interactions between SDGs for planet, prosperity and people. I mportantly,  integrated frameworks are  flexible and can be used iteratively as part of participatory and adaptive processes ,  allow ing  incorporation of diverse values  and uncertainty .  For example, decision-makers can develop primary indicators for costs and benefits alongside secondary indicators on  value judgments and  uncertainty, and further indicators to evaluate  feasibility, such as  practicalities, costs and likely impacts of different policy responses   (Booth et  al., 2020; Booy et al., 2017) . This could help to manage conflicting values and data, by explicitly assessing the relative weight or importance of different priorities, and thus improve the transparency of decision-making processes."
"233" "Discussion"
"234" "In the wake of COVID-19,  there are calls for  policy interventions  to   minimize  public health risks  related to zoonotic diseases   through  measures including  banning  wildlife trade.   However, uncertainty remains regarding the role of wildlife trade in the emergence of COVID-19   (Cohen, 2020; C. Huang et al., 2020) . Moreover, wildlife trade does not represent a homogeneous risk to public health, and can be   beneficial to both biodiversity and people  (Cooney, 2019; Hurley et al., 2015; McRae et al., 2020) .  As such,  wildlife trade p olic ies in  responses  to  COVID-19 must  consider the trade-offs within and between public health and other dimensions of the SD G s.   We have presented how decision-makers might evaluate these trade-offs and synergies for different species and contexts ,  in order to formulate risk-based policies.  Explicitly considering the  diversity  of costs and benefits of wildlife trade  along supply chains  could guide decision-makers towards more appropriate policy interventions for  heterogenous  species, contexts and scales, to  maximize different  sustainable development outcomes   without compromising others ."
"235" "Implementing a r isk-based approach to wildlife  trade policy: practical challenges and potential solutions"
"236" "Despite the   benefits  of   adopting a risk-based approach   for formulating  wildlife trade policy , challenges  remain for practice and implementation .  These include data needs and gaps, and  effective and equitable compliance management ."
"237" "For  instance , the process we have outlined  (Figure 3)  will be more data intensive and time consuming than taking rapid ,  reactive  (and potentially ill-informed)  decisions, which may be necessary in times of crisis such as a global pandemic. A middle ground may be to adopt  crisis   measures in the short-term, with a shift towards more nuanced measures in the medium-term ,  once a range of potential policy options have been identified and evaluated. Data gaps may also hinder this process. For example, a lack of data  on  species ’  population  statuses or the benefits from informal trade,  c ould create information asymmetries in cost-benefit analyses. Similarly, there are unknown unknowns, for example from new or undescribed zoonotic pathogens, which are difficult to predict or account for. Such data gaps underline the importance of adaptive management (step 7, Figure 3), so that policies can be adapted as situations change or new information comes to light."
"238" "A further challenge relates to  how   people and institutions   respond  to new policies, particularly  if they are  negatively affected , and therefore how to  design effective and equitable compliance management systems . For example, if trade in a species is restricted, and existing traders face large barriers to adaptation, they could face large absolute costs in terms of income forgone.   T hough these  costs  should be  minimised  via a risk-based approach, they cannot  always  be completely avoided , and  could create strong incentives for non-compliance or negative impacts on the well-being of certain groups .  In such cases, a ‘no net loss to human well-being’ approach to could be adopted  (Griffiths, Bull, Baker, & Milner-Gulland, 2019) , whereby opportunity costs are evaluated and  compensation  is provided  to  ensure vulnerable people are no worse off .  T axa- and location- specific policies  can also  create  additional  challenges for monitoring and enforcement, such as identifying prohibited species   or monitoring diffuse and complex markets.  T hese issues can be addressed via more significant investments in infrastructure, technology and human capacity for wildlife trade monitoring and bio-security, which are likely to become more serious political priorities following the COVID-19 pandemic.   In most cases,  ‘ s mart regulation’  will be  needed , whereby a combination of  instruments  are used to create an  appropriate  policy mix, which  can flexibly ,  efficiently  and equitably  incentivise  multiple  stakeholders and  institutions   (Gunningham & Sinclair, 2017; Young & Gunningham, 1997) .   Wildlife trade is also a highly emotive topic, and policy decisions can be  influenced  by strong public opinions, which aren’t necessarily rational or data-driven  (Hart et al., 2020) . More transparent approaches to decision-making  are needed to address  wildlife trade in the face of public health crises and beyond ,  wherein decision criteria and costs and benefits clearly outlined and  are  publicly available."
"239" "3.2  Global problems require global solutions: t he role of multilateral agreements"
"240" "Moving forwards,  new or revised multi-lateral agreements  may  be needed to strengthen  cross-sectoral  coordination and   political commitment  at the intersection of wildlife  use  and  sustainable development ,  with key stakeholders  currently in the process of deciding what is needed and how it might be delivered .  For example, d iscussions have begun on the  role of the Convention on International Trade  in  Endangered Species  of Wild Fauna and Flora  (CITES) in protecting human health ,  by regulating animal health in  international  trade  (Ashe & Scanlon, 2020; CITES, 2021) .  However,   relying  on CITES  would likely  result in an overly-narrow focus on  CITES-listed species , whilst missing  heavily-traded taxa not under the purview of the Convention (e.g. farmed mink) and critically, other key drivers of zoonotic disease emergence,  such as  intensive  animal agriculture   and land-use change.  In contrast,  the Convention on Biology Diversity (CBD) has a broader remit, and is soon to establish the post-2020 agenda   (CBD, 2020) . However,   t he CBD   arguably  lack s   compliance mechanisms and political commitment  for   institut ing  and  incentivising  the necessary transformational  policies ,  to   unite multiple sectors and  cut across multiple aspects of sustainable development  (Díaz et al., 2019; Leach et al., 2018) .  Rather, a new and more integrated agreement,  which  perhaps build s  on the  Agreement on Climate Change, Trade and Sustainability (ACCTS)  and the World  Organisation  for Animal Health , may be necessary to foster serious political will towards the cross-sectoral challenge of “s aving lives, protecting livelihoods, and safeguarding nature ”, as a matter of global urgency."
"241" "3.3 Next steps for wildlife trade and beyond"
"242" "In the medium-term , we must better understand the transmission pathways of zoonotic diseases in traded wild species,  and  the extrinsic and intrinsic drivers of zoonosis emergence across species and supply chains. Interactions and trade-offs between wild-sourced and domesticated food systems, and the substitution relationships between different protein sources, should also be better understood. This will help to predict potential displacement effects of policy interventions , and overcome some of the challenges highlighted above . More broadly, there is a need to expand the scope of policy responses to zoonotic disease risk ,  beyond the current narrow focus on wildlife trade.  Evidence  indicates t hat land-use change and agricultural expansion  are major drivers of  the emergence of zoonotic diseases  (Allen et al.,  2017; Han et al., 2016) . Rather than a narrow focus on wildlife trade, t he COVID-19 crisis should serve as a wake-up call to re-think many aspects of  humanity’s relationship with nature . A paradigm shift towards holistic risk-based management of  wildlife trade, embedded within a broader socio-ecological systems perspective,  could ensure  that future use and trade of wildlife is safe, environmentally-sustainable and socially-just."
"243" "Acknowledgments"
"244" "A ll authors are grateful to the Oxford Martin  Programme  on the Illegal Wildlife Trade  (OMP-IWT) ,  support from which made this research  possible.  The  author s  also thank  the following  funding sources , respectively:  HB  – the  Oxford NaturalMotion Graduate Scholarship in Zoology , University of Oxford ; MA  -    the  W ildlife  C onservation  S ociety (WCS) ,  the  W ildlife  C onservation  N etwork , and  the  Secretaría  de  Educación  Superior,  Ciencia ,  Tecnología  e  Innovación  of Ecuador ( SENESCYT ); SB  – the DEFRA Darwin Initiative ; DWSC  and AO  – the  National Geographic Society; MK  -  the  Zutshi -Smith foundation; TK  -   the   C ommonwealth  Scholarship Commission ; YL  -  the Rhodes Trust; RO  -  the  Agencia  Nacional de  Investigación  y  Desarrollo ,  Becas  Chile Program; TP  -  the Natural Environment Research Council Environmental Research Doctoral Training Partnership  (NERC DTP)  and Wolfson College, Oxford;  D WS C and  EJMG  acknowledge funding from the UK Research and Innovation’s Global Challenges Research Fund (UKRI GCRF) through the Trade, Development and the Environment Hub project (project number ES/S008160/1) ."
"245" "References"
"246" "’t Sas-Rolfes, M., Challender, D. W. S., Hinsley, A., Veríssimo, D., Milner-Gulland, E. J., ’t Sas-Rolfes, M., … Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019). Illegal Wildlife Trade: Scale, Processes, and Governance.  Annual Review of Environment and Resources ,  44 (1), 201–228. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-101718-033253"
"247" "AFP. (2020). Gabon bans eating of pangolin and bats amid pandemic. Retrieved from https://www.france24.com/en/20200403-gabon-bans-eating-of-pangolin-and-bats-amid-pandemic"
"248" "Allen, T., Murray, K. A., Zambrana-Torrelio, C., Morse, S. S., Rondinini, C., Di Marco, M., … Daszak, P. (2017). Global hotspots and correlates of emerging zoonotic diseases.  Nature Communications ,  8 (1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00923-8"
"249" "Alves, R. R. N., & Rosa, I. L. (2013).  Animals in traditional folk medicine: Implications for conservation . Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-29026-8"
"250" "Andersen, K. G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W. I., Holmes, E. C., & Garry, R. F. (2020). The proximal origin of SARS-CoV-2.  Nature Medicine ,  26 (4), 450–452. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0820-9"
"251" "Antunes, A. P., Rebêlo, G. H., Pezzuti, J. C. B., Vieira, M. A. R. de M., Constantino, P. de A. L., Campos-Silva, J. V., … Shepard, G. H. (2019). A conspiracy of silence: Subsistence hunting rights in the Brazilian Amazon.  Land Use Policy ,  84 , 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.02.045"
"252" "Ashe, D., & Scanlon, J. E. (2020, June). A Crucial Step Toward Preventing Wildlife-Related Pandemics.  Scientific American . Retrieved from https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/a-crucial-step-toward-preventing-wildlife-related-pandemics/"
"253" "Baker, S. E., Cain, R., van Kesteren, F., Zommers, Z. A., D’Cruze, N., & Macdonald, D. W. (2013). Rough Trade: Animal Welfare in the Global Wildlife Trade.  BioScience ,  63 (12), 928–938. https://doi.org/10.1525/bio.2013.63.12.6"
"254" "Beauvais, W., Zuther, S., Villeneuve, C., Kock, R., & Guitian, J. (2018). Rapidly assessing the risks of infectious diseases to wildlife species. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.181043"
"255" "Blomley, T., Namara, A., Mcneilage, A., Franks, P., Rainer, H., Donaldson, A., … Infield, M. (2010).  Development AND gorillas? Assessing fifteen years of integrated conservation and development in south-western Uganda . London."
"256" "Bonwitt, J., Dawson, M., Kandeh, M., Ansumana, R., Sahr, F., Brown, H., & Kelly, A. H. (2018). Unintended consequences of the ‘bushmeat ban’ in West Africa during the 2013–2016 Ebola virus disease epidemic.  Social Science and Medicine ,  200 , 166–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.12.028"
"257" "Booth, H., Pooley, S., Clements, T., Putra, M. I. H., Lestari, W. P., Lewis, S., … Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2020). Assessing the impact of regulations on the use and trade of wildlife: An operational framework , with a case study on manta rays.  Global Ecology and Conservation ,  22 , e00953. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2020.e00953"
"258" "Booy, O., Mill, A. C., Roy, H. E., Hiley, A., Moore, N., Robertson, P., … Wyn, G. (2017). Risk management to prioritise the eradication of new and emerging invasive non-native species.  Biological Invasions ,  19 (8), 2401–2417. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10530-017-1451-z"
"259" "Boylan, S. (2011, September). Zoonoses Associated with Fish.  Veterinary Clinics of North America - Exotic Animal Practice . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cvex.2011.05.003"
"260" "Broad, S., Mulliken, T., & Roe, D. (2002). The nature and extent of legal and illegal trade in wildlife. In Sara Oldfield (Ed.),  The Trade in Wildlife Regulation for Conservation  (pp. 3–22). London: Earthscan Ltd. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781849773935-11"
"261" "Callan, R. J., Bunch, T. D., Workman, G. W., & Mock, R. E. (1991). Development of pneumonia in desert bighorn sheep after exposure to a flock of exotic wild and domestic sheep.  Journal of American Veterinary Medical Association ,  198 (6), 1052–1056. Retrieved from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/2032914"
"262" "CBD. (2020).  Zero Draft of post-2020 biodiversity framework .  Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity . Retrieved from https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/efb0/1f84/a892b98d2982a829962b6371/wg2020-02-03-en.pdf."
"263" "Challender, D. W. S., Harrop, S. R., & MacMillan, D. C. (2015). Understanding markets to conserve trade-threatened species in CITES.  Biological Conservation ,  187 , 249–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2015.04.015"
"264" "Challender, D. W. S., Heinrich, S., Shepherd, C. R., & Katsis, L. K. D. (2020). International trade and trafficking in pangolins , 1900 – 2019. In D. W. S. Challender, H. C. Nash, & C. Waterman (Eds.),  Pangolins: Science, Society and Conservation  (pp. 259–276). Academic Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815507-3.00016-2"
"265" "Chinese Academy of Engineering. (2017).  Research on Sustainable Development Strategy of Chinese Wild Animal Farming Industry . Beijing, China. Retrieved from http://view.ckcest.cn/Detail?dbID=10&sysID=2089&type=21&dbName=ZKBG#"
"266" "CITES. (2021). Notification to the Parties. In  NOTIFICATION TO THE PARTIES No. 2021/009 . Geneva. Retrieved from https://cites.org/sites/default/files/notifications/E-Notif-2021-0009.pdf"
"267" "CITES & Livelihoods. (2019a).  Community-based trophy hunting of Bighorn Sheep in Mexico Introduction:  Retrieved from https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/prog/Livelihoods/case_studies/6. Mexico_bighornsheep_long_Aug2.pdf"
"268" "CITES & Livelihoods. (2019b).  Saltwater Crocodile harvest and trade in Australia . Retrieved from www.cites.org"
"269" "Cohen, J. (2020). Wuhan seafood market may not be source of novel virus spreading globally.  Science . https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb0611"
"270" "Coker, R., Rushton, J., Mounier-Jack, S., Karimuribo, E., Lutumba, P., Kambarage, D., … Rweyemamu, M. (2011). Towards a conceptual framework to support one-health research for policy on emerging zoonoses.  The Lancet Infectious Diseases ,  11 (4), 326–331. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(10)70312-1"
"271" "Cooney, R. (2019).  Harvest and trade of Vicuña fibre in Bolivia . Retrieved from https://cites.org/sites/default/files/eng/prog/Livelihoods/case_studies/2. Bolivia_vicuna_long_Aug2.pdf"
"272" "Cooney, R., & Dickson, B. (2012).  Biodiversity and the Precautionary Principle: Risk, Uncertainty and Practice in Conservation and Sustainable Use . Earthscan. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781849770583-12"
"273" "Cooney, R., Roe, D., Dublin, H., & Booker, F. (2018).  Wild life, wild livelihoods: involving communities in sustainable wildlife management and combating illegal wildlife trade . Nairobi, Kenya. Retrieved from https://wedocs.unep.org/bitstream/handle/20.500.11822/22864/WLWL_Report_web.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y"
"274" "Defries, R., & Nagendra, H. (2017). Ecosystem management as a wicked problem.  Science ,  356 (6335),  265–270. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aal1950"
"275" "Dellas, E., & Pattberg, P. (2013). Assessing the political feasibility of global options to reduce biodiversity loss.  International Journal of Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services & Management ,  9 (4), 347–363. https://doi.org/10.1080/21513732.2013.853696"
"276" "Díaz, S., Settele, J., Brondízio, E. S., Ngo, H. T., Agard, J., Arneth, A., … Zayas, C. N. (2019, December 13). Pervasive human-driven decline of life on Earth points to the need for transformative change.  Science . American Association for the Advancement of Science. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax3100"
"277" "Eskew, E. A., & Carlson, C. J. (2020). Overselling wildlife trade bans will not bolster conservation or pandemic preparedness.  The Lancet Planetary Health . https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30123-6"
"278" "Feng, X., Wai Neng LAU, M., Stuart, S. N., Chanson, J. S., Cox, N. A., & Fischman, D. L. (2007). Conservation needs of amphibians in China: A review,  50 (2), 265–276. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11427-007-0021-5"
"279" "Fournie, G., Guitian, J., Desvaux, S., Cuong, V. C., Dung, D. H., Pfeiffer, D. U., … Ghani, A. C. (2013). Interventions for avian influenza A (H5N1) risk management in live bird market networks.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  110 (22), 9177–9182. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1220815110"
"280" "Fukuda, Y., Webb, G., Manolis, C., Delaney, R., Letnic, M., Lindner, G., & Whitehead, P. (2011). Recovery of saltwater crocodiles following unregulated hunting in tidal rivers of the Northern Territory, Australia.  The Journal of Wildlife Management ,  75 (6), 1253–1266. https://doi.org/10.1002/jwmg.191"
"281" "Golden, C. D., Fernald, L. C. H., Brashares, J. S., Rasolofoniaina, B. J. R., & Kremen, C. (2011). Benefits of wildlife consumption to child nutrition in a biodiversity hotspot.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America ,  108 (49), 19653–19656. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1112586108"
"282" "González-Wangüemert, M., Domínguez-Godino, J. A., & Cánovas, F. (2018). The fast development of sea cucumber fisheries in the Mediterranean and NE Atlantic waters: From a new marine resource  to its over-exploitation.  Ocean and Coastal Management ,  151 , 165–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2017.10.002"
"283" "Griffiths, V. F., Bull, J. W., Baker, J., & Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019). No net loss for people and biodiversity.  Conservation Biology ,  33 (1), 76–87. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13184"
"284" "Gunningham, N., & Sinclair, D. (2017). Smart regulation. In P. Drahos (Ed.),  Regulatory Theory: foundations and applications  (pp. 133–148). Canberra, Australia: ANU Press."
"285" "Han, B. A., Kramer, A. M., & Drake, J. M. (2016). Global Patterns of Zoonotic Disease in Mammals.  Trends in Parasitology ,  32 (7), 565–577. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pt.2016.04.007"
"286" "Hart, A. G., Cooney, R., Dickman, A., Hare, D., Jonga, C., Johnson, P. K., … Somerville, K. (2020). Threats posed to conservation by media misinformation.  Conservation Biology ,  34 (6), 1333–1334. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13605"
"287" "Head, B. (2008). Wicked Problems in Public Policy.  Public Policy ,  3 (2), 101."
"288" "Heid, B., & Márquez-Ramos, L. (2020).  Wildlife Trade Policy and the Decline of Wildlife .  CESifo Working Papers ."
"289" "Huang, C., Wang, Y., Li, X., Ren, L., Zhao, J., Hu, Y., … Cao, B. (2020). Clinical features of patients infected with 2019 novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China.  The Lancet ,  395 (10223), 497–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30183-5"
"290" "Huang, I. B., Keisler, J., & Linkov, I. (2011, September 1). Multi-criteria decision analysis in environmental sciences: Ten years of applications and trends.  Science of the Total Environment . Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.06.022"
"291" "Huber, C., Finelli, L., & Stevens, W. (2018). The Economic and Social Burden of the 2014 Ebola Outbreak in West Africa.  The Journal of Infectious Diseases ,  698 (5), 218. https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiy213"
"292" "Hurley, K., Brewer, C., & Thornton, G. N. (2015). The role of hunters in conservation, restoration, and management of North American wild sheep.  International Journal of Environmental Studies ,  72 (5), 784–796. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207233.2015.1031567"
"293" "Kayed, A. S., Kandeil, A., Gomaa, M. R., El-Shesheny, R., Mahmoud, S., Hegazi, N., … Ali, M. A. (2019). Surveillance for avian influenza viruses in wild birds at live bird markets, Egypt, 2014-2016.  Influenza and Other Respiratory Viruses ,  13 (4), 407–414. https://doi.org/10.1111/irv.12634"
"294" "Keita, M. B., Hamad, I., & Bittar, F. (2014). Looking in apes as a source of human pathogens.  Microbial Pathogenesis ,  77 , 149–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.micpath.2014.09.003"
"295" "Kenter, J. O., Hyde, T., Christie, M., & Fazey, I. (2011). The importance of deliberation in valuing ecosystem services in developing countries-Evidence from the Solomon Islands.  Global Environmental Change ,  21 (2), 505–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2011.01.001"
"296" "Knight, A. T., & Cowling, R. M. (2010). Trading-Off ‘Knowing’ versus ‘Doing’ for Effective Conservation Planning. In  Trade-Offs in Conservation  (pp. 273–291). Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781444324907.ch15"
"297" "Koh, L. P., Li, Y., & Lee, J. S. H. (2021). The value of China’s ban on wildlife trade and consumption.  Nature Sustainability ,  4 (1), 2–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00677-0"
"298" "Kolby, J. E., Smith, K. M., Berger, L., Karesh, W. B., Preston, A., Pessier, A. P., & Skerratt, L. F. (2014). First evidence of amphibian chytrid fungus (Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis) and ranavirus in Hong Kong amphibian trade.  PLoS ONE ,  9 (3). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0090750"
"299" "Krumkamp, R., Ahmad, A., Kassen, A., Hjarnoe, L., Syed, A. M., Aro, A. R., & Reintjes, R. (2009). Evaluation of national pandemic management policies-A hazard analysis of critical control points approach.  Health Policy ,  92 (1), 21–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.healthpol.2009.01.006"
"300" "Kyne, P. M., Jabado, R. W., Rigby, C. L., Dharmadi, Gore, M. A., Pollock, C. M., … Dulvy, N. K. (2019). The thin edge of the wedge: extremely high extinction risk in wedgefishes and giant guitarfishes.  BioRxiv , (April), 595462. https://doi.org/10.1101/595462"
"301" "Larrosa, C., Carrasco, L. R., & Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2016). Unintended Feedbacks: Challenges and Opportunities for Improving Conservation Effectiveness.  Conservation Letters ,  9 (5), 316–326. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12240"
"302" "Leach, M., Reyers, B., Bai, X., Brondizio, E. S., Cook, C., Díaz, S., … Subramanian, S. M. (2018, October 9). Equity and sustainability in the anthropocene: A social-ecological systems perspective on their intertwined futures.  Global Sustainability . Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/sus.2018.12"
"303" "Leader-Williams, N. (2003). Regulation and protection: Successes and failures in rhinoceros conservation. In S. Oldfield (Ed.),  The Trade in Wildlife Regulation for Conservation  (pp. 89–99). Routledge."
"304" "Li, H.-Y., Zhu, G.-J., Zhang, Y.-Z., Zhang, L.-B., Hagan, E. A., Martinez, S., … Daszak, P. (2020). A qualitative study of zoonotic risk factors among rural communities in southern China.  International Health ,  12 , 77–85. https://doi.org/10.1093/inthealth/ihaa001"
"305" "Li, Y. (2020). China’s Announcement on Wildlife Trade - What’s New and What Does It Mean? Retrieved June 29, 2020, from https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/blog/chinas-announcement-on-wildlife-trade-whats-new-and-what-does-it-mean/"
"306" "Liu, X., Luo, Y., Chen, J., Guo, Y., Bai, C., & Li, Y. (2015). Diet and prey selection of the invasive american bullfrog (Lithobates catesbeianus) in Southwestern China.  Asian Herpetological Research ,  6 (1), 34–44. https://doi.org/10.16373/j.cnki.ahr.140044"
"307" "Maxwell, S. L., Fuller, R. A., Brooks, T. M., & Watson, J. E. M. (2016, August 10). Biodiversity: The ravages of guns, nets and bulldozers.  Nature . Nature Publishing Group. https://doi.org/10.1038/536143a"
"308" "McRae, L., Freeman, R., Geldmann, J., Moss, G. B., Kjær-hansen, L., & Burgess, D. (2020). A global indicator of utilised wildlife populations   : regional trends and the impact of management.  BioRxiv . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.02.365031"
"309" "Mendelson, S., Cowlishaw, G., & Rowcliffe, J. M. (2003). Anatomy of a bushmeat commodity chain in Takoradi, Ghana.  Journal of Peasant Studies ,  31 (1), 73–100. https://doi.org/10.1080/030661503100016934"
"310" "Mickleburgh, S., Waylen, K., & Racey, P. (2009, April). Bats as bushmeat: A global review.  ORYX . Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605308000938"
"311" "Milner-Gulland, E. J., Mcgregor, J. A., Agarwala, M., Atkinson, G., Bevan, P., Clements, T., … Wilkie, D. (2014). Accounting for the impact of conservation on human well-being.  Conservation Biology ,  28 (5), 1160–1166. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12277"
"312" "Milner-Gulland, E. J., & Shea, K. (2017). Embracing uncertainty in applied ecology.  Journal of Applied Ecology ,  54 (6), 2063–2068. https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12887"
"313" "Ministerio de Medio Ambiente y Agua. (2020). Compendio de Instrumentos para la Regulación de la Gestión de la Biodiversidad, 239."
"314" "Moore, A. B. M., Séret, B., & Armstrong, R. (2019). Risks to biodiversity and coastal livelihoods from  artisanal elasmobranch fisheries in a Least Developed Country: The Gambia (West Africa).  Biodiversity and Conservation , 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10531-019-01732-9"
"315" "Narrod, C., Zinsstag, J., & Tiongco, M. (2012). One health framework for estimating the economic costs of zoonotic diseases on society.  EcoHealth ,  9 (2), 150–162. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-012-0747-9"
"316" "Nash, K. L., Blythe, J. L., Cvitanovic, C., Fulton, E. A., Halpern, B. S., Milner-Gulland, E. J., … Blanchard, J. L. (2020). To Achieve a Sustainable Blue Future, Progress Assessments Must Include Interdependencies between the Sustainable Development Goals.  One Earth ,  2 (2), 161–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2020.01.008"
"317" "Nilsson, M., Chisholm, E., Griggs, D., Howden-Chapman, P., McCollum, D., Messerli, P., … Stafford-Smith, M. (2018). Mapping interactions between the sustainable development goals: lessons learned and ways forward.  Sustainability Science ,  13 (6), 1489–1503. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11625-018-0604-z"
"318" "Nilsson, M., Griggs, D., & Visbeck, M. (2016). Map the interactions between Sustainable Development Goals.  Nature ,  534 (7607), 320–322. https://doi.org/10.1038/534320a"
"319" "Oyanedel, R., Gelcich, S., & Milner ‐ Gulland, E. J. (2020). Motivations for (non ‐ )compliance with conservation rules by small ‐ scale resource users.  Conservation Letters . https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12725"
"320" "Pérez-Moreno, J., Martínez-Reyes, M., Yescas-Pérez, A., Delgado-Alvarado, A., & Xoconostle-Cázares, B. (2008). Wild mushroom markets in central Mexico and a case study at Ozumba.  Economic Botany ,  62 (3), 425–436. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12231-008-9043-6"
"321" "Petrovan, S., Aldridge, D., Bartlett, H., Bladon, A., Booth, H., Broad, S., … Sutherland, W. (2020). Post COVID-19: a solution scan of options for preventing future zoonotic epidemics. Retrieved June 9, 2020, from https://osf.io/5jx3g/"
"322" "Pienaar, E. F., Rubino, E. C., Saayman, M., & van der Merwe, P. (2017). Attaining sustainable use on private game ranching lands in South Africa.  Land Use Policy ,  65 (October 2016), 176–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2017.04.005"
"323" "Pienkowski, T., Dickens, B. L., Sun, H., & Carrasco, L. R. (2017). Empirical evidence of the public health  benefits of tropical forest conservation in Cambodia: a generalised linear mixed-effects model analysis.  The Lancet Planetary Health ,  1 (5), e180–e187. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(17)30081-5"
"324" "Plumptre, A., Robbins, M. M., & Williamson, E. . (2019). Gorilla beringei. Retrieved May 1, 2020, from https://www.iucnredlist.org/species/39994/115576640"
"325" "Prime Minister of Vietnam. Directive no. 29/CT-TTg on a number of urgent solutions for wildlife management (2020). Vietnam. Retrieved from https://english.luatvietnam.vn/chinh-sach/chi-thi-29-ct-ttg-2020-giai-phap-cap-bach-quan-ly-dong-vat-hoang-da-187252-d1.html"
"326" "Purcell, S. W., Mercier, A., Conand, C., Hamel, J.-F., Toral-Granda, M. V., Lovatelli, A., & Uthicke, S. (2013). Sea cucumber fisheries: global analysis of stocks, management measures and drivers of overfishing.  Fish and Fisheries ,  14 (1), 34–59. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-2979.2011.00443.x"
"327" "Ripple, W. J., Abernethy, K., Betts, M. G., Chapron, G., Dirzo, R., Galetti, M., … Young, H. (2016). Bushmeat hunting and extinction risk to the world’s mammals.  Royal Society Open Science ,  3 (10), 160498. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.160498"
"328" "Roe, D., & Booker, F. (2019). Engaging local communities in tackling illegal wildlife trade: A synthesis of approaches and lessons for best practice.  Conservation Science and Practice ,  1 (5), e26. https://doi.org/10.1111/csp2.26"
"329" "Roe, D., Dickman, A., Kock, R., Milner-Gulland, E. J., Rihoy, E., & t’ Sas-Rolfes, M. (2020). Beyond banning wildlife trade: COVID-19, Conservation and Development.  World Development ,  136 , 105121. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105121"
"330" "Roe, D., & Lee, T. M. (2021). Possible negative consequences of a wildlife trade ban.  Nature Sustainability ,  4 (1), 5–6. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-020-00676-1"
"331" "Runge, M. C., Converse, S. J., & Lyons, J. E. (2011). Which uncertainty? Using expert elicitation and expected value of information to design an adaptive program.  Biological Conservation ,  144 , 1214–1223. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.12.020"
"332" "Shea, K., Runge, M. C., Pannell, D. J., Li, S.-L., Probert, W. J. M., Tildesley, M., & Ferrari, M. (2020). Harnessing multiple models for outbreak management.  Science ,  368 (6491), 577–580. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb9934"
"333" "Shereen, M. A., Khan, S., Kazmi, A., Bashir, N., & Siddique, R. (2020). COVID-19 infection: Origin, transmission, and characteristics of human coronaviruses.  Journal of Advanced Research ,  24 , 91–98. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jare.2020.03.005"
"334" "Short, R., Addison, P., Hill, N., Arlidge, W., Berthe, S., Tickell, S. C. y, … Milner-Gulland, E. J. (2019). Achieving net benefits: A road map for cross-sectoral policy development in response to the unintended use of mosquito nets as fishing gear.  SocArXiv , 1–45."
"335" "Singh Khadka, N. (2020). Coronavirus: China wildlife trade ban “should be permanent.” Retrieved November 23, 2020, from https://www.bbc.com/news/science-environment-51310786"
"336" "Swift, L., Hunter, P. R., Lees, A. C., & Bell, D. J. (2007). Wildlife trade and the emergence of infectious diseases.  EcoHealth ,  4 (1), 25–30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10393-006-0076-y"
"337" "Teng, K. T.-Y., Devleesschauwer, B., Maertens De Noordhout, C., Bennett, P., McGreevy, P. D., Chiu, P.-Y., … Dhand, N. K. (2018). Welfare-Adjusted Life Years (WALY): A novel metric of animal welfare that combines the impacts of impaired welfare and abbreviated lifespan.  PLOS ONE ,  13 (9), e0202580. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0202580"
"338" "The Economist. (2021, January). What is the economic cost of covid-19?  Finance & Economics . Retrieved from https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2021/01/09/what-is-the-economic-cost-of-covid-19"
"339" "The Lion Coalition. (2020, April 4). Open letter to World Health Organisation. Retrieved May 1, 2020, from https://lioncoalition.org/2020/04/04/open-letter-to-world-health-organisation/"
"340" "Tilman, D., Clark, M., Williams, D. R., Kimmel, K., Polasky, S., & Packer, C. (2017, May 31). Future threats to biodiversity and pathways to their prevention.  Nature . Nature Publishing Group. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22900"
"341" "Travers, H., Archer, L. J., Mwedde, G., Roe, D., Baker, J., Plumptre, A. J., … Milner ‐ Gulland, E. J. (2019, July 3). Understanding complex drivers of wildlife crime to design effective conservation interventions.  Conservation Biology , p. cobi.13330. https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13330"
"342" "UNEP and ILRI. (2020).  Preventing the next pandemic: Zoonotic diseases and how to break the chain of transmission . Nairobi, Kenya. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/Depts/Cartographic/"
"343" "Walzer, C. (2020). COVID-19 and the Curse of Piecemeal Perspectives.  Frontiers in Veterinary Science ,  7 ,  582983. https://doi.org/10.3389/fvets.2020.582983"
"344" "Wang, H., Shao, J., Luo, X., Chuai, Z., Xu, S., Geng, M., & Gao, Z. (2020). Wildlife consumption ban is insufficient.  Science ,  367 (6485), 1435–1435. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6463"
"345" "Weber, D. S., Mandler, T., Dyckc, M., Van Coeverden De Groot, P. J., Lee, D. S., & Clark, D. A. (2015). Unexpected and undesired conservation outcomes of wildlife trade bans-An emerging problem for stakeholders?  Global Ecology and Conservation ,  3 , 389–400. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2015.01.006"
"346" "Wong, A. C. P., Li, X., Lau, S. K. P., Woo, P. C. Y., Kong, H., & Hk, A. (2019). Global Epidemiology of Bat Coronaviruses. https://doi.org/10.3390/v11020174"
"347" "Wu, Y. C., Chen, C. S., & Chan, Y. J. (2020). The outbreak of COVID-19: An overview.  Journal of the Chinese Medical Association . Wolters Kluwer Health. https://doi.org/10.1097/JCMA.0000000000000270"
"348" "Young, M. D., & Gunningham, N. (1997). Mixing instruments and institutional arrangements for optimal biodiversity conservation. In  OECD International Conference an Biodiversity Incentive Measures  (pp. 141–165). Cairns, Australia. Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/102.100.100/223210?index=1"
"349" "Zhang, L., Zhu, G., Jones, G., & Zhang, S. (2009, April). Conservation of bats in China: problems and recommendations.  ORYX . Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0030605309432022"
"350" "Zhu, A., & Zhu, G. (2020). Understanding China’s wildlife markets: Trade and tradition in an age of pandemic.  World Development ,  136 , 105108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105108"
