Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the
COVID-19 Outbreak in the Philippines and Malaysia

Gio Eiron M. Villanueva
December 31, 2020

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the
COVID-19 Outbreak in the Philippines and Malaysia
Gio Eiron M. Villanueva
When faced with new and threatening events like a global health crisis, the public tends to draw
inferences from news media to make sense of the uncertainties of the situation. This study explores
how online news media in the Philippines and Malaysia depicted the outbreak of COVID-19 during
the early period of its spread. The study analyzes the discourse around the outbreak based on a large
corpus of Facebook news posts between January and March 2020. Using a corpus-based approach
called Keyness Analysis, salient themes & topics, and framings around the disease were identified
and interpreted. The results show the differences in the reporting of the outbreak between the two
countries. News reports in the Philippines depicted the disease in an enigmatic lens which explains
the alarmist angle of news reports and the reassuring tone of the government, versus the war framing
of Malaysian news that depicted the disease as an enemy to be fought and defeated. In reporting
about the bid to contain the spread of the virus, Philippine news reports dealt mostly with the
restrictions and regulations of movement while the Malaysian news covered more issues on personal
hygiene and safety protocols. Lastly, concerns for Filipino seafarers and Overseas Filipino Workers
(OFW) that needs to be repatriated was a recurring theme in Philippine news reports regarding
COVID-19, while concerns for the economy was prominent in the Malaysian news reports. The
study therefore shows that the depiction of COVID-19 in Malaysia and the Philippines are shaped
by each country’s present social and political conditions.

Introduction
On the eve of New Year 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) took notice a media
statement from the People’s Republic of China about the emergence of a “mysterious” pneumoniacausing virus in Wuhan, Hubei Province. By the 9th of January, WHO alerted the world about the
virus and initially called it Novel Coronavirus 2019 (n-COV). The name came from the family of
virus called coronavirus of which belongs previously reported virus like MERS-cov and SARS.
The First death was recorded on the 11th. Since then, the virus spread throughout almost all the
inhabited part of the world. As a result, government authorities from all over the world have placed
quarantine protocols, social distancing rules and other public health protocols to contain the spread
of the virus.
Ten months since the first day of lockdown in the Philippines, Coronavirus Disease-2019
(COVID-19) continues to top news headlines as it remains a threat to public health. And for ten
months and counting, the public encounters terms and concepts about the disease that are
previously unknown to them. COVID-19 is a news topic gravely important to the people, but its
domain of knowledge is alien to them.
The present study aims to explore how online news reports depict COVID-19, given the
abovementioned apparent tension between the news presentation of COVID-19 and the public’s
reception. In particular, I will investigate how the discourse on the disease was framed and the
topics or themes with which it was discussed. Interested with how the pandemic was problematized
(or negated) in news reports, I focused on news reporting of COVID-19 during its emergence and
2

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

early outbreak. The lockdown period in the Philippines announced on March 12, 2020 was chosen
as the threshold limit of the covered period for the study. A comparative approach was applied in
analyzing the data, in particular Facebook news reports in in the Philippines versus Facebook news
reports in another English language news publishers in Malaysia.

Conceptual Background
News reporting of diseases and pandemics
Emerging diseases that pose a public threat with the right amount of unpredictability are a perfect
candidate for news value. Vasterman and Ruigrok (2013) succinctly describe the characteristics of
a news on pandemic that make it so newsworthy: among others, unexpectedness with tension of
expectation (sudden outbreak… a new pandemic previously predicted) and unpredictability (how
severe will the pandemic unfold?).
Be that as it may, not all diseases and potential pandemics are created equal. Some will
immediately gain public attention and concerns while others will not. Ungar (1998) characterize
news coverage on emerging diseases and noticed that not every outbreak gain expected attention.
This is because crises, in this case health crisis, do not invariably give rise to a hyped public
attention or panic as they emerge. When a crisis is communicated by interest groups, media does
not always respond accordingly. And even when media communicates crisis, Ungar (1990)
observed that the public may not respond as expected. An example is the AIDS outbreak in the
1980s which was left unattended to by the media in the first few years. For several years it was
“framed” as a threat that can only affect marginal groups such as homosexuals which resulted to
nonchalance attitude of the public towards the threat.
This example summarized how ‘framing’ operates in news media. News stories are not entirely
objective. It is written to take one perspective over another which influences the representation of
the news matter. Framing determines what is included or excluded from the news stories and thus
has the potential to misrepresent, say, an emerging disease. (Hilton and Hunt, 2010).
It is in this note that a number of research studies on the news representation of pandemics and
emerging diseases were published in the recent decades. Peter Washer’s (2004) investigation on
the representation of SARS in British newspapers revealed a parallel framing that we observe in
the AIDS epidemic. In his analysis of newspaper coverage on SARS in the first 4 weeks following
the first case, Washer (2004) observed that SARS was presented as “unlikely to personally affect
the UK reader because the Chinese were so different to ‘us’; so ‘other.” (p.2561).
The same “othering” appeared in the representation of Ebola outbreak in 1995 and H1N1 in 2009.
In Ungar (1998) critical analysis of newspapers and magazine, the ‘othering’ view that framed
news on Ebola was used as a strategy to allay the fear of the public. (Ungar, 1998). The H1N1, flu
virus on the other hand was the subject of Mayor et.al. (2012) study which employed a mixed
method where they analyzed the media coverage of H1N1 and interviewed select participants to
triangulate their findings. In the results, they found that representation of the disease and its
3

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

concomitant perception by the public changes over time. Othering emerged as a frame of
perception at the onset of the outbreak, but as the events unfold it gradually disappears.
So far, these studies analyzing Western news media echo the phenomenon of ‘othering’ which is
a discourse that sprung from Said’s notion of orientalism or the construction of identity through
binary opposition of ‘us’ versus ‘them’. (Said, 1978 cited in Washer, 2004. Aside from othering,
war is often used to frame topics on diseases. Military metaphors which are used to discuss politics,
criminality, and war, is also used in the discourse on diseases. It is commonplace to encounter
statements like, “fight HIV”, “battle against cancer”, “combat polio” etc. The same framing also
emerged in the discourse on COVID-19 pandemic which are being called out by some interest
groups. Writing for the Scientific American, Wise (2020) deplored associating pandemic with
wartime: “to [contain the virus and treat patients] under the banner of war implies the necessity of
a heedless approach that leaves both doctors and patients open to an indefensible level of risk.”
War framing is a conventional choice because it easily communicates crisis situation, the urgency
for action and the call for cooperation.
Another metaphorical classification process in news construction is anchoring which employs
association of new and unfamiliar issue with previous familiar phenomana. (Moscovici 1984 cited
in Tarkkanen 2017). Anchoring includes referring to known diseases or previous pandemics. This
is evidenced by statements like “SARS-like” “flu-like” when referring to the previously unknown
COVID-19.
The node of representation research is fast migrating to the cyberspace to accommodate online
publishing and news consumption. In particular, social media platforms appear in recent research
on diseases and pandemics. Sharma et.al (2017) explored Facebook as a platform for disseminating
information about the Zika virus pandemic. Looking into the twitter universe, Philipp Wicke and
Marianna Bolognesi (2020) analyzed a corpus of tweets relating to COVID-19 in order to
understand how common people make sense of the novel coronavirus. The present study follows
this growing body of works on news representation of pandemics and pandemics in social media.

News in Facebook and the Power of Headlines
The public rely heavily in news media as their primary source of information. As Tarkkanen (2017)
puts it, "The public does not find it necessary to research an issue further but rely solely on the
information presented by the news media." (p.3). It is in this crucial role played by news media
that proves how powerful its influence is to affect the perception and attitude of the public as they
inform. The public’s absolute dependence on the contents of news media is even more
strengthened by the sheer immensity of accessible news on the internet. The ubiquity of internet
and its impact in daily affairs is unsurprising nowadays. In the span of a decade, access to the
internet grew by almost 72% in the Philippines: from only having 25% of the population to having
almost half (47%) of the population using internet in 2019 (World Telecommunication/ICT
Indicators Database, 2020; Ramos, 2019). With half of the money-spending and vote-casting
Filipino adults having access to the internet, it is not surprising that businesses have transitioned
4

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

to expanding to world-wide-web territory. Traditional news media is not an exception. Major news
brands and outlets in the Philippines have their own websites and social media accounts. Even the
now defunct television channel is thriving on the internet.
Now that 99% of internet-using adults having a Facebook Account, this social media platform has
surpassed the prominence of radio and newspaper as daily source of news (SWS, 2019). In the
2019 Social Weather Survey on news consumption, Facebook comes second as the top platform
Filipinos use daily for news consumption (Ibid). All of these statistical data are a telling evidence
to the widespread reach of news media through the internet and social media, namely Facebook.
One key difference of news consumption in Facebook vs. the traditional media is the gating of full
access to the entire article. In Facebook, news pieces are served in a container of headline and
description. This headline-description is the initial contact of users to the news article. Reading the
entire news article to get the full information in the right context requires an investment of money
(mobile data), time and opportunity cost: it takes abandoning other content options in the
newsfeed, clicking the article, waiting for the article to load and spending time to read the text. In
the country were internet connection is hard to come by, people encounter news articles on
Facebook through the headline-description format.
In traditional newspapers, headlines reach much wider audience than the articles itself: newspapers
are accessible in newsstands where the frontpage matters are available for all to see, readers or not,
buyers or not. The same is true online, but in the age of Facebook, I contend that this is magnified
to a large extent because online news publishers specifically aim to reach the widest range of
audience. Reach is a crucial indicator of success for publishers on social media as it determined
the volume of engagement (likes, shares, comments, clicks) and revenue they can earn. And every
interaction of online readers creates a ripple effect which results to having the news articles reach
the network of users connected to a reader who interacted with it.
Now, news headlines are a powerful weapon in journalism. In fact, the power of news articles lies
on the construction of its headline. Without a compelling headline, readers will not bother read the
whole article. And if they did not read the article, still they read the headline. Devolette and
Rechniewski (2001) argued that the impact of headlines on the reader is all the stronger because
of linguistic features that make them strike the reader’s mind. Powerful impact is deliberately
sought through puns, alliteration, rhetorical devices etc.
Headlines train “the reader to develop certain expectations and imposes certain connections and
interpretations” through repetitions. (Devolette and Rechniewski, 2001). And by framing or
anchoring topics, it can impose forms of classifications to similar or even disparate phenomena
e.g., war and disease. And among other things, headlines use cultural references in order to stand
alone without explanation or definition: cultural forms serve as signposts that are easily
recognizable and identifiable by readers. (Ibid). Its impact therefore lies in its use of cultural
references that pique the cultural knowledge of readers.

5

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

It is in this light that the present study focused on Facebook news headlines and description as the
data to be used for the analysis. Given the large amount of news headlines and descriptions posted
on Facebook each day, I used corpus-based approach as a method of the study, following the theory
and method of Corpus Linguistics

Corpus Approach
A total of 7,316 headline-descriptions make up the corpora gathered in this study. A corpus-based
approach is used precisely because it is best for studies that include large amounts of data. Corpus
approach comprises four major characteristics (Bennet, 2010):
1. Corpus approach is empirical, analyzing real-life patterns of language use.
2. Corpus approach utilizes corpus as the basis of analysis—corpus being “large and
principled collection of naturally occurring text”.
3. Corpus approach makes use of computational software for analysis
4. Corpus approach depends on both quantitative and qualitative analytical techniques.
Corpus approach deals with large amounts of naturally occurring text. It is used to identify
linguistic patterns, manners in which language is used, with the help of statistical tools that would
otherwise be impossible to surface if done manually. (Tarkkanen, 2017). In this method, patterns
in language are first identified and quantified, after which they are interpreted and analyzed.
Corpus approach therefore does not only provide quantitative analysis, but more importantly
qualitative analysis.

Study Design
To address the research questions, the researcher explored the themes and topics discussed in the
news reporting about COVID-19 on Facebook in the Philippines and Malaysia.
To identify the topics, each corpus was analyzed against a reference corpus of the English
Language to surface Keywords. This method is called Keyness Analysis. In this method, words
that occur “with unusual frequency in a given text […] by comparison with a reference corpus”
are called “key word[s]”. (Scott, 1997 p.236 cited in Gabrielatos, 2018). In corpus linguistics key
words are crucial to establish the “aboutness” of the corpus—what it is all about. (Gabrielatos,
2018). Key words generally characterize what the corpus is about. When these set of key words
are grouped together in a “culturally significant way” it could “provide a representation of socially
important concepts”—in this study, the representation of the novel coronavirus 2019. (Scott, 1997
p.233 cited in Gabrielatos, 2018). Key words, or henceforth “keywords”, will be used to determine
the main topics discussed in the news coverage on COVID-19 in the Philippines and in Malaysia.
The reference corpus used in this study as a “benchmark” of standard English is the Brown Corpus
which is composed of 1 million words of edited English prose published in the United Stated in
1961. Brown corpus is today's standard of edited American English. (Francis and Kucera, 2011
[1979]). To measure the strength of being a key word (keyness) if a word is in fact a key word, the
statistical measurement that I used is %Diff by Gabrialatos and March (2011). In this measurement
6

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

positive values show higher frequency, a value of '0' indicates equal frequencies and negative
values indicate lower frequency. (Gabrielatos, 2018). For context, a value of 100 means the key
word is twice more frequent in the Philippine or Malaysian corpus versus the reference corpus,
200 indicates three times more frequent, 300 means four times more frequent and so on. A
threshold of 100 %DIFF was set in order to focus only on high scoring key words.
Keywords are analyzed in context to surface the salient ideas relevant to the research question. I
used the concordance tool to identify how the keywords are used in context. Collocations are also
inspected for some keywords in order to deepen the understanding about the news discourse on
coronavirus. Collocation is a concept based on the notion that words are not used in random. Words
tend to co-occur with certain words more often than it does with others. (Lehecka, 2015). Cooccurrence of words or collocation can manifest a pattern of choice in language use which can
point to salient ideas associated with a phenomenon. (Jaworska and Krishnamurthy, 2012). Cooccurring words or collocates are the neighboring words that have statistically high association
with a focus word. The statistical measure used in this study is T-score instead of the more common
MI score. This is a prudential choice considering the modesty of wordcount in the corpus. MI score
does not work well with low frequencies, but t-score “provides a way of getting away from this
problem as it also takes frequencies into account” (A Guide to Statistics: t-score and mutual
information, 2008)

Constructing the Corpora
News headlines and description were used as the unit of text for the corpus of the study. The corpus
of headlines and descriptions was built by running a search query for the terms “coronavirus”,
“virus”, “ncov” and “covid” in the CrowdTangle Insight Tool for Facebook posts published
between Dec 1, 2019 and March 10, 2020. The search terms were manually identified based on
the various referent names and the lack thereof in the news reporting since January 2020. It was
not named when the virus first hit the news on January 6. It was identified to belong to the
coronavirus family on 9th and since was named n-COV. Later, it became known as COVID-19
(Coronavirus Disease 2019). All these terms were accounted for in the corpus. The date range was
determined based on the earliest instance of novel coronavirus 2019 in the news and before the
lockdown in the Philippines was reported on March 12, 2020.
The tool provided 15,491 results. Each result is a set of headline and description. The initial corpus
was filtered to exclude mixed language texts e.g., Tagalog-English. What remains were English
language Facebook posts from three Facebook pages from the Philippines and Malaysia. For the
Philippine corpus: CNN Philippines, Inquirer, and Philippine Star. For the Malaysian corpus: New
Straits Times, Malaysiakini and The Star. The next filter was to include only Facebook posts that
are Link Post (link to the news article) and exclude video and photo posts. After all the filtration,
the final result consists of 3,191 headline-description for the Philippine corpus and 4,125 for the
Malaysian corpus. Each headline-description from both corpus is grouped by the week number it
was published, starting at Week 0, and ending at Week 11. This grouping is used for the range of
distribution later in the analysis.
7

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

General Corpus Analytics
Each corpus was fed into AntConc 2019 and LancsBox v5, free software tools for corpus linguistic
analysis. The tools provide statistical data on word use or linguistic features and concordance
window to view how words are used in context.
Corpora

HeadlineRange
Tokens
Descriptions (Weeks) (Word Count)

Philippine Corpus (PH)
Malaysian Corpus (MY)

3,191
4,125

0-11
0-11

114,462
107,145

Types
(Unique
Words)
8,899
10,614

Lexical
Complexity
0.078
0.099

There are 114,462 number of words (“Tokens”) in the Philippine corpus of which there are 8,899
unique words (“Types”). The Lexical Complexity (Types divided by Tokens) of the corpus is
0.078, meaning the complexity of the corpus is extremely low. For context, the highest Lexical
complexity is 1 where there is not one word repeated in the corpus. In the Malaysian Corpus, total
Tokens is 107,145 and total Types is 10,614. Lexical complexity of this corpus is also extremely
low at 0.099 but slightly higher than the Philippine counterpart.

How was COVID-19 reported in the Philippines and in Malaysia
The area that I examined is the “aboutness” of the corpus. It is a certainty that all the headlinesdescriptions discuss coronavirus, but what is interesting are the themes and topics that appear along
with the disease. Discourse on public health is not a distant news matter that is aloof from the
concerns of the common people. The topics, then, that come along in the discourse must represent
the concerns of the public, the reader audience. By implication, the topics around the news about
coronavirus gives us a view of what are the concerns of the society. By identifying the topics,
therefore, we can glean some insights on the things that matter to the society as viewed by the
media.
There are 12 individual themes or topics identified in the study. Each theme is composed of
keywords found in either or both of the corpora. To ease the analysis and get a better grasp of the
topics covered in the news media report of COVID-19, I grouped the individual themes or topics
into four subgroups: (1) Nature of News, (2) Spread of the Virus, (3) Safety Protocols and
Guidelines, (4) Related topics.
Words in black font color are shared between the PH and MY corpus. These words appear as
keywords in both corpora. Words in orange font color are Keywords in the MY corpus, while the
words in green color are keywords in PH corpus. In the discussion, the keywords are written in
bold black letters and frequency of words are stated in normalized measure of “per 10 thousand
words” viz. 10.9 therefore means an absolute frequency value of 125. This is to make an equitable
comparison of frequencies between the two corpora.

8

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

Themes 1-4: Nature of News
Themes
Keywords
Novelty/Uncertainty suspected, novel, new, unverified, mysterious, unidentified, possible
Alarmist
concerns, fear, fears, scare, warns, worries, concern, threat, threats,
warned
Reassurance
panic, safe, safety, assures, calm
Mis/Disinformation fake, twitter, facebook, media, misinformation, news, online, google,
false, claiming, fakenews, internet, info
War Framing
fight, killed, combat
Enigmatic and Alarmist Reporting in the Philippines
PH corpus features more keywords that depict the novelty and uncertainty around COVID-19 than
the MY corpus. While both corpora identify coronavirus as novel and new, PH news reporting
tend to use words that depict the enigma around the virus such as mysterious (2.18), unidentified
(0.70) and possible (10.75). In the reporting of covid-19 in the Philippines, based on the corpus,
the novelty of the virus is not just about its being the most recent discovered coronavirus but more
interestingly about it having a numinous novelty tainted with mystery.
This mysterious representation provides the precondition for putting much focus on the alarmist
frame in the PH corpus than in the MY corpus. This is evident by the sheer number of words that
the PH corpus has as keywords that corresponds to an alarmist frame. And more importantly the
remarkably high frequency of alarmist keywords in the PH corpus supports this conclusion: The
top three most frequent keywords in PH have a normalized wordcount of 19.92 (threat), 15.20
(fears) and 13.54 (scare), while in MY the top three have 15.96 (fears), 4.76 (panic) and 4.57
(fear).
Interestingly, along with an alarmist frame and enigmatic tone of the news reporting in the PH
corpus, there is more evidence of reassuring angle in this corpus than in the MY corpus. News
reports prominently quote or paraphrase panic-thwarting statements from the authorities with the
keyword safe (2.71) such as in the following manner: “declared safe”, “apparently safe from”,
“still safe” and “safe to + action word”. Keyword assures (1.14) also appear prominent in the PH
corpus for reassuring statements of authorities e.g., “Duterte assures…”, “Palace assures” and
“DOH assures.”. Also, the authorities’ statements feature the keyword calm (2.71) as in phrases
like, “remain calm”, “stay calm”. Lastly, what other way to keep the public from panicking than
to urge them not to panic (4.54) which in the corpus appeared associated with reassurance
statements half of the time as in statements with the phrase “need not to panic”.
This apparent paradox of having an alarmist angle fed by a mysterious representation of COVID19 and the reassuring tone in the PH corpus is neither unique nor surprising. The reassuring tone
can be read as only a response to the alarming news of the mysterious disease. More importantly,
9

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

this confluence of alarm, assurance and uncertainty essentially validates and agrees with the
observation of Ungar (1998) on news media reporting on emerging diseases, “
In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, when uncertainty and risks tend to be the highest, panicthwarting reassurances may ensue.” (p.37).
The alarmist reporting around COVID-19 can be associated with what is called a grass-root panic.
This is a type of panic that emerges when the public responds sooner than the elite and other
interest groups. The threat which causes public panic often entail events that develops in
"unpredictable ways" and are viewed as "having the potential to pose an imminent personal threat
to specific populations." (ibid). The public must have seen COVID-19 as an imminent personal
threat at the outset, back when its incidence was still developing in "unpredictable ways" before it
burgeoned into a pandemic. This explanation must account for the enigmatic and alarmist reporting
in the PH corpus.
Wartime Mentality and False News in Malaysia
MY corpus, on the other hand, features more keywords regarding the spread of false news and
information on the internet. In fact, MY has all the keywords relating to mis/disinformation while
PH corpus has only shared keywords (black) but nothing that is unique to itself (green). Fake as
in fake news and fake information appeared as a keyword in both corpora, but it is particularly
more frequent in the MY corpus (9.24) than in PH corpus (3.32). Discourse on fake news in both
corpora leans towards warning the public about the dangers of peddling false information and the
concomitant arrests and lawsuit that comes with the illicit act. Crime-related words like "jail",
"arrest" and "investigation" are commonly associated with reports on fake news. And there is
hardly any emphasis on particular fake news that were peddled on the internet. MY corpus' stark
difference with the PH corpus is in the number of news headlines that it covered which is three
times more. Also, considering the nature of cyberspace which knows no national boundaries, MY
corpus has a more cosmopolitan treatment when it comes to fake news. It mentioned incidence
within and outside the country e.g., Singapore, Thailand.
Moreover, MY corpus has more words related to war than the PH corpus. As with the fake news
keywords, MY has all the keywords used to frame the coronavirus health crisis as if it is a war,
and no unique keyword for the PH corpus. This suggests war framing feature prominently in the
MY corpus. When news reports in MY corpus mention a bid to curb the spread of the virus, it
chose war-related word fight (7.28) as in “fight coronavirus”, “fight against COVID” and combat
as in “combat COVID” and “combat coronavirus” whereas in the PH corpus, news reports used
more neutral words like contain (5.77) more frequently than fight (3.93). In fact, the most used
action word to denote a bid to curb the spread of the virus is the neutral word prevent as in the
phrase “prevent the spread”, with a normalized frequency of 9.00.
When the keywords fight and combat are used as action words for the coronavirus, the pandemic
is figuratively portrayed as a war and the situation is framed as wartime. This framing, war
10

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

framing, is a conventional figurative frame used in the discourse around diseases and pandemics
because of its popular appeal, the urgency that it can conjure and the necessity for actions that it
easily conveys. However, recent studies suggest that the framing of diseases as a war which renders
the body a battlefield is not well received. Wicke and Bolognesi (2020) mentioned that arguments
against this framing range from blindness that it generates towards efficient solutions, rise of
xenophobia and heightened fear and anxiety of the public. A telling argument against the framing
is summed up by Wise (2020), “To adopt a wartime mentality is fundamentally to allow for an allbets-are-off, anything-goes approach to emerging victorious.” What is interesting is that the war
framing is not prominent in the PH corpus despite the government’s overt waging of war against
the virus. This, however, can be explained by the date range of the corpus, as a banner of
“Solusyong medikal hindi militar” [Medical solution, not a military one] emerge in the public
discourse during the course of the lockdown.

Themes 5-6: Spread of the Virus
Themes
Velocity

Magnitude

Keywords
spike, surge, spreading, drop, soar, growth, spread, boost, spreads, rise,
rises, fast-spreading, soars, plunge, jump, peak, jumps, surges, raises,
rebound, outbreaks, emerged, sparked, emerging, climbs, risen, eruption,
slowing, expanded
total, toll, worst, biggest, tally, largest, lowest, zero

Regular reporting of Magnitude and Velocity of the Virus spread in MY
Velocity of the spread of the virus is a common theme in the news reporting on COVID-19 in both
corpora. As the outbreak was still unfolding in the period covered in the corpora, most of the
keywords denote rapid increase. Both corpora put much emphasis on the spread of the virus as
evidenced by a remarkably close normalized frequency for two of the top keywords: spread (MY
– 22.31; PH – 30.14) as in “global spread” or “coronavirus spread”; spreading (MY – 6.81; PH –
7.60) as in “fast spreading” or “spreading coronavirus” and rise (MY – 5.13; PH – 5.77) as in
“cases rise”. The balance between the corpora is close for this theme, but the MY corpus apparently
features better median normalized frequency versus PH corpus, and it contains more terms that
straightforwardly denote rapid increase like jump/s, peak, raises, soars, surges.
In terms of reporting the magnitude of the virus infection, both corpora put considerable emphasis
on reporting total number of cases and deaths. Keyword toll appeared in MY corpus (17.17) almost
as frequent in PH corpus (14.24); equal balance also for keyword number (MY – 6.81; PH – 7.60).
Keyword total is particularly striking in this set of keywords. It has a normalized frequency of
22.21 in MY corpus but only 8.47 in PH corpus. Based on the range of this keyword, it appeared
in MY corpus 23.8 times every week on average versus a meager 9.8 in PH corpus. Total is almost
11

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

exclusively used for reporting total confirmed cases of the day. Using the concordance tool, the
keyword can be seen in context. It appears that news media in MY corpus reports daily total cases
regularly using the template “Total cases so far (updated daily)”. This feature is absent in the PH
corpus.

[Figure 1: Keyword in Context for the keyword “total”]
Themes 7-8 Safety Protocols and Restrictions
Themes
Restrictions

Protocols

Keywords
ban, banned, bans, barred, cancel, cancellation, cancelled, cancels, closed,
closes, contain, containment, curb, evacuate, evacuated, evacuees,
guidelines, isolation, lockdown, measures, monitoring, postpone,
postponed, postpones, quarantine, quarantined, quarantines, restrictions,
screening, self-quarantine, shuts, stop, suspending, suspension, trapped,
allowed, cancellations, checkpoints, checkpoints, control, evacuation, halt,
stringent, surveillance, warded, advised, banning, canceled, implement,
impose, imposed, imposes, issuance, mandatory, ordered, prompted,
stricter, suspend, suspended, suspends, suspensions, test
contact, masks, monitored, precautionary, precautions, prevention,
preventive, protect, protective, safe, safety, screening, tested, tests, vaccine,
detection, facemask, facemasks, glove, gloves, handshakes, hygiene, avoid,
precaution, protocols, test, testing

Focus on restrictions in PH corpus, and hygiene & safety protocols in MY corpus
Safety protocols and restrictions appear prominently in the reporting of COVID-19 in the MY and
PH corpus. A wide range of restrictive words are shared by the two corpora. The top three
12

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

keywords in the MY corpus are measures (12.41), quarantine (12.32) and ban (7.93), while in
the PH corpus, the top three keywords are ban (20.01), quarantine (19.5) and quarantined
(10.83). Notice the huge difference in the frequency of ban in the PH corpus which is more than
twice as much as in the MY corpus. The range of frequencies for the top 3 keywords in PH (10.83
– 20.01) is also relatively higher than in MY corpus (7.93 – 12.41). And there are more restrictive
keywords in PH than in the MY corpus. Based on these data, news reporting in the PH corpus
hugely features prohibitive and commanding keywords relating to restrictions taken by the
government to curb spread of the virus.
When read in context, the top restrictive keywords are associated with the Related Topics which
are covered in the next section. For instance, “ban” in PH corpus is used almost exclusively with
“travel and tourism” as in the statement “travel ban”. It can be remembered that travel ban was a
hot topic in the country after the first case of COVID-19 was confirmed on January 30. Partial
travel ban was imposed on the 31st to travelers from Hubei province. This is a more immediate
response than the travel ban imposition in Malaysia which was implemented two days after the
first case. Concomitant to the travel ban discourse is quarantine—the second most frequent
keyword--which almost exclusively relates to travelers and passengers from abroad.
On the other hand, MY corpus’ most frequent keyword in this category is the more general term
measures as in “preventive measures”, “precautionary measures” and “safety measures”. What it
lacks for news reporting in restrictions was offset with a well-rounded coverage on safety
protocols. There are more unique keywords relating to health and safety protocols in MY corpus
than in the PH corpus: facemasks (0.09), glove (1.12), gloves (1.21), hygiene (1.77) and
handshakes (1.03). A shared keyword, masks as in “face masks” appeared more frequently in the
MY corpus (11.76) than in the PH corpus (8.56). It is interesting that the news reporting in the MY
corpus tackles handshaking and gloves, aside from the go-to protection which is facemask. With
the foregoing, MY corpus undoubtedly provided better and more information to the public about
ways to avoid getting infected with the virus.
It can be concluded that PH reporting dealt mostly with the restrictions and regulations of
movement while MY corpus covered more issues on hygiene and safety protocols.

Themes 9-11: Related Topics
Themes
Geographic
Locations

Keywords
beijing, china, china's, daegu, hk, hubei, indonesia, international, iran, italy,
japan, japan's, korea, korea's, malaysia, philippines, saudi, shanghai,
singapore, taiwan, thailand, tokyo, uk, us, vietnam, wuhan, bahrain, bali,
baru, cambodia, france, hongkong, india, johor, kelantan, kl, klang,
kuala, langkawi, lombardy, lumpur, malaysia's, m'sia, myanmar,
pahang, penang, perth, provinces, sabah, sarawak, selangor, singapore's,
13

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

southkorea, s'pore, s'wak, bicol, bohol, boracay, cainta, california, capas,
cavite, cebu, cordillera, davao, dubai, hong, iloilo, jeju, kalibo, kuwait,
louvre, macau, manila, marikina, mindanao, negros, palawan, pasay,
philippine, quezon, rizal, sagada, taal, tacloban, tarlac, uae, visayas,
yokohama
Race

Overseas Travel

Economy

asian, chinese, iranian, japanese, korean, malaysian, taiwanese, thai, italian,
malaysians, m'sian, m'sians, singaporean, singaporeans, arab, filipina,
filipino, filipinos, pinoys
aboard, airasia, airline, airlines, airport, arrival, arrivals, crew, cruise, dock,
docked, entry, flight, flights, flown, overseas, passenger, port, ports,
repatriated, ship, ships, stranded, tour, tourism, tourists, travel, visa, arrive,
border, docking, hotels, klia, liner, malindo, package, pilgrims, returning,
travelled, arrived, bi [beaureau of immigration], cargo, carrier, carriers, copassengers, immigration, naia, pal, repatriate, repatriates, repatriation,
transport, traveled, travelers, vessel, vessels, visas
billion, businesses, economy, employees, gdp, imported, investors, prices,
sector, shortage, stocks, stores, bank, bil [billion], brent, buying,
companies, customers, delivery, economic, employee, genting, greenback,
industry, khazanah, klci, market, maybank, mil [million], million, oil, pct,
recession, ringgit, rm, sectors, smes, bsp, deloitte, dow, economies,
factories, inflation, worker

China as a geographical location in PH corpus, but as a type of virus in MY corpus
Having originated in a foreign territory, the MY and PH corpora cover a global scope in reporting
on the spread of coronavirus as it emerged in various places in and outside the epicenter, China.
Keywords china (MY – 85.12; PH – 81.95) and wuhan (MY – 43.03; PH – 32.59) appear
prominently in both corpora. In fact, both keywords rank within the top 20 of both corpora. An
interesting distinction is noticeable when we look at the collocates of china. In the MY corpus, the
top five collocates are “in”, “coronavirus”, “wuhan”, “virus”, “from”. Considering that I limit the
collocation span to include only two words right or left of the keyword, it is interesting that the top
five only include two prepositions of place (in, from). This suggests that MY corpus mentioned
china not only to denote a geographic location, but also as a modifier to the coronavirus. In the
corpus, “China virus” stood as an alternative name to coronavirus. It remained a proxy name up to
week 8 of the reporting period (Feb 16 - 22, 2019)—one week after the World Health Organization
officially named the novel coronavirus as COVID-19 on Feb 11, 2020.

14

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

[Figure 2: Keyword in Context for the keyword “china”]
The same proxy name also appeared in the PH corpus but in a comparatively less frequency:
“virus” as the immediate collocate of china appeared only 49 times in PH corpus, while it appeared
123 times in MY corpus. Versus MY corpus, china was more frequently mentioned to denote a
geographic location than a type of virus in PH corpus: top five collocates of the keyword are, “in”,
“from”, “to”, “wuhan”, and “mainland”. The same distinction can be said in terms of the keyword
wuhan. “Wuhan virus” appeared largely on MY corpus than in PH corpus. Had this data came
from a corpus of Western newspapers, the labeling of the virus as “China virus” can be read as a
form of “othering”. This orientalist perspective was found to be a key theme in reporting of
previous contagions such as the Ebola and AIDS among others (Washer, 2004; Ungar 1998; Hilton
and Hunt 2010). Can this also be a possible scenario within the “oriental” community? This
requires a further study.
Other observations in this theme are that Asian neighbors appear more exclusively in the MY
corpus: India, Cambodia, and Myanmar. While the PH corpus’ exclusive keywords are more
varied: California, UAE, Dubai, and Hong (Kong). A possible explanation is that the news
reporting in the MY corpus is more concerned with travelers and tourists from neighboring
countries, while the reporting in PH corpus is concerned with the workplace of Overseas Filipino
Workers. This can be further explained by the following themes.
Economic concerns in MY corpus, OFW in the PH corpus
The top-ranking keyword in the race category is chinese which appeared relatively higher in PH
corpus (MY – 31.83; PH – 35.38). Chinese is a keyword used as an adjective in various ways. In
both corpora, it was used to identify a city, government, the coronavirus, and the people. MY
corpus viewed chinese more in its economic merit as a description for tourists: there are only three
15

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

noun collocates that identify chinese as people, first is "tourists", followed by "nationals" and the
last one is "visitors". PH corpus, on the other hand, identified chinese people in its generic
connotation being foreigners to Filipino readers. Top five noun collocates are "national",
"tourists", "woman", "couple", "man", "boy".
In the list of shared keywords, almost all have relatively equal normalized frequencies in both
corpora, save thai (MY – 3.64; PH – 0.52) which is high in MY and korean (MY – 1.49; PH –
3.76) in PH. Thai appeared more frequently in MY corpus because it was in Thailand, border
neighbor of Malaysia, where the first coronavirus case outside China was reported. Korean
appeared in a variety of topics in PH corpus, among these include flight ban and the South Korean
positive who arrived in Cebu.
For the exclusive keywords, endonyms (Malaysians in MY corpus and Filipinos in PH corpus)
rank highest in each corpus. But there is a stark difference on the weight of these terms in their
respective corpus. Endonym keywords appeared 26.12 (filipinos), 15.81 (filipino), 2.71 (filipina)
and 1.49 (pinoys) times in the PH corpus, while the endonym keywords in MY corpus appeared
much less at only 11.11 (malaysians), 2.43 (m’sians) and 1.40 (m’sian) times. PH corpus
mentioned the Filipino people in the context of having OFWs in different virus-hit places.
Concerns for the OFWs are a recurring theme in the news coverage of PH corpus. Even in the
travel and tourism category, the top keywords are related to OFWs. Cruise (20.44) and ship
(23.06) are two of the top keywords in the PH corpus. As one of the world’s top suppliers of
seafarers, Filipino OFWs aboard cruise ships were the central figure of the news reports. Exclusive
keywords are also highly associated with OFW stories repatriate (1.05), repatriates (2.36), and
repatriation (2.53).
In the MY corpus, the main concern seems to be regarding tourism: the same are the top keywords,
cruise (14.48) and ship (19.04) but reporting focused mostly on the concerns of tourists arriving
in their ports as well as coronavirus-stricken cruise ship stories in Japan, South Korea and Italy
that were the headliners in February 2019. Potential losses for travel ban also feature prominently
in the MY corpus with keywords tourism and tourists having high normalized frequency. In line
with this, economic concerns appear to be a major concern in the MY corpus as it dominates the
list of keywords relating to economics.
Beside owning a long list of keywords exclusive to the corpus, MY has a particularly high
normalized frequency for the shared keyword economy with 8.03 (vs. 5.68 in PH corpus) and
with the exclusive keyword economic (8.21) as in “economic concerns”, “economic downturn”
and “economic impact”. It can be seen the MY corpus reported a negative trajectory for the
economy, hence “economic stimulus package” became a headliner as early as week 5 of the
reporting period (Jan 26, 2020 – Feb 1, 2020). Discourse on stimulus package appeared only
once in PH corpus, and in March.

16

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

Conclusion
The depiction of COVID-19 in the MY and PH corpus are characteristic to the social and political
events in the country where they belong to.
In the weeks that lead to the promotion of COVID-19 as a global pandemic, news reports in the
Philippines depict the disease with an enigmatic lens and in an alarming frame. This suggests the
media responded to the crisis communication accordingly, and the public must have viewed the
COVID-19 as an imminent personal threat. This explains why reassuring news reports appear
prominently in the corpus, as a way to allay fear. While war framing was present in the Philippine
and Malaysian news reporting, this metaphorical device was more prominently apparent in the
Malaysian corpus. Instead of buzzing the alarm, it is possible that Malaysian news reports
responded to this crisis on a military-like stance. In the time when a lot of uncertainties surround
the “mysterious” disease, Malaysian news viewed it as an enemy to be fought and defeated. And
along with waging war against the disease, news reports in Malaysia saw fake news as another
threat to be fought. It then appears that Malaysian news reporting considered it not only the disease
but also fake news that needs to be addressed. Along with this drive against false information,
Malaysian news reports also was early to adopt a regular daily update on the growth and spread of
the virus.
The Philippine news reporting on the other hand put much concern with the restrictions that need
to be imposed in order to contain the spread of the virus. This is in part explained by the high
relevance of Travel and Tourism as a related theme in Philippine news reports. Travel and tourism
are an important topic in the Philippines because of the number OFWs and their families that will
be affected by travel bans and restrictions. Of course, another related topic to restrictions is the
influx of Chinese nationals and the call to ban travel from and to China which was a hot debate
during the period. If Philippine news reports dealt mostly with the restrictions and regulations of
movement, Malaysian news reports covered more issues on hygiene and safety protocols. MY
corpus undoubtedly provided better and more information to the public about ways to avoid getting
infected with the virus than PH corpus.
The areas of life problematized by news reports in COVID-19 truly reflect the concerns and issues
valued by the society where news reports are published for. Concerns for OFWs generate a lot of
attention to topics concerning travel and tourism. Concerns for Filipino seafarers, and OFWs that
need to be repatriated are a recurring theme in the reports regarding COVID-19. On the other hand,
concern for the economy appeared prominently in the Malaysian reports. This includes concerns
for the tourism industry, as well as talks about the impact of the outbreak on the economic growth
as early as the first few weeks of the outbreak. Discourse on economic stimulus package appeared
as early as the first week the virus case was confirmed in Malaysia, while in the Philippines this
topic appeared only once and two months after the first case.
The present paper is only a preliminary study on the representation of COVID-19 in the news
reports in the Philippines and Malaysia. Much can be discovered about the depiction of the
17

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

pandemic when a larger corpus is included in the study and the span of report coverage covers up
until the recent months. Also, a deeper study on the collocation and word patterns can be employed
in order to surface salient ideas, catchphrases and latent perceptions that are embedded in the ocean
of words in news reports.

References
A Guide to Statistics: t-score and mutual information. (2008). Retrieved from Harper Collins
Word Bank: https://wordbanks.harpercollins.co.uk/other_doc/statistics.html
Bennet, G. (2010). Introduction to Corpus Linguistices. In G. Bennet, Using Corpora in the
Language Learning Classroom (pp. 1-22). University of Michigan Press.
Brezina, V., Weill-Tessier, P., McEnery, A. (2020). #LancsBox v. 5.x. [software].
http://corpora.lancs.ac.uk/lancsbox.
Christine Develotte, Elizabeth Rechniewski. (2001). Discourse analysis of newspaper headlines :
a methodological framework for research into national representations. Web journal of
French Media Studies, 1-16.
Database, W. T. (2020). Individuals using the Internet (% of population) - Philippines. Retrieved
from World Bank: https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?locations=PH
Eric Mayor, Veronique Eicher, Adrian Bangerter, Ingrid Gilles. (2012). Dynamic social
representations of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic: Shifting patterns of sense-making and
blame. Public Understanding of Science,, 1012-1024.
Gabrielatos, C. (2018). Keyness Analysis: nature, metrics and techniques. In A. M. (eds), Corpus
Approaches to Discourse: A Critical Review. Oxford: Routledge.
Gibbs, C. C. (2008). Representations of HIV/AIDS management in South African newspapers.
African Journal of AIDS Research,, 195-208.
L, A. (2020). AntConc 3.5.9 [Computer Software]. https://www.laurenceanthony.net/software.
Lehecka, T. (2015). Collocation and Colligation. In J.-O. Östman, Handbook of Pragmatics.
John Benjamins Publishing .
Megha Sharma, Kapil Yadav, Nitika Yadav, Kieth Ferdinand. (2017). Zika virus pandemic—
analysis of Facebook as a social media health information platformr. American Journal of
Infection Control, 301-302.
Peter Vasterman, Nel Ruigrok. (2013). Pandemic Alarm in the Dutch Media: Media Coverage of
the 2009 Influenza A (H1N1) Pandemic and the Role of the Expert Sources. European
Journal of Communication, 436-453.

18

Gio Eiron Villanueva, 2020 | Corpus-based Comparative Study of Online News Reporting of the Outbreak of
COVID-19 in the Philippines and Malaysia

Philipp Wicke, Marianna M. Bolognesi. (2020). Framing COVID-19: How we conceptualize and
discuss the pandemic on Twitter. PLoS ONE, 1-24.
Ramos, C. M. (2019, March 13). 47% of Filipino adults use the Internet — SWS. Retrieved from
Inquirer.net: https://technology.inquirer.net/84201/47-of-filipino-adults-use-the-internetsws
SWS. (2019, June 29). First Quarter 2019 Social Weather Survey: 1 of 5 adult Pinoys use
Facebook daily as a source of news. Retrieved from Social Weather Stations :
https://www.sws.org.ph/swsmain/artcldisppage/?artcsyscode=ART-20190629182313
Sylvia Jaworska, Ramesh Krishnamurthy. (2012). 2012-On the F word: A corpus-based analysis
of the media representation of feminism in British and German press discourse, 1990–
2009. Discourse and Society, 1-31.
Tarkkanen, L. (2017, Jun). Master's Thesis. A corpus-based study of the news reporting of the
Zika virus in the Guardian and the New York Times – a discourse analytical approach.
University of Eastern Finland.
Ungar, S. (1998). Hot Crises and Media Reassurance: A Comparison of Emerging Diseases and
Ebola Zaire. The British Journal of Sociology, 36-56.
W. N. Francis, H. Kučera. (2011 [1979]). A Standard Corpus of Present-Day Edited American
English, for use with Digital Computers (Brown). Retrieved from Varieng:
http://www.helsinki.fi/varieng/CoRD/corpora/BROWN/
Washer, P. (2004). Representations of SARS in the British newspapers. Social Science &
Medicine, 2561–2571.
Wise, A. (2020, April 17). Military Metaphors Distort the Reality of COVID-19. Retrieved from
Scientific American: https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/militarymetaphors-distort-the-reality-of-covid-19/

19

