Capturing and analyzing social representations. A first
application of Natural Language Processing techniques
to reader’s comments in COVID-19 news. Argentina,
2020
Germán Rosati​1,2,3 + ​, Laia Domenech​1 +​, Adriana Chazarreta​1,2 +​, Tomás Maguire​1 +
1​

Instituto de Altos Estudios Sociales, Universidad Nacional de San Martín, ARG
Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas, CONICET, ARG
2​
Programa de Investigaciones Sobre el Movimiento de la Sociedad Argentina (PIMSA), ARG
+​
Equal contributor
2​

german.rosati@gmail.com

Abstract. ​We present a first approximation to the quantification of social
representations about the COVID-19, using news comments. A web crawler
was developed to construct the dataset of reader’s comments. We detect
relevant topics in the dataset using Latent Dirichlet Allocation, and analyze its
evolution during time. Finally, we show a first prototype to the prediction of the
majority topics, using FastText.
Keywords:​ NLP, News Comments, COVID-19, Social Representations.

1

Introduction

Generally
speaking,
social or collective representations are
sociopsychological constructs that perform a symbolic role, representing something
–an object– to a person or group [8]. They consist in systems of values, ideas and
practices [8], and are a largely discussed theme in social science. From early
approaches linked to the marxist notion of ideology [4] [7] to more modern
definitions of the term [8]. Historical studies have also addressed this issue: for
example the “inherent ideas” in different forms of pre-industrial riots [9]. These
collective representations should not be seen as logical and consistently thought
structures: they can be formed by incoherent fragments of ideas.
They have been classically studied using a variety of sources [11]. The most
relevant ones are sampling surveys [1] [8], manual text analysis [9] and in-depth
interviews [11]. More modern approaches have worked with social networks [3],
especially analyzing political representations and its diffusion. However, other
spontaneous discourse sources, like news reader’s comments seem not to wake the
same interest as a source for analyzing these problems. There were, however, some

2

attempts: Schuth et al [10] tried to extract the discussion structure of reader’s
comments in several dutch newspapers.
Is it possible to construct relevant information about social representations
regarding a specific theme using news reader’s comments? Which are the main topics
discussed in news comments? How do these topics evolve over time? The aim of this
paper is to present some preliminary results of an ongoing research addressing these
questions using some novel data sources.
We present the whole workflow (from data gathering, preprocessing,
modeling and predicting) of the reader’s comments on COVID-19 news in five
argentinian papers.
2

Data and methods1

2.1

Scraping news and comments

We study the comments of online news articles available in five newspapers
(with national circulation): Página 12, La Nación, Clarín, Infobae and Ámbito
Financiero. In order to get the reader’s comments it was necessary to scrap the news
themselves first. To do so, we made a series of GDELT2 requests every one or two
week intervals. This provided an input of all the article links by argentinian
newspapers labeled as “COVID-19”.
We developed a crawler, which we applied once we had each set of articles.
This crawler ran through every link of our input database and scraped all the
comments of each article. The final database contains all the 385.255 comments
produced between 13/03/2020 and 01/06/2020.

​The web scraping, preprocess, modeling and prediction stages were developed in Python
using standard libraries (BeautifulSoup, Selenium, scikit-learn, etc.). The visualizations were
produced in R using ggplot library.
2
GDELT (Global Database of Events, Language and Tone) -https://www.gdeltproject.org/is a huge free access database about human society considered as the “bigger, most complete
and with higher resolution” ever created. It is growed day by day monitoring online news in
several countries with more than 100 languages, saving published news and identifying topics,
locations, themes and emotions present in each article. It is updated every 15 minutes.
1

3

Fig. 1.​ Flowchart of data acquisition process.

2.2

Topic modeling with Latent Dirichlet Allocation

The second step was to train a topic model using LDA [2] to create an
instrument which could be useful for an automatic tag of each comment.
LDA is a method for analyzing large quantities of unstructured data, in
which each topic is characterized by a distribution of words. Each distribution of
words provides a ‘thematic summary’ of the topic. In other words, we can read each
topic as an answer to what are the social representations surrounding our input
documents.
3

Experiments and results

We applied several standard preprocessing operations to text data: removing
stopwords, punctuation, digits, web links and usernames and transforming to
lowercase. We also constructed the Term-Frequency matrix using l1 normalization
and TF-IDF weighting.
After iterating we found ten topics which were conceptually relevant.

4

Table 1.​ Topic identification and labeling
Order
Topic 01
Topic 02

Topic 03

Topic 04
Topic 05
Topic 06
Topic 07
Topic 08
Topic 09
Topic 10

Words distribution
[alberto peronismo impuesto chile acuerdo
razon excelente paso tipo ministro brasil
ignorante test gato casos]
[vos sos gamurra tenes porota cuba troll
venezuela foto matanza mano barbijo decis
paga quiero]
[gente pandemia china argentina salir
cuarentena argentinos muertos gusta
gobierno paises virus digo infectados
hablar]
[globo pobre vieja jajajaja arroyo grande
fideos mujer cosa sueldo albertitere miedo
patria queda dictadura]
[larreta peronista inutil seguro deja viejo
cabeza verguenza kk ojo peronistas veo
basura pasa idea]
[che cuarentena ja anos muertos fernandez
titere pena argentina vas mira favor hijo
economia delincuentes]
[gobierno alverso dolar virus cientificos
coronavirus presidente inutiles covid leer
default bolsonaro meses inflacion pobres]
[macri jajaja nota comentario ladrones
chorros cree voto diario clarin jaja sale
alguien cerebro llama]
[cara medicos votaron cubanos falta
politicos deuda aca provincia mundo comer
odio conurbano espero perdon]
[millones gente pagar cuarentena impuestos
casa gobierno personas presos trabajar anda
anos ojala trabajo plan]

Label
Government, cases and testing at
the regional level
Insults between readers
Testing, cases and deaths at the
local level
Miscelaneous
Macrism, antiperonism
Government and the economic
policy
Insults to the government,
economic crisis
Macrism, antiperonism
Insults to the government,
economical crisis
Public administration

Topics 07 and 09 were merged as “​Insults to the government, economical crisis​”
as well as topics 05 and 08 which were labeled as “Anti-peronist macrism”. We
finally got 8 topics which can be plotted during time:

5

Fig. 2. Time evolution of topic composition (mean of each topic) in reader’s comments on
COVID-19 news

The antiperonist-macrism debate along with the insults towards the
government and economical crisis are the two main topics in the distribution. The
debate regarding public administration is a close third main topic: for a while between
april and may, it reaches the means of the first two topics as well, but it begins a
decreasing tendency afterwards. It seems like an argued debate gained strength in the
first weeks of the quarantine and until the midst of it, but as we are reaching more
recent months people began to drop it. Other relevant topic is the one that talks about
testing, cases and deaths at the local level.
In a preliminary model we made, we kept in the input dataframe the
duplicated comments. The main topic turned out to be the critics towards the
government and there was a topic which represented the trolls, bots and spammers.
The fact that the removal of these comments makes those topics disappear can
indicate that this is a preliminary way of controlling trolls (which generally copy and
paste the same message multiple times) and analyzing comments of people.

6

Table 2.​ Illustrative comments (random sample between comments with high prevalence of
topics 05 and 08)
Topic order
-

Topic 05 - Macrism,
antiperonism

-

Topic 08 - Macrism,
antiperonism

-

-

Text of sampled comment
LA CUARENTENA SIGUE HASTA EL
2023… PARA ALBERTITO, EL
CORONAVIRUS ES SU TABLA DE
SALVACIÓN...
EL LAVADO DE K ULO, ES PARA LA
FASE 3 !! OK?
El verdadero virus que destruyó Argentina es
el peronismo. Cristina, Alverso, el General,
Menem,Duhalde, Eva. Todos lo mismo. El día
que logremos una vacuna efectiva contra el
peronismo, ese dia va a arrancar el pais
Como es posible que la oposicion se prestara a
este bochorno¡ lamentable R Larreta!!!
los gobierno no..... los peronistas.... no
generalices....
SI ESTUVIERA MAURICIO....LAS
INSTITUCIONES FUNCIONARIAN !!!!!
Mauricio,¿Qién es ese individuo?
Naaaa ya estabamos quebrados, Macri lo hizo
NO SOLO ORKO CEREBRO DE
AMEBA,..SINO QUE UN REVENRENDO
PE-LO-TU-2,.ESTAMOS INFECTADOS DE
ESTE VIRUS KAKA
Son K el ADN de chorros no se los quita nadie

As can be seen in the previous table, both topics seem to capture the
so-called “grieta” in argentina. They contain positive and (mostly) negative positions
and images in relation to current administration, peronism in general, and the previous
national government.
As a general appreciation, the evolution of the complete topic composition
seems to be rather stable during the period.

7

Fig. 3. ​Time evolution of topic composition (mean of each topic) in reader’s comments on
COVID-19 news by newspaper

When we plot the same evolution but conditioning over newspaper, we see
that there aren’t many differences amongst what the readers of each site talk about. In
most of the cases, the topic regarding public administration is the highest, except in
Clarin where the antiperonist-macrism is. In general, we see that there aren’t
substantial differences within the topic distribution of each media. This opens the
question to whether the commenters (which may have a distinct profile from readers)
of newspapers with different political ideologies have different profiles or not. In
terms of what they talk about when reading news, we can offer a preliminary answer:
no, they don’t.
3.1

Predicting majority topic with FastText

Since the topic detection seemed to be rather unstable (we tried it in different
periods of time and the topics changed) we tried to convert the topic detection into a
supervised problem. The idea is to predict the main topic of a determined comment.
We present in this section the first approximation to this problem.
After estimating the LDA model, we detected the most relevant topic in each
comment and we used that topic in order to tag it. We only tagged the comments if
the majority topic were to have a prevalence higher than 0.3, this is to say, we tagged
only those comments which presented a clearly distinctive category.
We applied a FastText classification to predict the tag. FastText [5] [6] [12]
makes the vectorial representation of each word in a vocabulary, taking into account
the morphology by considering subword units and representing words by a sum of its
character n-grams.

8

Our training set was constructed using a random sample of comments per
day from our main database, and the test set was a result of the remaining comments:
for each day in the analyzed period we use a 30% as a test set and the 70% remaining,
as a training set. Our final results from the test set were validated by precision and
recall metrics.
Since the class distribution of the dataset was not severely imbalanced, we
tried a classifier with no over or undersampling. After performing an auto tuning
process of the classifier, the final embedding produced has 100 dimensions.
Table 3.​ Performance metrics of fasttext algorithm in majority topic prediction
Labels
Government, cases and testing at the regional
level
Insults between readers

Precision

Recall

F1

n

0.90

0.89

0.89

5733

0.89

0.87

0.88

3450

Testing, cases and deaths at the local level

0.92

0.93

0.93

16537

Miscelaneous

0.90

0.87

0.88

3792

Macrism, antiperonism

0.82

0.85

0.84

2795

Government and the economic policy

0.89

0.89

0.89

4991

Insults to the government, economic crisis

0.90

0.88

0.89

3649

Macrism, antiperonism

0.90

0.81

0.85

3488

Insults to the government, economical crisis

0.89

0.84

0.87

2725

Public administration

0.93

0.95

0.94

22316

Total (weighted)

0.91

0.91

0.91

69476

The performance of the classifier seems promising. It will also provide the
word embedding which could be used to perform more in-depth analysis about the
semantic structure of these comments.
4

Conclusions and future work

We have presented the first results of an ongoing investigation about the
possibilities that news reader’s comments and Natural Language Processing
techniques have as a tool for studying social representations. We use the COVID-19
theme as a test case, but one of the main goals of the research is to develop a tool and
a workflow useful for other themes or situations.
Using labelled links to digital news articles, provided by GDELT, we were
able to construct a dataset of comments framed in the COVID-19 discussion. LDA
topic modeling allowed us to detect some relevant themes of discussion in this frame.
Topics regarding critics, negative views, insults to the government and the economic
crisis were particularly relevant. Discussion of public administration and the problem
of testing cases were also a relevant theme in news comments. But one of the main

9

findings was the existence of two topics which capture the so-called “grieta” in
argentinian political discussion: the peronism-anti peronism axis.
We have also trained a preliminary fasttext model to predict the majority
topic of each comment with good first results. It would be possible to use
word-embedding representation to capture other relevant semantic dimensions of the
corpus analyzed. At the methodological level some of the future steps are
-

restate the problem as a multilabel classification problem: train the
model to predict the three more relevant topics
perform a deeper parameter search
test most advanced NLP frameworks such as BERT in order to see
if it is possible to achieve a higher accuracy in the topic prediction

At a theoretical level, several research questions arise: how stable is the
existence of the peronism-anti peronism topics? Is it possible to observe it in
comments framed in another discussion? These questions are to be addressed in the
near future.

References
1. Adorno, T., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D., Sanford, N.: Studies in authoritarian
personality. 1st edn. New York: Harper & Row (1950).
2. Blei, D., Ng A.Y., Jordan, M.: Latent Dirichlet Allocation. The Journal of Machine
Learning (3), 993-1022 (2003).
3. Calvo, E., Aruguete, N.: #Tarifazo. Medios tradicionales y fusión de agenda en redes
sociales. Inmediaciones de la Comunicación (13), 189-213 , (2018).
4. Gramsci, A.: Notas sobre Maquiavelo, sobre la política y sobre el estado moderno. 1st edn.
Buenos Aires: Nueva Visión, Buenos Aires (1972).
5. Joulin, A., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., Mikolov, T.: Bag of Tricks for Efficient Text
Classification. arXiv:1607.01759 (2016).
6. Joulin, A., Grave, E., Bojanowski, P., Douze, M., Jégou, H., Mikolov, T.: FastText.zip:
Compressing text classification models. arXiv:1612.03651 (2016).
7. Marx, K., Engels. F.: The German Ideology. 1st edn. International Publishers, New York
(2004).
8. Moscovici, S.: El psicoanálisis, su imagen y su público. 1st edn. Huemul, Buenos Aires
(1979).
9. Rudé, G.: Ideology and Popular Protest. 1st edn. Lawrence & Wishart, Great Britain
(1980).
10. Schuth, A., Marx, M., Rijke, M.: Extracting the Discussion Structure in Comments on
News-Articles. 9th ACM International Workshop on Web Information and Data
Management, pp. 97-104. Lisbon, Portugal (2007).
11. Wagner, W., Duveen, G., Farr, R., Jovchelovitch, S., Lorenzi-Cioldi, F., Markova, I.,
Rose, I.: Theory and method of social representations. Asian Journal of Social Psychology
(2), 95–125 (1999).
12. Xu, J., Du, Q.: A Deep Investigation into fastText. IEEE 21st International Conference on
High Performance Computing and Communications, pp. 1714-1719. Zhangjiajie, China
(2019).

