It’s (not) like the flu: Resonant Expertise and the COVID-19 Pandemic
in Mainland China, Hong Kong, and the United States
Larry Au1, Zheng Fu1, & Chuncheng Liu2
larry.au@columbia.edu; zf2205@columbia.edu; chchliu@ucsd.edu

1. Department of Sociology, Columbia University
2. Department of Sociology, University of California San Diego
Authorship in alphabetical order, all authors contribute equally to this work

Abstract
Why did societies respond to COVID-19 differently? Unlike popular explanations relying on
political or cultural differences, we examine the role that experts and expertise play in shaping
the initial responses to COVID-19. We ask three specific questions: (1) Who were the COVID19 experts, (2) How was expertise mobilized to understand the emerging threat of COVID-19,
and (3) How did these expert statements resonate with policymakers and publics in different
political contexts? Through our three-case comparison of Mainland China, Hong Kong, and
the United States, we show how past experiences with disease outbreaks shaped how experts
deployed their expertise to make sense of the emerging crisis. Furthermore, past experiences
with disease outbreaks also shape how these forms of expertise become resonant with
policymakers and publics, as the past itself becomes a cultural object that is mobilized,
contested, and seen as potentially useful to solve the problem of COVID-19. We argue that the
process of resonant expertise played a key role in coming up with effective policies to tackle
COVID-19.
Keywords: Expertise, Global Health, COVID-19, China, United States, Hong Kong

1

1. Introduction
When the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) outbreak began, societies responded
differently initially. Popular analyses attribute variations to factors such as political systems,
regime type, and cultural norms (e.g., Jennings 2020; Martin and Walker 2020)—but these
generalizations ignore the processes of mobilizing policymakers and publics in moments of
crises. In comparing Mainland China (hereafter China), Hong Kong (hereafter H.K.), and the
United States (hereafter U.S.), we show the critical role of experts and expertise in initiating
and shaping state and societal responses to COVID-19. We examine the resonance of different
types of expertise as experts along with policymakers and the public try to come up with
policies to contain and mitigate the outbreak.
We ask three specific questions: (1) Who were the COVID-19 experts, (2) How was
expertise mobilized to understand the emerging threat of COVID-19, and (3) How did these
expert statements resonate with policymakers and publics in different political contexts?
Through our three-case comparison, we show how the resonance of expertise as a process
shaped the responses of societies to COVID-19, by enabling experts to see COVID-19 as a
problem and by identifying the sets of policies that could help mitigate and contain COVID19 (McDonnell, Bail, and Tavory 2017). Our study details how the trauma of past epidemics,
particularly, the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) epidemic in 2003 prompted
societies like China and H.K., to act decisively on COVID-19. In our analysis, past experiences
were evoked by experts and shaped the resonance of expertise, highlighting (1) how the past
becomes a cultural object that is used by experts to mobilize stakeholders, and (2) how political
contexts limit the scope of possible actions and determine the configuration of interests for
stakeholders.
To distinguish between different types of expertise, we draw on Lakoff’s (2015b)
distinction of sentinel devices or warnings of impending disaster because of unknowns, and

2

actuarial devices or calculations of risk based on prior events. While in China and H.K., the
SARS experience prompted “SARS experts” to mobilize sentinel devices to push for vigilance
against COVID-19. But the SARS memory was both an effective warning and a challenge to
the state. In China, resonant expertise needed to overcome the authoritarian impulses of local
policymakers that sought to censor warnings from experts, and was achieved after top
policymakers were convinced that COVID-19 was a SARS-like problem. In H.K., resonant
expertise also had to overcome the reluctance of city policymakers to overreact and found an
ally with the public, as civil society mobilized to pressure policymakers to adopt stricter antiepidemic measures. The U.S. similarly had policymakers who were unwilling to recognize
COVID-19 as a growing problem. But with no immediate past experience of disease for experts
to draw on, a wide range of experts mobilized both sentinel and actuarial devices. Amidst the
backdrop of political polarization, different types of expertise resonated selectively with
various audiences, but failed to achieved widespread resonance during the initial months of the
pandemic.

2. Theoretical Framework
Our theoretical framework focuses on past experiences and the relationships between
experts, policymakers, and the public, as well as how expertise becomes resonant with different
stakeholders. We see expertise as central to the network that mobilizes timely and effective
responses to COVID-19. Our starting point is Eyal’s (2013) distinction between experts and
expertise: Experts are “the actors who make claims to jurisdiction over a task” (869); and
expertise involves "networks that link together objects, actors, techniques, devices, and
institutional and spatial arrangements" (864) that are mobilized to accomplish a task. In times
of crisis, which type of expertise is seen as relevant becomes contested (Knowles 2012;
Whooley 2013). To differentiate abstractly between types of expert warnings, we build on

3

Lakoff's (2015b) distinction between sentinel devices and actuarial devices: Sentinel devices
operate on the logic of vigilance, relying on systems of monitoring that flag potential
catastrophic events; actuarial devices operate on the logic of risk management, using past data
and future projections to model potential impact. These devices aid in future-coordination
between stakeholders (Tavory and Eliasoph 2013), and are deployed by experts as
interventions aimed at swaying policymakers and publics (Eyal and Buchholz 2010; Carduff
2015).
As we show, these types of expertise can be mobilized concurrently and past experience
shapes different types of expertise mobilized. More critically, this expertise must become
resonant become impactful. We draw on McDonnel, Bail, and Tavory’s (2017) pragmatic
conceptualization of resonance as not simply congruence with past experience, but as a “the
ability of cultural objects to help actors solve puzzles they face” (2). How the past matters
differ from the path dependency theory where the future is “locked-in” (Pierson 2004); instead
the past matters in an emergent process in which scientific, social, and political concerns are
coproduced (Jasanoff 2004). In other words, expertise does not guarantee resonance: Work
must be done to create resonance that speaks to the concerns of the stakeholders.
This is where past experience comes in. The past becomes a cultural object that is usable
but also mutable and an object of struggle between experts, policymakers, and publics (Sewell
1990; Swidler 1986). Past experience can therefore help facilitate the resonance of expertise
with different stakeholders. For instance, the resonance of a specific type of expertise can be
facilitated by collective memories of past outbreaks, which intersects with individual cognition
and a society’s stock of knowledge, shaping how individuals prioritize and think about
infectious disease (Cerulo 2002; Olick and Robbins 1998; Zerubavel 1997). Similarly, the
resonance of different forms of expertise can be shaped by the institutional repertoires of public
health that were reconfigured by past outbreaks to focus on preparing for the next outbreak

4

(Heymann and Rodier 2004; Lakoff 2015a). In our case, we focused on examining the impacts
of past experience with disease outbreaks on the COVID-19 responses.
Specifically, we highlight the legacy of the 2003 SARS epidemic, which accumulated 5327
cases in China and 1755 in H.K., with 348 and 298 death, respectively, in contrast to 75 cases
and 0 deaths in the U.S. The memory of SARS was salient amongst people in China and H.K.
associating with great social, economic, and political consequences: Both societies suffered
greatly from economic lost, widespread social panic, and damaged international image (Huang
2004; J.-W. Lee and McKibbin 2004). China’s initial response to the SARS was delayed,
lacked transparency, and ineffective, which intensified the epidemic (Huang 2004), but sparked
a host of public health reforms that provided tools that policymakers could deploy in the event
of another epidemic (Mason 2016). The H.K. government’s response to SARS was also marked
by missteps, which left a considerable imprint on the city’s institutions and collective memory
(J.-W. Lee and McKibbin 2004). In contrast, the U.S. did not suffer as much from SARS, and
the case was largely seen as a successful instance where the global health security apparatus
successfully mobilized “the culture of negative asymmetry” to avert disaster (Cerulo 2008,
196). Furthermore, U.S. experts were wary of “overreacting” as the global health security
apparatus system was accused of during the Swine Flu scare of 2009 (Lakoff 2015a: 313).
These collective memories result in a widely recognized concern of another SARS, which
became a powerful resource for expert to raise attention to COVID-19. Despite of the turn to
vigilance in the global community of public health experts, the same urgency, alongside fears
and angers, are not shared by the public without past epidemic collective memory in the U.S.,
making an important analogy that has close cognitive distance with the public unavailable to
vigilant experts in the U.S.
To activate appropriate responses to COVID-19, expertise needs resonate and be useful in
addressing the concerns of the stakeholders. In China, bottom-up expert sentinel warnings that

5

attempted to invoke the SARS memory with the public activated state repression from local
policymakers. Sentinel warnings of a SARS-like virus became resonant when it reached toplevel policymakers who mobilized a robust response to contain COVID-19. SARS memory
was only invoked with the public under a state-managed process. In H.K., experts were critical
of policymakers which they saw as reluctant to act. Sentinel warnings of SARS coming back
became resonant with the public that was also highly distrustful of the government, and civil
society organizations mobilized to pressure policymakers to enact stricter anti-epidemic
measures (see also Wan et al. 2020; Hartley and Jarvis 2020). In the U.S., different media
outlets amplified a wide range of experts who mobilized a variety of sentinel and actuarial
devices to understand COVID-19. This was exacerbated by political polarization as well as the
“crisis of expertise” and the “post-truth moment” (Eyal 2019; Fujimura and Holmes 2019;
Sismondo 2017). This led to the failure in creating a widespread resonance of expertise in the
U.S. during the initial months of the pandemic. The process of resonance is important across
regime types.

3. Data and Methods
We focus on the initial responses to COVID-19, a time of uncertainty when actors were
faced with many unknowns. Our case selection is based on a modified extreme case design
(Seawright 2016). It took H.K. four days between the first death and effective quarantine
regulation, two weeks in China, and months for the U.S. yet largely on voluntary compliance.
We picked out China and the U.S. as they fall on opposite sides of the spectrum in responses.
H.K. was selected as a comparison due to its similarity to China in SARS encounters, but has
been experiencing intense ongoing quest for democracy and distrust of government, which
makes it a priori difficult to predict H.K.’s COVID response and presents us with an
opportunity to investigate the key process behind each society’s search for solutions. It is

6

important to note that we are not comparing these cases in search of a set of underlying
variables that can be generalized to explain response to COVID-19 in all societies. Rather, we
examine the contingencies that enabled certain types of expertise to become resonant in critical
moments and the processes where alliances with key stakeholders were created,
To trace how experts and expertise circulate and resonate at the initial stage of the pandemic
in our three societies, we collected 12507 articles from six popular news sources in China
(Caixin [1597] and Global Times or GT [618]), H.K. (South China Morning Post or SCMP
[2101] and Apple Daily or AD [1452]), and U.S. (New York Times or NYT [6120] and Fox
News [619]) based on their contrasting ideological stances and target audiences. In China,
Caixin is a widely read news source that is known for its relative autonomy from the state,
while GT is a newspaper that frequently takes a nationalist tone in its reporting and editorials.
In H.K., the SCMP is an English language newspaper that is read by the business community,
while AD is a Chinese language tabloid newspaper known for its anti-establishment tendencies.
In the U.S., the NYT is a liberal leaning newspaper, while Fox is known for its conservative
stance. Using media data for comparative analysis is common in studies of resonance
(McDonnell, Bail, and Tavory 2017), expertise (Eyal and Buchholz 2010), and have been
applied for COVID-19 research (Chung et al 2021). We use a set of keywords to search the
media articles that constitute our sample.1 We selected time periods that corresponded to the
initial response of each society: when societies recognized COVID-19 was a problem to be
confronted and settled on a public health intervention. 2 Each author was in charge of the

1

Keywords we used include coronavirus (guanzhuang bingdu), Covid-19, pneumonia (feiyan), plague (wenyi),

outbreak (yiqing), and pandemic (daliuxing).
2

For China, we selected the period from December 1 to February 1, one week after the Wuhan lockdown; for

H.K., we selected the period from December 31 to Feb 29, after mandatory quarantines were imposed on China
and other major hot spots of COVID-19; and for the U.S., where there was no landmark of strict disease control

7

analysis of single case, and we relied on regular discussions over the course of Summer and
Fall 2020 to compare cases and articulate our theoretical framework. We conducted in-depth
readings through our materials. We understand expert statements in the media to be a form of
intervention aimed at swaying the public and policymakers (Eyal and Buchholz 2010). From
there, we also collected social media postings, government reports, and transcripts that
supplement our analysis.

4. Mainland China: Resonant Sentinel Warnings from the Top-down
Although the first COVID-19 case was detected in mid-December 2019 and evidence soon
pointed to the potential for disaster, the Chinese government did not publicly recognize its
severity until the late-January 2020. While institutions that were designed to identify and
respond to outbreaks like COVID-19 failed due to the political pressure, Chinese experts
strategically mobilized the contested memory of SARS as sentinel devices to resonate with
different stakeholders with different consequences: Some experts directed their warnings at the
public were met with repression; others tried to persuade policymakers, particularly those at
higher levels, without necessarily alerting the public. This does not mean resonance with the
public is not important. After public health experts and policymakers achieved consensus and
decided to enforce contain COVID-19, they still needed public cooperation. This was
accomplished through the state’s selective invocation of SARS collective memories.
a. Failed Bottom-up Sentinel Warnings
In mid-December 2019, clinical evidence suggested that a SARS-like virus started
spreading in Wuhan. Despite the implementation of protocols developed after the SARS
epidemic, such as China’s Information System for Infectious Disease Control and Prevention

on the national level aside from social distancing guidelines issued in mid-March, we selected the period from
January 1 to April 30.

8

(CISDCP), their use was suppressed in the early days of COVID-19. During the December,
doctors in Wuhan tried to report cases in CISDCP or notify the public yet were suppressed by
hospital leaders and the local health authority. Records in CISDCP were either deleted or
dismissed.3 Alongside problems in the CISDCP design such as overlapping disease categories
in the reporting system (Wang et al. 2017), there is an important political reason for the
malfunction of this existing reporting system: an infectious disease outbreak might paint the
local government as incompetent and impact the political future of officials. Hospital leaders
and local policymakers put social stability as the top priority, despite the rising worries about
the new SARS.
Wuhan municipal and Hubei provincial authorities tried to repress the information about
the new virus and its severity, while experts – mostly clinical doctors – had little leverage.
Doctors are managed by hospitals, which are governed by local health authorities. The local
health authorities are under the supervision of two institutions: the central health authorities
and local government. In practice, the latter often has more power, and in this case, decided to
censor the information of a new virus.4 People who spread the warnings about the new virus
were disciplined. On December 30, 2019, Li Wenliang, a doctor at Wuhan Central Hospital
that later became known as the “whistleblower,” saw a test result that confirmed the existence
of SARS-like cases and tried to warn his friends and colleagues. However, the connection
between SARS and COVID-19 that Li and many other doctors with clinical expertise made did
not automatically resonate with others in success. In contrast, reactivating SARS memories to
the public without convincing the authorities first was considered to be problematic and may

3

信娜, 王小, 孙爱民, and 辛颖. 2020. “传染病网络直报系统投资了 7.3 亿，为何失灵了 28 天?” Caijing.

February 25, 2020; 萧辉, 包志明, and 高昱. 2020. “武汉疫情中的中南医院.” Caixin. April 12, 2020.
4

王端. 2020. “管轶：新冠肺炎发展曲线与 SARS 高度相似.” Caixin, January 20, 2020.

9

result in social panic and instability, which may impact the political career of local officials.
Li’s was admonished by the local police for “spreading rumor”, a common accusation in China
when news unconfirmed by official sources arouses widespread public attention and
indignation (Jiang 2016). Leaders of the Wuhan Central Hospital even forbade doctors to wear
personal protective equipment (PPE), which latter caused a high casualty rate among doctors
there.5 No news articles were published about the emerging virus while how people who spread
rumors about SARS received punishment were circulated in the national media. Social media
posts on related topics were limited and constantly censored (Lu, Pan, and Xu 2021), indicating
these early attempts of warnings and resonance failed to reach the majority of the public.
On December 31, the Wuhan health authority finally released a statement, acknowledging
the virus’s existence but still claiming it was preventable and controllable, downplaying its
severity. Even after this, Chinese experts rarely appeared in the media before January 20, when
the Chinese central government started to recognize the problem. Health authorities
monopolized most of the information about the emerging pandemic.
b. Making the Sentinel Warning Resonate with the Right Audiences
When the SARS-like cases were detected, not all Wuhan experts were alert and many failed
to elicit an effective response from policymakers due to the political barrier. However, some
experts skillfully sent out sentinel warnings to policymakers while taking concrete steps to
safeguard healthcare workers. Wang Xinghuan, the head of Wuhan Zhongnan Hospital since
2015 who was a doctor in a Guangzhou hospital during SARS in 2003, was one of these rare
exceptions. When Wang received evidence showing the similarity between the new virus and
SARS virus on January 2, 2020, “I felt something horrible was going to happen, SARS is

5

包志明, 覃建行, 高昱, and 萧辉. 2020. “李文亮所在医院为何医护人员伤亡惨重？.” Caixin. March 10,

2020.

10

back.”6 The combination of the virology evidence, his experiences of the SARS epidemic, and
his tacit knowledge of Chinese politics pushed him to prepare for the terrible implications
suggested by the SARS analogy and acted fast. Unlike Li Wenliang, Wang did not spread his
concerns and speculations publicly. Instead, he mobilized the hospital to train employees,
reorganized the hospital space, and prepared more medical equipment – all according to the
potential needs of another SARS epidemic before the government sent out any signal.7
Wang also actively tried to mobilize local officials to ally with him by invoking some more
targeted memories of SARS. He made a list of events in the 2003 SARS outbreak and sent
them to government officials with a note saying that “the similarity is astonishing” in early
January to remind the authorities how devastating SARS was. He specifically highlighted the
negative consequences for government officials who hid the SARS epidemic information: the
mayor of Beijing and the minister of health were discharged due to their lax response. Wang
aimed to ally with officials who wanted to preserve their political futures, although his efforts
were not fully successful – the local authority still refused to draw the connection of the new
virus to SARS. The best response Wang got from local government officials was a question
“Are things really that bad?” while others were warnings for him to not speak out. 8
Additionally, Wang tried to relay local epidemic information to national experts and the
central government. When Zhong Nanshan and Li Lanjuan, experts in charge of the COVID19 investigation were sent down by the central government on January 18, Wang used his
personal connections to reach out to Li Lanjuan and Zhong in their hotel to convince them of
the similarity between SARS and the new virus. He went over the local authorities, who still

6

萧辉, 包志明, and 高昱. 2020.

7

徐炳楠, and 高翔. 2020. “多点战疫, 担当救治骑兵” Health News, March 30, 2020.

8

萧辉, 包志明, and 高昱. 2020.

11

wanted to downplay the problem and warned Wuhan experts to watch for their words. At that
point, local authorities convinced two previous expert teams that the virus is preventable and
controllable by pressuring local medical experts.
Compared to Li, Wang’s attempts to mobilize different actors without endangering himself
while also successfully prepared his hospital for the upcoming pandemic demonstrated the
allowed mechanisms in the existing system for expertise to cast an influence in the pandemic.
Even when the SARS memories found resonance among public health and clinical experts,
they needed to carefully navigate the political landscape to avoid being classified as rumor
spreaders and work within the political system to find ways to make the SARS analogy resonate
with the political power. The collective memory of past disasters does not speak for itself and
can be mobilized for different purposes. Different stakeholders struggled for the interpretation
and mobilization of past disease memories, which became increasingly salient as the pandemic
received national recognition after January 20, 2020.
c. State Managed Resonance with the Public: SARS or Like-SARS?
The turning point of China’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic happened on January
20, 2020. The national expert team went back to Beijing that day and confirmed to the central
authorities that the new virus could be a serious problem. Xi Jinping spoke about the outbreak
for the first time, and Zhong was interviewed on national TV, stating that the virus is
transmissible between humans. Once the central government acknowledged the problem, for a
country with vivid past epidemic memory, actuarial devices were not needed to convince others.
In three days, social media posts about COVID-19 increased more than 100 times (Lu, Pan,
and Xu 2021). The task now is to contain the outbreak and mobilize the appropriate public
response, invoking the “ideal” SARS narrative to evoke vigilant responses without social panic
or placing blame on the government.

12

Zhong Nanshan is a Guangzhou-based pulmonologist who made a reputation after the
SARS epidemic as a “SARS hero.” Zhong gained this reputation not only because he developed
effective treatment for SARS, but most importantly, challenged public health officials over the
severity of SARS epidemic and urged for more transparency at the beginning of the outbreak.
After SARS, Chinese central government and media framed his challenges as objections to
corrupt local officials and honored him as a SARS hero. During the COVID-19 outbreak,
Zhong was considered as one of the most credible experts due to his SARS experience and was
the most cited expert in the media.
SARS memories were strategically reactivated by Zhong in the media. In Zhong’s January
20 interview, SARS was highlighted. However, he carefully noted the differences between the
novel coronavirus and SARS, trying not to embarrass the Wuhan authority for punishing
doctors who claimed “SARS is back” in the early stage:
It is natural to connect the coronavirus with SARS. Yet the current coronavirus is
different from SARS […] It’s a virus of completely different nature […] Compared
with SARS, the infectivity is not so strong, and the toxicity is not so great.
At the same time, Zhong emphasized the uncertainty of the virus:
The infection with the new coronavirus has just begun and is still in the climbing stage.
As for what will happen in the future, the current case fatality rate cannot be
comprehensive, it depends on its development ... so we still must be vigilant.9
Zhong’s carefully calibrated statement shows that when facing COVID-19, SARS memory
must be addressed in China, even though it also refers to the government’s mishandling of
SARS. And yet his careful reference to the SARS memory left room for him and the authority
to adjust their assessments. This “SARS-like but not SARS” reference was common among

9

陈宝成, and 赵今朝. 2020. “钟南山：新型冠状病毒肺炎肯定人传人.” Caixin, January 20, 2020

13

experts on media, who mostly had clinical backgrounds. This comparison meant to alert the
public and policymakers, while preventing social panic and avoiding reminders of the
government failure during SARS. After all, the multifaceted SARS collective memories could
be both a facilitator and barrier for mobilizing ideal public resonance and response. On one
hand, SARS memories represent how China can control the outbreak with intensive efforts,
vigilance, and public collaboration. On the other hand, SARS memories are connected with
how the Chinese government hid key information at the beginning and the devastation of
society, which may cause dissatisfaction toward the government or social panic.
Emphasizing the former to mobilize the public without raising the latter aspect of SARS
memories was a big challenge. This careful framing is salient in newspapers that are closed to
the state, like GT. Although SARS was constantly mentioned, only how the Chinese
government effectively controlled it, such as building Xiaotangshan Hospital in a week,10 was
discussed in GT. Similar to Zhong’s “SARS-but-not-SARS” language, GT emphasized Zhong
and other experts’ judgment on the virus’s relevantly weak toxicity and stressed that China
today differs from the China during SARS. An editorial article published in late January argued
that the government’s delayed response did not mean that it was “hiding something,” but the
result of being “accurate and steady.” After all, China has “learned from the SARS experiences
and has the capacity to control new diseases”.11 However, what were the lessons from SARS?
GT never explicitly stated them, as elaborating on what lessons learned would inevitably lead
to the discussions of what mistakes made at first. Only when the Hubei provincial and Wuhan

10

李司坤, 陈青青, 万琳, and 李昊. 2020. “小汤山启用引发关注.” GT. March 17, 2020

11

环球时报. 2020. “防控好新型肺炎，让春节更祥和". GT, January 20, 2020.

14

municipal government leaders were discharged in February did GT implicitly mentioned
similar governmental failure happened in SARS.12
However, critical media outlets and experts outside of China were more willing to make a
direct comparison to SARS and to eschew the balance of expertise and politics that experts like
Zhong were bound by. Guan Yi, a virologist from the University of Hong Kong, explicitly drew
a connection between COVID-19 and SARS in a January 20 interview with Caixin, not only
about the virological similarities, but also how the government covered up information and the
disastrous consequences. Guan’s warning became even stronger when he returned from a twoday Wuhan-trip on January 23, when, with his embodied SARS experience, he emotionally
claimed that the upcoming pandemic will not be like SARS, but much worse than SARS:
Wuhan cannot control the outbreak… I can say that I have experienced a hundred
battles… But for this new coronavirus, I feel extremely powerless. There is no way to
compare it with the SARS epidemic... Most of them [previous diseases] were
controllable, but this time I am scared.13
Although different with Zhong’s balanced stand, Guan and Zhong’s comments were both
on sentinel warnings without complicated models, as these sentinel arguments are enough to
resonate society with a past disaster. Discourses allying with Zhong’s overwhelmingly
surpassed Guan’s take of the COVID-19. However, the central government’s sudden
accelerated move of the disease control showed that policymakers at the top seemed to be
persuaded by this “more-than-SARS” warning. At midnight on January 23, Wuhan suddenly
announced a strict lockdown. Seventeen cities in Hubei province followed two days later.
China’s powerful state machine was finally fully operating to combat the disease.

12

樊巍, 杨诚, 崔萌, 李珍, 青木, 叶蓝, 陈一, 王伟, and 柳玉鹏. 2020. “中国抗疫之战迎来新局面” GT.

February 14, 2020
13

王端, and 文思敏. 2020. “管轶：去过武汉请自我隔离.” Caixin, January 23, 2020.

15

5. Hong Kong: Sentinel Warnings Resonating with the Public
H.K.’s past experiences with SARS was crucial in its response to Covid-19. But sentinel
warnings did not resonate with policymakers initially to activate the toolkits left by SARS, and
experts openly criticized policymakers for not adopting stronger anti-epidemic measures.
Instead, expert warnings of a “SARS-like virus” that carried catastrophic implications
resonated with the public that was already distrustful of policymakers and motivated parts of
civil society, such as nurses and doctors unions, to go on strike to pressure policymakers to
take on stronger policies to combat COVID-19. Policymakers eventually relented and heeded
the advice of critical SARS experts, and imposed border restrictions and quarantines for new
arrivals.
a. Critical SARS Experts
The SARS Expert Committee Report completed in October 2003 with recommendations
for future outbreaks was frequently cited by policymakers during the initial weeks of the
COVID-19 outbreak. Experts prominent in the media during COVID-19 were active during
SARS and were referred to as “SARS experts”. This is similar to the case in China, and in
contrast with the diversity of experts in the U.S. Experts belonging to the H.K. government’s
COVID-19 expert advisory group formed on January 25 included Yuen Kwok-yung, David
Hui, Gabriel Leung, and Keiji Fukuda: Yuen was a microbiologist who helped identify the
SARS coronavirus; Hui was a clinician at the Prince of Wales Hospital, which was at the
epicenter of the SARS outbreak; and Leung is a noted epidemiologist, who helped track the
spread of SARS. Unlike the Chinese and U.S. cases, experts adopted critical stances publicly
during the early phase of the outbreak. Despite their role as government advisors, these experts
spoke out against what they perceived to be the policymaker’s slow and inadequate response.
These experts advocated measures that they perceived to have helped during SARS. Their
advice includes wearing masks, setting up quarantine facilities, retrofitting isolation wards in

16

public hospitals, and border health checks. Ho Pak-leung, a microbiologist at the University of
Hong Kong, was an early proponent of mask usage as early as January 9:
“The public should wear disposable surgical masks in crowded places,” Ho said. “They
should also clean their hands frequently.” He added it was important to take note of good
toilet hygiene, as according to past experiences in SARS and MERS, infected patients’
urine and feces could carry lots of coronaviruses that could be spread to others.14
These warnings were given ahead of guidance issued by U.S.-based experts, who were still
waiting for evidence in support of these precautionary measures. The SARS experts therefore
did not simply draw on established science to guide their advice to policymakers and the public,
but rather, relied on the experience of combatting SARS to help contain COVID-19.
b. Sentinel Warnings of a SARS-like Virus
Even though H.K. policymakers initiated several measures to monitor the potential import
and spread of the novel coronavirus, these critical experts continued to push for stronger
measures. When news of cases of “pneumonia of unknown origins” broke in late December
2019, H.K. experts compared the mystery illness to SARS. While H.K. policymakers activated
the “serious response level” on January 4, policymakers faced criticism for doing too little.
H.K. policymakers came to know about the COVID-19 outbreak in Wuhan through these
experts. In an interview, Yuen recounted the role of informal information sharing with contacts
in China:
On Dec 31, 2019, I heard from some mainland researchers that a new virus had emerged,
and it was suspected to be a SARS-like virus. It sounded like trouble. I notified the [H.K.]
government as soon as I got the word. […] By the evening, the Hong Kong government
had already convened a small group of experts, after which the Department of Health asked

14

Cheung, Elizabeth. 2020. “Wuhan Pneumonia: What We Know about the New Virus and How You Can Stop

Yourself Getting Sick.” SCMP, January 9, 2020.

17

the hospital authorities, customs and family doctors to step up health surveillance with a
raft of measures. We did not know how serious the virus was at that time, nor did we know
it was a new type of coronavirus, but because the virus appeared in the winter season and
we were told it was related to SARS, we decided to be very cautious, and the Hong Kong
government took our opinions seriously.15
While policymakers heeded Yuen’s initial warning, Yuen and other critical experts would
come to criticize the policymakers for not doing enough to prevent a local outbreak. Reports
in early January also latched onto the finding that the new virus was “80 percent the same as
SARS,” stressing the need to be vigilant.16 While the warnings did not achieve the level of
resonance that was desired with policymakers, the analogy of COVID-19 to SARS and its
implications for taking stricter public health measures resonated with the media. Yuen
mobilized this comparison with SARS in warning the public, in remarks to the media on
January 21:
Now we can see infections of family members and in hospitals. What we are worried most
about is a large outbreak in the community that may cause a situation like what we
experienced during SARS... We are worried that the super-spreading event might have
occurred already… we need to see if sustained human-to-human transmission has
happened.17
The potential for super-spreader events and community spread was echoed by other experts
in the media during this early period. The massive flow of people accompanied with the

15

Li, Isabelle, and Zuoyan Zhao. 2020. “Q&A with HK Microbiologist Yuen Kwok-Yung Who Helped Confirm

Coronavirus’ Human Spread.” The Straits Times, March 10, 2020.
16

AD. 2020. “基因圖譜網上曝光

武漢肺炎首宗死亡 病毒八成似沙士.” AD, January 12, 2020.

17

Cheung, Elizabeth. 2020. “Wuhan Virus a Step Closer to Full-Blown Epidemic, Expert Warns.” SCMP, January

21, 2020.

18

Chinese New Year festivities at the end of January further exacerbated the worry of experts
that those returning to or arriving from China would import cases of the mystery illness.
Other experts also openly criticized policymakers. Hui urged the government to step up
checks at the border and to punish those who lie on health declaration forms. Ho, the outspoken
microbiologist, on January 23 sounded the warning in stark terms: “Hong Kong needs to wake
up. We all need to wake up. The situation right now is very severe.” 18 Leung, the
epidemiologist, was later interviewed on a local radio show on February 5, and was heavily
critical of the indecisiveness of policymakers and the half-baked measures that they had rolled
out thus far:
Was it too late? If we are closing down the checkpoints, we should have done that in early
January… The best public health measures should be rolled out in one go, rather than being
announced in stages, especially when the stages were just days apart…. Can we have
stronger measures to contain the disease? The health declaration was done on an honor
system, but was it enough?... Some medical experts are pessimistic, they think all we can
do is just mitigate the situation, not to roll out measures to contain it… I am not sure
whether we are in the mitigation or containment stage, but I know we are not in an early
containment stage.19
These criticisms on the government’s disease containment efforts resonated with a public
that was already skeptical of the H.K. government and the Mainland authorities (see also Wan
et al. 2020; Hartley and Jarvis 2020). This mistrust is rooted in their mishandling of SARS in

18

Siu, Phila. 2020. “China Coronavirus: Hong Kong Officials ‘Not Doing Enough to Stop Spread.’” SCMP,

January 23, 2020.
19

Cheung, Tony, and Gary Cheung. 2020. “Coronavirus: Quarantine for All Arriving in Hong Kong from

Mainland China.” SCMP, February 5, 2020.

19

2003, the perceived deference of the H.K. government to Mainland authorities, as well as the
political upheavals in H.K. in 2019 over the Extradition Law Amendment Bill.
Distrust in Chinese authorities manifested itself in models and actuarial devices aimed at
estimating the disease spread within China, rather than projections of future spread in H.K..
Leung, the epidemiologist, estimated on January 27 that there were some 25,630 symptomatic
patients in Wuhan and that the number would double in 6.2 days. This was in contrast to
numbers put out by the Mainland authorities, which announced that the number of confirmed
cases across the country was 2,800. Leung did not mince words:
We have to be prepared, that this particular epidemic may be about to become a global
epidemic…. Substantial, draconian measures limiting population mobility should be taken
immediately… So, the question is not whether or not to do more… The question really is,
how can we make sure that it is feasible, implementable and enforceable.20
The use of these models had two effects. First, Leung’s model showed the need for early
intervention if H.K. did not want to see a massive outbreak. Second, the contrast between
Leung’s numbers and official numbers coming out of Wuhan and Beijing would exacerbated
public distrust of the Mainland authorities.
c. Resonance from the Bottom-Up: Mobilizing Civil Society
These warnings from H.K.’s critical experts resonated with the public. Reporting in AD—
an outlet known for its criticism of the H.K. and Chinese governments—was largely skeptical
of information from Chinese officials and experts, stoking fears and anxiety about a SARSlike cover up amongst the public.21 Reporting in early January in AD was often in the genre of
undercover reporting, where journalists showed up in Wuhan in hopes of probing hospital

20

Ting, Victor. 2020. “‘Draconian Measures’ Urged as Research Estimates 44,000 Virus Cases in Wuhan.”

SCMP, January 27, 2020.
21

For example, AD. 2020. “全城恐慌瘋搶口罩板藍根.”AD, January 2, 2020.

20

workers, train station staff, and pharmacists about the “actual situation.”22 Rumors on Chinese
social medias were also cited in these news reports, and warnings about not to repeat the
mistake 17 years ago of trusting Mainland authorities were commonplace. 23 A January 3 AD
report described H.K. residents looking for surgical and N-95 masks only to find that
pharmacies had increased prices by over 30% and that some pharmacies had sold out of medical
masks. 24 A January 7 SCMP report also described panic buying of face masks and price
gouging, because of widespread anxieties amongst the public of an impending outbreak in the
city. 25 Resonating with the widespread public distrust and perceptions that the local
government to be too afraid to contradict Chinese authorities.
Professional organizations and unions took a leading role in exerting pressure on
policymakers. Unlike similar groups in China that faced consequences for speaking out and
weakened unions in the U.S., these professional groups held sway over the provision of key
public goods and services necessary in combating the epidemic. During SARS, the city’s
medical staff were unprepared to deal with the infectious disease, with many succumbing to
SARS. Eager to prevent history from repeating itself, doctors and nurses, largely from the
Hospital Authority’s public hospitals, organized quickly. Alfred Wong, a spokesman for a
political advocacy organization in the medical sector Medecins Inspires, was quoted as saying
on January 19 in SCMP, that H.K. needed to “stand firm and demand more information from

22

AD. 2020. “春運旅客塞爆 車站零防疫少人戴口罩.” AD, January 11, 2020.

23

AD. 2020. “武漢個案急增當局稱情況「可控」深圳嚴陣收 17 疑似染疫者.” AD, January 20, 2020.

24

AD. 2020. “市民撲口罩部份藥房斷貨.” AD, January 3, 2020.

25

Zhang, Karen. 2020. “Hong Kong’s N95 Stocks Low amid Wuhan Mystery Virus Fears.” SCMP, January 7,

2020.

21

China… This is a key period for H.K. to prevent the spread.26 Even the U.S. a whole ocean
away requires travelers from Wuhan to fill out health declarations. H.K. should have higher
contact with Mainland authorities, we should be more well prepared.” Thousands of medical
staff represented by the newly formed Hospital Authority Employees Alliance in H.K. would
go on a 5 day “anti-epidemic strike” in early February, demanding the government close the
city’s borders and supply more PPE. Carrie Lam, H.K.’s Chief Executive, ruled out the
proposals by labor unions to close the border, calling this “inappropriate and impractical”.27
Other allied unions, such as the Flight Attendants’ Union representing Cathay Pacific air
stewards, echoed the concerns of medical staff and also called for their company to halt flights
to and from China, threatening to strike on February 2. On February 4, Cathay Pacific
responded to these concerns and announced that it would cut 90% of its China services, while
also modifying in flight service protocols to reduce the risk of on-board transmission. This
category of lay and professional experts who had outsider knowledge on the potential impact
of an epidemic was featured prominently in news coverage during the end of January and
beginning of February.
Existing political anger propelled the wider public to find resonance in more drastic
measures aside from unions and workplace actions. Parents United, a concern group pressuring
the government to suspend classes, noted that many parents were “frustrated by the bureau’s
‘slow response’ to the outbreak.” 28 Eventually, Sophia Chan, H.K.’s Health Secretary,

26

Low, Zoe. 2020. “China Coronavirus: Hong Kong Urged to Step up Measures as New Cases Suspected.”

SCMP, January 19, 2020.
27

Lum, Alvin. 2020. “Hong Kong leader adopts advice from medical experts – but draws line at closing border

with mainland China.” SCMP, January 25, 2020.
28

Chan, Ho-him. 2020. “Pressure Mounts on Education Bureau to Suspend Classes after Holiday.” SCMP,

January 24, 2020.

22

admitted that existing bans on Hubei travelers was “not 100 per cent effective” and that the
government was considering more drastic action, but needed to consult with the Mainland
authorities before implementing border closures. 29 More radical action was pursued by
protesters, such as burning objects and throwing debris into the East Rail line, which connects
Kowloon to the Shenzhen border. 30 Explosive devices were also detonated at the Caritas
Medical Center in Cheung Sha Wan, and a message from the perpetrators was posted
anonymously on Telegram, saying “We will act on our word. Go on strike immediately if you
don’t want to die. We will take more actions to call for the closing of borders.” 31 It is unclear
how these extreme actions factored into the thinking of policymakers. Nonetheless, the
pressure from professional organizations and unions helped convince policymakers in H.K. to
adopt stricter border checks and quarantine measures for new arrivals in the city by midFebruary. The resonance of sentinel warnings with the public played a critical role in shaping
H.K.’s response to Covid-19.

6. United States: Diversified Warnings, Diversified Resonance
The U.S. case stands out from China and H.K. due to the high degree of political
polarization. Furthermore, without the experience of a recent disastrous disease, past disease
memories in other countries could not serve as a powerful warning for the U.S. public. As
COVID-19 entered the U.S., there was no dominant consensus regarding its implications

29

Chan, Ho-him. 2020. “H.K. health minister admits Hubei entry ban ‘not 100% effective’, ahead of meeting to

discuss new measures against contagion.” SCMP, January 27, 2020.
30

Leung, Kanis. 2020. “Hong Kong Protesters Disrupt Railway, Declare ‘Dawn of Anti-Epidemic’ Action.”

SCMP, January 29, 2020.
31

Cheung, Tony, and Christy Leung. 2020. “Police Suspect Hospital Bomb Linked to Hong Kong Protests.”

SCMP, January 27, 2020.

23

among public health experts, leading to the contested use of sentinel and actuarial devices.
Even when severe consequences were almost certain, the lack of an obvious analogy led to the
reliance on modeling and future predictions. The diversity of pandemic experts opened the
door to selective mobilization of expertise that resonated differently with actors located in
various positions on the political spectrum. Although sentinel warnings were raised by experts
in the U.S. at different times, this form of expertise failed to achieve widespread resonance.

a. Diversified Resonance Under Different Political Interests
Messages from public health experts achieved different levels of resonance with actors in
various positions on the political spectrum, and political actors enlisted different experts to
advance their political positions. Important discrepancies in media coverage only appeared
after the strict measures like quarantine and travel restrictions against China were set in place
in late January. Public health experts did not dispute the necessity of these measures at the time
and mobilized sentinel warnings. Nancy Messonnier, director of the National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(hereby CDC), when justifying the first federal quarantine order in 50 years, said “While we
recognize this is an unprecedented action, we are facing an unprecedented health threat.” 32
Anthony Fauci, director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, also
highlighted uncertainty when justifying the precautionary actions taken in late January, “Unlike
influenza, which is fairly predictable in terms of infection and mortality… there was not the
same certainty about the rate and path of the coronavirus transmission”33.

32

Rabin, Roni Caryn Rabin and Denise Grady. 2020. “195 Quarantined in California After Fleeing Coronavirus

Epicenter”. NYT, January 31, 2020.
33

Michael Corkery and Annie Karni. 2020. “Trump Administration Restricts Entry Into U.S. From China”. NYT,

January 31, 2020.

24

These sentinel warnings achieved different levels of resonance across media outlets.
Amongst conservative commentators, the strict measures fit well with preexisting antagonistic
sentiments against China, and served as a diversion from the impeachment of then President
Trump. In late January, Fox News often featured “China hawks” and Republican Senators
known for mistrust of the Chinese government. These commentators described China as on the
“brink of a real disorder”34 and leaned towards strict measures to prevent the spread of Covid19 to the U.S. During an interview, Republican Senator Tom Cotton suggested stopping air
travel from China, stating that: “I suspect that months from now… when people look back at
this time, coronavirus will be considered the bigger story than impeachment.” 35 Fox hosts
suggested that the new virus could be worse than SARS, due to the two week incubation period,
and compared the pandemic potential of Covid-19 to the Spanish flu36. There was no sign of
dismissing public health experts as being overly cautius among Fox hosts at this early stage.
Before the travel ban was announced in late January, Fox host Hannity invited Fauci to join his
show to discuss the severity of cases in China and highly praised Fauci’s expertise, “I’ve
watched you over many decades and I know this is your wheelhouse” 37 . Yet, the vigilant
attitude was directed to countries other than the U.S. While the virus was described as causing
terrible consequences in China and other “weak health systems”, for the U.S., “the flu… is a

34

Fox. 2020. Fox News Channel: Tucker Carlson Tonight. February 3, 2020.

35

Fox. 2020. Tucker Carlson Tonight. January 27 2020.

36

Some examples: January 29, Fox News: The Five; January 28, Fox News: The Five; January 28, Tucker Carlson

Tonight.
37

Fox. 2020. Hannity, January 27 2020.

25

much bigger threat than coronavirus” according to a physician commonly interviewed on Fox
and Fox correspondent38.
NYT took on a different tone that formed stark contrast to Fox News. As a prestigious liberal
media outlet, NYT highlighted issues such as human rights and xenophobia. While NYT also
reported the cover-up of Chinese government and the severity of the pandemic in China, the
NYT also reported on the racism and xenophobia experienced by the Chinese diaspora early
on39 and also warned in opinion pieces against Trump’s xenophobic instinct to overreact40.
Additionally, NYT opinion pieces featured psychologists warning against irrational instincts to
overreact. It was argued that influenza is more serious than COVID-19, although without the
American-exceptionalism in the Fox argument:
The virus had killed about 1,100 worldwide and infected around a dozen in the United
States… but a much more common illness, influenza, kills about 400,000 people every
year… the metrics of public health might put the flu alongside or even ahead of the new
coronavirus for sheer deadliness… there is a lesson, psychologists and public health experts
say… it illustrates the unconscious biases in how human beings think about risk.41

38

Fox. 2020. Tucker Carlson Tonight. January 30 2020. Other examples:

Fox. 2020. Fox News: Your

World with Neil Cavuto. January 28 2020.
39

Joseph Goldstein and Jeffrey E. Singer. 2020. “Coronavirus in New York: Lunar New Year Events Canceled

Over Fears” NYT. January 29, 2020. Motoko Rich. 2020. “As Coronavirus Spreads, So Does Anti-Chinese
Sentiment” NYT. January 31. James Barron. 2020. “Coronavirus in N.Y.Without Chinese Tourists, Business
Sags”. NYT. February 4, 2020.
40

Crowley, Michael. 2020. “Health Experts Worry Trump May Overreact to Epidemic.” NYT. February 11, 2020.

41

Fisher, Max. 2020. “Coronavirus ‘Hits All the Hot Buttons’ for How We Misjudge Risk.” NYT, February 13,

2020.

26

An editorial by another psychologist made a similar argument that the fear stoked by the virus
toll would make people “more susceptible to embracing fake claims.”42 A journalist from a
travel industry news company, an industry that had an interest in maintaining borders open
with China, wrote an opinions piece titled “Who Says It’s Not Safe to Travel to China?”,
arguing against the travel ban and described the motivation behind it as “doesn’t appear to be
evidence”43. It should be noted that most of NYT’s news reports attempted to present a “balance”
of differing expert opinions, and thus featured both the actuarial and sentinel expertise. The
argument that COVID-19 would become a pandemic and spread like H1N1 was raised as early
as February 244. However, a significant amount of opinion articles written by a wide range of
experts, including physicians, frequent NYT contributors, and psychologists, published in this
period leaned towards an actuarial stance, and even when articles argued for caution, they
usually highlighted the importance of keeping calm, washing hands and expressed reservation
towards face masks, in other words, not deviating much from life as usual45.
In summary, although in the very early period both NYT and Fox News deferred to the
experts, Fox News was more supportive of a sentinel attitude while NYT leaned towards an
actuarial attitude, both of which resonated with the existing political interests of the medias.
The sides would soon change.

42

DeSteno, David. 2020. “Coronavirus Fear.” NYT, February 11, 2020.

43

Spinks, Rosie. 2020. “Who Says It’s Not Safe to Travel to China?” NYT. February 5, 2020.

44

McNeil Jr., Donald G. “Wuhan Coronavirus Looks Increasingly Like a Pandemic, Experts Say” NYT. February

2, 2020.
45

Farhad Manjoo. 2020. “Beware the Pandemic Panic” NYT. January 29, 2020; Elisabeth Rosenthal.2020.“How

to Avoid the Coronavirus? Wash Your Hands” NYT. January 30th,2020. Knvul Sheikh, Derek Watkins, Jin Wu
and Mika Gröndahl. 2020.“How Bad Will the Crisis Get?”NYT. February 2, 2020; Aaron Carroll. 2020. “Health
Lessons That Go Beyond the Coronavirus Epidemic” NYT. February 11, 2020.

27

b. Making the Serious Warnings Resonant: It’s Like A Bad Flu
The debates of expertise became more public and dramatic as the virus began to spread in
the U.S. With no lived memories of past catastrophes available, the task of making strict public
health measures acceptable to the public became more difficult. SARS was invoked by U.S.
experts and media outlets, but this comparison did not resonate with the public. In late January
Fauci devoted an article comparing SARS-COV-2 with SARS-COV and MERS in a
professional journal (Paules, Marston, and Fauci 2020). In the early presentations of COVID19 in the U.S. media, when COVID-19 was largely outside of the U.S., SARS was mentioned
quite often by both Fox and NYT. However, when concerning the U.S., economic expert Larry
Kudlow described that like SARS, COVID-19 is a “Chinese pandemic” unlikely to impact the
U.S. economy 46 . This sentiment was shared by Marc Siegel, a physician and a Fox News
contributor, describing flu as more worrisome than the new coronavirus in the U.S. 47Although
NYT did not share the American exceptionalism sentiment, in this early period, SARS was
sometimes presented as a positive example that “SARS-like scare” could turn out to be a “blip
in epidemic history.”48
The sacrifices made and horror experienced in China and H.K. during SARS to make the
elimination of SARS possible was not part of the U.S. experience. There were no obvious
implications regarding the pending community spread of a new coronavirus in the U.S. The
experts mobilizing different forms of expertise provided various interpretations for what it

46

Fox. 2020. Live Event. January 29, 2020.

47

Fox News Channel: Tucker Carlson Tonight. January 29, 2020.

48

Dan Werb, “To Understand the Wuhan Coronavirus, Look to the Epidemic Triangle”. NYT. January 30, 2020.

Denise Grady. 2020. “As Coronavirus Explodes in China, Countries Struggle to Control Its Spread”. NYT.
January 31, 2020. Farhad Manhoo, “Beware the Pandemic Panic”.NYT. Jan 29,2020. Fox.2020. Live Event,
January 29, 2020.

28

would mean to the U.S.. Similar to the previous stage, this difference would be picked up and
amplified by the media outlets on different sides of the political spectrum. However, the media
stance regarding sentinel and actuarial devices switched as the Trump administration leaned
towards an actuarial approach once the pandemic had spread widely within the U.S..
On February 25, Messonnier issued a sentinel warning that community spread of COVID19 was almost certain, proposing measures like social distancing, closing schools, and working
from home.49 While the NYT article covering Messonnier’s statements was sympathetic to her
general judgement, there was no reference to past catastrophic disease memories. Although
Anne Schuchat, principal deputy director of the CDC, agreed with this judgment, she compared
the expectations to a bad flu year and the 2009 swine flu, “I think to help Americans frame
what to expect, it’s helpful to think about a bad flu year, or even the 2009 pandemic”.50 She
also appeared during Fox News’ coverage of White House briefings, saying that the
coronavirus “spreads in a similar way to the common cold or to influenza… everyday sensible
measures that we tell people to do every year with the flu are important.. not very exciting
measures. but really important…”51. In the White House press briefing covered by Fox, flu had
7 mentions whereas SARS had no mention. The implications of this comparison were
drastically different from the catastrophic comparisons to SARS that the Chinese and H.K.
public were exposed to.
Interpretations of these sentinel warnings differed drastically even amongst commentators
within the same media outlet. On February 25, after quoting the stern warning of Messonnier,

49

Belluck, Pam, and Noah Weiland. 2020. “C.D.C. Officials Warn of Coronavirus Outbreaks in the U.S.” NYT,

February 25, 2020.
50

Rev. 2020. “Transcript: U.S. Health Officials on Response to Coronavirus February 25, 2020.” Rev. February

25, 2020.
51

Fox. 2020. Fox News: Special Report with Brett Baier. February 26, 2020.

29

Fox host Carlson cited a Harvard epidemiologist that predicted the coronavirus as likely
uncontainable and went on to criticize that “America is not ready for this or for any major
epidemic… Thanks to the CDC’s flawed rollout of coronavirus testing”.52 However, on the
Ingraham Show in Fox News, after showing a clip of Messonnier’s warning, they immediately
shifted to expressing cynicism over China’s disease control without discussing Messonnier’s
message at all. Fox News also interviewed Fauci on the same day. While Fauci was optimistic
that the virus “has been contained very successfully” in the U.S., he also stressed the unknown,
saying that “the chances of there being spillover into our country… a pandemic… you have to
prepare for it.”53. However, the conclusion that Fox host Baier drew was, “Do what you always
do” 54 . The voice of the experts was selectively emphasized and the sentinel warning
downplayed. Meanwhile, forming a contrast with Fox News, NYT highlighted the sentinel
warning by heavily covering Messonnier’s message at the beginning of one article, mentioning
Fauci at the bottom as “other federal health officials were trying to tamp down concerns”55.
The consequences of a highly contagious new coronavirus about to spread in the
communities was open to contending interpretations that differed between sentinel and
actuarial leanings. Without a vivid lived experience of past disasters, the sentinel warnings did
not achieve widespread common resonance in the U.S. as it did in China and H.K. Expert
statements could be selectively mobilized for political purposes: which aspect of the experts’
voice got to represent the future was intermingled conveniently with political concerns. Even

52

Fox News, Tucker Carlson Tonight, February 25, 2020.

53

Fox. 2020. Special Report with Brett Baier, February 25 2020.

54

Fox. 2020. Fox News: Special Report with Brett Baier. February 25 2020.

55

Belluck, Pam, and Noah Weiland. “It 'Could be Bad': Viral Crisis in U.S. is Deemed Likely”. NYT. February

26, 2020.

30

when experts expressed uncertainty, the analogies and interpretations referring to a not-soscary past is available, and could lead to the conclusion of life as usual.
c. Diversified Resonance Take Two: Contesting Validity of Models
Even as the opinions of public health officials converged, with no immediate catastrophic
past to draw on, experts with sentinel warnings had difficulty developing a resonant frame that
is close to the experiences of the public and had to resort to future predictions. However, the
resonance of future predictions based on models could be easily contended as commentators
undermine the authority of experts producing the models drawing on other expertise.
In late February, predictions of the pandemic’s course by public health experts increasingly
converged. In mid-March, NYT reported Fauci warning people to “hunker down significantly
more than we as a country are doing.”56 This statement was preceded by his statement on March
10 to flatten the curve, as the gentler curve results in fewer deaths. However, while public
health expert opinions converge, the search for a resonant message to convey the consensus
had much less success. Hope was increasingly placed on predictions generated by models. And
yet, in late February, while reports on CDC internal modelling began to appear on the media,
showing drastic projections of how the virus could spread in the worst-case scenario in which
no actions were taken and the projections of the spread of virus under different intervention
measures, NYT reported that CDC had not yet provided any public official projections of the
virus.57 Although the experts interviewed explained that they did not disclose the modelling
result because overdoing leads to panic while the opposite leads to complacency, the same
article highlighted the importance of expert predictions in motivating Americans to adopt even
stricter measures to mitigate the spread of the virus:

56

Padilla, Mariel, and Zach Montague. 2020. “Nunes Encourages People to Dine Out as Experts Urge Them to

Stay Home.” NYT, March 15, 2020.
57

Fink, Sheri. 2020. “Worst-Case Estimates for U.S. Coronavirus Deaths.” NYT, March 13, 2020.

31

Without an understanding of how the nation's top experts believe the virus could ravage
the country, and what measures could slow it, it remains unclear how far Americans will
go in adopting – or accepting – socially disruptive steps that could also avert deaths. And
how quickly they will act.
However, future predictions are imagined scenarios that are distant from people’s lived
experience and are fragile and open to debate. That is not to say that future predictions can
never work as resonant expertise, but when future predictions have been politicized and sides
are drawn, political actors would attack the experts who did not provide predictions that they
wanted.
Worrying signs emerged in late February after Messonnier’s warning. Many Fox shows
started to connect strict disease control measures with Democrats’ attempt to politicize the
pandemic and use it against Trump58. Fox host Tucker Carlson, who was initially very alert to
the development of the pandemic, flipped his judgment as criticisms against the Trump
administration’s handling of the pandemic amassed. Following a stock market slam on April 3
triggered by a bad unemployment report and Trump repeatedly stating “We have to open out
country again”59, Carlson used the actuarial stance that Fauci took in the early days of the
pandemic against him, undermining Fauci’s demand to take even more drastic measures. He
quoted what Fauci said in the early days that “people ought to worry more about ‘the real and
present danger of the annual flu’ than about coronavirus.”60 Carlson made the argument that

58

Fox. 2020. The Story with Martha MacCallum. February 26, 2020; Fox. 2020. The Story with Martha

MacCallum. February 28, 2020.
59

Donald

Trump,

Donald

Trump

Coronavirus

Task

Force

Transcript

April

4.

https://www.rev.com/blog/transcripts/donald-trump-coronavirus-task-force-transcript-april-4 Accessed May 13,
2021.
60

Fox. 2020. Tucker Carlson Tonight, April 04, 2020.

32

NYT was making two months ago, that “Human beings frequently underestimate risk,
particularly risk on the horizon. Then they very often in turn overreact to risk once they identify
it.” He further argued that the models that medical experts relied on to predict the hospital beds
have been wrong by large margins, much fewer beds are needed than predicted in reality,
placing the argument that slowing the curve can prevent overwhelming hospital resources in
doubt. Enlisting expertise, the same reasoning can serve different political purposes at different
timepoints. When experts’ current advice goes against the current political interests of the
media, their previous history can be used against them to undermine their authority. More
evident attacks on the credibility of experts were also launched. In April, the National Institutes
of Health experts were described on Fox News as “working with China. They didn’t want to
get China upset,” which would “bury many Americans because of this.”61
NYT, on the other hand, increasingly published dire projections based on modelling. On
March 13th, NYT began publishing articles of non-CDC experts modelling the growth of cases,
especially emphasizing the exponential growth capacity of COVID-19. 62 After Trump
suggested opening the country soon on March 23, NYT teamed up with epidemiologists on
March 25 to create model predictions of what the curve would look like if the reopening
happened too soon.63
Like H.K. and China, disease control devices became politicized in the U.S. However,
unlike H.K. and China, there was no lived memories of catastrophic past diseases that can
easily resonate with the public. The implications of a novel pandemic relied upon the

61

Fox. 2020. Tucker Carlson Tonight, April 15, 2020.

62

Roberts, Siobhan. 2020. “The Exponential Power of Now.” NYT, March 13, 2020.

63

Kristof, Nicholas, and Stuart A. Thompson. 2020. “Trump Wants to ‘Reopen America.’ Here’s What Happens

If We Do.” NYT, March 25, 2020.

33

demonstration of the future through modeling, which became easily contended as media outlets
drew on diverse expertise to criticize the experts behind the models.

7. Conclusion
Our study explored different expertise and the different ways in which resonant expertise
was achieved in China, H.K., and the U.S. during the initial stage of COVID-19 (Table 1).
Through these case comparisons, we demonstrated that the process of expertise gaining
resonance was critical in enabling state and society to recognize the threat of COVID-19 and
devise strategies to counter the outbreak.

Table 1: Resonant Expertise
Leading
Experts
Dominant
Expertise

Policymakers

Public

Mainland China
SARS experts (and
heroes)
Sentinel devices:
Reactivating the
SARS memories in
different ways

Hong Kong
SARS experts

Resonance achieved:
First ignored and
repressed by local
policymakers; strict
lockdown once
sentinel warnings
resonated with
central policymakers
Complied with
directives from
policymakers;
collective memories
of past epidemic

Policymakers heeded
advice of experts, albeit
slowly, and were
criticized for reluctance
to close the borders

Resonance not
achieved: Fractured
response; veering
from anti-science to
neglect

Resonance achieved:
public distrust of
policymakers and
critical of weak
response; collective
memories of past
epidemic

Resonance not
achieved: Critical of
experts and models;
lack of recent
memories of severe
infectious diseases

Sentinel devices:
Reports of SARS-like
disease in Mainland
China + estimates of
spread in Mainland
China as sentinel
warnings

34

United States
Debates between
experts
Mixed sentinel and
actuarial devices:
Debates between
public health experts
and the politicization
of public health
experts by other
experts

We showed in our analysis how past experiences with disease, approach of expertise, in
conjunction with the political orientations of different actors shaped the approach to COVID19 in different societies. The different invocations of the past enabled different types of
resonance to emerge. Both China and H.K. experts relied on sentinel devices and SARS
collective memories, highlighting the uncertainty of the new virus and potential devastating
consequences it might cause. They went through different pathways to ally with the key
stakeholders in their societies and contribute to more effective responses to the crisis. The slow
and ineffective response of the U.S., especially when compared to H,K., can be attributed to
not just the anti-science orientation of political leaders, but also to the ways in which sentinel
and actuarial expertise was debated by the public with different political interests. Resonant
expertise was particularly difficult amidst political polarization.
While such examples of resonant expertise detailed in our study is highly contingent and
context dependent, the process of expertise gaining resonance is crucial in shaping COVID-19
responses in other countries. There were societies where policymakers and publics heeded the
advice experts who advocated for strong measures of quarantine and social distancing, based
on past experience with disease outbreaks such as SARS and MERS, such as with South Korea,
Singapore, and Taiwan. The fractured expert field and the lack of resonance of expertise
observed in the U.S. can also, to a certain degree, be seen in the United Kingdom, which only
reluctantly imposed harsher measures when projections showed an exponential increase in
cases. However, there were also countries where past experience with disease was not as
apparent. In these cases, local experts had to do double the work to convince policymakers and
the public that harsh measures were needed, such as in New Zealand. Additionally, as we
demonstrate in our study, it is not enough that policymakers and the public “listen to the
science,” as seen in the case of Sweden, which pursued a limited mitigation strategy that is
often described as aiming to produce “herd immunity”, on the advice of a small segment of

35

local experts. The content of expertise, which is also associated with one society’s past
experience and current contingencies, matters too.
There are necessarily limitations to our study. Cross-case comparisons often ignore
sequence effects. How different societies respond to COVID-19 is not independent from how
others respond. The China- H.K. are also not fully separate societies, although anti-Beijing
sentiments in H.K. remains high. Our comparisons sacrifice detail and analysis of within-case
variation in order to elicit dynamics that are comparable across cases. Another limitation is our
reliance on media reports, but we have made efforts to triangulate and trace the documentary
trail across a variety of sources. This was limited by the challenges of conducting fieldwork
during the crisis. Our observations are exploratory. Future work should make use of archival
access, interviews, and observations of how various forms of expertise influenced decision
making in key organizations.
These findings have several implications for the management of future crises and for public
health. First, given the variety of experts and expertise identified by the media as relevant to
COVID-19, there needs to be more reflexivity in the process of deciding what is legitimate and
illegitimate forms of knowledge. Both over-centralization and -diversification of the public
experts could be problematic, as China's repression on experts and the U.S.’s inaction and
confusion indicated. Second, the relevant experience of SARS that served China and H.K. well
should have also informed the responses of the U.S. and elsewhere. As commentators have
noted, there were information gaps and lags, where headlines and scientific findings common
in China were repeated weeks and months later in the U.S. (Yang 2020). This points to a certain
unevenness in the global field of science and public health that privileges statements from elite
and dominant scientists. As a community of inquiry, scientists engaged in public health should
pay attention to marginal and peripheral voices and consider ways in which hard-to-codify
experiential knowledge can be shared.

36

The expertise field and the claims based on past memory are never homogeneous but are
constantly contested. The struggles of the expertise and the past during the COVID-19 will not
stop when the pandemic is over. While the pandemic rages on, we already saw battles over
how we should remember COVID-19. The Chinese government, for example, published an
“official history” of the COVID-19 to institutionalize “correct collective memories” and
suppress recollections of the information repression and the delayed response in the early stage.
Similar attempts can be observed during the Trump administration in the U.S. too. Sociological
research must play a role in documenting and analyzing these struggles over the past and
challenging the claims of different powerful actors.

37

References
Carduff, Carlo. 2015. The Pandemic Perhaps. UC Press.
Cerulo, Karen A. 2002. Culture in Mind: Toward a Sociology of Culture and Cognition.
Psychology Press.
Chung, Angie Y., Hyerim Jo, Ji-won Lee, and Fan Yang. 2021. “COVID-19 and the Political
Framing of China, Nationalism, and Borders in the U.S. and South Korean News
Media.” Sociological Perspectives 07311214211005484.
Eyal, Gil. 2019. The Crisis of Expertise. Cambridge, UK ; Medford, MA: Polity.
Eyal, Gil, and Larissa Buchholz. 2010. “From the Sociology of Intellectuals to the Sociology
of Interventions.” Annual Review of Sociology 36 (1): 117–37.
Fujimura, Joan H., and Christopher J. Holmes. 2019. “Staying the Course: On the Value of
Social Studies of Science in Resistance to the ‘Post-Truth’ Movement.” Sociological
Forum 34 (S1): 1251–63.
Hartley, Kris, and Darryl S. L. Jarvis. 2020. “Policymaking in a Low-Trust State: Legitimacy,
State Capacity, and Responses to COVID-19 in Hong Kong.” Policy and Society 39
(3): 403–23.
Heymann, David L., and Guénaël Rodier. 2004. “Global Surveillance, National Surveillance,
and SARS.” Emerging Infectious Diseases 10 (2): 173–75.
Huang, Yanzhong. 2004. The SARS Epidemic and Its Aftermath in China: A Political
Perspective. Learning from SARS. National Academies Press.
Jasanoff, Sheila. 2004. States of Knowledge: The Co-Production of Science and the Social
Order. Routledge.
Jennings, Ralph. 2020. “How Cultural Differences Help Asian Countries Beat COVID-19,
While US Struggles.” Voice of America. July 22, 2020.

38

Jiang, M. (2016). The coevolution of the Internet, (un)civil society, and authoritarianism in
China. The Internet, social media, and a changing China. University of Penn Press.
Knowles, Scott Gabriel. 2012. The Disaster Experts: Mastering Risk in Modern America.
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lakoff, Andrew. 2015a. “Global Health Security and the Pathogenic Imaginary.” In
Dreamscapes of Modernity. edited by Sheila Jasanoff and Sang-Hyun Kim. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, Andrew. 2015b. “Real-Time Biopolitics: The Actuary and the Sentinel in Global
Public Health.” Economy and Society 44 (1): 40–59.
Lee, Jong-Wha, and Warwick J. McKibbin. 2004. Estimating the Global Economic Costs of
SARS. Learning from SARS. National Academies Press.
Lu, Yingdan, Jennifer Pan, and Yiqing Xu. 2021. Public sentiment on Chinese social media
during the emergence of COVID-19. JQD: DM. 1.
Martin, Timothy W., and Marcus Walker. 2020. “East vs. West: Coronavirus Fight Tests
Divergent Strategies.” Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2020.
Mason, Katherine. 2016. Infectious Change: Reinventing Chinese Public Health After an
Epidemic. Stanford University Press.
McDonnell, Terence E., Christopher A. Bail, and Iddo Tavory. 2017. “A Theory of
Resonance.” Sociological Theory 35 (1): 1–14.
Olick, Jeffrey K., and Joyce Robbins. 1998. “Social Memory Studies: From ‘Collective
Memory’ to the Historical Sociology of Mnemonic Practices.” Annual Review of
Sociology 24: 105–40.
Pierson, Paul. 2004. Politics in Time: History, Institutions, and Social Analysis. Princeton
University Press.

39

Rosenberg, Charles E. 1989. “What Is an Epidemic? AIDS in Historical Perspective.”
Daedalus. 118(2): 1-17.
Seawright, Jason. 2016. “The Case for Selecting Cases That Are Deviant or Extreme on the
Independent Variable.” Sociological Methods & Research 45 (3): 493–525.
Sewell, William H. 1990. “Three Temporalities: Toward a Sociology of the Event,” 37.
Sismondo, Sergio. 2017. “Post-Truth?” Social Studies of Science 47 (1): 3–6.
Swidler, Ann. 1986. “Culture in Action: Symbols and Strategies.” American Sociological
Review 51 (2): 273–86.
Tavory, Iddo, and Nina Eliasoph. 2013. “Coordinating Futures: Toward a Theory of
Anticipation.” American Journal of Sociology 118 (4): 908–42.
Wan, Kin-Man, Lawrence Ka-ki Ho, Natalie W. M. Wong, and Andy Chiu. 2020. “Fighting
COVID-19 in Hong Kong: The Effects of Community and Social Mobilization.” World
Development 134: 105055.
Wang, Yu, Nijuan Xiang, Daxin Ni, Qun Li, and Zijian Feng. 2017. “Performance of
Surveillance System of Pneumonia with Unknown Etiology in Two Hospitals at
Municipal in Anhui Province.” Disease Surveillance 32 (5): 428–32.
Whooley, Owen. 2013. Knowledge in the Time of Cholera: The Struggle over American
Medicine in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Yang, Zeyi. 2020. “Pandemic Coverage and Information Gaps.” Columbia Journalism Review.
April 27, 2020.
Zerubavel, Eviatar. 1997. Social Mindscapes: An Invitation to Cognitive Sociology.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

40

