"x"
"1" "Integrating Multifunctionality Framework for Planning Emergency Open Public Spaces in High - Density Urban Areas: Lessons from COVID-19 Pandemic"
"2" "Guzin   Yeliz   Kahya  "
"3" "City and Regional Planning Department,  Erciyes  University, Turkey"
"4" "Email:yelizkahya@gmail.com  "
"5" "Aynaz   Lotfata  (Corresponding Author)"
"6" "Geography Department, Chicago State University, USA "
"7" "Email:alotfata@csu.edu"
"8" "Abstract"
"9" "Purpose"
"10" "This study aims to translate residents ’  and local organizations’ responses to the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions into the emergency planning agenda of cities. The study underlines the multifunctionality of existing public facilities to raise urban flexibility, in particular, if there is a need to increase the open public space capacity of dense built-up urban areas in emergency conditions."
"11" "Design/methodology/approach"
"12" "The  preliminary accessibility analysis  was conducted using the public schools of Bahceli evler  in Istanbul Metropolitan  to study whether there are ways to improve open public space deficits in high-densely urban environments. In addition, the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index ( NDVI) and  the Normalized Difference Built-up Index ( NDBI) were mapped using Remote Sensing to identify the existence of greenery and vacant lands for future interventions. The literature review on multifunctionality was applied to propagate the formulation of the research problems and identify the potential research idea."
"13" "Findings"
"14" "The preliminary analysis’ results have shown that by including open public space of schools into public use about 96,740 m 2  of open space will be added to the Bahcelievler District. In addition, this study conceptualizes a new research idea by inviting policymakers and planners to reinvent traditionally defined multifunctionality concepts in emergency planning of public facilities. This study suggested a guideline that underlines three spatial, temporal, and regulative aspects for the resident-based emergency planning of public facilities."
"15" "Social implications"
"16" "The multifunctionality of public facilities improves neighborhood walkability, supports mixed land uses as a critical component of achieving better places to live, and addresses the diversity of opportunities within the walking distance."
"17" "Originality/value"
"18" "This study reinvents the multifunctionality concept and defines it in a way to boost urban flexibility in conditions of emergency."
"19" "Keywords:  Multifunctionality, Open Public Space, Reclaiming, Public Facility, COVID-19  pandemic"
"20" "Introduction"
"21" "Public open space has been at a premium during Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19). The huge need for  local public  space exceeds the public space capacity of the cities to cope with the COVID-19 pandemic. The COVID-19 has spread to almost all countries while lack of comprehensive emergency planning and enough socioeconomic supplies has forced countries to adopt a new normal of the COVID-19 (Fang  et al. , 2020). The neighborhoods with poor open space suffer the most in the pandemic, leading to a problem of equity in emergency relief.  Further the pandemic mobility restrictions across the world have dramatically changed how people experience the urban environment and how to navigate and interact with their locales.   Since mobility is restricted both in cities and between cities, people are forced to minimize the scale of their urban activities in  cities. Much emphasis has been placed on accessible open spaces on foot or cycling (Moreno  et al. , 2020). It is based on the very basic urban principle saying that  15–20-minute  access to open public spaces enhances cities’ sociability performance ( Capasso   et al. , 2020) and it should be used as a metric to evaluate urban adaptability."
"22" "Given that the COVID-19 pandemic tends to be a repetitive emergency, it forms a cycle that can be divided into phases of mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.  The first two phases happen during the pandemic and the second two phases happen after the pandemic. In both phases, emergency planning intends to both reduce the spread of the infection and contribute to the continuity of urban experiences. Open space emergency planning can improvise efficiently if it is not considered as a short-term/temporary spatial intervention ( Şenik  and  Uzun , 2021; Wei, 2020)."
"23" "While cities face curfews and lockdowns during the COVID-19 pandemic, open spaces are the sole places to have a healthy way of socializing without exposure to infections.  Accordingly, the worldwide open public space deficits become the center of attention of the news as the new coronavirus has spread rapidly in cities around the globe .  “How might the virus make us think differently about urban design in the future? (BBC, April 2020)” , “ Building Public Places for a COVID World (The New York Times, September 2020) ”,   “ Post-pandemic cities can permanently reclaim public spaces as gathering place s  (The Conversion, January 2021) ” ,  “   After  COVID-19, The City’s Rebirth (Chatham House, April 2021)” , “ Building Public Places for a COVID World (The New York Time, September 2020)” ,  “ City dwellers gained more access to public spaces during the pandemic – can they keep it? (The Conversion March 2021) ” and “ Is temporary the new permanent? COVID street experiments open our eyes to creating better cities (The Conversation, March 2021)”  address the concerns about the future of public space under new regulations of the pandemic and the importance of access to open space in the local urban environments.  To respond to the public space deficit, three approaches were observed across the world; 1. informal conversions ( e.g.,  urban squats, street music), 2. quasi-informal conversions (e.g. ,  outdoor restaurant, vacant lands with collaboration of local government), and 3. formal conversations (e.g. ,  street to pedestrian use by local agencies). The COVID-19 pandemic not only raises the importance of accessible open spaces for public use but also comes up with some rapid solutions, like rapid residents ’  responses, administrative policy changes and spatial interventions  to overcome open public space deficits.    Reclaiming open spaces  gained momentum during the pandemic to improve urban locality in particular to explore new ways of local access to safe open spaces for public uses."
"24" "In this paper, we take a high-density residential area -Bahcelievler District in Istanbul Metropolitan Area- as a case suffering from open public space deficits. In our preliminary analyses, we aim to show spatial footprints of multifunctional roles in that the public schools take the secondary functions during pandemic apart from their original function. Having open public space benefits from the multifunctional presence of public schools in the emergency time, we translate how these benefits offer solutions to our planning and design practice to build a framework for a more adaptive and flexible city. We conclude the study with guidelines to plan an emergency open public space. Figure 1 illustrates the conceptual framework of this study."
"25" "Fig.1. The conceptual framework"
"26" "Multifunctionality of Urban Space"
"27" "Multifunctionality of urban space has its roots in architecture, urban geography, and urban design  to establish diverse use of space which can change during time, that is stated as ‘multi-uses of  spaces ( Ziedler , 1985). Parallel to this definition, it is highlighted as the capacity of urban space to provide multiple urban services (Rolf  et al. , 2019; Roe and Mell, 2013;  Belmeziti   et al.  2018) and “an integration and interaction between services” (Roe and Mell, 2013). At the regional level in England, the  NorthWest  Green Infrastructure Think Tank (2008) states: functions can co-exist, leading to multifunctionality, and can therefore aid economic, environmental, and social objectives through the spatial integration of land uses and activities. All these works imply multi-functionality is generally desirable, as it encourages efficient use of land, delivers wider public benefit, and builds partnerships of user groups, leading to better stewardship."
"28" "Taking the multifunctionality concept within the emergency planning framework, urban space should be identified with socio-economic and ecological layers while committing to the alternative public functions (Haines-Young and Potschin,2010). Accordingly, in this study, multifunctionality aims at intertwining different functions and thus using limited space more effectively (Ahern, 2011). Many studies analyze the role of major green areas to assess the different types of natural and social services that they provide at the urban level (e.g. ,   Breuste  and Qureshi, 2011;  Chiesura , 2004) though few studies (e.g. ,   Peschardt   et al. , 2012) have focused on the potential of open spaces at public facilities as secondary functions can be integrated into the emergency planning agenda."
"29" "Therefore, this study proposes a framework to evaluate existing public facilities’ capacities to be translated into other uses in emergency times. The evaluation of such capacities that existing public functions hold add practical insights to support cities’ flexibility and adaptability to respond to changing circumstances. It may open new ways to attain and integrate these procedures into local political environments."
"30" "Study Area and Methodology"
"31" "In the case of Istanbul, dense urbanization made the city vulnerable to the spread of COVID-19 virus, and the social impacts of pandemic unequally showed up among urban spaces.   Odman  and  Tülek  (2020) confirms that the most populated neighborhoods are the ones more likely to be subject to the fast spread of pandemic ( see the map).  The studies of the   Istanbul  Kalkinma  Agency report (2020)  reported that there is a link betw een urban density and the spread of  pandemic.  According to data-driven policy tool Kent95 Platform ( Guvenc  and  Tulek , 2018;  Erginli , 2018), Bahcelievler District within its densely populated neighborhoods and its compact land use pattern can be taken as one of the fragile districts of Istanbul."
"32" "The Bahcelievler District with 6.448 m² is one of the high-density residential areas with a population density of 37,000/km 2 . It includes 11 neighborhoods where the open green space per individual is significantly low. The average public space capacity per individual is 0.4 m2 and a total of 17 h of accessible green space in the Bahcelievler ( Güvenc  and  Tülek , 2018). The majority of the population is young and children."
"33" "Based on our observations, residents are reclaiming the schools’ open space to use as a public space during the COVID-19 pandemic in the Bahcelievler District. Public school areas with their gardens, playgrounds, and green open spaces are closed for almost one year of COVID-19 as other non-utilized urban facilities in Istanbul and other Turkish cities.  Accordingly, the 25 public schools of the Bahcelievler District, as an area with outdoor spaces, are selected for the preliminary analysis to examine the secondary function of school open spaces as alternative open public spaces. In addition, emergency planning of schools as part of urban open space infrastructure ( Boldemann   et al. , 2011;   Dyment   et al. , 2009) contributes to the integration of the schools in neighborhood structure and provides mutual benefits for the neighborhood and education system. Open green spaces of the schools provide various aesthetic functions (Moore and Wong, 1997), socializing ( Mårtensson , 2013) and engaging students with real-world practices (Malone and Tranter, 2003)."
"34" "We obtained the school data from the Ministry of National Education and their X-Y coordinates from the Istanbul Greater Municipality geospatial portal.  We used the street-based Service Analysis in ArcGIS Pro to examine the schools’ service domain within 400 meters (15-min) of their geographical location. In addition, NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index) and NDBI (Normalized Difference built-up Index) have been also mapped to identify the existing greeneries and the potential vacant lands for future greenery and public space intervention."
"35" "The 1C-level -processed, cloudless Sentinel-2A image of date of July 2020 was used to estimate the NDBI and NDVI, for the Istanbul Metropolitan Area.  The sentinel-2 image includes 13 spectral  bands: four visible and near-infra-red bands at 10 m, six bands at 20 m and three bands at 60 m spatial resolution. NDBI has been mapped using near-infra-red (Band 8) and red (Band  4 )  10 m spectral bands. The  NDVI equation is as follows:"
"36" "NDVI=(NIR(B 8)− Red(B4))/(NIR(B8)+Red(B4))"
"37" "This index outputs values between -1.0 and 1.0, mostly representing greenness, where any negative values are mainly generated from clouds, water, and snow, and values near zero are mainly generated from rock and bare soil. Very low values (0.1 and below) of NDVI correspond to barren areas of rock, sand, or snow. Moderate values (0.1 to 0.5) represent shrub and grassland, while high values (0.5 to 0.8) indicate temperate and tropical rainforests."
"38" "The 1C-level-processed, cloudless Sentinel-2A image of the date of July 2020 was used to estimate the NDBI and NDVI, for the Bahcelievler, Istanbul. The sentinel-2 image includes 13 spectral bands: four visible and near-infra-red bands at 10 m, six bands at 20 m, and three bands at 60 m spatial resolution. NDBI has been mapped using near-infra-red (Band 8) and red (Band 4) 10 m spectral bands.   The NDBI equation is as follows:"
"39" "NDBI=(SWIR(B 11)− NIR(B8))/(SWIR(B11)+NIR(B8))"
"40" "NDBI values range from -1 to 1. -1 to 0 represents water and green areas, -0.1 to 0.1 represents barren areas, and 0.1 to 1 represents built-up areas. Google Earth was used for visual interpretation and validation of the results. In the following section, we did a preliminary spatial analysis to study if there are ways to enable changes in open public space deficits in high-densely built-up urban environments."
"41" "The preliminary study of open spaces at the public schools of Bahcelievler District"
"42" "Figure 2 illustrates the NDVI result in Istanbul and Bahcelievler District. The predominantly built-up areas range between -0.02 and 0.2 and greenery areas, including parks and green corridors vary between 0.2 and 0.5 scarcely distributed across the study area. The results show the green space deficits in Bahcelievler District."
"43" "Fig. 2. NDVI result of Bahcelievler and its surrounding area"
"44" "Figure 3 illustrates NDBI results and the calculation of the 400 meters service area for each public school on the existing street network of Bahcelievler. The NDBI results show that built-up area  varies in the range of 0.2 and 1, vacant lands vary in the range of 0 and 0.1. The high dense areas in the center of the district compared to the areas in the southeast of the district with vacant lands needed to develop alternative solutions to combat public space deficits. As shown in Figure  3, public  schools give 15 minutes of access to open spaces of schools are the solutions suggested in this study. The 400 meters services covered a district contribute to better adaptation to the emergencies like the COVID-19 pandemic brought mobility restrictions."
"45" "There is no international standard for the open spaces of educational urban facilities. In Turkish urban design regulations, the average amount of green area per student in schools is marked as 4 to 5 m 2  per person. For example, in the study of 1323 schools of Istanbul ( Karaburun   et al.,  2015), a total of 5,119,530 m 2  was allocated to outdoor spaces of schools. Based upon this measurement, in this study, we took 3869 m 2  as the average area of open space per every 25 public schools at Bahcelievler. Functioning as an open public space, they add about 96,740 m2 open space to the existing open spaces of the Bahcelievler District."
"46" "Here, the service areas derived through the network analysis are considered as walkable paths in 15 minutes to access the schools. Alternatively, this analysis provides a scheme to see the implicit neighborhood parts in which one can easily access these publicly available allocated open spaces of schools. This pattern presents that the alterations in the modes of urban space use might have some sort of reflections in the network structure of the neighborhood in terms of organizing pedestrian movement. This temporary change in urban structure indeed would encourage pedestrian-driven mobility since more open spaces are accessible in 15 minutes to the residents of neighborhoods."
"47" "Fig.  3. NDBI results of Bahcelievler and school service area with 400 meters."
"48" "Access to open public spaces as a part of urban equality issues is therefore crucial. Our case analysis of Bahcelievler  has provided evidence of the district’s fundamental green infrastructure deficit. The presented findings imply that the use of school facilities as open public space shapes a new identity of the school and their public space functionality in urban structure."
"49" "The way forward"
"50" "Further to the implications derived from the case study analysis, the procedures of public facilities’ emergency planning are explained in two steps. The first step guides to identify (Table 1) the capacities of urban spaces that perform several functions and provide several benefits based on the multifunctionality literature which identifies the multifunctionality with socioeconomic and ecological services of urban space. The second step aims to expand the broadly defined multifunctionality concept in the first step toward proposing the criteria for feasibility of emergency planning of public facilities (Figure 4). Figure 4 addresses the  Spatio -temporal and regulatory aspects of urban environments that can be used to assess whether to allocate an open public space function to the officially predefined public facilities."
"51" "First step:  Based on literature survey on landscape multifunctionality (e.g. ,  Lovell, 2010;  Otte , Simmering and Walters, 2007), Table 1 presents five categories of multifunctionality that should be studied to examine the multifunctional capacity of public facilities. The five categories include 1. Ecological layer, 2. Economic layer, 3.  Socio-cultural layer, 4. Historical layer, 5.   Aesthetic layer. All public facilities are not required to exhibit a similar response to any given attribute per category in Table 1.  As an example, a hospital can provide a personal/relaxing experience for visitors besides its essential function. Mosques can be a meeting place for neighborhood residents besides religious gatherings and education. Assessed land use capacity based upon those five categories address the readiness and capacities of public facilities to take a new function (s)."
"52" "Table1. Multifunctionality Assessment Criteria for Essential Public Facilities"
"53" "Multifunctional Criteria of Public Facilities"
"54" "Ecological layer"
"55" "Nature-Society interaction (such as diverse livelihoods)"
"56" "Conservation of Agricultural Landscapes as urban garden to local food production and environmental impacts (such as air pollution removal,  microclimate  regulation, noise reduction, carbon sequestration and storage, rainwater drainage, sewage treatment and energy saving) (Kim  et al.,  2015)"
"57" "Heterogeneous Landscapes (such as mosaic Landscapes)"
"58" "Economic layer"
"59" "Labour"
"60" "Customer-Consumer relationship"
"61" "Production Services"
"62" "Flow of Goods and Surplus"
"63" "Socio-cultural layer"
"64" "Opportunities for Recreational Activities"
"65" "Cognitive development"
"66" "Relaxation"
"67" "Spiritual Reflection"
"68" "Artistic Inspiration"
"69" "Historical layer"
"70" "Cultural, Historical & Religious Heritage   (such as historic urban fabric, symbolic meaning, touristic attraction );"
"71" "Authenticity & Genuineness (Palermo and  Ponzini , 2015;  Relph , 2016)"
"72" "Aesthetic layer"
"73" "Attractive landscape features enhancing living conditions (experimental and qualitative place attributes); Furniture, Feeling pleasure, safety and security"
"74" "Second Step:  We suggest the below Chart shown in Figure 4 to identify  Spatio -temporal and Regulatory aspects, each of which is determinative on the use of the public facilities with outdoor spaces as public open space. Public facilities include work (offices, plazas, ateliers, factories, etc.); commerce (retail, wholesale stores, banks, shopping malls, markets, etc.); education (schools,  libraries, museums, etc.); and culture and recreation (theaters, cinema, music halls, public centers, etc.). The identified criteria of the below chart are derived from our learning from the COVID-19 pandemic and literature survey."
"75" "Fig. 4. Illustrati ng the required  spatio -temporal and regulative aspects to use public facilities as an emergency open space."
"76" "According to the suggested chart, the socio-temporal and regulative criteria should be present to adopt the alternative functions for a public facility in addition to the multifunctionality capacity of  urban space within it.  Public facilities with these qualities should be allowed to residents’ reclaiming before the identification of the permanent alternative functions.  With this highlighted second step, the paper places the residents’ interventions more centrally in the conversions of public facilities and contributes to formulating the ways of translating these criteria into actionable emergency urban planning agenda."
"77" "As it is shown in Figure 4, the  spatio -temporal aspects divided into (a) Location within City and Accessibility, (b) Environmental Quality and (c) Psycho-social demands of Community can be taken as essential determinants on enabling the multifunctionality of public facilities. Those criteria address the public space elements that public facilities reflect."
"78" "The criteria of pu blic facilities listed within Location within the City and Accessibility include the  spatial aspects addressing different ranges of neighborhood accessibility patterns, for example, street network characteristics - connectivity, continuity, hierarchy (Marshall, 2005), and the way discrete functions are spatially delineated - mixed-use, multiple-uses and density ( Mashhoodi  and  Berghauser  Pont, 2011). For example, an urban garden with higher spatial accessibility would constitute an interface that mediates residents’ reclaiming practices. Other  examples;  Walkability and cyclability through well-connected green infrastructure accommodate the public facility well within larger urban scales. These increased levels of accessibility may support functional alterations that will continuously be discovered by residents and local organizations."
"79" "The Environmental Quality Criteria including recreational lighting, the appropriate level of green space and density, less environmental pollution (e.g. ,  noise and air pollution), micro-climatic effect, and traffic-highway safety addresses positive humans’ reflexive response to their surroundings ( Whitford   et al. , 2001;  Shashua -Bar and Hoffman, 2000). Those environmental criteria are indicators of healthy public life, providing a setting to be reclaimed by people, and having the potential to be integrated with the emergency planning as a temporary and or permanent emergency asset."
"80" "The criteria listed within Psychological-Social Demands address the satisfaction of community needs. For instance, a sense of belonging including the political and religious identity of a  place,  familiarity  of the place, social dialogue, personal networks, civic rights, privacy, and respect for all people are some of the realities of living in public spaces that need to be considered in design and planning. When these demands are satisfied, the degree of people’s involvement in active public life is encouraged; and more exchanges and interactions occur among residents. In addition, even though neighborhood monitoring is essential, integrating active neighborhood surveillance mechanisms encourages a feeling of uneasiness in those daytime/  night time  passes by and might be seen as a barrier in active public life. Accordingly, public facilities placed in areas with symbolic identity can be reclaimed by people and be integrated into emergency planning."
"81" "These triangular criteria are not the only aspects that impact the possibilities of spatial conversions of public facilities into open spaces of community hubs. They should be assessed about the regulative aspects to constitute external contextual drivers that steer how the multifunctionality of public facilities are expanded by residents’ interventions. As it is shown in Figure 4, the regulatory aspects ask for both the enabling conditions for residents’ reclaiming of public space as well as the degree of different stakeholders involved and their mutual interests)."
"82" "There should be enabling conditions for reclaiming to happen at a place, and they might help to expand the multifunctionality of public facilities. Enabling conditions to range from (the conditions of physical scarcity) to (the conditions of unmediated and open creation and exchanges) ( Noev , 2020). The conditions of scarcity, such as unstable flow of goods, withdrawal of safety nets, absence of urban infrastructures, situations of vulnerability, and poverty (Muller and  Trubina , 2020) influence residents to come up with their solutions. At the same time, the enabling conditions can be encouraged by planning perspectives and governance cultures, such as collaboration on task, community engagement, participatory planning action, creative interventions, authorization policies, and land ownership mechanisms. These regulative conditions should be taken into account when policymakers prepare the emergency conversion plan of open space. For instance, private ownership can be taken as a resisting factor towards emergency action if it prevents temporary conversions from taking place in response to the urban crisis."
"83" "The greater inclusivity of different stakeholders and the communication among their interests offer a greater possibility to incorporate resident-based reclaiming in urban space use. The residents-led  organizations, such as NGOs, community organizations, and civic organizations, acting on the field to constitute solutions to local problems have a substantial impact on cities undergoing urban transformations while undergoing new vital configurations in the conditions of emergency ( Rauws  and De Roo, 2016). To illustrate, a stronger civil society leverages well-developed and coordinated urban responses in times of emergency. For example, a place is convertible when residents and stakeholders from the neighborhood, local, urban, and regional scales align well with the idea of multifunctional-based emergency planning."
"84" "Taking account of the illustrated aspects in the chart can guide policymakers and urban practitioners to prepare the urban space for unforeseen emergencies through rethinking the emergency use of public facilities. To provide flexibility and resiliency of urban spaces, some aspects as it is shown in Figure 4 should work together to make the existing public facilities, like schools, convertible to temporary functions."
"85" "Therefore, the way forward, we suggested taking the multifunctionality of urban space as an ad-hoc intervention to improve the capacity of the city to function in different ways in emergencies. To make sure of the efficient function of the place, regular planning tools should allow different stakeholders such as community groups, civic organizations, or residents to temporarily reclaim allocated temporary functions at the place before its identification as a permanent secondary function."
"86" "Conclusion"
"87" "The nature of urban crises varies, and they impose different regulations on urban contexts. These regulations are structured by imposed restrictions and governmental emergency responses. The emergency regulations restrict the ordinary functioning of cities. The COVID-19 governmental restrictions on residents’ daily routine impacted where public activities took place. Restrictions on land use and mobility have led to the rediscovery of open urban spaces for collective appropriations, meeting places, and shared experiences by residents and local organizations. While both resident-based responses and local organizations’ formal interventions are considered to be specific to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is equally plausible that residents’ responses can then be  translated into an urban planning and design agenda of cities as the resources of urban diversity. Their integration raises the flexibility of urban functions."
"88" "This study has two major limitations. First, the lack of publicly available land use data to estimate open spaces of public schools to precisely estimate the added public space. Second, the lack of access to fine resolution demographic data limits the estimating profile of target users of public schools within 400 meters of access."
"89" "Planning guides urban development by allowing formal, informal, and quasi-informal temporary conversions of urban land  use  to play a key role to cope with unexpected outcomes of urban crisis. It is necessary to rethink how to use these spatial conversions in urban management while planning an urban emergency urban program to define certain limits in these sorts of interventions."
"90" "In addition, this study offers future studies on the multifunctionality of schools.  While the public use of schools contributes to neighborhood walkability, it improves the educational climate of the neighborhood and the social cohesion of the schools. This sort of multifunctional framework can be preserved through management methods aimed at improving public facilities' functional efficiency. This becomes more important for areas experiencing public open space loss due to growing urbanization."
"91" "References"
"92" "Ahern, J. (2011 ),  “ From fail-safe to safe-to-fail. Sustainability and resilience in the new urban world”.  Landscape and Urban Planning 100: 341–343."
"93" "Boldemann , C., Dal, H.,  Mårtensson , F.,  Cosco , N., Moore, R., Bieber, B.,  Blennow , M., Pagels, P.,  Raustorp , A., Wester, U.  and   Söderström , M. (2011),  “Preschool outdoor play environments may combine promotion of children’s physical activity and sun protection” . Further evidence from Southern Sweden and North Carolina. Sci. Sports 26, 72–82."
"94" "Belmeziti , A.,  Frédéric,  C.  and Bernard, K. (2018),  “Improving the multi-functionality of urban green spaces: .Relations between components of green spaces and urban services”,  Sustainable Cities and Society, Volume 43, Pages 1-10, ISSN 2210-6707."
"95" "Breuste , J.H. and Qureshi, S. (2011),  “Urban sustainability, urban ecology, and Society for Urban Ecology (SURE) ”. Urban  Ecosyst  (Springer, USA) 14(3):313–317."
"96" "Broudehoux , A-M  ( 2021 ), “ Post-pandemic cities can permanently reclaim public spaces as gathering place s ”, The Conversation-Retrieved  21 April 2021:"
"97" "https://theconversation.com/post-pandemic-cities-can-permanently-reclaim-public-spaces-as-gathering-places-150729"
"98" "Capasso , D. S., Denise, K. David, A.  and   Lemar , S. (2020),  \" Accessibility in Practice: 20-Minute City as a Sustainability Planning Goal\",   Sustainability 12, no. 1: 129."
"99" "Chiesura , A. (2004), “ The role of urban parks for the sustainable city ”. Landscape and Urban Planning 68:129–138."
"100" "Constable, H. (2020),  “How do you build a city for pandemic?”, BBC News-  Retrieved 21 April 2021:  https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200424-how-do-you-build-a-city-for-a-pandemic"
"101" "Dyment , J. E.,  Bell,  A.  C.  and Lucas, A. J.  ( 2009 ),  “T he Relationship Between School Ground Design and Intensity of Physical Activity. ” Children’s Geographies 7 (3): 261 –267."
"102" "Fang, D. et al. (2020), et al. BMJ Global Health 5:002815."
"103" "Fitzwilliam, H. (2021), “ After COVID-19, The City’s Rebirth ”,   The  Chatham House-retrieved April 21:"
"104" "https://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/the-world-today/2021-04/after-covid-19-citys-rebirth"
"105" "Evde   kal   cagrisina   İstanbul'un   hangi   semtler   katildi ? (2020),  Retrivied  23 April 2021:  https://www.cumhuriyet.com.tr/haber/evde-kal-cagrisina-istanbulun-en-cok-hangi-semtleri-katildi-1729340"
"106" "Güvenç , M. and  Tülek , M.,  vd ., (2018), “ İstanbul  Geneli   ve   İlçeleri :  Yaş   ve   Rayiç  Bedel  İtibariyle   Katmanlaştırma   Haritaları ” , İstanbul  İlçe   Belediyelerinde   Çocuğa   ve   Aileye   Yönelik   Hizmetler , ( yaz .)  Bürge  Elvan  Erginli , İstanbul: TESEV Yayınları. https://www.tesev.org.tr/wp-content/uploads/rapor_istanbul95.rapor_1.pdf"
"107" "Haines-Young, R. and  Potschin , M. (2010),  “The links between biodiversity, ecosystem services and human well-being” . In:  Raffaelli  D.,  Frid  C., editors.  Ecosystem Ecology: A New Synthesis.  Cambridge University Press; BES, pp. 110–139."
"108" "İstanbul  Kalkınma   Ajansı .  “COVID-19  Salgını   Mücadele   Sürecinde  İstanbul  Kırılganlık   Haritası   Proje   Raporu ”. İBB  Kültür  AŞ.  Yayını .  Kasım  2020, İstanbul."
"109" "Karaburun ,  A. ,   Demirci ,  A. and Saka,  E. (2015), “ Spatial Assessment of the Schoolyards in the European Side of Istanbul: A Sufficiency Analysis Based on the Number of  Students ”.Marmara   Coğrafya   Dergisi , (31): 20-47."
"110" "Kim, H., Jung, M., Mallari, K. J. B., Pak, G., Kim, S., Kim, S., Kim, L., and Yoon, Y. (2015), “ Assessment of porous pavement effectiveness on runoff reduction under climate change scenarios ”. Desalination and Water Treatment, 53 (11), pp. 3142-3147."
"111" "Lovell, S. T. (2010),  “Multifunctional urban agriculture for sustainable land use planning in the United States. Sustainability”,  2(8), 2499-2522."
"112" "Lusk, K. (2021),  “City dwellers gained more access to public spaces during the pandemic – can they keep it?”,  The Conversation- Retrieved 21 April 2021:"
"113" "https://theconversation.com/city-dwellers-gained-more-access-to-public-spaces-during-the-pandemic-can-they-keep-it-155016"
"114" "Malone, K. and Tranter, P.J. (2003), “ School grounds as sites for learning: Making the most of environmental opportunities” . Environmental Education Research, 9(3), 283-303."
"115" "McFarlane, C. (2010), “ The comparative city: Knowledge, learning and urbanism ”. International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 34(4): 725–742."
"116" "Moreno, C., Allam, Z.,  Chabaud , D., Gall, C. and  Pratlong , F. (2021),  “ Introducing  the “15-Minute City”: Sustainability, Resilience and Place Identity in Future Post-Pandemic Cities” . Smart Cities, 4, 93–111."
"117" "Marshall, S. (2005,) Streets and patterns. Routledge, London and New York."
"118" "Mashhoodi , B.  and   Berghauser  P. M. (2011),  “Land-use distribution and mixed-use in relation to density, accessibility and urban form” . 18th International Seminar on Urban Form. 26-29 August 2011."
"119" "Mårtensson , F. (2013), “ Guiding environmental dimensions for outdoor play, Journal  of Social medicine ”, 90 (4) 658-665."
"120" "Moore, R. C., and H. H. Wong. (1997 ),  “ Natural Learning: The Life History of an Environmental Schoolyard ”. Berkeley, CA: MIG Communications."
"121" "Muller, M. and  Trubina , E. (2020), “ Improvising urban spaces, inhabiting the in-between” . Environmental  Planning :  Society and Space D: 38 (4): 664-681."
"122" "Noev , I. (2020), “I ncorporating Spontaneity in Urban Disciplines ”, In Inclusive Urbanism pp."
"123" "Odman  and  Tülek  (2020), map-  Retrieved 23 April 2021:"
"124" "https://cdn.knightlab.com/libs/juxtapose/latest/embed/index.html?uid=5967edae-f052-11ea-bf88-a15b 6c7adf9a"
"125" "Odman , A. and  Tülek , M. (2020), “ COVID-19  pandemisi   döneminde   sosyomekansal   eşitsizlikler   ve   veri  /  halk   sağlığı   ilişkisi ” . TTB COVID-19  Pandemisi   Altıncı  Ay  Değerlendirme   Raporu . 17  Eylül  2020, Ankara. Sf:531."
"126" "Otte , A., Simmering, D. and Wolters, V. (2007), “ Biodiversity at the landscape level: recent concepts and perspectives for multifunctional land use” . Landscape Ecology, 22(5), 639-642."
"127" "Palermo P.C. and  Ponzini , D. (2015), “ Place-making and urban development: new challenges for contemporary planning and design” . Routledge, New York"
"128" "Peschardt , K. K.,  Schipperijn , J. and  Stigsdotter , U. K. (2012), “ Use of Small Public Urban Green Spaces (SPUGS) ”. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, 11(3), pp 235–244"
"129" "Rauws , W. and De Roo, G. (2016), “ Adaptive Planning: Generating Conditions for Urban adaptability: Lessons from  DUtch  Organic Development Strategies ”. Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design 1-23."
"130" "Relph , E. (2016), “ Place and  placelessness ” , 4th  edn . Sage, London."
"131" "Rolf, W.,  Pauleit , S. and  Wiggering , H. (2019), “ A stakeholder approach, door opener for farmland and multifunctionality in urban green infrastructure ”, Urban Forestry & Urban Greening, Volume 40, 2019, Pages 73-83, ISSN 1618-8667."
"132" "Roe, M. and Mell, I. (2013),  “Negotiating value and priorities: Evaluating the demands of green infrastructure development ”. J. Environ. Plan. Manag.56, 650–673."
"133" "Rowe, H. (2021), “ Is temporary the new permanent? COVID street experiments open our eyes to creating better cities”,  the Conversation."
"134" "Retrieved 21 April 2021:"
"135" "https://theconversation.com/is-temporary-the-new-permanent-covid-street-experiments-open-our-eyes-to-creating-better-cities-156591 ."
"136" "Russels , J.S. (2020),  “Building public places for a Covid World ” ,   The New York Times- Retrieved 21 April 2021:"
"137" "https://www.nytimes.com/2020/09/11/arts/design/architecture-urban-planning-coronavirus.html"
"138" "Şenik , B. and  Uzun , O. (2021 ),  “ An assessment on size and site selection of emergency assembly points and temporary shelter areas in  Düzce ”. Nat Hazards 105, 1587–1602 (2021)."
"139" "The North West Green Infrastructure Think Tank (2008 ),   Retrieved  23 April 2021"
"140" "http://www.greeninfrastructurenw.co.uk/resources/GIguide.pdf ."
"141" "Wei, Y.,  Jin , L., Xu, M., Pan, S., Xu, Y., and Zhang, Y. (2020 ),  “ Instructions for planning emergency shelters and open spaces in China: Lessons from global experiences and expertise ”. International journal of disaster risk  reduction :  IJDRR, 51, 101813."
"142" "Whitford , V.,  Ennos , A. R. and Handley, J. F. (2001),  “City form and natural process – indicators for the ecological performance of urban areas and their application to Merseyside, UK ”. Landscape and Urban Planning, Vol. 57(2), pp 91-103."
"143" "Zeidler , E. H. (1985), “ Multi-use Architecture in the Urban Context”.  New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold."
