Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

Mutating mobilisations during the
pandemic crisis in Spain
Miguel A. Martínez (April 27th)
For a social movement and urban scholar, these are not the best days for
conducting fieldwork on the streets. Off-line demonstrations, protests with
gathering bodies and banners, deliberative assemblies and the like have been on
hold for a long period in countries such as Spain. The coronavirus pandemic and
the stringent measures taken by the government have set an unprecedented
situation in terms of social life and politics, especially for the generations who
did not live under the Francoist dictatorship (1939–1978), where surveillance
and repression determined daily routines and anti-regime mobilisations. The
current ruling coalition between the social democratic party, PSOE, and the
more leftist Unidas Podemos, had opened up a promising term for, at least,
some progressive policies since they took office in January 2020. However, the
sudden economic crisis that the pandemic is unfolding has abruptly
undermined even the least optimistic prospects.
As a regular online observer of bottom-up organisations, campaigns, and
collective actions, as well as a follower of the debates that stir and flood the
political sphere in Spain, I was surprised by some of the innovative ways of
continuing to protest during these difficult times of home confinement, starting
March 15, 2020, when the government declared a state of emergency.
Obviously, online protests are not new at all but, in this short period of time,
activists explored appealing forms of articulating discourse and campaigns.
Grassroots mobilisations for social justice have included practices and
challenges to the authorities previously unforeseen. In particular, the following
selection of experiences resembles the context of the 2008 global financial
crisis, although some dimensions have changed too. Hence, this preliminary
analysis aims at understanding what seems like the first stage of an emerging
cycle of mutating mobilisations.
Solidarity and mutual aid
From the first days of the lockdown, most grassroots politics focused on
discussing how the most vulnerable people, those without a home, could be
sheltered, how those with casual jobs would face their contracts being
terminated immediately, and how those in overcrowded prisons and migrant
detention centres would cope with the new risks and rules. This was the
beginning of a powerful campaign of solidarity that was increasingly widening
its range in order to include concerns for the elderly, disabled, and people
otherwise at risk; concerns over domestic gender violence, and the situation of
workers on various fronts, as well as children. An enhanced meaning of the term
solidarity has thus entered the mainstream public discourse: “mutual aid”. In
addition, “support and care networks” organised by many grassroots
15

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

organisations and neighbours who were not involved in politics before, added
practices of reconstructing urban communities in a very different way from
charities and NGOs, although many of these have also been involved
(sometimes also in alliance with local governments, as showcased by the
platform “Frena la Curva” [Halt the Curve]). Furthermore, long-term
campaigns of solidarity towards migrants and refugees continue to focus on the
extreme vulnerability, racism, and criminalisation that these groups experience,
aggravated by their irregular administrative situation.
Examples of the above are:
•

Networks for care and mutual aid in order to help with daily errands and
shopping, to call an ambulance, company for hospital visits, doing
homework with children, providing basic supplies, taking care of pets,
etc. [link] [link] [link] [link] [link]

•

Food banks, especially for those without formal jobs. [link] [link]

•

Psychological assistance over the phone or via radio programmes. [link]

•

Hand-clapping every day at 8pm from windows and balconies to express
support and gratitude towards key workers, especially those in the public
health system, subject to increased risks and pressures during the
pandemic. [link] [link]

•

Racialised street vendors and women (such as the Sindicatos de
Manteros and the Xarxa de Dones Cosidores) produced masks and other
textile equipment to be donated to health workers. [link] [link]

•

Hackers and makers from autonomous and squatted social centres
produced medical equipment. [link]

•

A campaign asking for an extraordinary regularisation of all
undocumented migrants and asylum seekers (estimated to be around
600,000 people) was widely supported with more than 1,000 Civil
Society Organisations co-signing the campaign. [link]

•

Demands to shut down all the migrant detention centres (CIEs),
successful in many cases with the release of most inmates. [link] [link]
[link]

A “white” tide 2.0
Very early on too, this solidarity was translated into a renewed focus on the
public health system. Due to the privatisations and the severe cuts to this system
in many regions of Spain (a policy that was mainly but not only led by Madrid
and Catalonia), the pandemic revealed the shortcomings of the available
resources and triggered a widespread cry to recover this essential pillar of the
welfare state, if there is still time. Even right-wing politicians, who accelerated
and benefitted from the privatisations of hospitals, changed their public
discourse to pretend they were the first supporters of the public health system.
16

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

Like a reminder of the so-called “white tide” that took to the streets around the
uprisings of 2011 (the 15M movement), calling for a defence of public health
services and infrastructures, the pandemic has once more united large sectors of
the population under the same banner. This time, its main manifestation is the
regular applause heard every night at 8pm from the balconies of most cities
across the country. This repertoire of protests is new, and the scope of the
supporters is even broader than during “the white tide” one decade ago, but the
anti-neoliberal content of the mobilisation is not that different. The massive
staging or ritual performance of hand-clapping addresses all the workers of the
health system trying to save lives and handle the serious medical consequences
of the pandemic.
Rent strikes
A third strand of mobilisations, symbolising an important shift from previous
militant trajectories, covers all the ongoing rent strikes. An estimated 16,000
tenants have joined the strike that began on April 1 [link], although it is
expected to widen on May 1 in line with similar international calls. To date,
around 80 “strike committees” have been established in different
neighbourhoods and municipalities across Spain. Rent strikes by tenants are not
historically new, but the last one that took place in Spain was in 1931. The
present ones are a consequence of the previously strong housing movement led
by the PAH (Platform for People Affected by Mortgages) as a response to the
2008 global financial crisis and the wave of housing dispossessions that led to
the eviction of more than half a million households. Tenants unions were also
set up some years later in a number of major cities, especially following the
recovery of the speculative housing bubble around 2015, when many
international investment funds and short-term platforms such as Airbnb led to
unbearable rises in rents and massive displacements from gentrified urban
areas. Tenants unions and other housing organisations had been pressing for
the central government to change the rental laws and implement rent controls
measures.
However, the coronavirus crisis deepened and worsened an already strenuous
housing situation. During the pandemic, the government has ruled that home
evictions are forbidden and the payment of rents and mortgage can be
postponed, but not cancelled. Moreover, energy and water supplies cannot be
cut if the bills are not paid during the same period (six months after the state of
emergency). Unauthorised occupations (squats) are not covered by the decree
though. These measures are considered insufficient by activists and not help
alleviate the hardship of those who have become unemployed and impoverished
over the last weeks. If they pay rents later or apply for loans now, they may even
increase their levels of debt and their financial default in the aftermath of the
pandemic.

17

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

Who will pay for this crisis?
Many predictions estimate that unemployment will escalate to 30%. A similar
proportion is expected in terms of the average decrease of household income.
This adds to the already 12 million people living under the poverty threshold,
including the International Labour Organization’s accounts of 15% “poor
workers”, as well as the 3.2 million unemployed people [link]. Another recession
is going to devastate the living conditions of the working class even more. This
economic shock indicates that labour mobilisations will rise at higher rates than
the ones observed over the last six weeks, once the appeasing policies are no
longer viable (in the absence of any unconditional rescue by European
powerholders, which is unlikely to occur). Although the following list hints
towards the nascent labour protests:
•

Workers’ strike in the Nissan factory because the company is using the
crisis as an opportunity to fire workers. [link]

•

Workers’ strike in the Airbus factory due to the controversial decision
made by the government regarding the license for non-essential
productive activities to reopen operations. [link]

•

A similar motivation behind another strike at the Aernnova factory. [link]

•

Workers forced the Mercedes company to halt production due to the lack
of safety measures during the pandemic. [link]

•

Threat of workers’ strike in Glovo, Deliveroo, and UberEats due to the
worsening conditions and payments during the pandemic. [link] [link]

•

Also, as a reaction to highly precarious labour conditions, waged and selfemployed workers in the culture and arts sector called to various strikes
because of the lack of support from the government, and the cancellation
of events sine die. [link]

The reaction of the government has consisted in subsidies to the temporary
regulations of unemployment (ERTEs) that have the immediate effect of a 30%
income loss for workers affected in the short-term, but there is no certainty
around how long these subsidies will last. Domestic and care workers, especially
those with no formal contract (around 200,000 people, mostly racialised and
migrant women), will experience higher losses, ending up with wages of no
more than 500 Euros per month.
In this context, campaigns for a universal and unconditional basic income have
resurged [link] [link]. They have been alive for many decades, but hardly
reached the ears of the authorities. Once a key promise of political party
Podemos, at its birth in 2014, universal basic income programmes became later
replaced by less ambitious plans. However, the pandemic crisis has brought it
back to the table, despite the initial reluctance of the PSOE. The negotiations
between both parties concluded with an agreement of a conditional “minimum
income” that will alleviate only the poorest households with no less than a 500
Euros subsidy, although yet to be rolled out.

18

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

In fact, a universal basic income was one of the starring demands of the Plan de
Choque Social [Social Emergency Plan] [link] [link], a comprehensive list of
demands called for by more than 200 civic organisations (many trade unions
included) in order to press the government. Among them, activists demanded a
state takeover of private hospitals without compensation, special resources to
protect workers who are “sustaining life” (in elderly homes, social services,
transport, cleaning, food supply chain, pharmacies, and so on), and the
promotion of medical supply production. They also suggested higher taxes to
capital and the funds of bailed-out banks during the 2008 crisis should be used
to pay for the new expenses [link]. The alternative is to fall into the same
nightmare of austerity and financialisation that the troika (EC, ECB, and IMF)
imposed ten years ago.
No time to lose
To conclude, a few preliminary lessons may be learned.
First of all, the above-mentioned mutating mobilisations show the often longterm effects of social movements. A range of movements – 15M, housing,
feminist, antiracist, and migrant movements, to name a few – created the social
connections, the practical knowledge, and the discursive frames that made
many of the present mobilisations possible. Many of the previous activist
networks, despite their weakness and fragmentation since 2014, are now linked
to new ones. There is an ongoing and renewed wave of activist recruitment.
Different grassroots platforms are converging with one another, and sometimes
also with more institutional organisations and public authorities. On the other
hand, the current urgency and political momentum might be temporarily
relegating other areas of concern, such as the environmental movement. The
success of some grassroots organisations and protests may be seen as poor at
the short-run. Arrested migrants and impoverished tenants, however, would
think otherwise. Anyhow, the persistence of so many initiatives from below,
striving for social justice, continues to show their ability to mobilise large parts
of society and, albeit perhaps too slowly, erode the pillars of the main
hegemonic powers.
Secondly, another round of anti-neoliberal movements and campaigns are a
sign that it is not just about asking for “more state”. This would be an overly
simplistic conclusion, in my view. On the contrary, I read these expressions as a
direct opposition to the key operations of the neoliberal alliance between global
corporations and political elites. This is the case with the privatisation of health
systems, with devastating and tremendous consequences to life and societies, as
this pandemic is showing. On the one hand, the for-profit health industry had
neither the interest nor the means to assist the high number of people affected
by the pandemic. This realisation paved the ground for more positive views of
financially-strong, state-owned health systems of a universal and non-profit
nature. Hence, this second “wide tide” is an emergent movement that questions,
above all, the commodification of health and the segregated benefits it offers

19

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

those who can afford it. On the other hand, the emerging defence of the public
health system is claiming state accountability for previous privatisations, cuts
offs, plans, and mismanagement. In my view, it goes beyond the replacement of
the market by the state, although it stems from a general cry to defend and
improve essential state services. Capitalism and public health have proven to be
quite conflicting during the past weeks.
A third observation is that radical actions like rent strikes are possible in
exceptional situations, such as the prohibition of off-line demonstrations,
pickets, boycotts, and other forms of contentious and embodied actions.
Compared to workers’ strikes, the right to rent strike is not legally
acknowledged in Spain. If tenants do not pay their rents, they may be swiftly
evicted, and it is difficult to find affordable housing in a market that has been so
overheated due to the intervention of global investors such as Blackstone and
other vulture firms such as Airbnb. The timid moves of the government,
however, opened up the opportunity for the housing organisations to take the
risk of calling for a strike. In particular, the fact that home evictions are officially
forbidden during six months after the state of emergency leaves enough time for
the strike committees to organise and negotiate favourable agreements. All of
this is done online, which is significantly novel compared to other virtual
campaigns not so performative in terms of producing true radical practice.
Furthermore, more mobilisations are expected because a deeper economic
recession is in fact taking place, with higher unemployment rates to come. New
alliances between labour and social (and urban/housing) syndicalism are being
forged, as the Plan de Choque Social [Social Emergency Plan] suggests. The
notion of solidarity, usually an exclusive label for established NGOs, has been
broadened and replaced by the vibrant, self-organised and fully bottom-up
“networks of care and mutual aid”.
Finally, right-wing agitators are investing more and more in online mobilising.
This has not been in the scope of this account, although there are many
indicators that the extreme right is also on the rise. Their fake news campaigns,
their rampant stigmatisation and dehumanisation of vulnerable people and
leftist organisations, and their vicious attacks on any progressive measure taken
by the government, are above all, very robust financially speaking. Less clear is
how their legitimacy can last and how they can effectively counter their
opponents without winning elections. Once they achieve this, however, as we
recently saw in Poland and Hungary, for example, their dismissal of
parliamentary control is the first step towards implementing their authoritarian
and exclusionary political agenda. In this regard, it is worth noting that the
social support that the far-right was not able to garner during the 2008 crisis in
Spain has shifted towards a different scenario during the time of the pandemic,
because one of such parties (Vox) won 15% of the parliamentary seats in the last
general elections and is actively poisoning the political debates in many social
and mass media networks.

20

Interface: a journal for and about social movements
Movement report
Volume 12 (1): 15 – 21 (July 2020)
Martínez, Mutating mobilisations in Spain

About the author
Miguel A. Martínez is professor of housing and urban sociology at the University
of Uppsala (Sweden). He is interested in social movements, housing, migration,
and activist research. He is the author of Squatters in the Capitalist City.
Housing, Justice, and Urban Politics (New York: Routledge). Most of his works
are available at www.miguelangelmartinez.net

21

