"x"
"1" "Global food systems in the post-coronavirus era"
"2" "Robert M. Chiles"
"3" "March 20, 2020"
"4" "Abstract :  Coronavirus is  currently  dealing a concussive blow to global food systems , but this crisis could also present a rare opportunity to uncover and address longstanding social and environmental problems .   The purpose of this paper is to shed additional light on  this rapidly developing situation  by ( i ) outlining the vulnerabilities and inequities in the global food system that have been exposed by the coronavirus, (ii) identifying the emergent sociotechnical shifts that have occurred in the initial stages of the post-coronavirus era, and then (iii) interpreting these vulnerabilities, inequities, and shifts from the standpoint of  two key theories in environmental sociology: the  treadmill  of production  and ecological modernization."
"5" "Introduction"
"6" "The projected human toll of the coronavirus is nothing less than staggering. A recent Brookings study concluded that coronavirus could result in 15 million deaths globally, in the best case scenario, and 65 million deaths in the worst case scenario ( McKibben and Fernando 2020 ). The  OECD (2020)  warns that coronavirus could cut global economic growth in half and trigger  a  recession  across much of the globe ."
"7" "Coronavirus is also dealing a concussive blow to global food systems.  Global commodity markets are current experiencing what one analyst has called a “bloodbath ” ;    Chinese agricultural input and processing industries have slowed;    China’s recent agreement to purchase more US agricultural products has stalled; agricultural shipments have sat idle and spoiled at Chinese ports of entry; and global agricultural markets continue to be embroiled in uncertainty ( Zhang and  Xiong  2020 ). Many agribusiness analysts are projecting confidence that consumer demand will eventually return to pre-crisis levels, provided that mortality rates don’t skyrocket  ( Van Olson 2020 ) .  Zhang and  Xiong  (2020 )  project that China will  need to  increase its agricultural imports in order to fuel its economic recovery.  Nonetheless, even if e conomic growth, GDP, and commodity markets  were to recover, these  are limited measures of overall  societal  wellbeing , and man y will be left behind ."
"8" "Environmental sociology has  engaged  with the  political and economic   causes and  implications of  agri - environmental  crises for decades ( Pellow and Brehm 2013 ), and  its key theories  offer a useful lens from which to analyze the coronavirus.   Treadmill theory anticipates that post-coronavirus responses in the private sector will be used to shrink labor costs, reduce  inefficiencies, maximize externalities, and ultimately reinvest profits into expanded production capacity.  E cological modernization theory predicts that post-coronavirus innovations  could  more effectively address biosecurity risks, reduce environmental harms, and enhance social solidarity.  The  purpose of this paper is to  shed additional light on these divergent possibilities, by  ( i )  outlin ing   the vulnerabilities and inequities in the global food system that have been exposed by the coronavirus, (ii) identify ing  the  emergent  sociotechnical shifts that have occurred  in the initial stages of the post - coronavirus era ,  and then (i i i) interpret ing  these  vulnerabilities, inequities, and shifts  from the standpoint of  treadmill and ecological modernization  theories ."
"9" "Vulnerabilities and Inequities"
"10" "Like all disasters, the coronavirus crisis exposes the vulnerabilities and inequities in global food systems (Pellow and  Brehm  2013).  While the political-economic and environmental precipitators of  this specific crisis  are still being analyzed, interpreted and actively debated (see  Wallace, 2020 ),  z oono ses  can spread rapidly  from nearly anywhere  in a globalized world. Zoonotic diseases are being catalyzed and worsened by the global proliferation of intensive livestock operations; increased human/wildlife contact due to habitat  encroachment ; and climate change, which  triggers  more and deadlier epidemic diseases ( Gross 2020;  Kuchipudi  2020 ) ."
"11" "The impact of these types of public health threats  is  asymmetric and inequitably distributed, and this is fully evident in the post-coronavirus era.  Food system workers, farmers, grocers, restaurants, and hotels  already  operate on thin margins. Farmers are aging in the United States, China, and other modernizing economies, and this demographic is also the most vulnerable to serious complications from coronavirus. Much of  their  experiential  and  contextual knowledge about local  agri -environmental conditions  could be permanently lost . In the United States, legislators from rural districts have called for another round of farmer  bailouts ,  but  this may prove to be a difficult ask.  M uch of the  $28 billion  farmer bailout package from the US/China trade war went to the largest farmers ,  and  $67 million went to the Brazilian meatpacking   conglomerate  JBS.  Moreover, farmer owner operators are not the only ones in  urgent  need of support.  Migrant  agricultural workers  have little to no access to the financial savings, fluent English skills, familiarity with the local medical system, or basic legal protections that would give them confidence to seek coronavirus treatments .  School closures  will  force many of these workers to leave their jobs to care for their children. Other low-wage workers in the food system also live precariously, are often dependent on tips and/or food assistance programs, work part-time and/or fluctuating hours, and receive no health benefits, collective bargaining rights, or sick leave. Several large retailers and foodservice chains have extended emergency safety nets to these workers,  but these minimal protections could easily disappear  if restaurants are unable to sustain themselves or  the biosecurity threat of sick workers has dissipated. Even before coronavirus hit, the margins of  foodservice  industries were being significantly eroded by large tech companies. Hotels, for example – a major provider of foodservice operations –  have been  decimated by Airbnb (Galloway 2018). A  recent feature in   The Counter  similarly declared that “the American restaurant is on life support ,” largely due to the broader displacement of brick- and-mortar by online shopping, automation, and warehouse fulfillment.   Demand for meal and grocery delivery services has further surged during the coronavirus crisis, but like all gig work, it’s highly precarious and has no benefits.  In short, c oronavirus thus threatens to further widen the economic gap between college-educated knowledge economy workers and  the rest of the labor pool , particularly in rural areas that lack access to broadband ."
"12" "Sociotechnical shifts"
"13" "The lesson that many financial analysts are drawing from this crisis is not that agriculture and industry needs to be localized, but rather that global supply chains need to be more diversified, flexible, and automated ( Derviş   and Strauss 2020 ). Coronavirus is already pushing global supply chain conglomerates to accelerate their transition to data-driven, automated, frictionless, no-touch, “smart” logistics – including self-driving vehicles - that are far less vulnerable to human frailty .  These features are enabled by big data, the  I nternet of  T hings, blockchain, artificial intelligence, robotics, and cloud/edge computing, which can allow operators to quickly identify and act on biosecurity risks and other disruptions.  Case in point,  the Chinese government  has recently  accelerated its subsidies for digital agricultural firms and industrial farming. This investment serves multiple purposes: reducing  coronavirus transmission , replacing aging, depopulated farming communities, and improving its bargaining position in US/China trade negotiations .  Other Chinese industries have similarly accelerated their investments and deployments of  artificial intelligence and robotics  in the aftermath of the crisis .   Moreover, unlike the United States and Europe, “China appears to be in the early stages of an economic rebound ( Reeves et al.   2020 , 1) .”  White-collar telecommuters are far from safe – they  may actually be  automated  before blue-collar workers, as quantitative analysis is generally easier to program than robotic manipulations of irregular physical objects (Lee  2018 ). This transition  could  be  further  accelerated by the massive movement of white-collar workers to home offices during the coronavirus pandemic. Just as many of the workers who were laid off during the 2008 financial crisis were never rehired, coronavirus is forcing corporations (including universities) to reconsider how they can more efficiently allocate their resources and minimize labor costs .   In short, coronavirus is  pushing  the global food system even faster into the 4 th  industrial revolution ( see  Schwab 2016) ."
"14" "These painful  socio economic transitions could make it much harder to confront climate change, as companies, governments, and publics may well remain preoccupied with the coronavirus until the global economy recovers .  This has outsized importance for the future of the global food system, as agriculture contributes to climate change while also being impacted by it. If the economy doesn’t recover, this could inhibit the ability of China to manufacture and export green  technologies, diminish the availability of capital for clean energy projects, and reduce the incentive to transition away from cheap oil   (Temple 2020) .  Some environmentalists are striking a more optimistic note, noting that the same type of collective mobilization, lifestyle adjustments, and public policy consensus that’s been used to confront the coronavirus could also be used to address the climate crises ."
"15" "Interpreting the early trends"
"16" "T he Treadmill of Production"
"17" "According to treadmill theory,  “any society driven by economic expansion is mired in a conflict with nature ( Fischer  and Jorgenson  2019 : 346 ). ”  Indeed, “continued human industrialization brings us closer to ecological thresholds and tipping points ( Gunderson and Stuart, 2014 : 61 ).”  These biosecurity risks have  moreover  been externalized by industries that  could never afford to pay for their aggregate and compounding costs.  When companies moreover trim their labor force and suppress wages, workers have less money to spend, which threatens the viability of the entire economic system ( O'Conner, 1991 ). This is glaringly apparent in the midst of the coronavirus pandemic, where workers who live paycheck to paycheck have no ability to withstand a temporary disruption.  Treadmill theory moreover argues that  when economic and environmental crises like the coronavirus strike,  nation states  feel  compelled to bail out  struggling  industr ies  in order to maintain the ir  growth imperative (Fischer  and Jorgenson  2019).  As elaborated by  ( Pellow and Brehm (2013 ,  232 ), “ the logic of such a system dictates that ever greater investments toward economic growth will usher in solutions to the socioecological crises the system caused in the first place.”  In the post-coronavirus era, however, it remains to be seen whether public officials and publics will agree to continue bailing out struggling industries.  Already, there has been significant public and political resistance to a repeat of the 2008  bailout  strategy, which propped up big banks but not struggling homeowners. Again,  difficult choices will likely be made as to which industries and companies will be saved and which will be left to fail ."
"18" "Another  concern  of treadmill theorists – the “metabolic rift” that capitalism has driven between rural production and urban consumption  ( Pellow and Brehm 2013 )  – requires further scrutiny in the post-coronavirus era. Biosecurity threats like coronavirus raise important theoretical, ethical, and empirical questions as to whether or not a metabolic rift between humans, animals, and the environment might sometimes be beneficial. Plant-based and cell-based food  technologies  that limit human-animal contact and reduce   intensive animal confinement could  thus  have significant  ethical, environmental, and  public health  advantages."
"19" "Ecological Modernization"
"20" "Drawing  in part  on the work of  Beck (1994),  who argued that the “universalization” of risks would bond publics together in collective solidarity, ecological modernization theorists are optimistic that technological innovation, civil society, and inclusive governance will eventually  manage to “decouple” economic growth from environmental degradation  ( Mol et al., 2014 ) . The massive collective action to tackle coronavirus would appear to lend some support for this theory, as the crisis has triggered a wave of multilateral cooperation, open access biomedical research, public/private partnerships,  state-led  action,  and  corporate social responsibility efforts ."
"21" "For  Ewing (2017),  ecological modernization fails to adequately account for the marginalized communities that have historically been excluded from such efforts. Coronavirus is a compelling test case for  these types of critiques. This pandemic  threatens the health and safety of all, but elderly , p oor , and refugee  communities that lack the resources to self-isolate are disproportionately vulnerable, both medically and economically.  Without tending to the needs of the most vulnerable, those in power will be less safe . Coronavirus would thus seem to exemplify the universalization of risk that Beck believed would compel solidarity and cooperation.   Jörgens   (2018)   is skeptical, however, as to what type of cooperation is emerging in response to these  global  risks. He anticipates that “large technical systems” are more politically acceptable and feasible than an “ecological civilization” based on social solidarity and sufficiency. In the  postcoronavirus  era, there is evidence to support this position as well; much of the response to the crisis has involved a redoubling of efforts to automate supply chains rather than fundamentally reconsider humanity’s relationship with animals and the environment."
"22" "Discussion"
"23" "The treadmill and ecological modernization theories provide  a useful starting point in understanding post-coronavirus  agrifood  systems , but both theories have limitations, particularly with respect to  the emergence of   “ authoritarian  capitalism ( Webb 2019 )” and “authoritarian  environmentalism  ( Zinda  et al. 2018 )”  in China.  To take one example, state policies and technological changes have reduced carbon emissions in Central and West China , but they have   increased  emissions in East China ( Chen et al. 2020 ).  In the aggregate, however,  Eckardt  et al. (2020 , 1 )  argue that  “tighter environmental regulations and massive green investments” have  successfully decoupled  China’s  economic growth from environmental degradation,  thus keeping China on  track to meet its Paris Agreement commitments.  In short,  Chinese environmental politics   cannot be pigeonholed between the two extremes of neoliberal capitalism and  democratic  eco - socialism  ( Zinda  et al .  2018) . Rather, it involves a “dance of domination and accumulation, degradation and rehabilitation ( Zinda  et al. 2018 ,  872 ) . ”  Moreover, b y implementing strict surveillance , biosecurity protocols,  and other social controls, China has addressed coronavirus   much more effectively than Western democracies,  the latter of which  have been  effectively stymied  by populist infighting , gridlock,   weak  political  leadership,  and  a  neoliberal  retrenchment from  social and environmental protections.   Washington Post  columnist David  Ignatius  has  accordingly warn ed  that “China’s authoritarian system is turning a corner toward recovery. American democracy needs to show that a free society can make that same turn nimbly and quickly.”"
"24" "Fischer and Jorgenson (2019 , 350 ), in seeking to “move beyond the stalemate” between the treadmill and ecological modernization camps, argue that “risk serves as a pivot for reorienting how society interacts with the natural environment, and these reorientations are multidirectional .”  This would  appear   to be an apt descriptor of  the  current moment . S ocial  response s to this crisis  have been fast paced, uneven, uncertain, and complex.   For Comerford (2020 , 1 ), “the response to coronavirus teaches is that people can still work together to do the right thing. We need hope, and trust in each other, to tackle the climate crisis. Perhaps, counter-intuitively, coronavirus will help us with this.”  Case in point,  U.S. elected  officials on the right and left  have  reached a working consensus in favor of   sick leave for workers and  no-strings cash payments, something that would have been almost unthinkable in the weeks before the crisis. While these types of  p rograms  could amount to a one-time shot in the arm, they could also pave the way towards  more empirical data , policy experimentation, and  public conversation   on  universal basic income , the social safety net,  and  the  future  of work  ( Gentilini , 2020 ) . These efforts, along with the European Commission’s recent investment in a green stimulus package,  are rays of hope that public policies could yet emerge that were adequate to the scale of our collective challenges."
"25" "References"
"26" "Chen,  Jiandong , Ming Gao,  Sachin  Kumar  Mangla ,  Malin  Song, and  Jie  Wen. 2020. Effects of technological changes on China's carbon emissions.   Technological Forecasting and Social Change  153:119938."
"27" "Comerford, David. 2020. Coronavirus should give us hope that we are able to tackle the climate crisis.  The Conversation . March 9."
"28" "Derviş  Kemal , and   Sebastián Strauss . 2020.  What COVID-19 Means for International Cooperation.  Project Syndicate.  March 6."
"29" "Eckardt , Sebastian, Raiser, Martin, and  Dafei  Huang. 2020.  The decoupling the world is waiting for: China’s green growth breakthrough.  Brookings.  February 4."
"30" "Ewing, Jeffrey A. 2017. Hollow ecology: ecological modernization theory and the death of nature.   Journal of World-Systems Research  23 (1):126-155."
"31" "Fisher, Dana R., and Andrew K. Jorgenson. 2019. Ending the Stalemate: Toward a Theory of Anthro-Shift.   Sociological Theory  37 (4):342-362."
"32" "Galloway, Scott. 2017.  The four: the hidden DNA of Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google : Random House."
"33" "Gentilini , Udo. 2020. 5 lessons for using universal basic income during a pandemic.  Brookings . March 13."
"34" "Gonçalves-Sá, Joana. 2020. In the fight against the new coronavirus outbreak, we must also struggle with human bias.   Nature Medicine  26 (3):305-305."
"35" "Gross, Michael. 2020. Virus outbreak crosses boundaries.   Current Biology  30 (5):R191-R194."
"36" "Gunderson, Ryan, and Diana Stuart. 2014. Industrial animal agribusiness and environmental sociological theory: Applications and areas for development.   International Journal of Sociology  44 (1):54-74."
"37" "Jörgens , Helge. 2018. What comes after ecological modernization as we know it? Environmental governance between Ecological Civilization and Ecological Modernization 2.0."
"38" "K uchipudi , Suresh. 2020.   Why so many epidemics originate in Asia and Africa – and why we can expect more.  The Conversation . March 4."
"39" "Lee, Kai-Fu. 2018.  AI superpowers: China, Silicon Valley, and the new world order : Houghton Mifflin Harcourt."
"40" "McKibbin , Warwick J, and  Roshen  Fernando. 2020. The global macroeconomic impacts of COVID-19: Seven scenarios."
"41" "Mol, Arthur PJ, Gert  Spaargaren , and DA Sonnenfeld. 2014. Ecological  Modernisation  Theory: where do we stand?   Ökologische   Modernisierung .  Zur   Geschichte  und  Gegenwart   eines   Konzepts  in  Umweltpolitik  und Sozialwissenschaften :35-66."
"42" "OECD. 2020.  OECD Economic Outlook, Interim Report March 2020 ."
"43" "Pellow, David N, and Hollie  Nyseth  Brehm. 2013. An environmental sociology for the twenty-first century.   Annual Review of Sociology  39:229-250."
"44" "Reeves , Martin,  Fæste , Lars, Chen, Cinthia, Carlsson- Szlezak , Philipp and Kevin Whitaker. 2020. How Chinese Companies Have Responded to Coronavirus.  Harvard Business Review.  March 10."
"45" "Schwab ,  Klaus.  2016.  The 4th industrial revolution .   New York: Crown Business ."
"46" "Temple, James. 2020. Why the coronavirus outbreak is terrible news for climate change.  MIT Technology Review . March 9."
"47" "Webb, Amy. 2019.  The big nine: How the tech titans and their thinking machines could warp humanity : Hachette UK."
"48" "Yadav,  Mahendra  Pal, Raj Kumar Singh, and Yashpal Singh Malik. 2020. Emerging and Transboundary Animal Viral Diseases: Perspectives and Preparedness. In  Emerging and Transboundary Animal Viruses , edited by Yashpal Singh Malik, Raj Kumar Singh and  Mahendra  Pal Yadav, 1-25. Singapore: Springer Singapore."
"49" "Wendong , Zhang and Tao  Xiong . 2020.  The coronavirus will delay agricultural export surges promised in trade deal with China .  The Conversation .    March 13."
"50" "Zinda , John Aloysius,  Yifei  Li, and John Chung- En  Liu. 2018. China’s summons for environmental sociology.   Current Sociology  66 (6):867-885."
