CRIME AND CORONAVIRUS: SOCIAL DISTANCING, LOCKDOWN, AND THE
MOBILITY ELASTICITY OF CRIME

Eric Halford1
Anthony Dixon2
Graham Farrell2
Nicolas Malleson2
Nick Tilley3

1

Lancashire Police

2

University of Leeds

3

University College London

Corresponding author: Graham Farrell, g.farrell@leed.ac.uk

ABSTRACT:
Governments around the world restricted movement of people, using social distancing and
lockdowns, to help stem the global coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic. We examine crime
effects for one UK police force area in comparison to 5-year averages. There is variation in the
onset of change by crime type, some declining from the WHO ‘global pandemic’ announcement
of 11 March, others later. By one week after the 23 March lockdown, all recorded crime had
declined 41%, with variation: shoplifting (-62%), theft (-52%), domestic abuse (-45%), theft
from vehicle (-43%), assault (-36%), burglary dwelling (-25%) and burglary non-dwelling (25%). We use Google Covid-19 Consumer Mobility Reports to calculate the mobility elasticity
of crime for four crime types, finding shoplifting and other theft inelastic but responsive to
reduced retail sector mobility (MEC = 0.84, 0.71 respectively), burglary dwelling elastic to
increases in residential area mobility (-1), with assault inelastic but responsive to reduced
workplace mobility (0.56). We theorise that crime rate changes were primarily caused by those
in mobility, suggesting a mobility theory of crime change in the pandemic. We identify
implications for crime theory, policy and future research.

Keywords: COVID-19 and crime; mobility and crime; movement and crime; Google COVID-19
consumer mobility reports; mobility elasticity of crime; mobility theory of crime.

Contents
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 1
METHOD ....................................................................................................................................... 3
Study area and crime data ........................................................................................................... 3
Crime rate model building and analysis ...................................................................................... 3
Mobility data ............................................................................................................................... 4
RESULTS ....................................................................................................................................... 5
Crime Rates and Mobility Rates ................................................................................................. 5
Mobility Elasticity of Crime ....................................................................................................... 6
DISCUSSION ................................................................................................................................. 7
Study Limitations ........................................................................................................................ 9
CONCLUSION ............................................................................................................................. 10
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................. 11

INTRODUCTION
In response to the coronavirus (covid-19) pandemic, governments around the world legislated for
the cessation of non-essential contact. With the introduction of social distancing and lockdowns,
it was soon apparent that the unanticipated effects upon crime could be dramatic (Farrell and
Tilley 2020, Ashby 2020, Bump 2020, Mohler et al. 2020). Here we study the effects on crime in
the days leading up to, and following, the introduction of a national stay-at-home lockdown.
While we focus on one UK police service area, the methodological approach may be more
broadly applicable, and the substantive findings of relevance for comparisons both to other
regions of the UK and other countries with similar socio-demographic and economic profiles.
The nature of the dramatic changes to mobility that occurred allow us to approach the study as a
natural experiment. We use crime data spanning five years to compare rates in 2020 to what
would have been expected based on trends from previous years. In addition, we use Google
COVID-19 Consumer Mobility Reports to compare area-based mobility to particular crime rates
of relevance. Specifically, we compare mobility change in the retail sector to changes in
shoplifting and other theft, mobility change in residential areas to burglary dwelling and theft
from vehicles, and mobility in retail and recreation areas to changes in assault. This allows us to
calculate the mobility elasticity of crime (MEC) as the percentage change in crime due to a one
percent change in mobility.
Our approach is informed by the theoretical perspectives of crime science, particularly the
lifestyle and routine activities approaches (Hindelang et al. 1978, Cohen and Felson 1979) that
identify crime opportunities as central (Clarke 2012). We view mobility as a core determinant of
the level of crime opportunities. Changes to mobility affect lifestyles and the likelihood of
interaction between potential targets (including victims) and potential offenders, and the
1

likelihood of surveillance and potential guardianship by others. In theory, covid-19 policies to
restrict movement will affect different crime types in different ways (Farrell and Tilley 2020).
For instance, increased time spent in the home might be expected to increase the opportunities
for domestic violence and child abuse to occur, because they are often committed by parents or
guardians, and potential victims and offenders are spending more time together. At the same
time, however, increased time spent in the home might increase guardianship and surveillance
against burglary. Reduced attendance at workplaces would be expected to reduce workplace
harassment, and reduced travel on public transport would be expected to reduce the many types
of crime that occur on such transport or around transport stations. Widespread closure of shops
would be expected to reduce shoplifting. With people spending greater work and leisure time
online, the opportunity for crimes to occur via the increases in virtual mobility. Hence changes to
mobility would not impact uniformly but, rather, different types of crimes would be affected in
different ways in different contexts, and we explore some specifics further in what follows.
The timeline and context for the study is as follows. On Wednesday 11 March 2020, the World
Health Organisation (WHO) declared covid-19 a global pandemic1. Five days later, on Monday
16 March, the UK government recommended nationwide cessation of all non-essential travel,
followed by, on Friday 20 March, an announcement that all bars, cafes, restaurants and gyms
were required to close that day. On Monday 23 March, a national ‘lockdown’ was announced.
Lockdown rules required everyone to stay home at all times with four exceptions; Exercise
(alone or with members of the same household); Shopping for basic necessities; Any medical
need, including providing care for a vulnerable person, and; Travel to or from work, but only
when a person cannot work from home (NPCC and College of Policing. 2020). These four dates
are shown as vertical lines in timeline charts in this study, and are labelled in Figure 2.
We find distinct declines in many recorded crime rates in the two weeks before, and in the period
immediately following lockdown. The sequencing of the onset of these declines tracked the
timeline of events, but with different crime types responding to different types of mobility
restriction at different times. While personal theft and theft from vehicles declined from 11
March, shoplifting and assaults declined from the introduction of restrictions on non-essential
travel from 16 March, while public disorder and criminal damage declined from the closure of
bars, restaurants and other such facilities on 20 March. We find preliminary evidence of prelockdown spikes in shoplifting, likely facilitated by the extra cover in crowded stores, and a
lesser spike in assaults immediately before the lockdown, likely due to anticipatory ‘last chance’
socialising. The first week of lockdown brought more substantial decreases in many types of
recorded crime.
We develop a metric to compare the changes in crime and mobility, which we term the mobility
elasticity of crime. We find shoplifting responsive (if technically inelastic) to change in mobility
in the retail sector, and burglary highly responsive to increased mobility in residential areas. We
find motor vehicle theft and assault inelastic though still somewhat responsive to changed
mobility in the workplace sector, and in residential and retail/recreation areas, respectively. The
primary conclusion of this study is that changes to mobility were the primary cause of changes to
the rates of many types of crime in the early stages of the pandemic.

2

METHOD
Study area and crime data
This study uses five years of daily counts of recorded crime data from a UK police service
covering over 5,000 square kilometres (2000 square miles) with a population in 2020 of around
1.5 million. The service employed over 5,000 persons with nearly 3,000 police officers and over
2000 police staff.2 Crimes recorded between 8 March and 02 April 2020 are compared to the
expected rates based on crimes recorded in the previous four years.3
The police service’s recorded crime data was assessed as ‘Good’ in a 2019 report by Her
Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabularies and Fire and Rescue Services covering data since 2017
(HMICFRS 2017, 2019). The report estimated recording accuracy of the Police Force at 93.3
percent with a confidence interval of +/- 1.48 percent.4 The models we used, described next,
account for variation in data quality by increasing the confidence intervals, making statistically
significant changes harder to detect. The overall effect is therefore to make the study findings
conservative, that is, under-stated.

Crime rate model building and analysis
The expected level of crime in 2020 was forecast using models that drew on data from previous
years. Five years’ of recorded crime data was used for the period covering the latter end of
February, the whole of March and the beginning of April.5 The same five-week period was used
from each year, to minimize seasonal confounds. The five weeks were aligned by day of the
week to minimize potential effects of differences due to day of the week. Specifically, data for
each year was aligned by the third Friday in March. The data was then trimmed to provide a 35day snapshot that broadly included the last week of February and all of March for each year, the
process governed by the need to have whole weeks and to exclude school or public holidays
(avoiding possible confounds because the dates often vary by year). The data were collected in
mid-April to alleviate the delay in crime reporting that can occur. That is, although the crime
series data end on 02 April, they were compiled in the days after that date, which should account
for any lag between crime events taking place and being recorded by the police.
Time series models were built using the 2016 to 2019 data and the first week of records from
2020, the latter to account for the longer-term national crime decline. The remainder of the 2020
data, from 06 March to 02 April 2020, comprised the Test data, that is, the actual rates for
comparison to the expected rates from the model.
For model building, the Training data were transformed into a time series with frequency seven.
Trend, daily effects and weather effects were removed by applying separate linear regressions for
each effect, and the coefficients used in the models. A piecewise linear model approach was
adopted (Chatfield 2016) which allowed trends to be analyzed sequentially in order to mitigate
breaks in data, changes to reporting, and other changes in trend. Hence, while seasonality and
weather effects relate to the entire reporting period, trend information was used in a more
targeted manner so that expected/forecast values contained the appropriate trends. Potential
weather effects were represented by the maximum daily temperature and amount of rainfall
(mm)6. Interaction affects within weather and day of the week were not statistically significant,
which meant that the simpler models described below were adopted. The resulting residuals from
3

the detrended and deseasoned models were analysed with ARIMA time series models,
appropriate models then selected using an automated function in R (Hydman et al 2020). The
automated function used a step-wise selection algorithm (Hydman and Khandakar 2008) based
upon Akaike information criterion (AIC) to iteratively determine the coefficients for the ARIMA
model which best explained the deseasoned and detrended residuals. The resulting ARIMA
model was used, along with the daily effect, the weather effect and trend, to produce a forecast
value for each crime type with an associated 95% confidence interval.7 Hence the general
equation for the crime rate was:
𝑋𝑡 = 𝜇(𝑡) + 𝑠(𝑡) + 𝑤(𝑡) + 𝜖𝑡
where 𝑋𝑡 is the Crime rate, 𝜇(𝑡) is the trend, 𝑠(𝑡) is the daily effect, 𝑤(𝑡) is the weather effect
and 𝜖𝑡 are the random errors. All at time t.

Mobility data
Previous studies have used various data sources to explore the role of ambient populations upon
crime rates (Andresen 2006, Malleson and Andresen, 2015a, b, Boivin, 2018, Kounadi et al.,
2018, Hipp et al., 2019, Johnson et al, in press). Due to the recent time period under study here,
these data were unavailable. To examine mobility, we use data extracted from the Google
COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports8.
The mobility reports “show how visits and length of stay at different places change” based on
data from phone users who have turned on their location history (Google 2020). The reports are
aggregations of locations over time and compare recent activity to a historical baseline. The six
locations or spheres of activity used are: residential, retail & recreation, workplaces, grocery
stores9, parks, and transit stations. A limitation of the data is that the baseline is the median
value, for the corresponding day of the week, during the 5-week period Jan 3–Feb 6, 2020
(Google 2020). This means that the mobility data baseline comparison is less rigorous than that
for our crime data (and something that future research should seek to overcome).
We compared changes in mobility and crime to calculate the mobility elasticity of crime (MEC)
as a metric of the change in crime in response to a change in mobility. The MEC draws upon the
concept of the price elasticity of demand, which gauges the effect upon consumer demand in
response to the change in the price of a good.
To operationalise the MEC, we identified crime-mobility combinations where there were
evidential and theoretical grounds to expect a relationship. Around half of the recorded theft in
the study area was shoplifting, which is by definition located largely at retail areas. Around two
thirds of personal theft occurred in or around a shop or supermarket, a public entertainment area
or the street, or inside a pub according to the most recently available Crime Survey for England
and Wales data (CSEW, ONS 2019a)10. Consequently, we compared shoplifting and other theft
to mobility in retail and recreation areas.
Burglary dwelling occurs in residential areas, so they were our most obvious pairing. Around a
third of assaults occurred at or around the workplace, but of those where the location could be
grouped into one of the mobility area categories, the workplace accounted for over half (CSEW
2019a). So we paired assaults with workplace mobility while recognising the potential
4

limitations11. Over three quarters of theft from vehicles occurred at or around the home
according to the most recent CSEW findings, so we compared trends in theft from vehicles to
those in residential area mobility.

RESULTS
Crime Rates and Mobility Rates
A summary of the changes to crime rates for the ‘pre-lockdown’ period 11-23 March, and by one
week after lockdown, are shown as Figure 1. Note that readers should interpret Figure 1 in the
context of the confidence intervals for individual crime types in Figures 2-4 and Table 1. By one
week after lockdown, all crime types had declined with the exception of theft of motor vehicles.
Theft and shoplifting had declined by more than half, assault, theft from vehicles and domestic
abuse between a third and a half, and burglary by a quarter.

INSERT FIGURES 1-4 ABOUT HERE

The ‘all crime’ category declined after 11 March (Figure 2), and was statistically significantly
different from the expected rate by 21 March, remaining so for the duration of the study period
(Table 1). The decline had levelled-off by late March. All individual types of recorded crime
began to decline before lockdown, with variation in the timing and extent, as discussed below.
The crime-specific results that follow are chronological by date of onset of identifiable change,
in order to correspond with Table 2 which is discussed later.

INSERT TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE

Theft declined from the WHO ‘global pandemic’ announcement of 11 March and fell 20 percent
by 13 March. A decline in shoplifting began around 16 March when non-essential travel ceased,
but was particularly pronounced after lockdown, becoming statistically significantly low and
remaining so through early April (Figure 3 and Table 1). By the end of March, one week after
lockdown, shoplifting had declined 62% and all theft 40 percent. In previous years there had
been a sharp decline in shoplifting on Sundays, which was less marked in March 2020. Theft
from vehicles also declined from 11 March, and halved by mid-March (while theft of vehicles
declined later, following lockdown). Recorded sex offences declined from around 13 March, the
trend continuing through March.
The ‘vulnerable child’ category refers to any type of recorded crime where a child was flagged
as vulnerable. This means that the 41 percent decline in all recorded crime would, other things
equal, produce a similar decline in vulnerable child records. Hence a preferable measure is
change is the proportion of recorded crimes with a vulnerable child indicator, shown as Figure 4.

5

Assaults declined from 16 March, continuing through March, but the weekend increases of
previous years were absent. Recorded domestic abuse declined from around 16 March onwards,
and had declined (statistically significantly) by over 40 percent one week after lockdown, with
weekend peaks also less prominent.
Criminal damage declined after 20 March. The apparent resurgence in criminal damage around
30 March may reflect delayed reporting after a weekend. Public disorder also declined from 20
March, with previous weekend increases absent, with a possible early April increase.
Burglary declined following lockdown on 23 March, falling by half over the next week. A
possible resurgence in burglary dwelling by early April could reflect a reporting increase after
the weekend. Theft of vehicles, while numerically small as a daily count, declined from the
lockdown of 23 March.
Changes in mobility in the six types of area, relative to the baseline, are shown in Figure 5. That
around residential areas increased from 16 March, and one week after lockdown there was
around 25 percent more mobility than expected in residential areas (Figure 5). Movement around
workplaces declined rapidly from 16 March and had fallen more than 50 percent by one week
after the 23 March lockdown. Mobility around retail and recreation areas decreased after 16
March and had declined by three-quarters compared to the expected rate by one week after
lockdown. There was increased movement around grocery stores in mid-March, followed by a
substantial decline beginning before lockdown on 23 March, with a decline of around a third by
one week after lockdown. There was greater than usual movement around parks for much of
March, but a sharp decline by late March. Mobility around transit stations declined from 16
March and had declined by well over half by one week after lockdown.

INSERT FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE

Mobility Elasticity of Crime
The visual comparisons of the deviation from baseline expectations for the crime type and
mobility comparisons are shown as Figure 6. The resulting mobility elasticities of crime are
shown as Table 2.

INSERT FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE
INSERT TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE.

Visual inspection of Figure 6 suggests that the timing and magnitude of change to shoplifting
and other theft tend to coincide with those to mobility in retail and recreation areas. The
respective MECs of 0.84 and 0.71 are inelastic but suggest that both are quite responsive. That is,
each one percent reduction in mobility produced slightly less than a one percent change in theft.

6

The timing and magnitude of change to burglary dwelling and residential area mobility fit quite
well (Figure 6), but inversely. That is, increased residential area mobility corresponded with
decreases in burglary dwelling. The MEC of -1.04 is effectively unitary which suggests that a
one percent increase in residential area mobility produces a one percent reduction in residential
burglary.
The timing and magnitude of change to assaults and workplace mobility do not coincide quite as
well as those discussed so far. After lockdown, workplace mobility declines proportionally more
than assaults (Figure 5). The MEC of 0.56 supports this interpretation, suggesting that each one
percent decline in workplace mobility produces a 0.56 percent decline in assaults.
The weakest relationship examined here is that between the timing and magnitude of change to
theft from vehicles and residential area mobility. Theft from vehicles declines earlier, more
rapidly and to a greater extent than residential area mobility increases (Figure 5). The MEC of 1.74 is elastic, suggesting that theft from vehicles declines more than proportionally in response
to increases in residential area mobility, but the lack of good visual fit between the two suggests
this should be interpreted with caution.

DISCUSSION
Area-based mobility and crime types are discussed separately first. The two aspects are then
brought together in a discussion of their relationship.
Changes in area-based mobility levels in the study area fit largely with expectations and the
timeline of covid-19 and related policies (Beadsworth 2020). Mobility in most areas declined in
the lead-up to or shortly following lockdown, reflecting restrictions on movement. The increased
movement in parks prior to lockdown probably reflects the warmest March since 1957 (BBC
2020a). The short-term pre-lockdown increase in mobility at grocery stores reflects preparatory
purchases and stockpiling. Mobility around areas of retail and recreation, workplaces and transit
stations began to decline from 16 March, reflecting the national advisory to cease non-essential
travel and work at home.12 Mobility trends in these three areas are similar, reflecting the
interconnectedness of the activities that they represent. The increase in mobility around
residential area occurs as people remained at home but undertook permitted local exercise.
Variations in the onset of change by crime type correspond largely with the timeline of change
relating to covid-19 from 11 March onwards: a summary of the timeline and onsets of change is
given as Table 3. The timing of the onset of decline in the ‘all crime’ category coincided with the
WHO announcement of a ‘global pandemic’ on 11 March. Theft, which as a higher volume
crime contributes more to the ‘all crime’ category for present purposes, declined from 11 March
(Figure 3). From 16 March, as social distancing was more formally introduced, and non-essential
travel reduced, the decline in mobility at retail and recreation areas, workplace areas and transit
stations began (if slowly), and so too did the declines in assaults. The closure of bars, restaurants,
and gyms from 20 March largely coincides with the onset of declines in criminal damage and
public disorder.
INSERT TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE

7

Shoplifting had declined dramatically by the first week of lockdown. Most retail (non-grocery)
shops and stores were closed at lockdown, dramatically reducing shoplifting opportunities.
Supermarkets and other stores that remained open promoted social distancing, which may have
discouraged shoplifting. It is possible that stores that remained open experienced an increase in
shoplifting. However, if they did, then it was at most a small-fraction of total potential crime
displacement, consistent with other findings (Johnson et al. 2014).
Non-shoplifting other thefts declined earlier than shoplifting. By one week after lockdown, other
thefts had declined around half, that is, extensively but not as much as shoplifting. The overall
decline fits with expectation that fewer potential victims of theft were available in retail and
recreation areas, as well as on public transport and at workplaces where mobility had declined.
The proportionally greater reduction in shoplifting than other theft is explained by the closure of
almost all stores where shoplifting could take place, whereas a greater proportion of
opportunities for other thefts remained elsewhere.
Recorded burglary dwelling declined a quarter by the first week of lockdown. By any normal
measure this was a large decline. It is likely explained by increased home guardianship and
surveillance (including of neighbours) as residents stayed home. However, the decline is less
than that in shoplifting and arguably not as extensive as might have been expected. The mobility
elasticity of burglary, being unitary, sheds light on this issue. While burglary was highly
responsive to change in residential area movement, that movement only increased 25 percent. If
guardianship and surveillance increased proportionally with movement then perhaps the 25
percent decline in burglary is readily explained.
The one quarter reduction in burglary of non-dwellings also fits with the explanation for burglary
dwelling. While many commercial premises would be closed and locked, they would not benefit
from the guardianship of increased occupancy (except natural surveillance from those
overlooking such premises). Decreased movement of offenders might have played a greater role,
but further research is needed to investigate that possibility further.
Elsewhere we suggested that domestic violence would be expected to increase under lockdown
(Farrell and Tilley 2020). Other things equal, increased interactions between potential victims
and offenders in domestic setting would represent an increase in the number of opportunities for
domestic abuse. It is possible that the drop in recorded domestic abuse found here is genuine, and
could have come about as a response to a decrease in external pressure placed on a household,
for example, through reduced alcohol consumption in bars or shorter working hours. However,
there is increasing evidence that an increase in domestic violence has occurred (BBC 2020c, The
Guardian 2020). The 40 percent decline in recorded domestic abuse observed here is, we
suggest, more likely to reflect a reduction in reporting and recording. There are multiple routes
by which this could occur. In particular, social distancing may well have increased the difficulty
of reporting domestic abuse if the offender remained on scene and could not be separated. If this
is the case then there is evidence of a worrying increase in the number of victims not having
access to the help and assistance they need, and that this is not conveyed by the recorded crime
statistics.
We interpret the pronounced decline in theft from vehicles as reflecting reduced use of vehicles.
This means that fewer vehicles were parked in city centres during the working day, or in other
non-home locations such as entertainment districts at other times, where they may have been
8

vulnerable to theft. Previous research has shown that vehicles parked at home, particularly those
on driveways or in garages, are at reduced risk of theft (Clarke and Mayhew 1994).
The small numbers and greater daily variability in theft of vehicles makes it harder to interpret
the trend. However, it is possible that, with the exception of the days immediately following
lockdown, there is a less discernible effect upon theft of vehicles. The major reductions in
vehicle theft in recent decades means that proportionally more of it has become professional or
organised in recent years, requiring offenders with greater skills. This includes the commission
of car-key burglaries, RFID-interception and immobilizer-bypass technologies (Wellsmith and
Burrell 2005, Brown 2016). If these resourceful offenders were more likely to ignore the
lockdown, and perhaps to view it as an opportunity to search for desirable on-street vehicles with
less natural surveillance due to reduced footfall, then it is possible that theft of vehicle would not
decline to the same extent as the less-skilled crime of theft from vehicles. These are issues that
further research and larger datasets, discriminating between age, make and recovery of stolen
vehicles, might explore.
The workplace mobility elasticity of assault of 0.56 indicates that each one percent decline in
mobility in and around the workplace produces around half the impact in terms of reduced
assaults. Recall, however, that only around a third of assaults occurred at or around the
workplace, so it would not necessarily be expected to be a strong relationship. More generally,
the declines in assault, criminal damage and public order offences found here are largely
consistent with the declines in outdoor activities at retail and recreation areas. This includes
attendance at sporting events and other forms of recreation and entertainment including the
closure of pubs and bars.
The decline in the proportion of crimes with a vulnerable child indicator may have occurred as a
result of a change in the crime mix, as a result of reduced likelihood of reporting and recording
of vulnerable children, as a result of an actual decline, or some combination of these possibilities.
Sex crimes are rarely reported and recorded, making interpretation of the trend difficult. If
recorded sex offences are more likely to be outside the home, then reduced mobility in relevant
areas may well explain this reduction, but further research should examine such issues.
Study Limitations
Some types of crime are less likely to be reported to the police than others (Office for National
Statistics 2020). For this study, reporting and recording will also have been affected by
circumstances particular to the pandemic. This could include the effect of police staff absences
due to illness or self-isolations, the need to reduce risk of infection in police work, the closure of
some custody suites, and increased single-crewing of police vehicles to promote social
distancing. Victim surveys may, in time, provide insight into the extent to which this occurred.
A potential limitation of the crime rate modelling was that, if the effects of covid-19 spread
earlier than we assumed then the effect would be included in the week of 2020 data used in the
forecasting model. It is also possible that other variables influenced the 2020 crime rates
differentially in comparison to previous years, the most likely effect of which would be to inflate
the confidence intervals for the present analysis. Both these possibilities would make our
estimates more conservative, under-stating the effect of change attributable to covid-19. In
general, however, the size of the crime rate change in 2020 and its correspondence with both the
timeline, mobility change and the fit with theoretical expectation, indicates that change relating
9

to the covid-19 pandemic played the primary role.
The Google Covid-19 Consumer Mobility Reports data was grouped into six areas, which were
imperfect for present purposes. For example, it is likely that a comparison of shoplifting to
mobility in some combination of the grocery and retail areas would be preferable. Proportional
weighting of mobility areas according to areas where crimes occur might improve the quality of
the match. Ideally, both datasets would be georeferenced to allow more precise spatial analysis.
Hence further research would benefit from more precise geographical linking of the mobility and
crime data. In addition, the baseline comparison group for the mobility data was earlier weeks in
2020, which is less robust than a baseline comparison group from several previous years of data:
it is to be hoped that further research can continue to develop these comparisons.
The aggregate mobility data used here did not distinguish between the movement of potential
offenders and potential victims. Perhaps future research, using retrospective tracking of mobility
at the individual level, can develop such comparisons. For example, the movements of known
offenders and those arrested during the course of events examined here, could be separately
traced to determine the extent to which they varied from aggregate movement patterns and those
of other sections of the population. To that extent, mobility tracking has potentially widespread
implications for the study of crime.
This study did not address all types of crime. This includes drug-related offences and organised
crimes of various types. We recognise that new opportunities have arisen for fraud and theft of
medical equipment, while many online crime types are likely to have been facilitated by
increased online remote working and leisure activities, but were outside the scope of this study.
In the context of mobility though, physical movement restrictions can, via increased online work
and leisure, increase the virtual movement necessary for internet-related crimes from online child
sexual abuse to fraud, and this suggests how the present study may shed light on changes to other
types of crime.

CONCLUSION
Most governments around the world restricted the movement of people through some
combination of social distancing and lockdown, as part of efforts to tackle the coronavirus
pandemic. This produced a range of unintended consequences, including upon crime.
This study examined the effects on crime in the days leading up to, and following, a lockdown.
Changes were found to largely fit with predictions, based on crime science theories, set out
before much of the evidence was available (Farrell and Tilley 2020)13. Our principal conclusion
here is that variations in the timing and trajectory of crime rate changes largely reflect those in
mobility that occurred in response to covid-19 and policies to address it. That is, we suggest a
mobility theory of crime change in the pandemic.
Many crimes continued to be committed during these early stages of the pandemic. For example,
shoplifting declined 60 percent which means it still occurred at 40 percent of its expected level.
Here the mobility elasticity of crime offers useful explanatory insight. For example, the inverse
unitary relationship between residential area mobility and burglary dwelling fits with how
mobility changes in residential areas were relatively smaller than those in retail and recreation
areas, and so too were the effects on crime.
10

In addition to the need for replication and extension of the work begun here, there are other
issues for further research. Clearly, further study of the mobility-crime relationship is needed,
amongst which the potential to examine offender and victim mobility may prove particularly
fruitful. More generally speaking, alternative applications of mobility reports, particularly if they
can be further disaggregated, holds significant potential. Victim surveys should shed light on the
reporting and recording of crime in the pandemic. We also recognise that there are various types
of crime not addressed here that are also important and will have been facilitated by conditions
relating to the pandemic. Changes to virtual mobility, that is, online traffic in different domains,
may shed light on online crimes just as physical mobility has shed light on physical crimes here.
Many crime types have been in long-term decline in recent decades, particularly in developed
countries. Reduced crime opportunities, mediated by improved security and reduced target
suitability, has emerged as a strong explanation (Farrell et al. 2014). Crime changes relating to
the coronavirus pandemic are consistent with effects upon crime opportunities of changes to
mobility. That is, the relatively short-term rapid changes in crime experienced during the covid19 pandemic appear consistent with the explanation offered for the longer-term international
crime drop, but so too with increases in cybercrime, fraud and other new and emerging crimes
that emerged as the result of increased crime opportunities. Policy and practice based on this
insight are likely to differ from those seeking to address crime from other perspectives.
The reduced crime opportunities to which the international crime drop is attributed have been
found to disproportionately reduce juvenile offending. One study suggested this has had a
longer-term ‘legacy effect’ because each annual cohort of juvenile offenders was smaller,
meaning fewer continued in offending over the life-course, thereby further reducing crime in the
decades that followed (Farrell, Laycock and Tilley 2015). The pandemic could, conceivably,
produce a similar but smaller legacy effect if the 2020 cohort of potential young offender
remained uninitiated, or found offending more difficult and less rewarding, because of mobility
restrictions. If there is something to this, the smaller 2020 cohort of continuing offenders will
produce an inadvertent beneficial legacy of covid-19 policies in years to come.

REFERENCES
Andresen, M.A. (2006). Crime measures and the spatial analysis of criminal activity. British
Journal of Criminology, 46(2), 258 - 285.
Ashby, M. (2020). Initial evidence on the relationship between the coronavirus pandemic and
crime in the United States, Crime Science, 9(6); 1-16. (We also used the version of 28 March
2020).
BBC. (2020a). March weather third warmest on record says Met Office, BBC News online, at
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-17595024 accessed 25 April 2020.
BBC. (2020b).Coronavirus: London parks closing as aeras urge tourists to stay away.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-51995092 accessed 25 April 2020.
BBC. (2020c). Coronavirus: Domestic abuse calls up 25% since lockdown, charity says.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-52157620 accessed 23 April 2020.
11

Boivin, R. (2018). Routine activity, population(s) and crime: Spatial heterogeneity and
conflicting propositions about the neighborhood crime-population link. Applied Geography, 95,
79-87.
Brown. (2016). Vehicle crime prevention and the co-evolutionary arms race: Recent offender
countermoves using immobiliser bypass technology. Security Journal. 30. 10.1057/s41284-0160001-1.
Bump, P. 2020. Crime fell in a locked-down New York City – but less than you might think,
Washington Post, 15 April 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/04/15/crimefell-locked-down-new-york-city-but-less-than-you-might-think/ accessed 22 April 2020.
Chatfield, C. (2016). The Analysis of Time Series: An Introduction. CRC Press.
Clarke, Ronald V. (2012). Opportunity makes the thief. Really? And so what? Crime Science,
1(2); 1-9.
Clarke, R.V. and Mayhew, P. (1994) Parking patterns and car theft risks: Policy-relevant
findings from the British Crime Survey. Crime Prevention Studies, 3, pp.91-107.
Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity
approach. American sociological review, 588-608.
Beadsworth, J. (2020). ‘UK Coronavirus timeline: From liberty to lockdown, EachOther,
At https://eachother.org.uk/uk-coronavirus-timeline-from-liberty-to-lockdown/ accessed 12 May
2020.
Farrell, G. and N. Tilley. 2020. Coronavirus: How crime changes during a lockdown. The
Conversation, 02 April. At https://theconversation.com/coronavirus-how-crime-changes-duringa-lockdown-134948 , accessed 02 April 2020.
Farrell, G., G. Laycock and N. Tilley. (2015). ‘Debuts and legacies: The crime drop and the role
of adolescence-limited and persistent offending’ Crime Science, 4(16); 1-10.
Farrell, G., N. Tilley and A. Tseloni. 2014. ‘Why the crime drop?’ in M. Tonry (Ed.) Why Crime
Rates Fall and Why They Don’t, volume 43 of Crime and Justice: A Review of Research.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (pp. 421-490).
Felson, M., & Boivin, R. (2015). Daily crime flows within a city. Crime Science, 4, Article 31.
Guardian, The. (2020). Domestic abuse surge in coronavirus lockdown could have lasting
impact, MPs say, at https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/apr/27/domestic-abuse-surgecoronavirus-lockdown-lasting-impact-mps , accessed 30 April 2020.
Google (2019) Mobility Report CSV Documentation.
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/data_documentation.html?hl=en accessed 23 April
2020.
Hindelang, M. J., M.R. Gottfredson and J. Garafalo. (1978) Victims of Personal Crime: An
Empirical Foundation for a Theory of Personal Victimisation. Cambridge, Mass: Ballinger.

12

Hipp, J. R., Bates, C., Lichman, M., & Smyth, P. (2019). Using social media to measure
temporal ambient population: Does it help explain local crime rates? Justice Quarterly, 36(4),
718 – 748.
Historical Weather Data, Preston. https://www.worldweatheronline.com/hwd/default.aspx .
Accessed on 12 April 2020.
HMICFRS (Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services). 2017.
Lancashire Constabulary: Crime Data Integrity inspection 2017.
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/publications/lancashire-crime-data-integrityinspection-2017/. Accessed on 24 April 2020.
HMICFRS (Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire and Rescue Services). 2019.
Lancashire Constabulary: Crime Data Integrity Re-Inspection 2019, 16 May 2019. At
https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/publications/lancashire-constabulary-crimedata-integrity-re-inspection-2019/ accessed 06 April 2020.
Home Office. 2020. Counting Rules for Recorded Crime,
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/counting-rules-for-recorded-crime. Accessed 06
April 2020.
Hyndman, Khandakar (2008). “Automatic Time Series Forecasting: The Forecast Package for
R.” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 27, no. 3, Foundation for Open Access Statistics, 2008,
pp. 1–22, doi:10.18637/jss.v027.i03.
Hyndman R, Athanasopoulos G, Bergmeir C, Caceres G, Chhay L, O'Hara-Wild M, Petropoulos
F, Razbash S, Wang E, Yasmeen F (2020). forecast: Forecasting functions for time series and
linear models. R package version 8.12, http://pkg.robjhyndman.com/forecast.
Johnson,S.D., R.T Guerette and K. Bowers. 2014. Crime displacement: What we know, what we
don’t know, and what is means for crime reduction, Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10,
549-571.
Johnson, P. M. A. Andresen, N. Malleson (in press) Cell towers and the ambient population: A
spatial analysis of disaggregated property crime. European Journal on Criminal Policy and
Research
Kounadi, O., Ristea, A., Leitner, M., & Langford, C. (2018). Population at risk: Using areal
interpolation and Twitter messages to create population models for burglaries and robberies.
Cartography and Geographic Information Science, 45(3), 205-220.
Malleson, N., & Andresen, M. A. (2015a). Spatio-temporal crime hotspots and the ambient
population. Crime Science, 4(1). Article 10.
Malleson, N., & Andresen, M. A. (2015b). The impact of using social media data in crime rate
calculations: Shifting hot spots and changing spatial patterns. Cartography and Geographic
Information Science, 42(2).
mynewsdesk. Over 4,000 domestic abuse arrests made since COVID-19 restrictions introduced
https://www.mynewsdesk.com/uk/metpoliceuk/news/over-4000-domestic-abuse-arrests-madesince-covid-19-restrictions-introduced-400900. Accessed 24 April 2020.
13

New Scientist. 2020. ‘Covid-19’. Newscientist.com , version of 26 March 2020.
Office for National Statistics. (2019a). The Nature of Violent Crime in England and Wales: year
ending March 2018. Office for National Statistics, release of 28 February 2019.
Office for National Statistics. (2019b). Nature of crime: personal and other theft, Dataset release
date 28 February 2019, at
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/datasets/natureofcrime
personalandothertheft , accessed 15 April 2020.
Office for National Statistics. 2020. Crime in England and Wales: Year Ending December 2019.
ONS Statistical Bulletin, 23 April 2020. Office for National Statistics.
Wellsmith, Melanie & Burrell, Amy. (2005). The Influence of Purchase Price and Ownership
Levels on Theft Targets: The Example of Domestic Burglary. British Journal of Criminology,
45. 10.1093/bjc/azi003.

14

Table 1: Change in crime rates by 02 April
Crime type
All recorded crime
All Theft
Domestic Abuse
Vulnerable child
Assault
Public Order

Days since 16th March
below expected
outside confidence
rate
interval
100%
78%
100%
72%
100%
61%
94%
56%
89%
50%
94%
44%

Shoplifting
Criminal Damage
Theft from vehicle

89%
89%
100%

39%
28%
17%

Sex crimes
All burglary
Burglary non-dwelling

100%
56%
72%

11%
6%
0%

Burglary dwelling
67%
0%
Theft of vehicle
44%
0%
Note: ‘Vulnerable adult’ category excluded due to data quality.

Table 2: Mobility elasticity of crime by crime type
Crime type
Shoplifting
Other Theft
Burglary dwelling
Assault
Theft from vehicle

% change
in crime
-61.58
-52.36
-25.44
-35.56
-43.32

Location
Retail & recreation
Retail & recreation
Residential
Workplace
Residential

% change
mobility
-73.65
-73.65
24.84
-63.18
24.84

Mobility elasticity
of crime (MEC)
0.84
0.71
-1.04
0.56
-1.74

15

Table 3: Timeline dates with changes in mobility and crime
Period
1

Date & event
11 March 2020: WHO
‘global pandemic’
announcement

Mobility change
Increased mobility around
grocery stores until lockdown;

2

16 March 2020: No noneessential travel - ‘formal
social distancing’

Onset of decreases at Retail &
recreation, and Workplaces.
Onset of increase at
residential areas.

3

20 March 2020:
Closure of bars,
restaurants. gyms etc
23 March 2020:
National lockdown

4

Decreased mobility around
grocery stores begins

Crime change
‘All crime’ decline begins;
Declines begin for theft (other
theft), theft from vehicles and
recorded sex offences.
Assaults decline begins
(subsequent weekend spikes
were absent). Shoplifting
decline begins
Criminal damage decline begins
(weekend spikes absent);
Public disorder decline begins
Burglary decline begins;
Theft of vehicles decline begins.

16

Figure 1: Percent change in crime by week after lockdown

17

Figure 2: All crime – comparison of March 2020 actual and expected rates

18

Figure 3: Recorded property crime rates per 10,000 population – Comparison of March
2020 to expected rate

Figure 4: Vulnerable child indications as proportion of all crime
19

Figure 5: Mobility changes by area relative to baseline expected rate

Figure 6: Comparison of changes in crime and mobility (relative to baseline expected
rates) for crime-mobility pairs used in elasticities analysis and shown in Table 2
20

Notes
1

We refer to covid-19 as the term used by the World Health Organisation for what is formally known as ‘severe
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2’ or SARS-CoV-2 according to the Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses
(New Scientist 2020).
2
Lancashire Constabulary. 2020. ‘What We Are and What We Do’ Lancashire Constabulary website, at
https://www.lancashire.police.uk/about-us/accessing-information/publication-scheme/who-we-are-and-what-wedo/ accessed 06 April 2020.
3
The crime categories included in this analysis are: burglary of a dwelling (burglary dwelling) and burglary of nondwellings (burglary non-dwelling), both categories including relevant distraction and attempted offences; theft
offences which we split into shoplifting and ‘other theft’ offences (including theft of pedal cycle, theft by an
employee, theft of mail, dishonest use of electricity, theft from a machine or meter, blackmail and all other theft
offences); theft of motor vehicles; theft from motor vehicles; criminal damage; public disorder; violence against
the person (including, assaults with injury, assaults without injury, cruelty to children, child abduction, murder,
manslaughter, all assaults on a constable and all racially or religiously aggravated assault); domestic abuse;
vulnerable child offences (any crime record identifying a vulnerable child). We also include a category of all
recorded crime. For further specifics, readers are referred to the national Counting Rules for Recorded Crime
(Home Office 2020).
4
There had been questions raised about the accuracy of the recorded crime data before 2018, and adjustments
were made to data for some crime types to account for under-recording during this period through piecewise
linear models.
5
Crime data was available for some but not the whole five-year period for criminal damage, vulnerable child
indications, sex crimes and public order offences, as detailed further in the text.
6
Historic Weather data, Worldweatheronline.com accessed 23 April 2020.
7
As an additional quality control check, we ran a placebo model for 2019, and the forecasts it produced remained
within confidence intervals for the duration of the study period.
8
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/
9
Technically this is the ‘grocery and pharmacy’ area. In the US, for which the area categories were defined,
pharmacies are often larger and more similar to UK supermarkets so, for clarity in the present context, we drop
the term ‘pharmacy’ here.
10
The remainder of personal theft occurred at public transport or ‘other’ locations;
11
This excludes the CSEW locations ‘On the street’ and ‘Other’.
12
In addition, there was increased mobility around grocery stores before lockdown (not shown in our Figures, likely
reflecting planning purchases or ‘stockpiling’ of food. There was reduced mobility around transit stations from 16
March (with timing and magnitude similar to workplace areas). There was a relatively late decline in mobility
around parks, likely reflecting continued use of parks until new police enforcement powers to enforce the
lockdown came into effect on 26 March.
13
Farrell and Tilley (2020) was drafted 24 March, pitched for publication 25 March, revised and published 02 April.

21

