The Digital Divide in Online Education. Inequality in Digital Preparedness of Students
and Schools before the Start of the COVID-19 Pandemic

Herman G. van de Werfhorst
Emma Kessenich
Sara Geven
Department of Sociology
University of Amsterdam
P.O. Box 16608
1001 NA Amsterdam
Netherlands
H.G.vandeWerfhorst@uva.nl
This research has partially been funded by ZonMW, grant 10430032010003

The Digital Divide in Online Education. Inequality in Digital Preparedness of Students
and Schools before the Start of the COVID-19 Pandemic

Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has disordered the educational process across the globe, as schools
suddenly had to provide their teaching in an online environment. One question that raised
immediate concern is the potential effects of this forced and rapid digitalization on
inequalities in the learning process by social class, migration background and sex.
Elaborating on the literature on the digital divide, we study inequalities in digital
preparedness of students and schools, before the pandemic took place. Using data from the
International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS) on seven countries, and the
Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) on 45 countries, both from 2018, we
demonstrate that schools and students vary in their preparedness for digital education, but
that school variation is not systematically related to the student composition by
socioeconomic and migration background. More important drivers for a digital divide in
corona-times are the ICT skills students have, which are strongly related to socioeconomic
background (known as the second level of the digital divide). We found little evidence for a
hypothesized ‘fourth level’ of the digital divide, which would result from social gradients in
the preparedness of school environments for digital education.

BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH QUESTION
The corona crisis resulting from the COVID-19 disease disordered the educational process of
millions of children. Distance education through online communication channels has become
the practice in many societies during the months of March till June 2020 (UNESCO 20201).
School exams have been cancelled in many societies. While schools slowly reopen in some
societies, and despite the great efforts that schools and teachers make to deal with the
immediate change of life, it is likely that the corona-crisis keeps affecting the educational
process for some time to come.

1

https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse, accessed 11 May 2020

1

One question that swiftly received attention of scholars and policy makers is whether
sociodemographic inequalities in educational progress will be enlarged by the school closures
(Bol 2020). For distance education to work, it takes a good study place with digital
equipment, sufficient digital skills, involved parents, and a well-prepared school, and these
circumstances are likely to be socially stratified. While the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on inequalities in educational progression can only be studied later, it is important
to examine whether children are well-prepared for the immediate change to online education.
It will inform the future study of educational inequalities resulting from the pandemic.
Importantly, we consider both student and school readiness for dealing with online
education, in terms of the access to computers and digital skills. Current efforts of (local)
governments are to increase digital provisions for families, for instance by lending computers
to children who need one. But as research on the ‘digital divide’ shows, access to computers
and internet are not the main drivers of digital inequalities these days. A second, and
currently more important source of digital divisions are the skills to use technology
(DiMaggio et al. 2004; Hargittai and Hinnant 2008). In the context of education, the
distinction between access and skills is even more relevant as the two requirements are
plausibly applicable to both the student and the school. Not only the student, but also the
school needs the necessary equipment and skills to work with online education technology.
We study inequality in corona-preparedness in two different ways. First, we use the
International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS) of 2018, for seven countries
(Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, and South Korea). This comparative
student assessment of 8th graders investigates students, school principals, ICT coordinators,
and teachers. Second, we use the Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) of
2018, a teacher and school principal survey, covering a much larger set of countries but
without information on student-level digital skills. While these data were gathered before the
pandemic took place, it helps us to see the extent to which students and schools are wellprepared for online education, by socioeconomic and migration background and composition.
While schools or policy makers have sometimes taken immediate action to increase the
availability of digital equipment to households during the school closures, it is likely that the
combination of student skills, equipment and school readiness is much harder to address with
the same immediacy.
We examine the extent to which students are ready for online teaching, defined as
having sufficient skills and facilities themselves and going to a school that is well-prepared

2

for online instruction, and whether this readiness varies by socioeconomic, migration
background and sex.
Our results indicate that there are strong inequalities by socioeconomic and migration
background in who is well-prepared for online education. However, most of the inequalities
are resulting from the skills that students have, and much less from the infrastructure and
digital preparedness of schools that students attend. Policies aimed at reducing the digital
divide among school children would then best be concerned with teaching digital skills more
equally.
THEORIZING THE DIGITAL DIVIDE IN CORONA TIMES
Since the early days of the internet, the ‘digital divide’ has been of concern to social
scientists. The literature has proposed three levels of the digital divide (Castells 2001;
DiMaggio et al. 2004; Hargittai and Hinnant 2008; Ragnedda and Muschert 2013; Scheerder
et al. 2017). A first layer is access to computers and the internet. While access was originally
an important source of variation between citizens, currently it is not accounting for a big
cleavage between social groups, at least not in highly developed economies. Yet, even today
access varies across socioeconomic groups in the material availability of devices, software,
subscriptions, and secondary equipment like printers and external hard-drives (Van Deursen
and Van Dijk 2019). In less developed economies access is still limited and unequal (Lavery
et al. 2018; Ragnedda and Muschert 2013; Rotondi et al. 2020).
A second level of the digital divide concerns the skills and usage of technology
(Büchi et al. 2016; Castells 2001; Hargittai 2001). Skills are crucial determinants of use of
technology and the internet, especially for more creative uses (Hargittai and Walejko 2008).
Determinants of skills and usage are usually similar to those of access, including
socioeconomic status, age, gender, location, and ethnicity. The literature distinguishes
between various forms of internet usage and skills, where predominantly information seeking
and engaging in commercial transactions are stratified by educational attainment, and
information seeking is strongly stratified by being a student or not (Büchi et al. 2016). Using
the internet for social interaction and entertainment are less stratified by education or other
socioeconomic indicators (Büchi et al. 2016; Van Deursen et al. 2016).
The third level of digital divide is concerned with the effects of technology access,
skills and usage on various outcomes (such as employment, education, social and political
connectedness, and health, Van Deursen and Helsper 2015). In the context of education,
3

research shows that digital skills enhance educational performance, particularly among
students from less advantaged backgrounds (Pagani et al. 2016).
Scholarship has also widened the theoretical scope of digital inequalities, by
proposing a resources and appropriation theory of inequality in the diffusion, acceptance and
adoption of advanced technologies (Van Dijk 2005; 2013). According to this relational
theory, it is not sufficient to describe inequalities in new technologies by examining
correlations with individual predictors. Instead, we should understand digital inequalities
from the appropriation of technology use by elites. “The dominant category is the first to
adopt the new technology. It uses this advantage to increase power in its relationship with the
subordinate category” (Van Dijk 2005: 11).
These three perspectives of the digital divide all focus on the users of technology;
focusing on whether they have access, have the skills, use technology, and experience
benefits from all this in other life domains. Yet, the extent to which digital inequalities
emerge in and through education is also dependent on the context in which students are
educated: the schools. Existing studies have sometimes placed the available infrastructure
under the access mechanism (Wei et al. 2011), and schools could similarly vary in the
infrastructure they have to provide digital education (e.g. by the availability of computers in
the school). However, the contextual environment may not only vary in the infrastructure that
is necessary to have access to digital learning, but also in the skills that teachers have to offer
the education necessary in an online environment (Sipilä 2014). The skills available in the
context within which students learn can be seen as a fourth level of digital divide. This fourth
level emphasizes that it is not only the readiness and skills of individuals that determine the
outcomes of internet use, but also the extent to which external parties create environments
conducive of the realization of personal goals. In the light of resources and appropriation
theory, schools can be seen as environments where the provision of computers and the
importance attached to digital learning function as strategies to advance students over
students in other schools. Attending resource-full schools thus not only offers the opportunity
to learn to study in a digital environment, but places the acquired skills and knowledge in a
power relationship against schools and students who are less able to learn in a digital way. A
coincidental, but nevertheless highly influential byproduct of the corona crisis is, then, that
inequalities in digital skills and usage are enlarged.
According to this line of reasoning, digital divides are of a multilevel nature. To the
extent that the fourth level of the digital divide exists, policies to reduce digital inequalities
should not only consider the access, skills and uses at the individual level, but also at the
4

contextual level. On the other hand, if the contexts are not unequally equipped with digital
preparedness, policies to reduce digital inequalities can primarily focus on the individuals in
question (i.e. the students).
Analyzing the Digital Divide
Following the digital divide literature, we make a distinction between access and skills. In
line with our suggested elaboration of a fourth level of digital divide, we furthermore
consider ICT resources of both the focal person (i.e. student) and the environment (i.e.
school) he or she attends. Thus, in order to understand student stratification in the readiness
to be educated in a digital environment, we consider the extent to which students of various
backgrounds have the skills and experience to use digital technology, attend schools that have
a supportive infrastructure, and attend schools where teachers have sufficient digital skills to
enable the digital educational process. Inequality in readiness for digital education is
examined by socioeconomic background, migration background, and sex.
We examine digital inequalities in two different designs. The first design employs
student-level and school-level data for seven countries, and studies student and school-level
dimensions of the digital divide. The second design only focuses on school-level data but a
larger set of countries, and incorporates student composition data to elaborate on digital
inequalities by socioeconomic and migration background. Moreover, the second study
includes more direct measures of teachers’ digital skills as a potential source for a digital
divide.
STUDY I: STUDENTS AND SCHOOLS IN SEVEN COUNTRIES
Methodology
For Study I, to examine students’ and schools’ degree of readiness for online education, we
use data from the International Computer and Information Literacy Study (ICILS) from 2018.
This cross-country survey measures how well 8th-grade students are prepared for the digital
age, combined with data about their schools’ and teachers’ ICT-related resources.
Specifically, we look at students in seven countries across three continents, selected because
rich student- as well as school-level data is available for these countries2: Chile, Denmark,

By rich we mean that all relevant questions were included in the survey, and there were few missing
observations
2

5

Finland, France, Germany, Italy and South Korea. We argue that readiness for online
education is a function of both a student’s individual ICT resources as well as the student’s
school ICT resources. Despite combining student- and school-level data, students thus serve
as our unit of analysis (N=18,882).
To measure students’ individual preparedness, we look at students’ experience in ICT
use as well as at students’ digital skills; we do not look at students’ access to ICT since we
study OECD countries where this is no longer a prominent level of the digital divide. To
measure ICT use, we use a factor score of 12 manifest variables that pertain to the frequency
of students’ school-related ICT use. These include, for instance, data about how often the
student uses ICT to write a document or to prepare a presentation. Since we are interested in
students’ readiness for online education, students’ ICT use for school-related tasks is
arguably of prime relevance. For this reason, manifest variables that pertain to the frequency
of students’ ICT use for non-educational activities, such as playing games, using social media
or listening to music, are not included. Moreover, since the objective of the factor analysis is
the construction of a valid measurement tool, all included items have relatively few missing
values, reasonably strong loadings on the emerging factor (≥0.35; Fabrigar & Wegener,
2012). The scale created is internally consistent (Cronbach’s alpha is 0.86 across countries;
average inter item correlation is 0.35). The resulting latent variable provides a valid and
reliable measure of students’ experience with using ICT for educational purposes.
Students’ digital skills are measured using a factor score of five plausible values of a
student’s score on a Computer and Information Literacy Achievement scale. These estimated
scores are summary statistics of students’ skills, derived from students’ results on test
modules that were specifically designed to assess a person’s “ability to use computers to
investigate, create, and communicate in order to participate effectively at home, at school, in
the workplace and in society” (Fraillon, Schulz & Ainley, 2013, p.17). These test modules
consist of comprehensive, real-world tasks such as creating a webpage about a school band
competition, or designing an infographic to raise awareness about waste reduction. A
student’s test results thus combine information about their level of proficiency in various
ICT-related activities, ranging from information-gathering to digital communication
(Fraillon, Ainley, Schulz, Friedman & Duckworth, 2019). Hence, the emerging digital skills
score taps into students’ ability to competently and effectively use ICT broadly.
School’s preparedness is measured by two dimensions: the school’s infrastructure
(availability of internet, software, devices), and the ICT competencies (usage, skills,
encouragement) prevalent in the school setting. These two dimensions of school preparedness
6

emerge from a factor analysis of 40 manifest variables that pertain to the evaluation by school
principals and ICT coordinators of their school’s ICT provision. Again, since the objective of
the factor analysis is to develop a valid measurement instrument, manifest variables are
included that clearly and strongly load on one and only one of the emerging factors (≥0.35),
selected in an iterative process (Fabrigar & Wegener, 2012). The first latent variable
comprises data about the school’s technology and software infrastructure, for example
internet access at the school or the availability of digital learning resources, a learning
management system or email accounts for school-related use. One could think of such
variables as promoting access to digital learning. The second latent construct encompasses
indicators about the importance the school attaches to digital learning outcomes of students
(e.g. the development of proficiency in processing information with ICT) and digital teaching
competences of instructors, for instance the extent to which teachers are expected to integrate
ICT into their lessons, are encouraged to participate in ICT-related professional development,
and are provided with resources to prepare lessons in which ICT is used. The resulting scale
can be seen as indicative of the ICT competencies available in the school context. Both
measurement instruments are internally consistent (Cronbach’s alpha is 0.85 for
infrastructure and 0.89 for competencies; average inter-item correlations are 0.24 for
infrastructure and 0.28 for competencies). Hence, the resulting factor scores provide valid
and reliable measures of two distinct dimensions of school preparedness for online education,
tapping into the ‘access’ to respectively the ‘skills and usage’ of digital resources at the
school.
In sum, we construct four continuous indicators of digital readiness that account for
the multi-level structure of the digital divide: students’ ICT use, students’ ICT skills, the ICT
infrastructure of students’ schools, and the ICT competencies of students’ schools. All four
indicators are based on standardized Bartlett factor scores that are estimated after an
exploratory factor analysis using maximum likelihood estimation and an oblique factor
rotation. Missing values for the factor scores are imputed by using the row-mean of the nonmissing manifest variables as a predictor. We argue that all four dimensions increase a
student’s digital preparedness since having experience in using ICT, possessing the skills to
competently handle ICT, going to a school that has a well-developed ICT infrastructure, as
well as attending a school that encourages high-quality digital teaching and learning all
facilitate the transition to online schooling. But although these four dimensions are distinct,
they may not be fully independent, meaning students may be (dis-)advantaged in several
dimensions at the same time. To examine students’ overall preparedness for online education,
7

we lastly construct a combined indicator by taking the average of the four separate indicators
discussed above, giving equal weight to all dimensions of readiness.
To analyze the divide in digital readiness, that is the extent to which digital readiness
differs between students, we look at three dimensions of stratification therein: students’
socio-economic background, migration background and sex. Student socioeconomic origin is
measured using the National Index of Socio-economic Background (NISB) that takes into
account students’ parental occupational status, their parental education level and the number
of books at home. On that basis, within-country quartiles of socioeconomic status are
constructed, resulting in an ordinal variable of low, medium-low, medium-high and high
socioeconomic status.
Students’ migration background is measured using a dichotomous variable whereby a
student is defined as a migrant if either both parents were born abroad or if the student and
the parents were born abroad. Finally, with respect to sex, we distinguish between boys and
girls. On the basis of these data, we conduct multivariate regression analyses separately for
each country, and compare the predicted outcomes across sociodemographic groups. The four
indicators of digital readiness serve as the respective dependent variables, while the three
stratification dimensions serve as the independent variables. By country, we thus analyze the
differences in four dimensions of digital readiness between students that a) come from
different socioeconomic origins; b) have a migration background or not; and c) are boys or
girls. If there is a digital divide in students’ preparedness for online education along these
sociodemographic lines, we hypothesize that there should be a significant association
between the stratification variables and students’ digital readiness.
Table 1 shows the descriptive statistics of the variables used in Study I. The first five
variables are the indicators of digital readiness; the latter three variables are the dimensions
of stratification. As latent variable scores are standardized, all ICT-related indicators have
their mean around zero. What is interesting, however, is that they vary in their degree of
dispersion: whereas students diverge in terms of their ICT skills by up to 8.3 standard
deviations, dispersion in students’ ICT use and their schools’ ICT provision is considerably
smaller (5.4 to 6.4 standard deviations). The overall readiness indicator takes an intermediate
position with a range of 7.5 standard deviations. Concerning their socioeconomic
background, the students in the sample are moderately dispersed, ranging from 3.7 standard
deviations below to 2.6 standard deviations above average socioeconomic status. Boys and
girls are equally represented in the sample, and 10 percent of the students have a migration
background.
8

Table 1: Descriptive statistics of the data for Study I
Student ICT use
Student ICT skills
School ICT
infrastructure
School ICT
competencies
Overall digital readiness
Socioeconomic
background
Immigration status
Sex
Observations

mean
0
0
0

sd
1
1
1

min
-2.044
-4.994
-3.023

max
3.391
3.337
3.330

0

1

-4.138

2.043

0
0

1
1

-3.674
-3.720

3.819
2.567

0.1
0.5
18882

0.3
0.5

0
0

1
1

Results
To study the extent to which students are ready for online teaching and how this readiness
varies by students’ sociodemographic background, we conduct multivariate linear regression
analyses (including all three predictors socioeconomic background, migration background
and sex).3 To examine the net effects of students’ socioeconomic background, migration
background and sex, we compare different student groups’ predicted outcomes on the four
indicators of digital preparedness. Starting with students’ usage of ICT, these predicted
outcomes are visualized in Figure 1. A first notable finding is that students’ predicted level of
ICT usage for school-related activities varies by country, with especially high values in
Denmark. Inequality in ICT usage by SES quartile is relatively small in Chile, Denmark and
France, but larger in Finland, Germany, Italy and Korea. While pointing in the expected
direction – i.e. the higher a student’s socioeconomic background, the more they tend to use
ICT for educational purposes – SES differences are modest, amounting to less than half a
standard deviation. Likewise, inequality in ICT usage by migration background is small in
most countries. In fact, after controlling for students’ SES and sex, students with and without
migration background do not differ statistically significantly in terms of their ICT usage in
Denmark, Finland and Korea. In Chile, France, Germany and Italy, there are statistical
differences but again of modest magnitude, not exceeding 0.2 standard deviations.

The tables with the detailed regression coefficients can be found on www.socarxiv.org (precise link will
follow after peer review).
3

9

Interestingly, if there are differences, they indicate that students with a migration background
tend to use ICT more frequently for educational purposes, meaning they are better prepared
for online education than students without a migration background (and similar SES). With
regard to students’ sex, differences in students’ school-related ICT usage are similarly small
but statistically significant in all countries except for Germany and Italy. Where there are
differences, girls tend to use ICT for educational purposes more frequently than boys, most
distinctly in Korea where girls’ lead amounts to 0.33 standard deviations. Overall, while the
degree to which students use ICT for school-related tasks varies along sociodemographic
lines, the divergences are modest.

10

Turning towards students’ ICT skills, Figure 2 displays predicted gaps in the ICT
skills as assessed in the ICILS student assessment. The lowest levels of ICT skills are found
in Chile and Italy, the highest in Denmark and Korea. Chilean students coming from the
highest SES quartile have ICT skills at a similar level as Danish students of the lower half of
the SES distribution. The gaps in ICT skills by SES groups are sizeable and statistically
significant in all countries, with students from socioeconomically advantaged backgrounds
possessing considerably better ICT skills than students from less advantaged backgrounds.
The strongest gaps are found in Chile, where the digital skills of students from the highest
SES quartile are 1.3 standard deviations higher than those of students from the lowest SES
quartile. By contrast, in Denmark, the difference in skills between students from the highest
and lowest SES quartiles ‘only’ amounts to 0.48 standard deviations. With regard to students’
migration background, the gaps in ICT skills vary across countries: while there are no
statistically significant differences in Chile, Italy and Korea, students with a migration
background are significantly disadvantaged in their ICT skills in all other countries, scoring
up to 0.54 standard deviations lower than students without migration background. In contrast
to the first indicator, ICT usage, migrants thus appear to be less prepared for online education
than non-migrants in terms of their ICT skills. Considering students’ sex, the pattern

11

indicated by their ICT usage is confirmed for ICT skills: again, girls tend to be better
prepared for online education; their skills are statistically and substantively significantly
better than those of boys, by up to 0.44 standard deviations. Students’ ICT skills, therefore,
vary to a considerable extent, especially by socioeconomic background but also between
migrants and non-migrants as well as between boys and girls.

Based on the results concerning students’ ICT usage and skills, it appears that
students in Denmark have the highest averages, and among the lowest inequalities, in ICT
usage and skills. Following these statistics, one would conclude that Danish students are best
prepared for digital education. However, these findings do not yet take the multi-level nature
of students’ readiness into account. Figure 3 presents findings on students’ schools’ ICT
infrastructure, by student SES quartile, migration background and sex. There are large
differences across countries in the provisions of internet, email addresses and other
infrastructural elements that promote access to digital education. In Denmark, Finland and
Korea, schools are generally well-equipped; the ICT infrastructure is less generous in France,
Germany, and Chile, and intermediate in Italy. An important finding is, however, that
statistically and substantively significant inequality by socioeconomic background is only
found in Chile, where high-SES students score 0.59 standard deviations above low-SES

12

students. Inequality by migration background only occurs, to a small extent, in Finland where
migrants tend to go to schools whose ICT infrastructure is 0.16 standard deviations higher
than that of non-migrants’ schools. Inequality by sex occurs in none of the countries,
meaning boys and girls go to schools that are equally well equipped in terms of their ICT
infrastructure. Hence, students’ schools’ ICT infrastructure hardly varies along
sociodemographic lines, with notable exceptions being the socioeconomic divergence among
Chilean students, and the migration divergence among Finnish students.

Figure 4 shows the predicted differences between schools’ ICT competencies for students of
different SES quartiles, migration background and sex. Generally, countries differ in the
importance schools attach to digital learning and teaching: ICT competencies of schools are
relatively low in Germany and France, countries that also scored relatively low on
infrastructural provisions. Comparatively well-resourced are schools in Chile, Finland and
Korea, whereas Denmark and Italy take intermediate positions when it comes to schools’
skills and usage of digital learning. In none of the countries, there is an SES or sex gap in the
ICT competencies available in students’ schools. A migration gap in school-level ICT
competencies only occurs in Finland, where migrants’ schools are modestly better skilled

13

than non-migrants’ schools, by 0.33 standard deviations. This confirms the results with
regard to schools’ infrastructure, where a migration gap also only occurs in Finland. Overall,
the ICT competencies of the schools that students attend hardly vary according to students’
sociodemographic characteristics, except for a modest migration gap in Finland.
Interestingly, the school-level indicators of students’ preparedness for online
education thus differ considerably from the individual-level indicators: while students’
individual ICT usage and especially their digital skills are characterized by significant
sociodemographic gaps in all countries, ICT resources of students’ schools hardy vary by
sociodemographic background in the countries under study. Moreover, the indicators also
differ in their absolute level: while, as previously mentioned, Danish students seem to be best
prepared for online education on the basis of the individual-level indicators, they are no
longer in the lead when considering the school-level ICT resources. Hence, the question
emerges which students in which countries ‘have it all’ or, at least, ‘most of it’? Arguing that
readiness for online education hinges on all four indicators, that is on students’ individual
experience and skills with ICT as much as on students’ schools’ access to and usage of ICT,
we analyze in the next step which students are digitally prepared multidimensionally, using
the combined indicator of readiness.

14

Figure 5 visualizes predicted gaps in students’ overall digital readiness, by SES
quartile, migration background and sex. Students are overall best prepared in Denmark,
followed by Finland and Korea. Students are least prepared in Germany and France, and
slightly better off in Italy and Chile. Inequality in digital readiness is highest among students
of different SES quartiles, and this socioeconomic divergence is most pronounced in Chile
(0.84 standard deviations) and least distinct, yet still considerable, in Denmark (0.23 standard
deviations). In all countries under study, therefore, high-SES students are statistically
significantly and substantively better prepared for online education than low-SES students.
Inequalities by migration background and sex are smaller in magnitude, but
significant gaps nevertheless occur. With regard to students’ migration background, the four
separate indicators did not indicate a clear pattern, with migrants appearing sometimes better
and sometimes worse prepared. Consequentially, when controlling for SES and sex, in most
countries migrants and non-migrants are overall approximately equally prepared for online
education, with the only exception being Denmark where migrants are disadvantaged by 0.19
standard deviations. This is a notable gap, but even Danish students with a migration
background are much better prepared than students in all other countries. Finally, with
respect to students’ sex, girls are overall significantly better prepared for online education
than boys in all countries except for Germany. The magnitude of girls’ premium varies,
however, ranging from 0.31 standard deviations in Korea to less than 0.1 standard deviations
in Chile and Italy. With regard to the multiple dimensions in which students are (not)
prepared for digital education, we thus conclude that both a student’s country matters but also
their sex as well as their socioeconomic status within the country. The students that ‘have it
all’, that are multidimensionally prepared for online teaching, tend to come from Denmark,
but being socioeconomically advantaged and a girl helps in all countries under study.
To conclude, students vary significantly in the extent to which they are prepared for
online education, both between and within countries. Looking at four dimensions of digital
readiness, a general pattern emerges that girls are better prepared than boys, and children
from socioeconomically advantaged backgrounds are better prepared than children from
disadvantaged backgrounds. Students’ migration background, by contrast, does not seem to
have a systematic impact on students’ digital readiness. These gaps between students of
different SES quartiles and sex add up over the various dimensions of readiness, resulting in
modest yet considerable inequalities in students’ overall digital preparedness. By far the
largest inequalities, however, arise from students’ ICT skills where students’ differential

15

preparedness for online education is most pronounced. Especially students’ school-level
digital readiness, by contrast, hardly diverges along sociodemographic lines.
STUDY II: TEACHERS IN 45 COUNTRIES
Methodology
In Study II, we further examine students’ degree of readiness for online education but take a
different approach, focusing specifically on students’ school-level preparedness and a larger
sample of countries, including more direct measures of teachers’ ICT skills. We use data
from the Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) of 2018. This international
survey is organized by the OECD and held among teachers and school principals to study
teachers’ working conditions and students’ school learning environments. We select the data
of teachers in lower-secondary schools in 45 countries and subnational regions, thereby
covering a similar time frame as well as student age group as in Study I4 while including
considerably more countries. The countries under study are spread across all continents, and
they are as economically, politically and socially diverse as Sweden, Saudi Arabia, Colombia
and Vietnam. This does justice to the global nature of the COVID-19 pandemic during which
online education has rocketed: since school closures are a worldwide phenomenon, it is
relevant to examine students’ preparedness in diverse societies. Moreover, the teacher data
allow us to zoom in on the multi-level structure of the digital divide. To the extent that a
fourth level of the digital divide exists and students’ readiness for online education is also
shaped by the differential ICT resources of students’ schools, this should be reflected in
teachers’ varying ICT-related behavior, as measured by TALIS.
The TALIS data cover many aspects of teaching and professional development, and
some of the questions address the use of ICT. We distinguish four indicators of the digital
preparedness of teachers: the attention to ICT use in teacher education and training, attention
to ICT use as part of the professional development while being a teacher, students’ use of
ICT during the teacher’s classes, and the teacher’s use of ICT to support student learning.
The first indicator, ICT in teacher education, is a standardized continuous scale that
incorporates both whether ICT use was addressed as well as how well the teacher was trained
in ICT use. The second indicator, ICT during professional development, is a dummy variable,

4

TALIS matches with the PISA student assessments of 15-year old students, while ICILS studies grade-8
studies with a modal age of 14.

16

measuring whether ICT skills for teaching were part of the teacher’s professional
development activities during the last 12 months. The third, ICT for classwork, and fourth,
ICT for student support, indicators are standardized categorical variables that indicate
respectively a) how often the teacher lets students use ICT for classwork, and b) the extent to
which the teacher supports student learning through the use of ICT. These four variables tap
both into teachers’ ICT skills, as acquired during their teacher training and
professionalization activities, as well as into teachers’ ICT usage, as evidenced by their use
of digital technology in class. Hence, these four indicators are complementary, together
providing a valid measure of teachers’ ICT competencies. We argue that if teachers score
high on these variables, that is they are digitally prepared, this implies that also their students’
school-level readiness for online education is high.
Our objective is to analyze whether there is a divide along sociodemographic lines in
how digitally prepared students are at the school level, yet the TALIS data do not contain
information on individual students. Hence, we use information on school composition
instead. In the survey, school principals estimate the proportion of students in their school
that a) come from a socioeconomically disadvantaged home, and b) are migrants or have a
migration background. In doing so, principals are asked to judge a student as ‘disadvantaged’
if they “lack the basic necessities or advantages of life” (OECD, 2018, p.8), and as a migrant
if either the student or the parents were born abroad. The data are categorized (none, >0-10%,
>11-30%, >30-60%, >60%).
We fit multi-level models, separately for each country, whereby teachers serve as our
unit of analysis (N=135,169) but are nested in schools. The four indicators of teachers’ digital
readiness serve as the respective dependent variables, while the student composition
measures function as the main independent variables. We fit linear models for all dependent
variables except for ICT during professional development, for which we fit a linear
probability model to accommodate its binary nature while maintaining our focus on (un)explained variances. If there is a digital divide in students’ school-level preparedness for
online education along sociodemographic (SES and migration background) lines, we
hypothesize two outcomes for the regression models:
1. There should be a negative association between the school composition variables
(proportion migrants and proportion low-SES) and teachers’ digital preparedness;
2. The between-school variance in teachers’ digital preparedness should be (partially)
explained by schools’ student composition measures.

17

To render the models more robust, we include several teacher characteristics as
control variables since these could influence both how digitally apt a teacher is as well as at
what kind of school the teacher works. These encompass a teacher’s experience in years, the
experience squared, whether they are a STEM-teacher (mathematics, science or technology),
whether the teacher has a Master degree, and the teacher’s sex. With the exception of the
experience measures, all control variables are dichotomously coded. Where data was missing
for either of the independent or control variables, the corresponding observations were
dropped. For 45 countries separately, we thus analyze the differences in four indicators of
school-level digital readiness among schools that a) have different percentages of students
from socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds; and b) have a varying proportion of
students with a migration background.
Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics of the variables used in Study II. The first four
variables are the measures of teachers’ digital readiness, the next two indicate the school’s
student composition, and the last variables refer to the teacher characteristics that we include
as controls. 70% of teachers have recently participated in ICT-related professional
development activities; the other three indicators of teachers’ digital readiness are
standardized and have their mean at zero. ICT attention in teacher education and ICT use for
classwork are approximately equally dispersed, whereas the dispersion in ICT use for student
support is comparatively higher. The overwhelming majority of schools in the sample have
no (45.4%) or less than 11% (39.1%) of students who are migrants or have a migration
background. The largest group of schools have some but less than 11% of students from
socioeconomically disadvantaged backgrounds (44.6%), with schools estimated to have 1130% of disadvantaged students scoring second (27.7%). The teachers in the sample have
widely varying degrees of experience, averaging 16.6 years. 40% of them are STEM
teachers, 40% have a Master degree and 70% of them are female.

18

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of the data for Study II
ICT in teacher education
ICT in professional
development
ICT for classwork
ICT for student support
% low-SES students in
school
% migration background
students in school
Teaching experience in
years
STEM teacher
Master degree
Teacher sex
Observations

mean
0
0.7

sd
1
0.5

min
-1.624
0

max
1.712
1

0
0
1.5

1
1
1

-1.698
-2.187
0

1.563
1.183
4

0.8

0.9

0

4

16.6

10.8

0

58

0.4
0.4
0.7
135169

0.5
0.5
0.5

0
0
0

1
1
1

Results
To examine the inequalities in students’ school-level readiness for digital education, we
conduct multi-level, multivariate regression analyses, and compare the results across the 45
countries under study. We expect that if there is a fourth, school level of the digital divide,
the percentages of students from socioeconomically disadvantaged and migration
backgrounds at a school should be negatively related to the ICT competencies of the teachers
at that school. The corresponding coefficients are displayed, for the respective indicators of
teachers’ digital readiness and controlling for other teacher characteristics, in Figures 6, 7, 8
and 9. Regarding the attention to ICT in teacher education (Figure 6), the expected negative
relationship with the percentages of students from low-SES and migration backgrounds
significantly applies in only one case: Mexico. Here, at schools where more than 60% of
students come from socioeconomically disadvantaged respectively migration backgrounds,
teachers have been 0.2 respectively 0.12 standard deviations less well trained in ICT use
during their teacher education than teachers in schools with no students from these
backgrounds. In most other cases, these effects are even weaker and not statistically different
from zero, whereas in some countries, they even point in the opposite direction. In Lithuania,
for instance, teachers at schools where more than 60% of students are socioeconomically
disadvantaged have been 0.28 standard deviations better trained in ICT use during their
teacher education than teachers in schools with no disadvantaged students.

19

20

Regarding the attention to ICT during professional development activities (Figure 7),
a similar picture emerges that the proportion of a school’s students from low-SES and
migration backgrounds tends not to be statistically significantly related to the ICT
competencies of the school’s teachers. In the overwhelming majority of countries, depending
on their schools’ student body, teachers are neither more nor less likely to have improved
their ICT skills as part of their professionalization activities while being a teacher. There are
some noteworthy exceptions in both the positive and the negative direction, however. In
England, for example, teachers at schools with more than 60% of low-SES students are 24
percentage points less likely to have attended an ICT-related professionalization activity than
teachers at schools with no low-SES students. By contrast, in Norway, teachers at schools
with a high percentage (>60%) of disadvantaged students are 28 percentage points more

21

likely to have upgraded their ICT skills as part of their professional development than
teachers at schools without disadvantaged students.

Moving from teachers’ theoretically acquired ICT skills to their practical ICT usage
in class, the relationship with the student composition of their school does not substantially
change. Regarding students’ use of ICT during a teacher’s classes (Figure 8), in most
countries this does not significantly vary with the perceived proportion of students from
socioeconomically disadvantaged or migration backgrounds at the teacher’s school. Where
there is a significant relationship, however, it is more consistent than with the first two
indicators of teachers’ ICT competencies, pointing in a negative direction, and the effect sizes
are larger. In Australia, for instance, teachers at schools with more than 60% of low-SES
students let their students use ICT for classwork 0.6 standard deviations less frequently than

22

teachers at schools without low-SES students. Likewise, in Italy, at schools with more than
60% of students with migration background, students use ICT during class 0.56 standard
deviations less often than at schools without migrants. By contrast, there is no country where
teachers at schools with more low-SES students significantly more often let their students use
ICT during class than teachers at schools without low-SES students, and for the student
composition in terms of students’ migration background, such a positive association only
applies in the United Arab Emirates as well as in Estonia.
Regarding teachers’ use of ICT to support student learning (Figure 9), the relationship
with the perceived sociodemographic student composition of teachers’ schools is less
consistent than with the ICT-for-classwork indicator, but it continues to be insignificant in
most cases. That is, in most countries, teachers at schools with many disadvantaged or
migrant students are neither more nor less able to support their students via the use of ICT
than teachers at schools with less students from these backgrounds. However, there are
exceptions in both directions: in Singapore, for example, teachers at schools with more than
60% of socioeconomically disadvantaged students are 0.36 standard deviations less able to
support their students by using ICT than teachers at schools with no low-SES students. At the
same time, teachers at schools with a comparably high proportion of students with migration
background are 0.28 standard deviations better able to support their students via ICT than
teachers at schools without migrant students. Hence, while students with a low
socioeconomic background tend to be disadvantaged in their school-level digital readiness,
students with a migration background tend to be advantaged in Singapore (net of SES
composition).

23

The paradoxical relationship between teachers’ ICT competencies and the student
composition of teachers’ schools in Singapore is no exception: for all four indicators of
teachers’ digital readiness, the effects of an increase in low-SES respectively migrant
students tend to be negatively correlated with each other, meaning where teachers’ digital
preparedness is positively associated with a larger share of migrant-background students, it is
negatively associated with a larger share of low-SES students, and vice versa. Overall,
however, these associations between students’ sociodemographic backgrounds and schoollevel digital readiness are very weak, hardly significantly different from 0, and no systematic
pattern is discernible. In some cases, teachers are less digitally prepared where many students
from socioeconomically disadvantaged or migration backgrounds attend their schools; in
other cases, teachers at comparable schools are more digitally prepared. In the overwhelming

24

majority of countries under study, however, the sociodemographic student composition of a
school is not at all statistically related with the digital preparedness of its teachers and,
consequentially, with the school-level digital preparedness of its students. No matter their
sociodemographic background, students are approximately equally prepared for online
education at the school level; their teachers are approximately equally digitally apt.

To further corroborate our conclusion that there hardly is a digital divide at the school
level, we analyze the between-school variance in teachers’ digital readiness. If there is a
school-level digital divide, we expect that the between-school variance in teachers’ digital
preparedness can be (partially) explained by schools’ student composition. Controlling for
teacher characteristics, the between-school variances in the respective indicators of teachers’
ICT competencies and how they change when additionally controlling for schools’ student
composition are visualized in Figures 10, 11, 12 and 13. Regarding the attention paid to ICT
during teachers’ initial teacher training (Figure 10), the unexplained between-school variance
generally tends to be low (less than 0.08 standard deviations in all cases), and it is hardly
reduced when accounting for schools’ student composition in terms of students’ SES and
migration backgrounds. Without accounting for students’ backgrounds, the variance is
relatively highest in Kazakhstan (0.071 standard deviations) but it cannot be substantially
explained by students’ backgrounds. In fact, the only cases where the between-school
variance in teachers’ attention to ICT during their teacher education can be non-negligibly
explained by the student composition of their schools are Buenos Aires/ Argentina, Israel and

25

South Africa, but even here the variance reduction amounts to less than 0.01 standard
deviations.

Regarding the attention paid to ICT not during teachers’ initial education but during
their professional development activities (Figure 11), the likelihood of ICT-related
professionalization likewise hardly varies between schools and is mostly independent of
schools’ sociodemographic student composition. Without accounting for school composition,
the between-school variance is relatively highest in Norway (0.034 percentage points) but
schools’ student composition can only explain a small part of it (4.5%). School composition
can explain the largest proportion of the between-school variance in teachers’ ICT attention
during their professionalization in Korea (23.0%) but in absolute levels the unexplained
variance is reduced by only 0.001 percentage points. In absolute terms, students’
sociodemographic backgrounds can best explain this between-school variance in England,
but even here the reduction only amounts to 0.003 percentage points.
When considering teachers’ digital readiness in terms of their ICT usage instead of
their ICT skills, the between-school variances tend to be higher in absolute terms but the
explanatory power of schools’ student composition remains similarly limited. Regarding
students’ ICT use during teachers’ classes (Figure 12), the total between-school variance
amounts up to 0.1 standard deviations in most of the countries under study. It is higher in the
Netherlands (0.15 standard deviations) and in Sweden (0.184 standard deviations) but
schools’ student composition can hardly explain these relatively high between-school

26

variances. This is not surprising given that neither the proportion of low-SES nor the
proportion of migrant-background students at a school significantly correlates with teachers’
digital preparedness in these two countries. Instead, in absolute terms, the largest reduction in
unexplained between-school variance in teachers’ digital readiness when accounting for
students’ backgrounds is achieved in Australia (by 0.021 standard deviations) where the
proportion of low-SES students at a school is highly significantly related to the frequency of
ICT-for-classwork use by that school’s teachers.

27

Regarding teachers’ use of ICT to support student learning (Figure 13), the picture is
again similar. In most countries under study, the total between-school variance in teachers’
ICT usage for student support is low (below 0.1 standard deviations). There are two notable
exceptions: South Africa (0.183 standard deviations) and Belgium (0.261 standard
deviations). Students’ background characteristics, however, cannot explain more than 0.01
standard deviations of the between-school variance in any of the countries studied.
To conclude, when examining the extent to which the between-school variance in
school-level digital readiness can be explained by schools’ student composition, the primary
finding is that in most cases there is hardly any between-school variance to explain in the first
place; oftentimes, it is not significantly different from zero. No matter whether considering
teachers’ digital preparedness in terms of their ICT skills acquired during their teacher
training or professionalization activities or in terms of their ICT usage for classwork or
student support, this hardly varies between schools within a country. The between-school
variance that does occur can in some cases be explained by schools’ sociodemographic
student composition but only to a very limited extent. Considering that a school’s
composition with regard to the socioeconomic and migration backgrounds of its students is in
many countries not statistically significantly related to its teachers’ ICT competencies, this is
not a surprising finding. Instead, it confirms the previous conclusions that the fourth level of
the digital divide tends to be minor. At the school-level, students are approximately equally
digitally prepared, no matter their sociodemographic background. That is, when inequality
arises in how prepared students are for online education, this is not substantially induced by
unequal preparedness of the schools that students attend.

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
The COVID-19 pandemic forces schools to rapidly digitalize their educational process, and
demands from children to do their class and homework in an online environment. Given the
expected inequalities that may come with it, the current study assessed whether there were
inequalities in digital preparedness of students and schools, shortly before the pandemic took
place. We examined the digital divide in a multilayered framework, by examining student
ICT skills, student usage of ICT, and the ICT infrastructure and competencies in the schools
that students attend. More precisely, we examined whether socioeconomic background,

28

migration background and sex were associated to gaps in these different facets of digital
preparedness.
We found clear evidence for a digital divide by socioeconomic and migration
background, and sex, but mostly with regard to the students’ individual ICT skills. Children
of more advantaged backgrounds, without a migration background, and girls had higher-level
ICT skills than their male peers from disadvantaged, migration backgrounds. These findings
point to the second level of the digital divide (Hargittai 2001; the first one being the access to
technology).
Other levels of the digital divide were less stratified by student background. Lower
SES and migrant children were not less likely to go to schools with a good digital learning
environment. Between-school differences in digital infrastructure and teacher competencies,
which existed in a number of countries, were hardly related to the share of disadvantaged
children or children with a migration background. It should be emphasized that the
differences across schools within a country were sometimes quite substantial. This in itself is
a fourth-level digital divide as some students go to secondary schools with good ICT
provisions while other schools are less well-equipped. But this variation is not strongly
related to the student composition in terms of social class or migration background, so these
patterns are not likely to form a source of a fourth-level of digital divide in the form of classbased or migration-related inequalities.
Given the educational situation during corona times, it is important to investigate
whether the demonstrated digital divides strengthen the third-level digital divide which is
concerned with the (educational) outcomes of access and usage of technology. Our study may
help educational practitioners, policy makers and scientists to bring focus in dealing with
unequal preparedness for the digital educational revolution we were suddenly confronted
with. There are two lessons to be drawn in this regard. First, student background is clearly
related to the level of ICT skills, while student background was hardly correlated with the
school’s digital preparedness. Socioeconomic and migration gaps in digitalization should be
primary concerned with equalizing the skills. Second, even if between-school differences in
digital preparedness were hardly related to the student composition, these between-school
differences do exist in many societies. This means that students are confronted with a
variability in infrastructure and school-level competencies, which creates inequalities in the
learning process. A better understanding of these between-school differences seems crucial to
promote equality of educational opportunity in the digital age.

29

References:
Bol, Thijs. 2020. “Inequality in Homeschooling during the Corona Crisis in the Netherlands.
First Results from the LISS Panel.” SocArXiv. DOI:10.31235/osf.io/hf32q.
DiMaggio, Paul, Eszter Hargittai, W. Russell Neuman, and John P. Robinson. 2001. “Social
Implications of the Internet.” Annual Review of Sociology 27(1):307–36.
Dimaggio, Paul, Eszter Hargittai, Coral Celeste, and Steven Shafer. 2004. “Digital Inequality:
From Unequal Access to Differentiated Use.” Pp. 355–400 in Social Inequality, edited
by K. Neckerman. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Fabrigar, L., & Wegener, D. (2012). Exploratory factor analysis. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Fraillon, J., Ainley, J., Schulz, W., Friedman, T., & Duckworth, D. (2019). Preparing for life
in a digital world: IEA International Computer and Information Literacy Study 2018
International Report. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: International Association for the
Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). Retrieved from
https://www.iea.nl/publications/study-reports/preparing-life-digital-world
Fraillon, J., Schulz, W., & Ainley, J. (2013). International computer and information literacy
study: Assessment framework. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: International Association
for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). Retrieved from
https://www.iea.nl/publications/assessment-framework/international-computer-andinformation-literacy-study-2013
Gelman, Andrew, and Jennifer Hill. 2007. Data Analysis Using Regression and
Multilevel/Hierarchical Models. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hargittai, Eszter, and Amanda Hinnant. 2008. “Digital Inequality: Differences in Young
Adults’ Use of the Internet.” Communication Research.
Hargittai, Eszter, and Gina Walejko. 2008. “The Participation Divide: Content Creation and
Sharing in the Digital Age.” Information, Communication & Society 11(2):239–56.
ITU. 2018. Measuring the Information Society Report. Geneva: International
Telecommunication Union.
Lavery, Martin P. J., Mojtaba Mansour Abadi, Ralf Bauer, Gilberto Brambilla, Ling Cheng,
Mitchell A. Cox, Angela Dudley, Andrew D. Ellis, Nicolas K. Fontaine, Anthony E.
Kelly, Christoph Marquardt, Selaelo Matlhane, Bienvenu Ndagano, Francesco
Petruccione, Radan Slavík, Filippo Romanato, Carmelo Rosales-Guzmán, Filippus S.
Roux, Kobus Roux, Jian Wang, and Andrew Forbes. 2018. “Tackling Africa’s Digital
Divide.” Nature Photonics 12(5):249–52.
OECD. (2018). Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) 2018: Principal
Questionnaire. Paris, France: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD). Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/education/school/TALIS2018-MS-Principal-Questionnaire-ENG.pdf
Ragnedda, Massimo, and Glenn W. Muschert, eds. 2013. The Digital Divide. The Internet
and Social Inequality in International Perspective. Abingdon: Routledge.
Rotondi, Valentina, Ridhi Kashyap, Luca Maria Pesando, Simone Spinelli, and Francesco C.
Billari. 2020. “Leveraging Mobile Phones to Attain Sustainable Development.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1909326117
Samuelsson, Ulli, and Tobias Olsson. 2014. “Digital Inequality in Primary and Secondary
Education: Findings from a Systematic Literature Review.” Pp. 41–62 in Media and
Education in the Digital Age: Concepts, Assessments, Subversions, edited by M.
Stocchetti. Berlin: Peter Lang.
Scheerder, Anique, Alexander van Deursen, and Jan van Dijk. 2017. “Determinants of
Internet Skills, Uses and Outcomes. A Systematic Review of the Second- and ThirdLevel Digital Divide.” Telematics and Informatics 34(8):1607–24.
30

Van Deursen, Alexander J. A. M., and Ellen J. Helsper. 2015. “The Third-Level Digital
Divide: Who Benefits Most from Being Online?” Pp. 29–52 in Communication and
Information Technologies Annual. Vol. 10, Studies in Media and Communications.
Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Van Deursen, Alexander J. A. M., Ellen J. Helsper, and Rebecca Eynon. 2016. “Development
and Validation of the Internet Skills Scale (ISS).” Information, Communication &
Society 19(6):804–23.
Van Dijk, Jan A. G. M. 2005. The Deepening Divide: Inequality in the Information Society.
SAGE Publications.
Wei, Kwok-Kee, Hock-Hai Teo, Hock Chuan Chan, and Bernard C. Y. Tan. 2010.
“Conceptualizing and Testing a Social Cognitive Model of the Digital Divide.”
Information Systems Research 22(1):170–87.

31

