"x"
"1" "A Comparative Study of Small-Scale Fishery Supply Chains' Vulnerability and Resilience to COVID-19"
"2" "Hannah R. Bassett 1* , Sonia Sharan 2 ,  Sharon K. Suri 3 ,  Sahir  Advani 4,5 ,  &  Christopher Giordano  6"
"3" "1  School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA"
"4" "2   Oceana, Washington D.C., USA"
"5" "3   Department of Anthropology and Department of Geography, Planning and International Development Studies, Amsterdam Institute for Social Science Research, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands"
"6" "4  Institute for the Oceans and Fisheries, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada"
"7" "5  Dakshin Foundation, Bengaluru, India"
"8" "6  Future of Fish, Lima, Peru"
"9" "*Corresponding author information:"
"10" "hbassett@uw.edu"
"11" "Abstract:"
"12" "The COVID-19 pandemic and response has significantly disrupted fishery supply chains, creating shortages of essential foods and constraining livelihoods globally. Small-scale fisheries (SSFs) are responding to the pandemic in a variety of ways. Together, disruptions from and responses to COVID-19 illuminate existing vulnerabilities in the fish distribution paradigm and possible means of reducing system and actor sensitivity and exposure and increasing adaptive capacity. Integrating concepts from literature on supply chain disruptions, social-ecological systems, human wellbeing, vulnerability, and SSFs, we synthesize preliminary lessons from six case studies from Indonesia, the Philippines, Peru, Canada, and the United States .  The SSF supply chains examined employ different distribution strategies and operat e  in different geographic, political, social, economic, and cultural contexts. Specifically, we ask: a) how resilient have different SSF supply chains been to COVID-19 impacts; b) what do these initial outcomes indicate about the role of distribution strategies in determining the vulnerability of SSF supply chains to macroeconomic shocks; and c) what key factors have shaped this vulnerability? Based on our findings, systemic changes that may reduce SSF vulnerability to future macroeconomic shocks  include  diversification of distribution strategies, livelihoods, and products, development of local and domestic markets and distribution channels, reduced reliance on international markets, establishment of effective communication channels, and preparation for  providing  aid to directly assist supply chains and support consumer purchasing power."
"13" "Introduction"
"14" "Small-scale fisheries (SSF s ) are important contributor s  to the global seafood system and crucial component s  of food and nutrition systems. Nearly half of the world’s seafood , the most traded food commodity  (Asche et al. 2015) ,  is produced by  SSFs   (World Bank 2012)   and has the potential to address global  under nourishment and food security issues  (Golden et al. 2016; Thilsted et al. 2016; Hicks et al. 2019) .  However,  COVID-19 and associated mitigation measures are disrupting global supply chain functions and the roles of supply chain actors. In this study we consider the impacts of COVID-19 disruptions on SSF supply chain functions and  the responses of  actors through comparison of case studies in Indonesia,  the  Philippines, Peru, Canada, and the United States."
"15" "While g lobal seafood trade is economically valuable, generating  USD  277 billion in 2016  (FAO 2018) , existing approaches to understanding shocks and disruptions in seafood supply chains overlook important , and increasingly recognized,  wellbeing   considerations  of  the  estimated 158 million people in production and distribution  (World Bank 2012; HLPE 2017) . Seafood supply chains can be subjected to a variety of shocks or disruptions  impacting  production or distribution  (Gephart et al. 2017) , however   the field of supply chain disruption studies  focuses  predominantly on management of disruptions to continue provisioning  (Xu et al. 2020) , excluding  additional  social considerations .   Beyond consumers and producers, global seafood trade  includes  market intermediaries and processors  relying  on SSF supply chain functions  (Fabinyi et al. 2018; Stoll et al. 2018) ."
"16" "Globalization has increased the interconnectedness between SSFs and expansive  international  commodity chains, allowing   access to new and distant seafood markets, while also exposing  SSFs  to new risks  (Crona, Basurto, et al. 2016; Crona, Daw, et al. 2016) . With risks no longer geographically bound, they can be transferred from global or regional scales to local actors   via ‘ripple effects’  (Ivanov et al. 2014)  or ‘multiplier effects’  (Abeysinghe and Forbes 2005) ,   essentially  a chain of impacts   creating  teleconnected  vulnerabilities  (Adger et al. 2009; Stoll et al. 2018) . Shifts to global markets have also led to diversion of seafood from local communities, unsustainable fishing,  change s to  traditional SSF dynamics, and competition of inexpensive imports with locally produced seafood  (Crona, Basurto, et al. 2016) .  This context  underlines the importance   of  understanding  SSF supply chain  actor  vulnerability  to macroeconomic shocks, such as COVID-19 ."
"17" "In this context,  SSFs and actors within these social-ecological systems (SES) have  disproportionately  f el t  the  impacts caused by   COVID-19  (Bennett et al. 2020 ) . With the pandemic’s origin in China and ensuing closure of their trade markets,  disruptions have  ripp l ed outwards through connected seafood systems, affecting multiple locations and nodes of seafood supply chains .  Th is   ‘ripple effect’  is  illuminating the global food system’s vulnerabilities and power imbalances   (HLPE 2020; Love et al. 2021)   t hat  may  be  further  exacerbated by future macroeconomic shocks caused by climate change  (Lam et al. 2020) .   As  the  pandemic continues ,  case studies  are needed  to document impacts on SSF supply chains  (Bennett et al. 2020; Love et al. 2021)   and  highlight  trends and mitigation or adaptation options.  I dentifying   spatial disparity of impacts  requires  regional case studies  (Meyer et al. 2020) ."
"18" "Examining SSF supply chain disruptions and responses  requires integrating  supply chain disruption, food systems, SES ,  and SSF systems theories and approaches .  The supply chain disruption  literature  provides valuable  conceptualizations of supply chain operations ,  disruption  models,  and phases of recovery   (e.g., Ivanov et al. 2014; Golan et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2020) .   However,  it  narrowly defines supply chain resilience  as  continued provision of food products to consumers in support of food security  (e.g., Tendall et al. 2015) .  This definition is  limiting , both in its normative conceptualization of resilience as inherently  desirable , and its exclusion of wellbeing provisions to supply chain actors in its identification of seafood supply chains’ core functions.  By  drawing from the SES   literature, system sustainability can be defined, in a broadly applicable sense, as the continued provision of  inclusive  wellbeing  to system actors   (Matson et al. 2016) .  A  system’s core functions  would  include the various ways wellbeing is  distributed  amongst   actors.  Thus, when  integrated  with a definition of resilience as the extent to which a system can absorb change while still performing its core functions  (Walker and Salt 2012) ,  SSF supply chain resilience  encompasses  the extent to which a system has been able to  sustain  existing  benefit  distribution  to all  involved  actors  when exposed to  a given hazard or disruption. This conceptualization rooted in SES theory considers that SSF supply chains’ core functions include not only provision of nutrients to consumers, but also provision of  livelihoods and  numerous dimensions of wellbeing to actors at every  node  of SSF supply chains."
"19" "We operationalize  Adger's (2006)  conceptualization of resilience, defined as “the magnitude of disturbance that can be absorbed before a system changes to a radically different state , ”   to assess the resilience of SSF supply chains to COVID-19 by examining impacts of and responses to the disruption ; we  then consider underlying causal mechanisms of change via analysis of system  and actor  vulnerability. As applied to SSF supply chains,  we consider  a ‘radically different state’ to be one in which there is a substantial change to the primary type or volume of products traded, the process by which trade occurs, or to the groups of actors involved in and benefitting from the supply chain system .  Vulnerability is the combination of a system and its actors’ exposure and sensitivity to disruptions and their capacity to adapt   (McCarthy et al. 2001) . To characterize exposure, we  consider  the stressors’ magnitude, frequency, duration, and areal extent  (Burton et al. 1993)   in relation to each system and actor group. Sensitivity ,  considered to be the extent to which each system and actor group is affected by the disruption  (Adger 2006) ,  is  re presented   for actors  by the ir  degree of dependence  on the disrupted system for obtaining wellbeing benefits  and for systems by their degree of dependence on the disrupted parts of the system  for continued operation .  Adaptive capacity is the ability of a system  or actors  to change and adjust to disruptions  (ibid)  and  encompasses  learning, flexibility, assets, organization, and agency  (Cinner et al. 2018) ."
"20" "We employ a non-normative concept of resilience as a quality of the system that is neither inherently positive nor negative, with resilience as a desir ed  system attribute when the system is in a  preferred  state, and undesirable when a system is in an un wanted  state  (Walker and Salt 2012) . The ‘desirability’ of a system would then be determined by its degree of sustainability, where a sustainable system is one that continuously provides inclusive and equitable wellbeing to all system actors  (Matson et al. 2016) . Vulnerability, defined as the susceptibility to being harmed, is inherently negative in nature, as is widely accepted in the SES literature  ( e.g.,  Adger 2006) .   Assessing the sustainability of SSF supply chains before and during the   pandemic is outside the scope of this paper, however,  this  would be a logical next  step .  U nderstand ing  system resilience and sustainability separately  is important , as a system may be resilient but unsustainable, or vice versa."
"21" "In this study, we ask: a) how resilient have different SSF supply chains and actors been to COVID-19 impacts; b) what do these initial outcomes indicate about the role of distribution strategies in determining the vulnerability of SSF supply chains to macroeconomic shocks; and c) what underlying conditions have shaped th is  vulnerability?   This study builds on an examination of initial responses of SSF supply chains to COVID-19 published by  Bassett et al.  ( 2021) , which includes four of the case studies addressed here as well as two others."
"22" "Methods"
"23" "In light of COVID-19 - related limitations on in-person fieldwork, we adopted a multi-step methodology incorporating ongoing case study research complemented by virtual key informant interviews. Cases were selected based on authors’ pre-existing knowledge of and interactions with SSFs and their supply chains in five countries   –  Indonesia, the Philippines, Peru, Canada, and the United States. Our focus on these cases studies and applied methods served to minimize burdens on actors, build on existing connections, and cover a diversity of geographies, sociopolitical contexts, and distribution strategies."
"24" "Data collection"
"25" "Authors’ pre-existing knowledge of their respective cases established baseline understandings of each system prior to COVID-19. Information about each study site and SSF supply chain’s experience of and response to the pandemic was gathered from media and governmental reports, websites, newsletters, and semi-structured interviews with key informants. Effort was made to interview actors from several nodes in the supply chains."
"26" "Interviews with key informants aimed to improve the authors’ understanding of events that transpired since the onset of COVID-19  through September 2020 .  A  collaboratively developed set of questions  explor ing  SSF supply chain vulnerability and resilience  were adapted  by case due to logistical constraints, cultural and linguistic norms, and knowledge gaps. By taking these steps, we aimed to address limitations to conducting timely research and avoid unnecessary burden to actors in an already stressful period.  A dditional details concerning data collection  for  each case  are included in Table 1 ."
"27" "Table 1.  Case-specific data collection details."
"28" "Processor  Rio (LKR)  and mobile   traders  (LKM),   Langkat , North Sumatra, Indonesia  (LK)"
"29" "Data were collected during six months of ethnographic fieldwork in the province of North Sumatra,   through participant observation and interviews with midchain actors. This was followed by five months of remote data collection focused on  Langkat  , comprising five interviews in conjunction with a local research assistant and ongoing discussions with key informants via WhatsApp.  "
"30" "Tañon  Strait,   Visayan Seas small-scale   fisheries ,  Philippines   (PH)"
"31" "Information collected was supplemented by five key informants, with unique knowledge and personal experiences on COVID-19 impacts to the SSF, located in Cebu and Negros Island in  Tañon  Strait and the Visayan Sea. Informants provided information via phone calls, emails, and through social media communications.   "
"32" "La Tortuga and La  Islilla  high seas"
"33" "artisanal fleet ,  Peru  (PE)"
"34" "Data collection was part of an ongoing project to incorporate social and economic incentives in the Peruvian mahi  Fishery Improvement Project (FIP). Informants were from the supply chain of the communities of Las  Islilla  and La Tortuga, in  Paita  province of northern Peru. In July and August 2020, six informal interviews over video calls were conducted with FIP participants.   "
"35" "Skipper Otto’s,"
"36" "British Columbia,"
"37" "Canada  (SO)"
"38" "One of the co-authors ( Author 4 ) worked part-time for SO’s distribution team between 2015 and 2019 and continues to be a member of the fishery. Key informant interviews with two SO staff members were complemented with analysis of member newsletters, blog posts, podcasts, and personal observations of seafood pickups at their Vancouver facilities.   "
"39" "Red Sea Urchin"
"40" "Dive Fishery,"
"41" "California, U.S.  (RSU)"
"42" "Prior to COVID-19, RSU fishery  information  was gathered via informal , exploratory  interviews. After the onset of COVID-19, fishery and supply chain information was obtained  during five telephone  interviews with three key informants  between March and August. These informants  play roles in urchin diving, selling, and processing, as well as participate in  the CSUC.  "
"43" "Analysis"
"44" "Case narratives were written by each respective author , then   qualitatively assessed to address the questions shown in Table  2 .  Authors  then identified similarities and differences in resilience and vulnerability and their potential causes across and between actor groups within their case.  All c ases were  then reviewed  and compared  by the other members of the research team. This exploratory approach precluded collection of strictly comparable data, but importantly, allowed for key insights to emerge from the actors’ lived realities."
"45" "Table  2 .  Key theoretical framework terms and overarching questions guiding qualitative analysis."
"46" "Theoretical framework term"
"47" "Guiding questions"
"48" "Sources"
"49" "Resilience"
"50" "Has the supply chain changed to a radically different state? Has there been a substantial change to the primary type or volume of products traded, the process by which trade occurs, or groups of actors involved in and benefitting from the system?"
"51" "Adger 2006"
"52" "Vulnerability"
"53" "What combination of a system or group’s exposure and sensitivity to disruptions and the capacity to adapt is seen?"
"54" "Adger 2006"
"55" "Exposure"
"56" "To what degree has the supply chain and its actors (e.g. ,  nodes or connections) been  exposed  to a stressor, i.e. ,  experienced COVID- derived environmental or socio-political stress? Characteristics of  stressors to consider are:  magnitude ,  frequency ,  duration  and  areal extent of the hazard."
"57" "Burton et al 199 3"
"58" "Sensitivity"
"59" "To what degree is the supply chain and its actors  sensitive  to the stressor, i.e., affected by the environmental or socio-political stress?  (Adger 2006) ."
"60" "Adger 2006"
"61" "Adaptive capacity"
"62" "What degree of  adaptive capacity  has   the supply chain and its actors exhibited to COVID-19 disturbances? Domains of adaptive capacity to consider are: learning, flexibility, assets, organization, and agency  (Adger 2006; Cinner et al. 2018) ."
"63" "Adger 2006;  Cinner et al. 2018"
"64" "Sustainability"
"65" "To what degree has the supply chain provided equitable and inclusive benefits to supply chain actors pre- and during COVID-19?"
"66" "Matson et al. 2016"
"67" "Case Studies"
"68" "Each case is described   in terms of pre-pandemic operations and background and changes since the  pandemic  onset .  Key events since the start of COVID-19  and intra-supply ch ai n ripple effects  are shown for each case in Figure 1.   The case s  are   presented in a way that allows for comparison, despite differing in scale and  depth of  detail  around supply chain nodes ,  and with acknowledgement of  the  constraints of conducting research remotely during a pandemic ."
"69" "Processor and mobile traders ,   Langkat , North Sumatra, Indonesia"
"70" "Pre-pandemic"
"71" "Indonesia is the  world’s  second largest capture fish producing country  and a major exporter , with the North Sumatra province contributing 11%  of  volume  and 12% of the associated monetary value  (BPS-Statistics Indonesia 2020; FAO 2020) . Indonesia has the highest nutritional dependence on marine and coastal ecosystems globally,  with  fish provid ing  more than 50% of animal protein intake  nationwide   (Selig et al. 2019; FAO 2020) .   W ithin   North Sumatra ,  the coastal regency of  Langkat   supplies a variety of  supply  chains with different endpoints, including local consumers, domestic consumers in the regional capital of Medan, and export markets  such as Malaysia, China, Europe, and the United States   (BPS-Statistics Indonesia 2020) .  Processors often work with only a few species, such as crab or shrimp,  while mobile traders sell a  wide assortment  of fish  from the local market ,  including   tilapia, rays, mackerel , goatfish, and small shrimp, in addition to a mix of vegetables ."
"72" "Since pandemic onset"
"73" "By early February 2020,  Indonesian  seafood exports were being refused entry into China  because  of  COVID-19-related restrictions, and customers in  Langkat  were  wary of buying food imported  from China  (Figure 1 . A . 1 ;  LK 0 1; LK 0 2).   L arge-scale movement restrictions ,   Pembatasan   Sosial   Berskala   Besa r ,   were  implemented  in  early April through late May   (CNN Indonesia 2020; Sianturi 2020) .  Alt hough  fishers and fish traders  could  continue working within  Langkat , movement outside of th e  regency was restricted, limiting the movement of fish to Medan  (Figure 1 . A . 3) .  As the demand and price for palm oil , a  major   sector ,   declined sharply,   consumers  employed in the palm oil industry were laid off or saw their hours  substantially  reduced   (LK3; Business Insider 2020) ."
"74" "M ovement restrictions contributed to a  seafood  glut filling local markets, compounded by the reduced purchasing power of consumers from the palm oil  sector  (Figure 1 . B . 1) .  M ore seafood in local markets with reduced consumer demand, le d  to a sharp drop in seafood prices  (Figure 1 . B . 2) . During a particularly low period in early May, two commonly consumed and affordable  local  fish,  Tongkol  and  Cuking , dropped to 20% and 43% of their regular prices, respectively (pers.   obs.,  S. Suri )."
"75" "One crab and snail processor, Rio ,  noticed  changes to the market from COVID-19 in late February, waiting until late March to close his factory. Exporters were the first to stop buying from him;  then  three weeks later ,  traders supplying the Medan market.  B etween pandemic  onset  and closing his  factory , Rio limited his purchase s   to low-price products . After shuttering his business, he  returned  to working as a driver,  but only for one month because of l ow  demand . In July, some exports res um ed, though volumes were  far  less than in previous years  (Figure 1 . A . 2 ;  LK 0 1)."
"76" "Unlike the processor s , mobile traders within  Langkat  continued to work throughout the pandemic; many households still relied on these traders for access to vegetables, tofu, tempeh, and fish. However, many customers were unable to work or took home reduced earnings, particularly those dependent on the palm oil industry (LK 0 2, LK 0 3). Some families received two or more months of government-distributed food aid, including rice, eggs, and oil, and/or small amounts of financial aid ; small portions of dried anchovies used as seasoning   was  the only fish included in the food aid   (LK 0 3, LK 0 4).  Despite reduced fish prices and supplemental financial aid, local households reduced their fish purchases , with food aid potentially displacing demand ."
"77" "L ocal  consumers  continu ed  to buy from mobile traders , increasingly by credit , leaving .  traders   with reduced cash flow and even financial losses from both unsold fish and extended credit  (Figure 1 . B . 4) . Some mobile traders decided to shift to other occupations such as construction  and fishing, likely to sustain their own household food security . Most mobile traders reduced the amount they worked from six  or  seven days per  week  to  two  or  three , with some renting their motorbikes to others  on  off  days (LK 0 2). To match  customer  demand, they reduced the volume of fish they  brought to resell,  from  50-60  kg  to  15-30 kg  (Figure 1 . B . 3) . Some trader households began salting the leftover fish as a side business to sell to collectors (LK 0 2 - 0 3 , LK 0 5 - 7).  Though less common, traders with more capital set up  new  businesses, such as small restaurants or food stalls. As of July, some mobile traders had begun selling fruit to make up for lost  fish  profits  or  assisted with government food aid  delivery  for food aid as payment (LK 0 2, LK 0 3)."
"78" "Visayan Seas  s mall- s cale  f isheries , Tañon Strait, Philippines"
"79" "Pre-pandemic"
"80" "The  Philippines ’   fisher y  sector ,  rank ed  11th   in total   capture  production  globally   (FAO 2020) ,  is  valued at USD 7.26 billion ,  and   a relevant contributor to the national GDP   (Lamarca 2017) . Not only are the Philippines economically reliant on fish, they are ranked second  globally  for nutritional dependence on coastal and marine ecosystems  (Selig et al. 2019) ."
"81" "In the Tañon Strait, a n important Filipino  fishing area, small-scale  fishers catch several   species, including groupers, mackerels, skipper, jacks, squid, sardines, tuna, rabbit fish, anchovy, and several other reef and pelagic fish ( PH01, PH03 ).   The fishers  sell their catch through  local consolidators  to  intermediaries in   city markets, such as  in  Cebu City  ( PH01 ) , normally fetching decent prices .   Thes e   intermediaries  require capital to purchase fish and transport it into city markets  to supply restaurants, hotels, and retailers (PH01, PH05) .   Local consolidators may also provide loans or fishing gear to fishers   to  lock in  low  selling prices.  Commercial fishers have a  more formalized system,  loading their catch into  trucks at the port , or distributing to  their regular  market  retailers .  Canning  factories  own their vessels and directly transport catch from port to factory ( PH01 )."
"82" "Since pandemic onset"
"83" "In March, the Philippines government enacted COVID-19 mitigation measures for public health through an Enhanced Community Quarantine (ECQ) . In addition to closing schools, non-essential businesses, and public transport across  Luzon , curfews and travel restrictions were imposed ,  closing many provincial borders  (Figure 1 . C . 1) . People were allowed out of their houses once a week for food and essentials, though in many parts of the country  a pass was  required. The army and polic e   employed fines, arrests, and threats of violence to enforce the ECQ   (Economist 2020) .  Concurrently, the country has faced  its  first economic slowdown in two decades   (ibid )  with  approximately  16.6% of the population   already living under the national poverty line  (Asian Development Bank 2019) . To partially mitigate these impacts, the government provided a subsidy/stimulus to poor families totaling  USD  4.1 billion and implemented a food relief program for those in need, including wage earners  (Figure 1 . C . 6 ;  Economist 2020)"
"84" "Fishers  were  acknowledged as essential workers under the ECQ and exempted from stay at home orders through Resolution 15 of the government’s Inter-Agency Task Force on the pandemic  (Figure 1 . C . 2 ;  Cabico 2020) . The Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) issued permission to allow the movement of food and  agri -fishery products  (BFAR 2020a) . However, implementation has been varied ,  with some fishers  lacking access to resources or markets   (Rey 2020 ;  PH 0 1, PH 0 2, PH 0 4). In  one  case, volunteers with a BFAR “Food Pass” were arrested for  ECQ  violation  (BFAR 2020b) . The SSF perception is that   political favoritism  is  at play in receiving exemptions (PH 0 1, PH 0 2, PH 0 3, PH 0 4)."
"85" "The government has   adopted  variably effective  support mechanisms ,  including  purchasing  fish  for  food relief packages   (Figure 1 . C . 5) ,  financial aid and loans ,  and new markets. Government-sponsored food relief packages have incorporated fish and promoted consumption of local fish  (Department of Agriculture 2020) , although implementation varied by locality . The Commission on Human Rights recommended  that  the national and local government units buy products from small-scale farmers and fishers for relief operations and mobile markets in rural and urban communities  (Cabico 2020) ."
"86" "Fishers could receive  around  USD  100 in  government  aid through the Social Amelioration Program and  were  eligible for food  aid . Small farmers and fisherfolk also ha d  access to  government  loans  of  about  USD  500 at zero interest, payable up to 10 years. The aid provided to families  wa s barely enough to cover costs of a single person in a rural area, let alone in cities (PH 0 1). While information about the loans was widely disseminated via radio,  complying with  requirements  wa s  difficult (PH 0 1, PH 0 3)  and  fishers in more remote areas  were  not reached  (Figure 1 . C . 6 ;   PH 0 1)."
"87" "There have been several government-supported markets , including at the village level and mobile vendors , that have allowed fishers to redirect sales from their usual tourism and restaurant markets . The Department of the Interior and Local Government created a market for municipal fisherfolk and small farmers. BFAR Region 6 used an online system for consumers to pre-order  and collect  fish directly from their office  (BFAR 2020c) . In  April, in  Davao de Oro, BFAR  Region  11, USAID and Silliman University started  ‘ Fish  Tiannge ’ , an online marketplace connecting 6,000 fishers with buyers from 300,000 households in South Negros, Visayan Sea in the Visayas region, and the  Calamianes  Group of islands in Palawan  (Figure 1 . C . 5 ;  Tamayo 2020) .  As  a publicly accessible platform ,   customers  purchase  fish  from sellers  online  and dedicated pedicab drivers deliver  the  orders. No prohibited fish products are sold and fish are sourced from  locally  licensed  fishers .  Fishing behavior has changed to adapt to shifting demand,  yet  what little is caught  does not  have a market.  Consumers and intermediaries  have either stopped buying completely  (supported instead  by aid )  or are offering below market prices,  citing  transportation restrictions  (Figure 1 . C .3 ) . In  Culion , fishers are struggling to sell their catch  and  fishing trips have  decreased  from 2-3 hours to 30 minutes to reduce effort  (Figure 1 . C . 4 ;  Rey 2020) . In Cebu City, large fish prices dropped over 36%  ( PH03 ) . Commercial operators  with  the resources to  easily  transport catch to market have stayed in business ,  whereas small-scale fishers, particularly informal (unregistered) fishers, are being questioned at the border by military or police  ( PH05 ) .   To  bypass intermediaries ,  fishers turned to other non-governmental or community organizations. This effort has helped stabilize prices back at market value, but is limited by an organization's resources (PH 0 1, PH 0 3)."
"88" "La Tortuga and La  Islilla   h igh  s eas  a rtisanal  f leet ,  Peru"
"89" "Pre-pandemic"
"90" "The Peruvian offshore artisanal fishery is the most profitable SSF in the nation, generating on average  USD  452 million in exports  annually  from 2012 to 2016  (REDES 2018) .  J umbo flying squid and pelagic shark  are caught year-round with  mahi  caught   seasonally  (ibid).  Prior to  landing,  b oat owners pre-arrange sale  to intermediaries  who   transport  export-quality  product to processing plants and  lower q uality to wholesale markets .   Squid  is  primarily exported ,  with about 80% going to China, South Korea, and Spain  in 2017   (PRODUCE 2018) . Squid is used  domestically  as a filler in popular seafood dishes like  ceviche  or  arroz con  mariscos ,   while the  low est  quality  is used as a protein filler in fish meal  (Grillo et al. 2018) .  In  contrast , a  larger  portion  (between 50-60%)  of mahi flows into the domestic  market , however it  has a greater chance of  being  mislabel ed   as higher-valued whitefish  than exported mahi   due to local preferences and perceived health risks   (Marín et al. 2018) ."
"91" "Since pandemic onset"
"92" "On  March 16 th , t he President of Peru declared a state of national emergency, mandating cessation of all international travel, a national curfew, restriction of within-country travel  except  essential services, required use of personal protective equipment (PPE),  and a stay-at-home order,  dependent on relevant ministry recommendations  (Figure 1 . D . 1 ;   Lerner 2020) .  Prior to the mandatory quarantine, the offshore artisanal fleet of La  Islilla  and La Tortuga  had been  operating normally, albeit with low landing volumes. Fishers clustered at fishing grounds and nearby landing sites in southern Peru fishing squid as the mahi season closed (PE02, PE03). Despite market closures in China and Europe, plants and exporters  had  continued to purchase mahi and squid, intending to continue  exporting  (PE01)."
"93" "After the quarantine declaration, overall fishing effort in Peru dropped approximately 80%  (Aroni 2020) . Informants suggested three key reasons why this occurred for the offshore artisanal fleet:  constricted  market demand , confusion around best practices to prevent the spread of COVID-19, and the arrival of COVID-19  in  vulnerable fishing communities  (Figure 1 . D . 2) ."
"94" "Fishing and product transport activities were considered essential services, however  c onflicting  means of  emergency rule  enforcement  across  scales of government  led  to  confusion and  breakdown  of  supply chain activities  (Pino Shibata 2020; Riveros 2020 ;  PE 0 3, PE 0 5).  For example,  to access  transit permission from the Peruvian National Police, actors had to supply a personal national identification number, a tax code registry number, and a legal residence  via online forms .   As  a largely informal  sector, many actors were unable to provide this information  (Gonzales 2020; Riveros 2020) . Transit documentation allow ed   only  for movement between a home  and  a  single  workplace,  thus   limiting  shipping activities  operating  through two  or more  locations   outside the  worker’s legal residence ( PE 0 4, PE 0 1).   Movement  r estrictions and  confusion  amongst supply chain actors  eventually  led to  s toppage  of product movement and  associated impacts on  SSF livelihoods   (Carrere 2020; Gonzales 2020) ."
"95" "M arket constriction was experienced different ly  at supply chain nodes.  F ishers  reported  reduced  price s  for squid and  reduced demand across species  ( PE 0 2, PE 0 3, PE 0 4).  Some  fishers   attempted   direct sale into   local  markets but  attribute d  their  limited  success to  lack of  demand .  Formal intermediaries  who  historically delivered product to processors were unable to  work   initially  due to transit restrictions and lack of COVID-19 control protocols  (Gonzales 2020) .   Other i ntermediaries   were   either unable to transport product to local open air markets or believed domestic consumers did not want squid  (Carrere 2020;  PE05).  A fter two months, processors developed protocols and secure d  workforce s  allowing  some plants to  reopen at  70% capacity (PE 0 1) ,  thereby  reactivating the squid supply chain   and  provid ing  intermediaries a potential market. Although the government allowed international shipping to continue, processors and exporters reported a reduced international demand and warehoused product until their key international markets recovered. Local surplus kept squid prices low (PE01)."
"96" "While plants and  intermediaries  developed internal practices to control the spread of COVID-19, fishers and dock workers  relied  on the National Agency of Seafood Sanitation (SANIPES).  Protocol  uncertainties led La Tortuga and La  Islilla  to take contrasting measures   (Figure 1 . D . 5 ) ;   La Tortuga  kept the community open, but enforced masks and social distancing, while  La  Islilla   restricted all travel (PE 0 3, PE4). SANIPES released national recommendations in April, however ,  within a month La Tortuga  had  over 14 fatalities attributed to COVID-19 and ,  a week later ,  the first cases appeared in La  Islilla  (PE 0 6). These unfortunate losses increased local perception of health risk s  and disincentivized a return to offshore fishing  (Figure 1 . D . 3) , despite aid (water, food,  and  PPE) being provided by nongovernmental actors and industry through corporate social responsibility programs  (Figure 1 . D . 4 ;   PE 0 3)."
"97" "D espite  the government-mandated quarantine and travel restrictions being lifted  in July , the offshore artisanal fleet effort has not recovered  (Gonzales 2020; Riveros 2020) . Informants reported electing to stay at home  and fish nearshore for subsistence ,  de spite not receiving income or government loans/aid, because it  was  safer than potential exposure during long trips and traveling between multiple ports  (Riveros 2020;  PE 0 2, PE 0 4). Additionally, many  struggle d  to finance the expensive trips, due to financial losses  (Carrere 2020) . Continued decreases in plant processing capacity and international demand for squid and mahi suggest that the impact s  will continue  (Figure 1 . D . 6) ."
"98" "Skipper Otto’s, British Columbia, Canada"
"99" "Pre-pandemic"
"100" "In Canada, British Columbia’s ( B . C . )  seafood industry relies heavily on  export  revenue .  Seafood worth   USD  1.1 billion was exported in 2018,  with  a third  going  to China, Japan, and Hong Kong  (B.C. Ministry of Agriculture 2019) . The viability of independent small-scale fisheries in  B . C .  has been threatened in recent decades due to inequitable licensing policies and increased control exerted by large corporations and seafood processors  (Haas et al. 2016; Edwards and Pinkerton 2019; Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans 2019) . Alternative seafood marketing initiatives, such as community supported fisheries (CSF),  are  a way to  resist neoliberal fisheries structures by promoting non-market values within simplified value chains  (Witter and Stoll 2017) . Skipper Otto’s Community Supported Fishery (SO) is one such organization that has attempted to restructure the seafood supply chain and associated financial model by supporting SSFs through direct fisher-to-member sales."
"101" "SO sells seafood produced by nearly  twenty  B . C .  fishing families to individual members from cities and small towns across several Canadian provinces. SO members purchase a “catch share” used to order a variety of seafood over the course of a year. Membership fees and catch shares collected by SO at the start of the fishing season are used to help fishing families purchase their licenses and quotas, repair gear, and prepare for the upcoming fishing season. Fishers agree to sell a predetermined volume of their catch to SO, usually above expected market  rate s . SO collects seafood from its fishers/growers, sends it to public and private processing plants or processes  it  (fillet ing , vacuum seal ing , flash freez ing ,  etc. )   through their own small-scale independent processor, then stores frozen seafood at storage facilities or  on site .  Sales are   directly  made  to members from the Granville Island Fishermen’s Wharf or through food co-ops and socially-conscious businesses in Vancouver and  domestically .  P roduct  labelling  informs  members who  caught  their seafood,  when, where,   and  with  what  gear .  Such  efforts   are  strategies to strengthen non-market values between fishers and seafood consumers within a seafood supply chain."
"102" "Since pandemic onset"
"103" "COVID-19 reduced demand for niche  B . C .  seafood products like Dungeness  c rab,  g eoduck,  s pot  p rawns ,   an d  h erring  roe that would normally have been exported to Asian markets for Lunar New Year or sold locally to high-end restaurants  (Figure 1 . E . 1 ;   Penner 2020) . Fisheries, falling under the food sector,  were  declared an essential service and permitted to continue functioning  (Government of Canada 2020) . Additionally,  the Canadian government released  a  USD  360 million aid package  in mid-May  to support   Canadian  fish harvesters  and USD 80 million  to  assist the  seafood  sector  i n  ensuring seafood supply, health and safety requirements  of workers,   market responsiveness,   and  domestic and international seafood storage capacities  (Figure 1 . E .6 ;  Prime Minister of Canada 2020) .  COVID-19 has  minimally  disrupted SO’s  production and  distribution system s . In the initial months of the pandemic, SO staff were aware of potential impacts COVID-19 could have on seafood systems and  communicate d  the impacts and potential solutions to their members through blog posts and newsletters  (Strobel 2020) ."
"104" "Since the pandemic and associated restrictions were introduced prior to the 2020 fishing season (April through October for several species), SSFs had time to adapt to the new conditions. Fishers  supply ing  seafood to SO  continue d   operating and received  above-market   price s  for their catch  (Figure  1 . E . 2) .  S ome fisher ie s ,  like  spot prawn ,   delayed opening (from May to June 4) and  fishers experienced considerably lower  demand from export markets  compared to  previous years. To assist SO’s fisher partners and increase their own inventory, SO bought a larger portion of spot prawn fishers’ product to sell to members. With transportation and seafood processing also listed as essential services, SO’s local and regional seafood processing and distributions systems continued  function ing  (Figure 1 . E . 4) . SO introduced measures ensuring affordable access to seafood during the pandemic by extending their discounted early-bird membership sign-ups and providing  less expensive , under-utilized seafood like hake and pink salmon."
"105" "SO also  a ttempt ed  to market and locally process niche seafood like Dungeness crab (SO 0 1).  With  certain community pick-up locations being closed at the start of the pandemic, SO trialed a home delivery service to members in areas of Vancouver and  partner ed  with new community pick-up locations. Towards the end of the summer, with a surge in new members  (Figure 1 . E . 3) , a functioning home-delivery system, and more operational community pick-up locations,  SO packing and distribution staff began working longer and more frequent shifts throughout the week, while maintaining social distancing measures (SO 0 2).  I ncreased  seafood  inventory and demand led to the installation of a second walk-in freezer at SO’s facilities   (SO 0 1).  Based on availability, fresh seafood pick-ups occurred throughout the summer months, with longer operating hours, clear signage, and staff  donning  face masks and shields (pers.  o bs.,  S. Advani )."
"106" "Red Sea Urchin Dive Fishery, California, U . S ."
"107" "Pre-pandemic"
"108" "The United States (U.S.) is the top seafood importer and among the top five exporters worldwide  (FAO 2018) .  California is not a top seafood producing state, but one of the  top eight  employers  in seafood processing  and  wholesale plants  (NMFS 2018) .  The California red sea urchin (RSU) fishery  operates in nine reporting regions across the state and,   historically , has  been  one of the  state’s  most economically valuable fisheries  valued at  USD 1 4  million  in 2001   (CDFW 2019) .  RSU  total  catch and value  ha s  since  declined,  averaging around USD 7  million  annually between 2003 and 2017 ,  with  2019 the worst year on record   at USD 5 million   (ibid) . I n 2016-2017,  divers and processors in  t he northern reporting regions  experienced drastic reductions  in profits  and   a  federal disaster  was declared . Northern  RSU   actors  qualified for federal relief , receiving USD 3.3 million   (CDFW 2020 ;   pers.  obs.,  H. Bassett ;  CA02 ) and the fishery is expected to qualify for  retroactive  federal relief statewide in 2018 - 2019 ( pers. obs.,  H. Bassett )."
"109" "The RSU fishery began in the  1970s  to supply   the Japanese market  with  urchin roe, or  uni .  Since the collapse of the Japanese market in the  1990s  and concurrent burgeoning of sushi restaurants in the U.S. , 90-95% of sales are  to  the   domestic market ,  primarily to restaurants (CA01).  Distributors maintain a small supply to Asian and SE Asian markets  (ibid)  and  recently, local and direct-to-consumer operations have emerged .   R un by divers or intermediary handlers (e.g., Sea Stephanie Fish  or Tuna Harbor Dockside Market) ,  they   account ed  for a relatively small  market  share prior to COVID-19  (pers. obs.,  H. Bassett ) ."
"110" "Currently, there are  262  licensed divers   (CDFW 2020b) , with around 80 active in the fishery  ( CA02, CA03 ) .  Divers  harvest   uni   operating either solo, with the assistance of a deckhand/tender, or in a  small  crew (CA02, CA03). Whole urchin s  are transported to processors ,   then ship ped  to  distributors in  the U.S.,  Asia and Southeast Asia (CA01).  D ivers , processors, or intermediary handlers  sell a smaller portion of the harvest   as whole urchin to local restaurants or consumers. Some processors  handle only   uni , while at least one also processes and distributes  many  locally caught species. Divers tend to operate in more than one fishery or hold other part-time jobs in addition to diving for  uni  (pers.  obs.,  H. Bassett ; CA02)."
"111" "Since pandemic onset"
"112" "At the onset of COVID-19, the RSU fishery  lost access to its  primary  and secondary  market s:  domestic restaurants  and exports  (Figure 1.F.1) .  In mid-March, directed  by state health and emergency officials,   restaurants  offered  only drive-through or pick-up/delivery   (C DPH  2020)   and the  g overnor  issued a stay-at-home order   (Executive Department State of California 2020) ,  halting  fish ing   and  process ing .   Export became infeasible as s tay-at-home mandates  reduc ed i nternational   passenger  flight s ,   tripl ing  the cost per pound for air freight across the Pacific   (Bradsher and Swanson 2020) ."
"113" "With domestic restaurant and international distribution  channels closed,  only a  small number of divers continued to harvest urchin and sell directly to consumers through personal connections, the Tuna Harbor Dockside Market, or intermediary fishmongers.  The  Market saw a n increase in social media activity and  a shift in their clientele as local San Diegans visited and tried to prepare  uni  for the first time   (CA03) .  C apitaliz ing  on   th e new attention,   the  Market   offered pre-ordering  online and curbside pick-up ( ibid ;  Figure 1.F.4). Sea Stephanie Fish  shifted her sales toward consumers preparing  uni  at home and started an online store  (Margolis 2020) ."
"114" "Some divers and processo rs pursued financial relief aid through  Federal or State  programs .   In addition to enacting policies to mitigate the financial and health impacts of COVID-19 on individuals and families,  California  expanded  unemployment benefits   with the addition of USD 600 on top of the weekly benefit received by workers as part of the new Pandemic Addi tional Compensation initiate d  by the  Federal  CARES Act   (Office of Governor 2020b) .  T he  S tate also provided USD 50 million  in loan guarantees for  small businesses   not eligible for federal relief   (Office of Governor 2020a) .   As independent operators, some divers  were  able to receive unemployment  benefits and make more than they did  diving, t hough  it's  unclear  how many  accessed benefits  ( CA02 ).  P rocessors  accessed small-business grants and loans to maintain operations through the   CARES Act  Paycheck Protection Program and Economic Injury Disaster Loans   ( CA01 ) .   One  uni - specific  processor closed for one month, but maintained their staff   using aid funds , while another closed for three months and laid off most of their employees (CA01).  One  multi-species  processor  was able to  maintain operations by adjusting to market demands ( CA01 ).   The California Sea Urchin Commission (CSUC), a statewide organization of divers, processors, and managers, provided information on  requesting aid  and it appears that access has not been an issue (CA01; CA02)."
"115" "D omestic and international distribution remained limited , forcing processors and divers to adjust operations . Prior to COVID-19, divers fish ed  on their own schedule and call ed  the processor to let them know when to pick-up at the dock. Now  they  coordinate  sales   in  smaller batches (Figure 1.F.2;  CA01 ,  CA02). Fewer divers are working the RSU fishery overall and many continue to rely on other jobs or fisheries  (though these are also impacted by COVID-19)  and government assistance  ( Figure 1.F.3 ;   CA01, CA02, CA03) . Some processors have  started  to  add  home deliveries in areas  they  deliver ed  t o restaurants  (CA01).  Social media has  also facilitated direct sales and new  c ustomers  (CA01; CA03).   Direct  impacts of COVID-19 on individuals  are not thought to have  been substantial, though o ne  buyer in New York contracted the virus  (CA01)  and  t here are some signs of divers and individual actors  experiencing  increased stress and reduced mental health as a result of reduced stability and general anxiety  (CA02) ."
"116" "Figure 1.  Diagrammatic representation of changes to SSF supply chains since onset of COVID-19 ,  as of August, 31, 2020. Supply chain nodes are shown in rectangles, with focal nodes in dark blue and other nodes in grey. Supply chain pathways are shown as blue arrows and aid pathways are green, pink, and yellow, where line width and style reflect changes to trade and aid activity along the specific pathway. Numbers reflect the chronological and causal series of events and correspond to numbered descriptions at the right of each figure."
"117" "A . A ."
"118" "A ."
"119" "A ."
"120" "Crab and snail processor,  Langkat , North Sumatra, Indonesia"
"121" "Border restrictions and closures from receiving countries caused a rapid loss of international markets, the primary destination for  the processor’s  product. By July 2020, restrictions had eased to the extent that some exports restarted, though at a decreased volume."
"122" "Processor reduced operations, shutting down from April to June. They were able to reopen but are still processing less volume of product. "
"123" "Movement restrictions also limited the flow of product from the processor to local markets in and around Medan, the provincial capital. "
"124" "B. B."
"125" "B."
"126" "B."
"127" "Mobile traders,  Langkat , North Sumatra, Indonesia"
"128" "Movement restrictions and palm oil  price drop  led to reduc ed  purchasing power from local consumers. Limited by cashflow, consumers reduced their purchases of fish. Additionally, many local consumers started receiving government food aid, which traders have said led  consumers  to further reduce their fish purchases."
"129" "Reduced fish purchases from consumers led to a glut of unsold fish in the local market, further depressing prices.  M obile traders were left with losses from unsold fish and increased credit extended to customers."
"130" "M obile traders reduced the amount of fish purchased from middlemen and fishers. Some mobile traders  shifted  to other work such as construction or fishing. Some  with  capital opened side businesses."
"131" "Though middlemen continued to purchase all or most of the fish from fishers, they did so at significantly reduced prices. So ,  while a fisher may have been able to sell all of their catch, they generally received much less money for this. "
"132" "C. C."
"133" "C."
"134" "C."
"135" "Visayan Seas Small-Scale Fisheries,  Tañon  Strait, Philippines"
"136" "Pandemic disruptions closed international markets, tourist businesses, and restaurants. Some restaurants have reopened, but customers have not rebounded."
"137" "Fishers received essential worker exemptions to fish."
"138" "Buyers (intermediaries) received aid and either stopped buying products or reduced prices."
"139" "Fishers faced with low buyer prices and absent demand sold fish locally at cheap prices. Many reduced effort - time fishing, catch - to match reduced demand."
"140" "Fishers increased focus on either direct to consumer sales using new online marketplaces or sold directly to the government for food aid packages."
"141" "Government provided a combination of food and financial aid to domestic consumers, local consumers, and producers; subsidies and supportive policies to fishers. Aid was insufficient and supportive policies were inaccessible by some."
"142" "D. D."
"143" "D."
"144" "D."
"145" "La Tortuga and La  Islilla  high seas artisanal fleet, Peru"
"146" "Government  institutes  quarantine, restricting landed product and worker mobility, despite essential worker exemptions to fishers and middlemen. "
"147" "Plants stop purchasing and processing product due to COVID -19  protocol uncertainty and worker transport issues."
"148" "Fishers decide to stay in the community and not leave to fish due to perceived infection risk and lack of product demand. COVID-19 cases occur in the community."
"149" "Government releases financial aid, loans or grants, which most plants and some buyers/middlemen qualify for, but few fishers can access. Fishers request food and PPE aid from industry and NGOs."
"150" "Fishers and plants independently develop health and safety protocol s   for  COVID-19. Plants coordinate protocols into the joint campaign #PescaLibreDeCOVID-19 ."
"151" "Plants slowly reopen, at reduced volume. Fishers return to fishing ;  issues sourcing PPE and controlling infections persist. Prices remain low due to reduced international demand."
"152" "E. E."
"153" "E."
"154" "E."
"155" "Skipper Otto’s, British Columbia, Canada"
"156" "Disruptions to international markets and domestic and local restaurants caused prices and demand for niche seafood to drop."
"157" "Fishers found a market for some of their product with SO."
"158" "SO witnessed a surge in new member signups and thus increased capital from member fees."
"159" "With processors and transportation systems operational, SO was able to transport seafood from fishers to processors and to SO members (consumers) across Canada ."
"160" "Canadian government provided emergency relief fund to citizens whose income had been impacted by COVID-19 ."
"161" "Stimulus aid provided to fishers and seafood processors by the Canadian government ."
"162" "F. F."
"163" "F."
"164" "F."
"165" "Red Sea Urchin Dive Fishery, California, U.S."
"166" "Initial loss of usual markets - domestic and local restaurants and international exports – then variable re-opening and closing, with demand much lower overall."
"167" "Processors reduced operations, some shutting down temporarily, then coordinated with divers to fill demand."
"168" "Fishers reduced effort and relied on other jobs/fisheries, unemployment financial aid, or spousal incomes."
"169" "Increased focus on direct-to-consumer sales saw some growth of consumer bases, but overall sales are lower, limited by access to consumers, consumer unfamiliarity with preparing  uni , and caps on storage capacity."
"170" "Federal aid allowed processors to maintain operations and for fishers to reduce fishing effort in response to reduced demand and lower prices."
"171" "Stimulus aid provided to local and domestic consumers, but widely considered insufficient, with problematic distribution. "
"172" "Discussion"
"173" "Each of the SSF supply chains examined have been  exposed to   COVID-19  disruptions , across all supply chain nodes :  directly  disrupted  by workers contracting the virus  (PE) , and indirectly by  restrictions on consumers’ ability to purchase seafood, leading to decreased demand, and  restrictions on mobility and trade ,   constricting  need for production activities .  Direct impacts were  reduced   in Peru  through already distanced activities (e.g., fishing alone) or strong sanitary practices (e.g., wearing full PPE at processing plants) ,  and  existing cultural norms or health and sanitation policies  helped  in Canada, the U.S., and Indonesia.  Sadly , the Peruvian case study saw several deaths in the fishing community, leading to fear amongst workers of perceived health risks."
"174" "Teleconnected  vulnerabilities were apparent as  some  local supply chain actors  experienced disturbances due to  international market stoppages   and  restaurant closures . Impacts traveled through and between supply chains, exhibiting the broad reach of ripple effects in highly interconnected food distributions systems   (Ivanov et al. 2014) . While these patterns persisted across cases, vulnerabilities of actor groups  differed  due to  varying  factors.  L ong, complex, and opaque  supply chains  have made  it difficult to determine further afield root causes of disruptions  in most cases   (e.g., Gephart et al. 2019; Triggs and Kharas 2020) .  Factors observed to increase or decrease supply chains’ and actors’ vulnerability are listed in Table 3."
"175" "Using the  theoretical framework (Table 2)  to  guide our  analysis ,  f our  dimensions of SSF supply chains emerged as useful for  discussing  the  key findings  – livelihoods, aid and capital transfer, information and communication,  and  markets and distribution strategies , with diversification a key element throughout . W e present  the analysis according to   these  dimensions , then  summarize  resilience and vulnerability  implications ."
"176" "Table  3 .  Factors contributing to an increase and decrease in exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity of supply chain systems and actors observed across case studies.  Supply chain in which a factor was observed are indicated by their abbreviations (see Table 1) in brackets following each factor. Due to differential vulnerability across actors within a system, in some cases, opposing factors have been observed within a supply chain."
"177" "EXPOSURE"
"178" "Factors contributing to an  increase:"
"179" "Factors contributing to a  decrease:"
"180" "Reduced consumer financial wellbeing (indirect exposure)  [LK, PE, PH]"
"181" "Target international markets or restaurants (indirect exposure)  [PE, LKR, PH]"
"182" "Unsafe working or living conditions for supply chain actors (e.g. ,  insufficient PPE or inability to distance from others while working) (direct exposure)  [PE]"
"183" "Relatively high consumer financial wellbeing (indirect exposure) [SO, RSU]"
"184" "Target local and domestic markets (indirect exposure)"
"185" "Sufficient PPE and safe working areas (e.g. ,  ability to distance) (direct exposure)  [RSU, SO]"
"186" "SENSITIVITY"
"187" "Factors contributing to an  increase:"
"188" "Factors contributing to a  decrease:"
"189" "Reliance on international markets and restaurants, esp ecially  tourism ,  which combines both  [RSU, LKR, PE, PH]"
"190" "Low income domestic and local consumer bases  [LK, PE, PH]"
"191" "Reliance on single species, esp ecially  niche or substitutable products  [RSU, PE, LKR]"
"192" "Established domestic and local distribution strategies (largely direct to consumers)  [SO, RSU, PH]"
"193" "Diverse portfolios ( fishers,  processors , traders )  [LKM, RSU, SO]"
"194" "Gov ernment  support to domestic and local  supply chain  actors and consumers  [all]"
"195" "Divers e  distribution strategies  [SO, RSU]"
"196" "ADAPTIVE CAPACITY"
"197" "Factors contributing to an  increase:"
"198" "Factors contributing to a  decrease:"
"199" "Established communication channels between intermediaries and producers to avoid supply/demand mismatches (organization, learning, flexibility)  [RSU, LKM, SO]"
"200" "Access to local and domestic  consumers  (organization)  [PH, LKM, RSU, SO]"
"201" "Gov ernment  support to domestic and local  supply chain  actors (food - health; financial aid - assets; policies - agency, flexibility)  [all]"
"202" "Diverse distribution strategies (flexibility)  [SO]"
"203" "Diverse portfolios and livelihoods (flexibility)  [RSU, LKM, SO]"
"204" "Digital tools (learning, organization, flexibility)  [RSU, PH, SO]"
"205" "Storage and delivery capacity (assets)  [SO, RSU]"
"206" "Access to capital (assets) [SO]"
"207" "Lack of access to local and domestic consumers (organization, learning , flexibility) [RSU, PE, LKR]"
"208" "Restrictions on movement (agency , flexibility )  [PE, LK]"
"209" "Ineffective allocation of exemptions on movement restrictions for essential workers (organization , agency, flexibility )  [PE, PH]"
"210" "Lack of storage (assets)  [PE, RSU, LKM, PH]"
"211" "Lack of capital (assets) [PE, RSU, PH, LKM]"
"212" "Livelihoods"
"213" "Changes to livelihoods have been at the center of the COVID-19 crisis  –  they have been  both the cause and  result of disruptions to SSF supply chains, and  for some,  a  means of adapting. The concept of   a ‘livelihood’ “seeks to bring together the critical factors that affect the vulnerability or strength of individual or family survival strategies… thought to comprise, chiefly, the assets possessed by people, the activities in which they engage in order to generate an adequate standard of living and to satisfy other goals such as risk reduction, and the factors that facilitate or inhibit different people from gaining access to assets and activities”  (Allison and Ellis 2001) . As the pandemic has strained livelihoods of people around the world,  reducing   their  access to assets and activities ,  SSF supply chain actors ’  livelihoods  have been  subsequently constrained ,  necessitating  adapt ive   strategies  to maintain their  ability to generate an adequate standard of living ."
"214" "Actors with diversified livelihoods  have shown  reduced vulnerability through decreased reliance on a single revenue stream  (RSU) , fishery  (SO , RSU ) , or product  (LK M , RSU ) .  Fishing in multiple fisheries  (RSU) , processing multiple species  (SO , RSU ) , and employing multiple distribution strategies  (SO , RSU )  ha s   reduced  actor  sensitivity to market disruptions and increased  their  capacity to adapt. Actors involved with multiple SSFs and supply chains  (LK M , SO, RSU )  have shifted their efforts to nimbly follow markets as COVID-19 disruptions shift spatially and temporally. These findings align with other studies across numerous fields that have highlighted the positive impact of the ‘portfolio effect’ on resilience in social-ecological systems  that  can experience sudden environmental and market shifts  (e.g., Cline et al. 2017) ."
"215" "Many supply chains have  attempted to  respond to drops in demand by reducing their rate of usual supply chain activities. In several cases, actors have reduced the volume of fish moved through the chain, by reducing the time and effort spent in production and distribution (sometimes redirecting to other work ; PH, PE, LKM, RSU ). In the Philippines, self-owned and small businesses reduced purchases, while fishers supplying to tourist-reliant businesses  and restaurants reduced their fishing effort.  Langkat  mobile traders also reduced the frequency of days worked and the amount of fish they bought to sell on their routes and RSU divers fished only when they had pre-arranged a buyer. Largely, however, upstream-initiated reductions in catch production and sales  have  been unable to compensate for the reduced demand , with  prices significantly decreas ing  in  several cas es ( LKM , P H , and P E ). This pattern suggests that COVID-19 has presented such a substantial shock that SSF supply chains and actors cannot maintain their core functions by simply coping and must take adaptive actions."
"216" "S ome actors  remaining within their usual supply chains  have adapted by adjusting or diversifying their livelihood activities. The most common trend has been for actors to shift to new local distribution strategies, particularly direct-to-consumer sales. Others who already provide d  direct-to consumer sales have  added  new means of purchasing (e.g. ,  online sales, public markets) and receiving (e.g., mobile delivery, curb-side pick-up) products. Some have expanded their offerings (e.g., salted fish in  Langkat ), provided tutorials for how to cook unfamiliar species (e.g., preparing  uni   at home   in the RSU fishery), and increased their social media and customer outreach. These  adaptive  activities are actively shifting their SSF supply chain systems into new regimes."
"217" "Supply chain actors have also adapted by shifting to alternative job opportunities, repurposing their assets, or supporting their livelihoods  with  subsistence fishing. In  Langkat , some mobile traders switched to fishing ,  while  o thers transitioned out of the fishery sector completely,  into   construction , set ting  up small restaurants , or  assist ing  with governm e nt food aid distribution .  I n  Peru, offshore fisheries pivoted to nearshore artisanal raft fishing. In this way, artisanal fisheries have provided an essential service during the pandemic,  supp lementing  livelihoods as needed, providing community food security  (Steenbergen et al. 2019)  and acting as a ‘labor buffer’, as they have  during  previous shocks  (Béné et al. 2016) . Making these livelihood shifts requires not only awareness of and access to other livelihood options, but the capacity to adapt to their new requirements."
"218" "A multi-pronged macroeconomic shock like COVID-19 highlights how crucial diversification is for resilience. For example, the  ability  for supply chain actors to move to other lines of work (i.e., diverse livelihood options) may  initially  seem   to not support the continued operation of the supply chain . H owever, the ability of the actor to be flexible and support their livelihood outside of the fishery when demand is low supports the near-term wellbeing of that actor,  and their ability to return in accordance with demand, thereby  support ing  supply chain  resilience   (e.g., Cinner and Barnes 2019) .   In contrast, when individual actors or supply chain nodes fail, supply chain resilience is reduced  (e.g., Golan et al. 2020) ."
"219" "Aid  and   capital transfer"
"220" "T argeted food aid  (Global Panel 2020) ,  direct fiscal aid, and supportive policies  (Triggs and Kharas 2020)  proved essential in supporting adaptation of SSF supply chains  and actors  to the widespread and varied disruptions of COVID-19 . Aid has been supplied across all cases  as financial support, food distribution, technical advice,  or   supportive policies ,  and has been provided by  governments,   NGOs, international institutions, fishery cooperatives, private enterprise ,   family members,  and others .  Nation al programs  distributed   COVID-19 -relief   aid to supply chain actors  and the community at large . While  aid has been  critical, impacts have varied widely based on the type of aid provided, the efficacy and equity of distribution, and the larger economic and social context."
"221" "Financial aid to intermediary small and medium businesses, via grants, loans, and direct cash transfers, was a critical factor in continued operations, reducing both exposure and sensitivity to the closure of international markets and reduced demand. In the U.S.,  unemployment aid   and small business loans  ha s  been directed to fishers and processors .   T he  Canadian Seafood Stabilization Fund of nearly USD  8 0  million was offered to seafood processors. This package was in addition to a USD 360 million COVID-19 fund to support Canadian fish harvesters. In Peru and the Philippines, financial aid was provided by the government although receipt was extremely limited , with  plants primarily receiv ing  aid, versus fishers. Access to subsidies was undercut by informality in the sector  with unregister e d  actors  excluded ."
"222" "The effectiveness of government (or other) aid in reducing supply chain and actor vulnerability was limited by constraints on aid  recipients  and scale mismatches with COVID-19 shocks; aid  has been  supplied to   some, though not all,  domestic recipients , however  can not reach international markets where many of the disruptions  a re rooted .  Without substantial inter-governmental coordination, national governments and organizations have limited ability to mitigate for negative impacts of a supply chain’s reliance on collapsed international markets  (Triggs and Kharas 2020) , thus the increased risk posed to local communities by  teleconnected  vulnerabilities  (Adger 2006) ."
"223" "Given the limits on aid in combatting international market losses, financial aid coupled with consumer financial security may have been an underlying factor in supply chains demonstrating relatively less sensitivity to COVID-19 . Supply chains located in high-income countries (HICs) with strong unemployment aid and disaster relief infrastructure (e.g. ,  SO and RSU) had access to consumers who retain ed  more purchasing power than those in the low and middle-income countries (LMICs) of Indonesia, the Philippines, or Peru.  T he U.S. and the Philippines provided only one-time stimulus payments, unlikely to change buying power in an ongoing crisis  (Triggs and Kharas 2020) . In the LMICs, reduced income and purchasing power amongst consumers both reduced their access to food and indirectly impacted supply chain actors reliant on related markets  (Béné 2020) .  In the Philippines, government and NGO financial investments supported new online markets and one fisher organization subsidized the price of fish, offsetting fisher losses  from  reduced market prices.  Only in the SO case was local demand, consumer purchasing power, and access to consumers sufficient to maintain a high volume of sales and support operations without subsidization or reduced incomes. Direct-to-consumer sellers in the RSU fishery saw similar success, though processors and handlers  without  established connections with local consumers  we re less able to capitalize on the potential consumer base."
"224" "In addition to fiscal aid,  household  food aid  was distributed   and  supportive SSF  supply chain  policies were passed  in Indonesia , Peru, and  the Philippines .   T he provisions  were intended to  reduce the  vulnerability of recipients , but  in some cases,  unintended  ripple effects  were evident .  In  the Philippines ,   several  local government unit s  purchased local fish   to distribute as part of the food aid ,  al though at reduced prices . Including seafood in food relief protected access to nutritious foods  for recipients , as recommended by the Global Panel (2020) , and  simultaneously  supported local fisheries .  In contrast, food aid in  Langkat   included tofu, tempeh,   and  eggs, which supported  consumers ’   and supply chain actors’  nutritional needs, but not SSF  livelihoods . The government’s provision of alternative protein  may  also   have  indirectly led to further reduced fish purchases  via reduced demand . As with fiscal aid, food aid had limited reach to informal actors or those in rural areas, requir ing  paperwork and registration. Similarly,  movement restriction  exemptions  allowed many to continue working ,  but distribution of benefits was  varied and inequitable .  I n some cases (e.g., the Philippines and Peru) ,  bureaucratic systems and sector informality  made exemptions inaccessible ."
"225" "Government aid has been the primary source of system-level support for maintaining supply chains in the face of the  COVID-19  crisis, highlighting both the crucial role of relief aid and its limitations.  Governments and local authorities have largely  striven  to protect the SSF sector  (Béné 2020) , with most problems arising from issues with implementation, aid strategies, or existing systemic issues.  Having  existing infrastructure to distribute aid  seemed to benefit   associated  supply chain actors – thereby bolstering system resilience  and reducing vulnerability  – while  the  informality of some SSF supply chains  seemed to  inhibit effective government support.  Limit ations in  immediate, equitable, and coordinated government response, as recommended by  Adger (2006)  and   Triggs and Kharas (2020) , resulted in  non-governmental  organizations stepping in to support actors   (RSU , PH, PE ) . In Peru, private entities (plants) provided technical assistance for safety protocols and coordinated PPE distribution and, in the RSU fishery, the CSUC shared information for accessing unemployment aid.  Effective  distribution of appropriate and ongoing  aid and supportive policies , whether governmental or otherwise,  emerged as an  important  factor  in reducing  systems’ and actors’ sensitivity to disruptions  and bolstering their adaptive capacity ."
"226" "Information and  c ommunication"
"227" "Access to information  (learning) , knowledge  sharing  (knowledge) , and coordination between actors  (organization)  have been  essential  dimension s  of adaptive capacity employed to  manage uncertainties  around  potential COVID-19 mitigation strategies and maintain supply chain function.  In ternet and  communication technologies (ICT)   were central to the adaptive actions of supply chain actors.  D igital  tools  are increasingly used for  coordination and transformation within supply chains  (Jensen 2007; Omar and Chhachhar 2012; Nthane et al. 2020) ,  and in  the presented   cases,   were used to communicate crucial information about supply  and  demand,  share knowledge of  potential COVID-19  policies and impacts , create new distribution strategies ,  and access new consumer bases .   Government agencies provided COVID-19 mitigation information for SSFs across the cases, with ICTs  essential  in Peru and the Philippines  as  agencies us ed  WhatsApp and Facebook  to communicate to fishers .  In the RSU, information  was  shared via pre-established e-mail listserv  and public meetings were held via Zoom  to discuss allocation of federal relief.   ICTs were  also  commonly harnessed  to bolster online sales and reach new clients through social media campaigns, drawing on organizational capacity to successfully expand engagement strategies and share information  with  consumers. Philippine SSF s   leaned  on the government and NGOs’ organizational capacity and assets to create online markets , maintaining product flow to local supply chains  and organiz ing   safe  pick-up process es.   Actors in the  SO and RSU  cases  used pre-existing assets and digital networks to expand their consumer bases."
"228" "The use of available tools  aided   mitigat ion  of  p otential inequities in access to information .  If not considered, l ack of local infrastructure, individual socioeconomic class, and historical power distributions  can inhibit  access to ICTs and  uniform distribution of information   (Nthane et al. 2020) , creating  disparities  in adaptive capacity .  However, in these  cases information appears to have been  largely  accessible. In t he Philippines , the  government   use d  radio  programming  to broadcast  loan program details . I n Indonesia ,   actors received information through  community  network s   providing  better  access to ICT -sourced  information ,   as has been seen in other studies   (Nthane et al. 2020) .  In accessing knowledge and supporting their learning,  actors relied on the assets and organizational capacity of  their networks  to bolster their  individual adaptive capacity ."
"229" "L imited  supply chain  coordination  reduced  actors’  capacity to adapt  to  product supply and demand  disruptions .  P erishable  or live seafood products  require special storage  and  SSF  supply chain  node s   a re highly sensitive to fluctuations in market demand .   A dapt ation   via increasing storage capacity  require s  substantial assets  and has only been seen in one case (SO) .  Otherwise,  producer and buyer  coordination is the primary means of ensuring harvest will find a market and garner profits.   Supply chain actors who were able to coordinate the supply of fish to available buyers (e.g., RSU) were better able to navigate fluctuations in demand and reduce product  waste  and effort. Several SSFs saw initial seafood gluts when the markets dropped-off suddenly, with more complex supply chains  and   distanced  nodes taking longer to minimize supply-demand mismatches  (e.g. PE) . Additionally, higher levels of adaptive capacity on the side of all supply chain actors (including consumers) seems to have improved coordination, as these actors were more able to communicate their preferences. For example, wealthier  Indonesian  clients preferr ing  a higher value product communicate d  their demand to mobile traders, who did not  typically  carry th em . Similarly, SO, relying on e-commerce and a cooperative business model, was able to effectively communicate with their suppliers to meet the demand of a growing client base and communicate surplus to clients to encourage sales."
"230" "Markets  and distribution strategies"
"231" "Market diversification, in particular, has been highlighted as a key factor for SSF resilience to surprise market disruptions, both in our study and others on COVID-19  (e.g., Béné 2020; Knight et al. 2020) . Within our case studies, actors have demonstrated  reduced vulnerability  to supply chain disruptions  by  their ability to adapt to alternative markets, innovate with new strategies to sell products, and utilize agency and assets to diversify the products they handle.  Supply chains  and their actors  heavily reliant on international trade or travel  were more sensitive to supply chain disruptions, as has been noted elsewhere  (Stoll et al. 2018) .  In B.C., fishers sensitive to international market demand were unable or unwilling to sell their product internationally , but  access ed  new local and domestic markets  through SO .  SO arguably benefited from its low exposure to international market variations and could purchase larger volumes of seafood  at lower prices  to sell domestically.   Langkat   mobile traders  continued tapping into local markets with a diverse set of products, while processors reliant on seafood exports were  sensitive to trade disruptions .  Peru’s squid and mahi supply chains and actors were additionally sensitive to trade and transit restrictions because of the centralization of processing facilities along the Peruvian coast.   I n the Philippines, fisheries dependent on tourism for sales redirected their catch to local communities, though often at significantly reduced prices.  Similarly, the RSU fishery was highly sensitive to COVID-19 closures as restaurants are a  majority   of their market."
"232" "Actors in each case operationalized different available dimensions of adaptive capacity to diversify their  distribution strategies  and product portfolios ,   thereby   reduc ing  their vulnerability to seafood supply  chain disrupti ons.  As  mentioned previously, soc ial media and ICTs, like  WhatsApp, were used to access a new markets and facilitate purchases, as seen in the Philippines, SO, and RSU. Recognizing the limited mobility of consumers, SO relied on agency and assets to implement new targeted distribution strategies, starting home delivery service and adding customer pickup locations. In some cases, actors could change their species or products offered in response to shifting demand volume.  Langkat   mobile traders already sold an assortment of perishable goods, including multiple fish species, selecting the species and volume each morning depending on price, quality, and expected sales. As fish sales declined, they demonstrated increased flexibility and agency by adding fruit sales, with similarly high profit margins.  Alternately  Rio, the Indonesian crab and snail processor,  lacked the flexibility  to shift to new species or markets and close d  his factory. In Peru, the supply chain had a limited, inflexible portfolio of two species of frozen seafood  leading m any plants to shut down or reduce capacity when demand disappeared.   Peruvian squid and RSU, as single species fisheries, were also limited by their inflexibility to target different species. In Canada, SO started selling less expensive species, like hake, and is exploring options to begin custom processing Dungeness crab, previously sold unprocessed.  As previously documented, SSFs can benefit from or be impacted by global seafood trade in varie d  ways   (Crona, Basurto, et al. 2016) .   In our cases, SSF supply chains had mixed responses to market and distribution disruptions, indicating that some chains may not be sufficiently prepared for the increased risk  associated  with  exposure to  international markets and  teleconnected  vulnerabilities."
"233" "Resilience and vulnerability"
"234" "All cases examined  can be considered to  have shifted to a ‘radically different state’  in the wake of COVID-19  due to substantial  change s  in   1) the  type or  volume of product traded (all, with an increase seen only in SO),  2)  the process by which trade occurs (all, except SO ) , and  3)  the groups of actors involved (all, with an increase in participation only in SO).  While,  the magnitude of  disruption  associated with COVID-19 has been too  great  for the SSF supply chains to absorb without  necessitating adaptive action and mov ement  into new regimes ,  their  ability to continue performing core functions  has varied  as a result of disparate vulnerabilities:"
"235" "Three  cases  (PE, LKR, and PH) exhibited relatively low resilience  and high vulnerability  in that s upply chain actors  could  not continue working in their usual roles and the usual consumers  did  not receive their regular seafood products. All three of these cases  were reliant on  international markets  or  tourism  (high exposure and sensitivity)   and exist in relatively low income countries and local areas  ( low  adaptive capacity) , where they have been  un able to establish new markets either due to consumer preference ,  spending power ,  or both.   With  some established domestic market  link s ,   the   Philippines   case  fared somewhat better than the other  two  ( low er  sensitivity and  higher  adaptive capacity) ."
"236" "Two cases (LKM and RSU)  demonstrated  moderate resilience  and vulnerability  as some actors continued in the supply chain and some consumers maintained access to products.  Both cases target domestic and local markets primarily, but t heir usual distribution channels were disrupted by reduced consumer spending power ( LKM) and restaurant closures (RSU)  (moderate exposure and sensitivity) . Adaptive capacity  varied amongst actors and  allowed  some to remain active in the supply cha in by modifying  the  focus of their activities , while others employed their agency and flexibility  to pursue other livelihood activities or means of support .  Diversification of products ( LKM ) and distribution strategies (RSU) was key to continued operation  of the   supply chain s  (moderate adaptive capacity) ."
"237" "One case (SO) showed high resilience  and low vulnerability  and was able to increase operations, hiring new employees and accessing new consumers.  Targeting a n affluent   domestic  market v ia   established  diverse  distribution  strategies and channels  (low exposure  and sensitivity, high adaptive capacity) , the SO supply chain was able to  capitalize on reduced international trade ,   increasing  domestic market  demand  and  reducing  local catch  price . Their  market was further strengthened by ongoing  government  financial relief provided to  Canadian  citizens  (lower sensitivity) ."
"238" "Examining across all case studies, several key factors for reducing SSF supply chain and actor vulnerability to the pandemic have emerged:  1)  access to local and domestic markets with  purchasing power (increased adaptive capacity, reduced sensitivity),  2)  low reliance on international, tourism, and restaurant markets (reduced exposure and sensitivity),  3)  access to information and communication (increased adaptive capacity),  4)  government aid supporting the SSF supply chain directly or consumer spending (reduced sensitivity, increased adaptive capacity), and  5)  diversified distribution channels and strategies, livelihood options, and products (increased adaptive capacity, reduced sensitivity)."
"239" "Conclusion"
"240" "COVID-19 is an unprecedented supply chain disruptor,  but will not be the last to  transcend geographic boundaries. Climate change, slower moving in its effects, will have similar global reach   (Lam et al. 2020) . S imilar processes as  those  observed here have been shown to be critical for building general resilience to climate change in marginal communities ;  namely ,   social learning and communication across multiple institutional scales,  ﻿ community reorganization, and adaptive capacity ( Osbahr  et al. 2008)."
"241" "The negative impacts experienced by SSF  supply chain  actors since the onset of COVID-19 have not been limited to direct health impacts. Instead, impacts derived mostly from underlying social conditions that increased the vulnerability of systems and actors to  this type of  disruption ,  as has been theorized by conceptual models   (Blaikie et al. 1994; Béné 2020) . These  underlying  factors contributed to increased or decreased vulnerability  of actors  and , ultimately, different levels of system  resilience  and vulnerability .  SSF supply chains and actors have modified their activities and roles in response to COVID-19 disruptions, but whe ther these changes will be sustained going for ward is unclear. Similarly,  whether  and how much any  sustained  changes will benefit  different  supply chain actors remains to be seen."
"242" "T hese  ca se studies   suggest  several systemic changes that could  support reduced vulnerability in  SSF supply chains and  prepare  actors  for  future shocks . First,  develop ment of  well-connected local  and domestic supply chains  reduces reliance on international markets and their associated  teleconnected  vulnerabilities.  While  local or domestic distribution may not be  economically   preferable  or culturally viable during ‘normal’   times, efforts to  develop the market  an d  diversify distribution strategies  may provide valuable al ternatives to the globalized trade system , leaving systems and actors less vulnerable to shocks and better able to cope or adapt  in times of stress .  Second, supporting  diversified product portfolios, livelihood activities, and distribution strategies will increase actor and system flexibility and their agency to respond to market fluctuations and logistical limitations. Third, proactive establishment of effective means of equitably distributing aid and information will support both supply chain actors and consumers  continue to operate their respective roles, thereby decreasing supply chain disruption.   Providing sufficient and consistent financial aid to households will increase their ability to purchase seafood and either buying fish for food relief packages or directly providing aid to supply chain actors will promote their continued functioning."
"243" "The case studies presented here suggest that these lessons for supporting  invulnerable and  resilient SSF supply chains can apply to a broad range of systems and contexts, if appropriately  adapted . As is always the case with social-ecological systems, there is a positive feedback loop in which the wellbeing of system actors supports continued provision of wellbeing from  the  system  in which they participate ; thus, e quity and inclusiv ity   are essential considerations  to promote  sustainable and   resilien t systems .   The pandemic has highlighted flaws in globalized and integrated seafood systems and its outcomes should inform preparation for similar future shocks."
"244" "Conflict of Interest Statement"
"245" "One author  ( S. Advani )  has previously worked with a fish processing company that is the focus of the author’s case study. This author no longer works with the company and does not receive any remuneration from them, financial or otherwise. On behalf of all other authors, the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest."
"246" "References"
"247" "Abeysinghe, T., and K. Forbes. 2005. Trade Linkages and Output-Multiplier Effects: a Structural VAR Approach with a Focus on Asia.  Review of International Economics  13: 356–375."
"248" "Adger, W. Neil. 2006. Vulnerability.  Global Environmental Change  16: 268–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2006.02.006."
"249" "Adger, W. Neil, Hallie Eakin, and Alexandra Winkels. 2009. Nested and teleconnected vulnerabilities to environmental change.  Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment  7: 150–157. https://doi.org/10.1890/070148."
"250" "Allison, Edward H, and Frank Ellis. 2001. The Livelihoods Approach and Management of Small-Scale Fisheries.  Marine Policy  25: 377–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0308-597X(01)00023-9."
"251" "Aroni, E. 2020. Peruvian Fisheries Experience Massive Decline in Activity from COVID-19.  Global Fishing Watch ."
"252" "Asche, Frank, Marc F. Bellemare, Cathy Roheim, Martin D. Smith, and Sigbjørn Tveteras. 2015. Fair Enough? Food Security and the International Trade of Seafood.  World Development  67: 151–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.10.013."
"253" "Asian Development Bank. 2019. Poverty in the Philippines.  Asian Development Bank ."
"254" "B.C. Ministry of Agriculture. 2019. Sector Snapshot 2018: B.C. Seafood."
"255" "Bassett, Hannah R., Jacqueline Lau, Christopher Giordano, Sharon K. Suri, Sahir Advani, and Sonia Sharan. 2021. Preliminary lessons from COVID-19 disruptions of small-scale fishery supply chains.  World Development  143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2021.105473."
"256" "Béné, Christophe. 2020. Resilience of local food systems and links to food security – A review of some important concepts in the context of COVID-19 and other shocks.  Food Security  12: 805–822. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-020-01076-1."
"257" "Béné, Christophe, Robert Arthur, Hannah Norbury, Edward H. Allison, Malcolm Beveridge, Simon Bush, Liam Campling, et al. 2016. Contribution of Fisheries and Aquaculture to Food Security and Poverty Reduction: Assessing the Current Evidence.  World Development  79: 177–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.11.007."
"258" "Bennett, Nathan J, Elena M Finkbeiner, Natalie C Ban, Dyhia Belhabib, Stacy D Jupiter, John N Kittinger, Sangeeta Mangubhai, Joeri Scholtens, David Gill, and Patrick Christie. 2020. The COVID-19 Pandemic, Small-Scale Fisheries and Coastal Fishing Communities.  Coastal Management  F. https://doi.org/10.1080/08920753.2020.1766937."
"259" "BFAR. 2020a. Food Lane Conduct Pass.  Official Portal of the Department of Agriculture ."
"260" "BFAR. 2020b. Statement on the Issuance of Food Pass by DA-BFAR to Pamalakaya."
"261" "BFAR. 2020c. BFAR Region 6 Official Website."
"262" "Blaikie, Piers, Terry Cannon, Ian Davis, and Ben Wisner. 1994.  At Risk: natural hazards, people’s vulnerability, and disasters . London: Routledge."
"263" "BPS-Statistics Indonesia. 2020. Statistical Yearbook of Indonesia 2020."
"264" "Bradsher, Keith, and Ana Swanson. 2020. The U.S. Needs China’s Masks, as Acrimony Grows.  New York Times , March 23."
"265" "Burton, I., R.W. Kates, and G.F. White. 1993.  The Environment as Hazard, Second ed.  Guilford, New York, U.S.A."
"266" "Business Insider. 2020. Palm Oil Price.  Markets Insider ."
"267" "Cabico, Gaea Katreena. 2020. Gov’t urged to ensure protection of fishers, farmers from impacts of COVID-19 | Philstar.com.  Philstar Global , September."
"268" "California Department of Health. 2020. State Health & Emergency Officials Release Guidance to Prevent the Transmission of COVID-19 in Food and Beverage Venues, March 16."
"269" "Carrere, M. 2020. Perú: COVID19 golpea la economía de los pescadores artesanales, May 6."
"270" "CDFW. 2019.  Table 15. Poundage And Value Of Landings Of Commercial Fish Into California By Area for 2000 - 2019 ."
"271" "CDFW. 2020a. NEW Information About Urchin Disaster Funds."
"272" "CDFW. 2020b. Commercial Fishing Licenses and Permits."
"273" "Cinner, Joshua E., W. Neil Adger, Edward H. Allison, Michele L. Barnes, Katrina Brown, Philippa J. Cohen, Stefan Gelcich, et al. 2018. Building adaptive capacity to climate change in tropical coastal communities.  Nature Climate Change  8. Springer US: 117–123. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41558-017-0065-x."
"274" "Cinner, Joshua E., and Michele L. Barnes. 2019. Social Dimensions of Resilience in Social-Ecological Systems.  One Earth  1. Elsevier Inc.: 51–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2019.08.003."
"275" "Cline, Timothy J., Daniel E. Schindler, and Ray Hilborn. 2017. Fisheries portfolio diversification and turnover buffer Alaskan fishing communities from abrupt resource and market changes.  Nature Communications  8. Nature Publishing Group: 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14042."
"276" "CNN Indonesia. 2020. New Normal 15 Kabupaten/Kota di Sumut Tunggu Masa Transisi.  CNN Indonesia , June."
"277" "Crona, Beatrice I., Xavier Basurto, Dale Squires, Stefan Gelcich, Tim M. Daw, Ahmed Khan, Elizabeth Havice, et al. 2016. Towards a typology of interactions between small-scale fisheries and global seafood trade.  Marine Policy  65. Elsevier: 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2015.11.016."
"278" "Crona, Beatrice I., Tim M. Daw, Wilf Swartz, Albert V. Norström, Magnus Nyström, Matilda Thyresson, Carl Folke, et al. 2016. Masked, diluted and drowned out: how global seafood trade weakens signals from marine ecosystems.  Fish and Fisheries  17. Blackwell Publishing Ltd: 1175–1182. https://doi.org/10.1111/faf.12109."
"279" "Department of Agriculture, Philippines. 2020. LGU chiefs urged to continue buying farmers’ and fishers’ produce.  Official Portal of the Department of Agriculture ."
"280" "Economist. 2020. The Philippines’ fierce lockdown drags on, despite uncertain benefits.  The Economist ."
"281" "Edwards, Danielle N., and Evelyn Pinkerton. 2019. The hidden role of processors in an individual transferable quota fishery.  Ecology and Society  24: 36. https://doi.org/10.5751/ES-11148-240336."
"282" "Executive Department State of California. 2020.  Exec. Order No. N-33-20 . USA."
"283" "Fabinyi, Michael, Wolfram H Dressler, and Michael D Pido. 2018. Moving beyond financial value in seafood commodity chains.  Marine Policy  94: 89–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2018.04.033."
"284" "FAO. 2018.  The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture .  fao.org . Rome."
"285" "FAO. 2020.  The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2020 . FAO."
"286" "Gephart, Jessica A., Halley E. Froehlich, and Trevor A. Branch. 2019. To create sustainable seafood industries, the United States needs a better accounting of imports and exports.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences  116: 9142–9146. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1905650116."
"287" "Gephart, Jessica A, Lisa Deutsch, Michael L Pace, Max Troell, and David A Seekell. 2017. Shocks to fish production: Identification, trends, and consequences.  Global Environmental Change  42: 24–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2016.11.003."
"288" "Global Panel. 2020.  COVID-19: safeguarding food systems and promoting healthy diets . Policy Brief No. 14. London."
"289" "Golan, Maureen S., Laura H. Jernegan, and Igor Linkov. 2020. Trends and applications of resilience analytics in supply chain modeling: systematic literature review in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.  Environment Systems and Decisions  40. Springer US: 222–243. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10669-020-09777-w."
"290" "Golden, Christopher D., Edward H. Allison, William W.L. Cheung, Madan M. Dey, Benjamin S. Halpern, Douglas J. McCauley, Matthew Smith, Bapu Vaitla, Dirk Zeller, and Samuel S. Myers. 2016. Nutrition: Fall in fish catch threatens human health.  Nature  534: 317–320. https://doi.org/10.1038/534317a."
"291" "Gonzales, I. 2020. Crisis sanitaria y pesca artesanal: infraestructuras, focos y vectores.  Grupo de Análisis para el Desarollo ."
"292" "Government of Canada. 2020. Guidance on Essential Services and Functions in Canada During the COVID-19 Pandemic.  Public Safety Canada . May."
"293" "Grillo, Jorge, Renato Gozzer, Juan Carlos Sueiro, and Juan Carlos Riveros. 2018.  Producción ilegal de harina de pescado en Perú a partir de anchoveta extraída por la flota artesanal y de menor escala.  Lima."
"294" "Haas, Andrea R., Danielle N. Edwards, and U. Rashid Sumaila. 2016. Corporate concentration and processor control: Insights from the salmon and herring fisheries in British Columbia.  Marine Policy  68. Elsevier: 83–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.marpol.2016.02.019."
"295" "Hicks, Christina C, Philippa J Cohen, Nicholas A J Graham, Kirsty L Nash, Edward H Allison, Coralie D’Lima, David J Mills, et al. 2019. Harnessing global fisheries to tackle micronutrient deficiencies.  Nature  574. Springer US: 95–98. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1592-6."
"296" "HLPE. 2017.  Nutrition and food systems . A report by the High Level Panel of Experts on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World Food Security, Rome."
"297" "HLPE. 2020. Impacts of COVID-19 on food security and nutrition: developing effective policy response to address the hunger and malnutrition pandemic. Rome."
"298" "Ivanov, Dmitry, Boris Sokolov, and Alexandre Dolgui. 2014. The Ripple effect in supply chains: Trade-off  “efficiency-flexibility- resilience” in disruption management.  International Journal of Production Research  52: 2154–2172. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2013.858836."
"299" "Jensen, Robert. 2007. The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.  The Quarterly Journal of Economics  122: 879–924. https://doi.org/10.1162/qjec.122.3.879."
"300" "Knight, Christopher J., Theresa L.U. U Burnham, Elizabeth J. Mansfield, Larry B. Crowder, and Fiorenza Micheli. 2020. COVID-19 reveals vulnerability of small-scale fisheries to global market systems.  The Lancet Planetary Health  4: e219. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30128-5."
"301" "Lam, Vicky W. Y., Edward H. Allison, Johann D. Bell, Jessica Blythe, William W. L. Cheung, Thomas L. Frölicher, Maria A. Gasalla, and U. Rashid Sumaila. 2020. Climate change, tropical fisheries and prospects for sustainable development.  Nature Reviews Earth & Environment  1. Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 440–454. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-020-0071-9."
"302" "Lamarca, Napoleon Salvador J. 2017. Fisheries Country Profile: Philippines.  SEAFDEC ."
"303" "Lerner, N. 2020. Cuarentena En Perú: cuáles son las nuevas medidas, restricciones y multas.  Diario AS Perú ."
"304" "Love, David C, Edward H Allison, Frank Asche, Ben Belton, Richard S Cottrell, Halley E Froehlich, Jessica A Gephart, et al. 2021. Emerging COVID-19 impacts, responses, and lessons for building resilience in the seafood system.  Global Food Security  28: 1–22. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2021.100494."
"305" "Margolis, J. 2020. Santa Barbara Sea Urchins, Prized By High-End Restaurants, Are Being Sold To Home Cooks.  LAist , May."
"306" "Marín, Alan, José Serna, Christian Robles, Beder Ramírez, Lorenzo E Reyes-Flores, Eliana Zelada-Mázmela, Giovanna Sotil, and Ruben Alfaro. 2018. A glimpse into the genetic diversity of the Peruvian seafood sector: Unveiling species substitution, mislabeling and trade of threatened species.  PLOS ONE  13. Public Library of Science: 1–34. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0206596."
"307" "Matson, Pamela, William C Clark, and Krister Andersson. 2016.  Pursuing Sustainability: A guide to the science and practice . Princeton University Press."
"308" "McCarthy, J. J., O. F. Canziani, N. A. Leary, D. J. Dokken, and K. S. White, ed. 2001.  Climate change 2001: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press."
"309" "Meyer, Geralyn, Bobbi Shatto, Orawan Kuljeerung, Lisa Nuccio, Adam Bergen, and Courtney Rae Wilson. 2020. Exploring the relationship between resilience and grit among nursing students: A correlational research study.  Nurse Education Today  84. Elsevier: 104246. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nedt.2019.104246."
"310" "NMFS. 2018.  Fisheries of the United States 2017 ."
"311" "Nthane, Tsele T., Fred Saunders, Gloria L.Gallardo Fernández, and Serge Raemaekers. 2020. Toward sustainability of South African small-scale fisheries leveraging ICT transformation pathways.  Sustainability (Switzerland) . https://doi.org/10.3390/su12020743."
"312" "Office of Governor. 2020a. Governor Newsom Announces New Help for Small Businesses & Workers Displaced by COVID-19, April 2."
"313" "Office of Governor. 2020b. Governor Newsom Announces Additional Unemployment Benefits for Workers Impacted by COVID-19, as Unemployment Claims Reach Record Levels, April 9."
"314" "Omar, SZ, and AR Chhachhar. 2012. A review on the roles of ICT tools towards the development of fishermen.  Journal of Basic and Applied Scientific Research  2: 9905–9911."
"315" "Penner, Derrick. 2020. B.C. commercial fishery among sectors fearing COVID-19 market fallout | Vancouver Sun.  Vancouver Sun , March."
"316" "Pino Shibata, Jesica. 2020. Pesca Artesanal y el Coronavirus, un cambio de la historia Peruana.  Revista Pesca ."
"317" "Prime Minister of Canada. 2020. Prime Minister announces new support for Canada’s fish harvesters, May 14."
"318" "PRODUCE. 2018.  Anuario Estadístico Pesquero y Acuícola 2017 . San Isidro, Lima, Peru."
"319" "REDES. 2018.  Mapeo de comunidades dedicadas a la pequería artesanal de perico, pota, y tiburón a lo largo de la costa peruana . Lima."
"320" "Rey, Aika. 2020. FOOD SECURITY FRONTLINERS: Coronavirus lockdown pushes farmers, fisherfolk into deeper poverty.  Rappler , September."
"321" "Riveros, Juan Carlos. 2020. La pesca o la vida en tiempos de pandemia.  RPP Noticias ."
"322" "Selig, Elizabeth R., David G. Hole, Edward H. Allison, Katie K. Arkema, Madeleine C. McKinnon, Jingjie Chu, Alex Sherbinin, et al. 2019. Mapping global human dependence on marine ecosystems.  Conservation Letters  12. Wiley-Blackwell: e12617. https://doi.org/10.1111/conl.12617."
"323" "Sianturi, Arnold H. 2020. Gubernur Sumut Dukung Pusat Tetapkan PSBB.  Berita Satu , April."
"324" "Standing Committee on Fisheries and Oceans. 2019.  West Coast Fisheries: Sharing Risks and Benefits ."
"325" "Steenbergen, Dirk J., Hampus Eriksson, Kimberley Hunnam, David J. Mills, and Natasha Stacey. 2019. Following the fish inland: understanding fish distribution networks for rural development and nutrition security.  Food Security  11. Food Security: 1417–1432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-019-00982-3."
"326" "Stoll, Joshua S., Beatrice I. Crona, Michael Fabinyi, and Emily R. Farr. 2018. Seafood Trade Routes for Lobster Obscure Teleconnected Vulnerabilities.  Frontiers in Marine Science  5: 239. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmars.2018.00239."
"327" "Strobel, Sonia. 2020. The Importance of Food Systems and Community.  Skipper Otto . Vancouver, BC. March."
"328" "Tamayo, Bernadette E. 2020. USAID, Silliman U develop online fish market.  The Manila Times , September."
"329" "Tendall, D. M., J. Joerin, B. Kopainsky, P. Edwards, A. Shreck, Q. B. Le, P. Kruetli, M. Grant, and J. Six. 2015. Food system resilience: Defining the concept.  Global Food Security  6: 17–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gfs.2015.08.001."
"330" "Thilsted, Shakuntala Haraksingh, Andrew Thorne-Lyman, Patrick Webb, Jessica Rose Bogard, Rohana Subasinghe, Michael John Phillips, and Edward Hugh Allison. 2016. Sustaining healthy diets: The role of capture fisheries and aquaculture for improving nutrition in the post-2015 era.  Food Policy  61. Elsevier Ltd: 126–131. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2016.02.005."
"331" "Triggs, A., and H. Kharas. 2020. The triple economic shock of COVID-19 and priorities for an emergency G-20 leaders meeting.  Brookings , March 17."
"332" "Walker, Brian, and David Salt. 2012.  Resilience Practice: Building capacity to absorb disturbance and maintain function . Washington, D.C.: Island Press."
"333" "Witter, Allison, and Joshua Stoll. 2017. Participation and resistance: Alternative seafood marketing in a neoliberal era.  Marine Policy  80: 130–140."
"334" "World Bank. 2012.  Hidden Harvest: The Global Contribution of Capture Fisheries . Report No. 66469-GLB. Washington, DC."
"335" "Xu, Song, Xiaotong Zhang, Lipan Feng, and Wenting Yang. 2020. Disruption risks in supply chain management: a literature review based on bibliometric analysis.  International Journal of Production Research  58. Taylor & Francis: 3508–3526. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2020.1717011."
