"x"
"1" "Title:  COVID-19: An opportunity to strengthen Public Health Policy and Advocacy Efforts in LMIC (Low- Middle-Income Countries)"
"2" "Author Information:"
"3" "Corresponding author: Ponn P. Mahayosnand, MPH, Research Scholar, Ronin Institute, Montclair, NJ ponn.mahayosnand@ronininstitute.org"
"4" "We request not to publish a mailing address."
"5" "Saman Essa, BA, Doctoral Student, University of Houston, Houston, TX, sessa2@central.uh.edu"
"6" "ZM Sabra, Medical Student, Islamic University of Gaza, Faculty of Medicine, Gaza, Palestine,"
"7" "zsabra@students.iugaza.edu.ps"
"8" "Disclaimers: The views expressed in the submitted article are those of the authors and not an"
"9" "official position of our institutions."
"10" "Article word count: 1118 References: 12"
"11" "Funding: None."
"12" "Competing interests: None declared."
"13" "Author contributions: Concept and design: PPM, ZMS. Conducted the literature review, drafted the manuscript, and approved final revisions: PPM, SE, ZMS. Technical editing: ZMS"
"14" "COVID-19: An opportunity to strengthen Public Health Policy and Advocacy Efforts  in LMIC (Low- Middle-Income Countries)"
"15" "Introduction"
"16" "Similar to how p hysicians practice evidence-based medicine to treat individual patients, policymakers  should  govern the public's health according to evidence-based data. Initiated by the World Health Organization's directive to make COVID-19 research open and freely accessible,   (1,2)    multidisciplinary studies  are still published daily . Collectively, policymakers worldwide have not used available data effectively to make noteworthy reductions in the pandemic that is now over a year old. This brief commentary introduces a policy  problem , then shares 3 categories of successful case studies as possible solutions: [1]  Low- and Middle-Income Countries ( LMIC ) :  Vietnam and Iran,  (3,4)   [2]  public health practitioners:  social workers in Africa and pharmacists in Zambia,  (5,6)  and [3]  public health programs: a  smoking cessation program and inmate health program.  (7,8)   Examples  from  LMIC were selected to  demonstrate practical , cost-effective and duplicable methods. A collaborative multidisciplinary approach with community health partners is also proposed.  (2,9)"
"17" "The 3 \"streams\" of effective policy making"
"18" "Kingdon suggests three “streams'' of  policy making. (10)   The first is the problem stream, which is convincing policymakers that a problem exists. The second, the politics stream, is proposing solutions attractive to lawmakers that are also feasible. The third, the policy stream, is negotiating to get the policy approved. Public health practitioners serve a crucial role in creating and supporting policy initiatives through research, planning, and presenting imperative information to policymakers."
"19" "The COVID-19 problem stream"
"20" "An important objective of governing is to minimize the effects of biases on public policy and to successfully communicate the basis of implementation to the general public.  (11)  There are many reasons why policymakers did not adhere to COVID-19-specific evidence, “scientific skepticism, political motives, and competing social values\" among them.  (12)  It was found that COVID-19 policymaking in the US was “inevitably  influenced by factors besides research evidence , including shared values, or political partisanship, and financial incentives.” One of their most costly decisions was the $3 billion investment of ventilators, which was not a public health recommendation, rather than investing in more effective messaging to promote healthy behaviors, which was.  ( 11 )"
"21" "The COVID-19 politics stream"
"22" "[1] Successful LMIC"
"23" "Vietnam and Iran, two LMIC, experienced significant success in the containment of COVID-19.  (3,4)  With close geographic proximity to China, Vietnam was expected to have high rates of COVID-19 infections. However, they were able to contain the spread through  a collaborative multidisciplinary approach . First, the government used technological platforms, including websites and apps, to disperse information about the epidemic. Second, hospitals were key in distributing knowledge and data concerning COVID-19. The government had high awareness and worked with the healthcare infrastructure to provide the same information to citizens."
"24" "Iran used a similar collaborative multidisciplinary approach.  (4)  Instead of relying on government officials alone, the Iranian government invoked help from religious leaders to increase awareness around COVID-19 and safety measures that should be implemented. Furthermore, they called on medical universities to implement measures at a local level. They also called on the support of  “street-level bureaucrats” (SLB), who  have greater access to the general public and  are essentially the first point of contact for those with COVID-19.  Involving SLB in policymaking made policy more effective, efficient, and useful."
"25" "[2] Successful public health practitioners"
"26" "Social workers played  a critical role in contributing to the containment of COVID-19 among older adults in Africa.  (5)  They used mass media to cultivate change among the general public. They used print, electronic, and social media to convey educational, counseling, and advocacy messages to reach various age groups. Keeping in mind that older adults were most vulnerable, social workers promoted public policy in two key areas: immediate action (like cash transfers and food deliveries) and long-term policy advocacy (investment in socio-economic and public health infrastructure)."
"27" "In Zambia, pharmacists played a substantial role in promoting wellness and increasing disease awareness.   (6)  Community pharmacists served as frontline workers because they are seen more regularly and more accessible than other healthcare professionals. Since community pharmacists were aware of the public’s most pressing healthcare needs, they served as crucial informants to and advocates for policymakers."
"28" "[3] Successful public health programs"
"29" "Multidisciplinary public health informed policy has been successful in suppressing the spread of COVID-19 through increased research, awareness, and advocacy.  For example , public health practitioners have cultivated awareness of the harms of smoking during this respiratory disease pandemic.  (7)  A policy recommendation to prioritize smoking cessation in England was successful in reducing COVID-19 cases. In California, community-based organizations formed partnerships with health educators and public health officials  to bring awareness to the detrimental effects  of COVID-19 within prisons.  (8)  This coalition wrote recommendations and interventions to policymakers to improve the health of inmates. Grassroot movements originating from specific health programs have proven effective in addressing COVID-19 in these communities.  Although these examples are not from LMIC, they were grassroots efforts led by communities supporting these programs. Public health programs within specific health issues, such as smoking, or among specific populations, such as prisoners, deserve attention as these policy efforts are cost-effective and duplicable in LMIC."
"30" "The COVID-19 policy stream"
"31" "The pandemic illustrated the dire need for policy to be informed by experts. Policymakers’ lack of research aptitude and poor scientific understanding of how the disease was transmitted led to the creation of policy that failed to keep constituents safe and healthy.  (12)  Examining other countries’ responses to COVID-19, among other diseases, has shown the efficacy of containing health-related problems when health workers are involved in informing policy."
"32" "One way to execute appropriate health policy is to create a  localized   Community Health Advisory Network.   (2,9)   Formalizing a collaborative multidisciplinary approach assures pivotal voices are heard during the policymaking process. Integral partners must include researchers because they can provide scientific literacy training to policymakers and keep them abreast of current data.  (12)   Mindful of how crucial these relationships are, universities in the UK create ongoing opportunities for researchers and policymakers to convene and even incentivize the  formation of those relationships.   Researchers should also practice open science.  (1,2)   Public health preventive medicine clinicians and practitioners also serve as key partners since they are  formally trained in health policy and advocac y.  Such a program may be replicated, and in Gaza, the formation of the Gaza Public Health Advisory Network has been proposed. Composed of key community stakeholders, such as local medical and dental schools, hospitals, and government and humanitarian organizations, the Advisory Network would aim to best inform policymakers, especially   during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"33" "Conclusion"
"34" "Policymakers of all levels (city, state, regional, national, and continental) have the ability to effect vital change to mitigate  COVID-19 , and such change should be evidence-based. Countries, especially LMIC, can benefit from applying the cost-efficient and easy-to-implement health policy and advocacy practices highlighted  herein."
"35" "References"
"36" "1.  Solidarity Call to Action [Internet]. [cited 2021 Apr 14]. Available from: https://www.who.int/initiatives/covid-19-technology-access-pool/solidarity-call-to-action"
"37" "2.  Mahayosnand PP, Sabra ZM, Sabra DM. COVID-19 and Gaza: The Ideal Time to Establish a Medical Reserve Corps of Public Health Preventive Medicine Specialists. Health Secur. 2021 Mar 30;19(2):235–9."
"38" "3.  La V-P, Pham T-H, Ho M-T, Nguyen M-H, P. Nguyen K-L, Vuong T-T, et al. Policy Response, Social Media and Science Journalism for the Sustainability of the Public Health System Amid the COVID-19 Outbreak: The Vietnam Lessons. Sustainability. 2020 Jan;12(7):2931."
"39" "4.  Raoofi A, Takian A, Sari AA, Olyaeemanesh A, Haghighi H, Aarabi M. COVID-19 Pandemic and Comparative Health Policy Learning in Iran. Arch Iran Med. 2020 Apr 5;23(4):220–34."
"40" "5.  COVID-19 and older adults in Africa: Social workers’ utilization of mass media in enforcing policy change - Tracy BE Omorogiuwa, 2020 [Internet]. [cited 2021 Mar 24]. Available from: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0020872820941748"
"41" "6.  Hangoma JM, Mudenda S, Mwenechanya MM, Kalungia AC. Community pharmacists’ knowledge and preparedness to participate in the fight against Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Zambia. medRxiv. 2020 Sep 2;2020.09.01.20185694."
"42" "7.  Grundy EJ, Suddek T, Filippidis FT, Majeed A, Coronini-Cronberg S. Smoking, SARS-CoV-2 and COVID-19: A review of reviews considering implications for public health policy and practice. Tob Induc Dis [Internet]. 2020 Jul 3 [cited 2021 Apr 27];18. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7336902/"
"43" "8.  Minkler M, Griffin J, Wakimoto P. Seizing the Moment: Policy Advocacy to End Mass Incarceration in the Time of COVID-19. Health Educ Behav. 2020 Aug 1;47(4):514–8."
"44" "9.  Hoover AG, Zephyr PD. Classifying Community Organizational Health Communication Networks: Local Health Department Recognition of Public Information-Sharing Partners Across Sectors. J Public Health Manag Pract JPHMP. 2020 Sep 9;"
"45" "10.  Dominguez D, Garcia D, Martinez D, Hernandez-Arriaga B. Leveraging the power of mutual aid, coalitions, leadership, and advocacy during COVID-19. Am Psychol. 2020;75(7):909–18."
"46" "11.  Halpern SD, Truog RD, Miller FG. Cognitive Bias and Public Health Policy During the COVID-19 Pandemic. JAMA. 2020 Jul 28;324(4):337–8."
"47" "12.  Ashtari N. A Plea for Evidence-Based Policy in the Era of COVID-19 — HMSR. Harv Med Stud Rev [Internet]. 2020 Jun 4 [cited 2021 Apr 27]; Available from: https://www.hmsreview.org/covid/a-plea-for-evidence-based-policy"
