Home, sweet home? The impact of working from
home on the division of unpaid work during the
COVID-19 lockdown
Judith Derndorfer1,2Y , Franziska Disslbacher2,3Y , Vanessa Lechinger1,2Y ,
Katharina Mader2Y , Eva Six1,2Y
1 Research Institute Economics of Inequality, WU Vienna University of
Economics and Business, Austria
2 Department of Economics, WU Vienna University of Economics and
Business, Austria
3 Department of Economics and Statistics, Chamber of Labour, Vienna,
Austria
YThese authors contributed equally to this work.

Abstract
A lockdown implies a shift from the public to the private sphere, and from
market to non-market production, thereby increasing the volume of unpaid
work. Already before the pandemic, unpaid work was disproportionately
borne by women. This paper studies the effect of working from home for pay
(WFH), due to a lockdown, on the change in the division of housework and
childcare within couple households. While previous studies on the effect of
WFH on the reconciliation of work and family life and the division of labour
within the household suffered from selection bias, we are able to identify
this effect by drawing upon the shock of the first COVID-19 lockdown in
Austria. The corresponding legal measures left little choice over WFH. In
any case, WFH is exogenous, conditional on a small set of individual and
household characteristics we control for. We employ data from a survey
on the gendered aspects of the lockdown. The dataset includes detailed
information on time use during the lockdown and on the quality and experience of WFH. Uniquely, this survey data also includes information on
the division, and not only magnitude, of unpaid work within households.
Austria is an interesting case in this respect as it is characterized by very
conservative gender norms. The results reveal that the probability of men
taking on a larger share of housework increases if men are WFH alone or
together with their female partner. By contrast, the involvement of men in
childcare increased only in the event that the female partner was not able
to WFH. Overall, the burden of childcare, and particularly homeschooling,
was disproportionately borne by women.

1

Introduction

Crises and measures to cope with them exert a different impact on men and
women, regardless of whether the nature of the crisis is economic (e.g. [1,2]),
environmental (e.g. [3–5]) or social (e.g. [6, 7]). The COVID-19 pandemic is
no exception to this rule. Following the rapid spread of the SARS-CoV-2
virus in early 2020, the immediate response of governments across the world
was to lockdown1 large parts of the economy to slow down the spread of

April 22, 2021

1/49

the virus and to mitigate negative effects on public health. A tremendous
amount of research investigates the impact of the pandemic and the measures implemented to cope with it on social and economic outcomes.2 The
vast majority of that research studies aspects that are subject to official
statistics, particularly labour market statistics and GDP, and stresses the
gendered, but country-specific, effects of the pandemic.3 However, spheres
not subject to official or regular data production efforts usually remain
a blind spot. This paper sheds light on one of these economically and
socially significant blind spots: unpaid work. We study how the shift towards working from home (WFH) for pay due to the first, strict lockdown in
Austria has had an impact on the division of unpaid work within households.
Unpaid work is conducted to provide unpaid domestic services for use
within the household and for reproduction. It includes housework, care
given to household members and others and the provision of community
services [8]. Across the world, women work longer unpaid hours than
men [8, 9]. Numerous approaches provide an explanation of the gendered
patterns of time use, ranging from time availability approaches [10], to
bargaining and separate spheres perspectives [11, 12], to the gender display approach [13–15]. Most of these theories stress that the division of
labour within the household results from gendered power relations, which
in turn are due to various factors: “some quantifiable, such as individual
economic assets, others less so, such as communal/external support systems
or social norms and institutions, or perceptions about contributions and
needs” [16, p. 7]. Importantly, unpaid work enables productive and paid
economic activity and stabilizes the economy in times of crisis. Despite its
pivotal role for the economy, unpaid work is not counted as productive work
in conventional productivity measures or GDP. Moreover, as unpaid work is
invisible, it remains unrecognized in most policy decisions and is frequently
neglected due to the belief that what happens in the household is a private
matter. This became evident during the pandemic, as governments closed
kindergartens and schools, while taking the provision of unpaid work in the
home for granted [17].
The COVID-19 lockdowns caused a substantial increase in the volume of
unpaid work by shifting production from paid to unpaid work and thus from
market to non-market production. This particularly affected parents of
young children. The closure of restaurants, canteens and bars translates into
more time spent on grocery shopping and the preparation of meals at home.
The lockdown of childcare institutions and schools increases the volume of
unpaid work by shifting care almost exclusively to the home. This is intensified by contact restrictions that make cleaning staff and nannies employed
by households unavailable. The hours spent on unpaid work also increased
as the support of grandparents, relatives and friends was to be avoided
in order protect their health and save lives. This overall increase in the
volume of hours spent on unpaid childcare during lockdown is documented
in a number of studies, and estimates range from an increase of 25% in
Spain [18], to 37% in Hungary [19], up to double the pre-lockdown hours in
the United Kingdom [20]. These and additional studies also find that during
COVID-19 lockdowns, women worked longer hours unpaid than men [21,22].
In addition to causing a gender-specific increase in the volume of unpaid
work, lockdowns also imply a shift towards work from home for pay (WFH)

April 22, 2021

2/49

for non-essential4 workers. As a result, many individuals and households
have to rearrange their entire (paid and unpaid) work life. Thus, as the
lockdown shifts the locus of production to the home, the household becomes
the prime location of both market and non-market production. Thereby
the barriers between WFH and unpaid work, between the public (paid) and
the private (unpaid) sphere are blurred. Such a shift towards the home
and household production also provokes behavioural responses that feed
back into the public sphere and the economy. For instance, to cope with
the increased volume of unpaid work, in particular childcare, mothers were
more likely than fathers to reduce paid working hours in response to the
lockdown [22–24]. Hence, the public and the private, the notion and extent
of paid and unpaid work, are by no means separate spheres of work; rather
– and this has clearly been revealed by COVID-19 lockdowns – they are
interwoven and inseparable.
In this paper, we study the effect of WFH during the first, strict COVID19 lockdown in Austria on the divisions of unpaid work within heterosexual
couple households and the working conditions of WFH. From a conceptual
point of view, we describe paid and unpaid work as interwoven dimensions of
work and we answer three related research questions: did the involvement of
males in housework and childcare increase during the lockdown as compared
to before? Is there a gender gradient in the experience of WFH? What is
the effect of WFH on the intra-household divisions of unpaid work? Our
empirical strategy for estimating the effect of WFH on the change in the division of housework and childcare exploits the experimental setting provided
by the lockdown measures. In essence, the pandemic and the following first
lockdown are shocks exogenous to the demand of unpaid work. In Austria,
the case studied in this paper, the design of the lockdown measures allowed
for few possibilities to opt in and out of WFH. This fact makes it possible
to identify the effect of lockdown-induced WFH on the intra-household
division of unpaid work. We employ data collected from the survey Multiple
Burdens under COVID-19 that we conducted between April and May 2020,
that is, during the first strict lockdown. Due to its relatively conservative
views on gender roles, Austria is a country and case of great interest in
this respect. According to the latest Eurobarometer survey No. 465 [25]
almost 4 out of 10 residents agree that “the most important role of a woman
is to take care of her home and family”. Amongst EU-15 countries, the
share of individuals who concurred with this statement is larger only in
Portugal (47%), Italy (51%), Ireland (52%) and Greece (69%). By contrast,
in countries which rank high on gender equality indices such as Sweden,
Denmark and the Netherlands, the share of respondents agreeing with this
statement is below 16 %. In addition, Austria was, next to Italy, confronted
with the rapid spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus at an early stage of the
pandemic. In the first weeks of the pandemic, Alon et al. [26] optimistically
argued that the COVID-19 crisis would result in a more equal division
of unpaid work within couple households, which would ultimately reduce
gender inequality on the labour market. Thus, we test this assumption
and examine whether WFH during the lockdown restrictions weakened
or strengthened traditional gender roles as expressed in the division of
housework and childcare.
We contribute to the literature on the gender-specific effects of lockdowns along the following lines. First, and most importantly, we present

April 22, 2021

3/49

the first paper that studies the change in the division of unpaid work, that
is to say, in the division of housework and childcare, within households due
to a lockdown. While previous work on the gendered division of labour in
high-income countries during lockdowns has focused on hours of unpaid
work by gender, we investigate whether and to what extent the first, strict
lockdown intensified the pre-lockdown gendered division of unpaid work
within the household. Second, we focus on the interwoven situations of
WFH and unpaid work and argue that the household composition of WFH
is a central mechanism behind this change. Although household characteristics such as age of household members, their education levels, and
the hours worked for pay, for instance, are important determinants of the
hours worked unpaid and the division of unpaid work within households,
we expect to find a significant effect of WFH on the change in the withinhousehold division of unpaid work conditional on these demographic and
socio-economic characteristics. Third, we are able to identify the effect of
WFH on the change in the division of unpaid work within households by
exploiting the experiment provided by the first lockdown. While the impact
of WFH on the division of unpaid work was already debated and studied
before the COVID-19 pandemic (see for instance [27]), these contributions
struggled to identify the effect of WFH, as in the investigated settings WFH
could have been both a cause and a consequence of unpaid work.

2

Research Design: Institutional Setting, Data
and Methods

In this chapter we introduce the research design. Specifically, we discuss the
timing and nature of the lockdown measures, the data source, the sample
definition and its characteristics, the definitions of the core variables, and
the econometric strategy and estimation method we employ to study the
effect of WFH due to the lockdown on the change in the division of unpaid
work in couple households.

2.1

The first lockdown

The first COVID-19 patients were hospitalized as early as February 2020,
yet it took a couple of weeks for the first legal measures to be announced
and become effective in Austria. On 10th March 10 2020 the Austrian
government announced the first regulations vastly restricting public and
private life. Starting with Monday, 16th March , people could leave their
homes only: (i) to attend their professional work if WFH was not feasible
(such as for emergency services, the healthcare sector, or the food retail
sector), (ii) to buy urgently needed goods (groceries, medicine, etc.), (iii) to
look after care recipients or (iv) to exercise outside for one’s physical and
mental health. Thus, as of mid-March, restaurants, bars, hotels, nurseries,
kindergartens, schools, universities, most offices, theatres, retail stores,
other public institutions, and many more were temporarily closed. Only
grocery stores, banks and pharmacies remained open. A couple of days
later, an official obligation for “home office” 5 was announced a couple of
days later, which reframed it as a ”target requirement“, meaning that, if
feasible, employers should let their employees WFH.6 . In practice, “home

April 22, 2021

4/49

office” was enacted overnight for large parts of the working population,
with no option to opt out. Additionally, with most of public life shut
down, police enforced high fines whenever regulations were violated. This
strict lockdown lasted one month, until after the Easter holidays (14th
April), but “reopening” only started slowly on 1st May. While shops and
stores could open again with strict safety measures on 14th April, childcare
facilities and most educational institutions, businesses and food services,
like restaurants, remained closed until the mid-Mid. Starting mid-May,
schools opened and divided their students into alternating groups with
each attending school only two days per week. With most offices staying closed and employees continuing to work from home, as well as most
public childcare facilities still not fully operational, the “softer” lockdown
period lasted until the end of June. In addition, the Austrian government
implemented a short-time work scheme. That is to say, while essential
workers continued going to work and others WFH, a substantial share of
the workforce was confronted with a drastic reduction in paid working hours.

2.2

Data and survey design

We use individual-level data from the cross-sectional survey Multiple Burdens under COVID-19 that we conducted during the strict COVID-19
restrictions in Austria. The overall aim of this survey is to enable research
on the gender-specific effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. Compared to
related surveys conducted in other countries, the strength of this data is
that it is both broad in scope and particularly detailed on the extent of
unpaid work and its division within households before as well as during
the lockdown. Applying the guidelines of Statistics Austria on time use
surveys [28], respondents had to report their time use on the previous
working day in intervals of 15 minutes for a set of given time use categories,
and these intervals had to add up to 24 hours. This provided a detailed
overview of how people spent their days during April and May 2020, a
period characterized by limited possibilities for activities outside the home.
However, we refrained from surveying time use before the lockdown in similar detail for several reasons.7 This implies that we are unable to compare
the change in hours per activity (such as unpaid work tasks). However,
we are able to study the change in the division of unpaid work within
households by drawing on different questions.
In addition to information on time use, the data include rich information on the division, organization and quality of paid and unpaid work
during the lockdown, on (satisfaction with) WFH, as well as a large set
of socio-economic and demographic characteristics of the respondents and
their partners and some information on any children who live in the same
household. For standard items, such as the highest level education completed, the questionnaire was designed following other surveys, such as the
European Survey on Income and Living Conditions 2020 [29], or – regarding
time use – the last Austrian Time Use Survey of 2008/09 [28]. However,
those questions that target information on WFH and the implications of the
lockdown were adapted such that they could capture the novel situation of
WFH. Unique features of the data are that they include information both
on respondents’ and their cohabiting partners’ time use and on the division
of unpaid work before as well as during the lockdown. We asked respon-

April 22, 2021

5/49

dents living in couple households whether their partner was also willing to
participate in the survey. If so, (a.i) they received an anonymous partner ID
for their partner to enter, which enabled us to link their responses. If not,
(a.ii) respondents had the opportunity to answer a “partner module” on the
time use and key characteristics (such as age, gender, education) of their
partner. Thus, while the sampling and (main) observational unit of the survey are individuals, we can depict household dynamics via this partner data..
We designed the questionnaire in the first weeks of the lockdown and
implemented it by means of the software LimeSurvey8 . Before starting to
distribute the survey, it was extensively pre-tested. The sampling strategy,
targeting respondents with and without children who worked from home, is
best described as “limited snowball sampling”: We distributed the survey via
various mailing lists of the Vienna University of Economics and Business,
the Vienna Chamber of Labour (that is, the legal representation of all
dependent workers), and the Austrian transport and services union Vida.
The call to answer the questionnaire was accompanied by the appeal to
forward the survey to friends, family and colleagues. In addition, we posted
the survey in groups of the social media platform Facebook9 and on Twitter.
The sampling strategy is hence a limited version of the standard snowball
sampling design that exclusively samples based on the appeal to invite
further respondents to answer a questionnaire. 2,113 respondents answered
the entire survey between 20th April and 14th May 2020. As the snowball
distribution strategy targeted individuals who were working from home at
that time, the sample has a constraint: compared to the Austrian working
population, it includes a disproportionately high share of individuals who
completed tertiary education, who were obliged to WFH by the lockdown,
and who live in Vienna, the capital city.

2.3

Sample and key variables

The main interest of this paper is to study the effect of WFH on the
change in the within-household division of unpaid work. For this reason, we
restricted the overall sample to 730 heterosexual couples (1,460 individuals)
who
b.i lived in the same household during the lockdown10
b.ii were both either employed, self-employed or on short-time work at
the time of the survey, and
b.iii either one partner answered the “partner module” and thereby provided information on her/his partner, or both partners answered the
survey and linked them via an anonymous partner ID.
Restrictions (b.i) and (b.iii) are necessary for the study of intra-household
dynamics, while (b.ii) reduces the sample to working couples. We obtained
11% of the observations from questionnaires answered by two partners that
we can link using a partner ID. However, the vast majority, 78%, of the
observations are from questionnaires answered by women providing information about themselves and their male partner. The remainder is from
questionnaires answered by males. Table S1 describes the characteristics of
this sample in detail. In the following section, we discuss the main variables

April 22, 2021

6/49

of interest and the covariates we include in the econometric analysis.

Division of unpaid work within the couple household before and
during the lockdown: We measure the division of unpaid work before
and during the lockdown based on two questions that asked respondents to
rank their share of (c.i) housework (HW) and (c.ii) childcare tasks (CC)
on a scale from zero (“Woman does everything”) to ten (“Man does everything”). housework includes cooking, shopping and cleaning, but also tasks
like gardening, animal care or repair work. Childcare comprises basic care,
teaching (homeschooling), and recreational activities like talking, reading
or playing with a child. Respondents had to answer these questions after
having reported heir time use for each of these subcategories. Thus, we
assume that they were aware of the definition of housework and childcare
when answering these questions. We define two of the main variables of
interest based on these questions about the division of unpaid work within
the household. First, the dependent variable in the econometric analysis
is a dummy variable indicating whether the male partner took on more
housework or childcare tasks during the lockdown than before the lockdown.
This variable equals one, if the value on the corresponding 11-point scale
was reported as being at least one point higher during the lockdown than
before. 25% of all couples indicated that the male partner took on at least
marginally more HW and 31% of all couples with children reported an
increased involvement of the male partner in CC (see Table S1). Thus,
we define the change in the division of HW and CC as an increased involvement of the male partner in these tasks. Second, we employ these
questions as a measure for the division of housework and childcare prior
to the lockdown. For this purpose, we subdivide the two 11-scale variables
into four categories: “Woman does much more” (scale nos. 0–2), “Woman
does more” (scale nos. 3–4), “Equal” (scale no. 5), “Man does (much) more”
(scale nos. 6–10). Owing to the fact that in very few households men are
primarily responsible for housework and/or childcare, we did not differentiate between “more” and “much more” in the case of males (see Table S1).

Working from home (WFH): In order to measure WFH during the
COVID-19 restrictions, respondents who stated they were currently employed, self-employed or in short-time work were asked if they do WFH
entirely, partly11 or not at all. As we are interested in dynamics within
couple households, we created a factor variable indicating whether within
a heterosexual couple nobody, only the man, only the woman or both
partners were WFH during the lockdown. Table S1 shows that the majority
of respondents were WFH during the COVID-19 lockdown: in 19% only
the woman was WFH, in 8% of cases only the man was WFH, whereas in
64% of all couples both were WFH.

Socio-economic characteristics (covariates): In addition, we include
several covariates measured at the household and individual level in the
econometric model: the relative income of partners, the highest level of
education completed, age, number and age of children living in the household, employment status and working hours (see Table S1). In order to

April 22, 2021

7/49

be able to assess the presence and extent of power dynamics as manifested
in income differences between partners, respondents had to report their
own net income in the last month, their total disposable household income
and their partner’s net income according to one of 15 income brackets.12
Based on this categorical income variable, we define a factor variable indicating whether a respondent earned either more, less, or roughly the same
as their partner13 . In the econometric specification, we focus on couples
with children younger than 15 years and we grouped children according
to their age. The cutoffs between age groups reflect differences in the
educational status of the children: 0–2 years (very young children), 3–5
years (kindergarten), 6–9 years (primary school) and 10–14 years (lower
secondary school). Table S1 shows the average number of children by age
group and household type. Furthermore, we distinguish between individuals
working part-time (less than 21 hours per week) and those who reduced
their working time (involuntarily) due to short-time work. In addition, there
is the group of “full-time short-time workers”, which refers to respondents
who were in short-time work but still worked more than 21 hours per week14 .

2.4

Data analysis and econometric approach

In order to answer the research questions, we make use of descriptive
statistics as well as standard econometric methods. In the first part, the
descriptive analysis, we provide evidence on the gendered burden of WFH,
characterizing the division of housework and childcare during the lockdown.
In the second part, the econometric analysis, we study the effect of WFH
on the change in the division of unpaid work within households. For this
purpose, we estimate an econometric model that explains the probability
that the male partner increased his share in unpaid work during the lockdown. Importantly, under “normal” circumstances, that is to say, without
any COVID-19 restrictions in place, it is impossible to establish a clear
relationship between (a shift towards) WFH and (the resulting change
in) the division of unpaid work in an observational study. For instance,
individuals can opt into or out of the treatment (WFH), resulting in an
endogenous treatment and thus biased estimates. In that case, it would not
be clear whether the option of flexible work, specifically WFH arrangements,
is either a cause or a consequence of parents’ involvement in household and
care work. The COVID-19 restrictions in Austria offer an experimental
setting that we can exploit to study the effect of WFH on the division of
unpaid work: WFH was strongly recommended by regulation (see section
2.1) and enacted overnight. In practice, it was no longer a personal decision
to WFH or not and there was no scope for planning. Within the population
of working individuals, WFH can thus be considered as randomly assigned
and exogenous. However, the legal WFH regulation entailed mereley a
strong recommendation to WFH. For this reason, we condition WFH on
individual and household-level factors known to exert a key influence on
the division of unpaid work as well as the pre-lockdown division of housework and childcare tasks. Thereby we are able to rule out any remaining
possibilities for selection into or out of WFH.
We estimate a set of logistic regression models by maximum likelihood
to investigate the effect of WFH on the binary dependent variable that
describes changes in the division of unpaid work within couple households.

April 22, 2021

8/49

Subsequently, we calculate the average of the corresponding sample marginal
effects for each variable in the regression model. These average marginal
effects (AME) depict the average change in the probability that the dependent variable is true.
The population equation is given by equation 1

P r(Yh = 1|z) = G(β0 + β1 W F Hi, j in h + β2 Di, j in h + β3 Xi, j in h + h ) (1)
where G(z) is the cumulative distribution function of the standard loexp(z)
gistic distribution (G(z) = 1+exp(z)
), which, for all real numbers, takes
on values strictly between zero and one (0 < G(z) < 1). h is assumed
to have mean zero and a constant variance. Note the h refers to the
couple household h = 1, ..., N nesting the partners i, ..., I and j, ..., J.
Thus, the dependent variable is the change in the division of housework
at the household level, while the variables on the right are measured at
the level of individuals nested in the corresponding household. For the
sake of simplicity, we define β = [β0 , β1 , β2 , β2 ] as the vector of coefficients corresponding to the variables in the matrices Di , W F Hi , and Xi ,
which together provide set of explanatory variables zi in the population
equation. β0 is a constant. We estimate equation 1 by means of maximum likelihood. Hence, we define the density of yh conditional on zh as
f (y|zh , β) = G(zh β)y [1 − G(zh β)]1−y ∀y = 0, 1; the log-likelihood of an individual observation is given by `h (β) = yj log(G(zh β))+(1−yh )[1−G(zh β)],
while the likelihood
that is maximized in order to estimate β is
Pfunction
n
defined as L(β) = h=1 `h (β).
We work with two dependent variables, Y , thus, we estimate two variants of equation 1. The first variable describes whether the male partner
increased his share in housework (of the household) during the lockdown,
the second depicts the increase in the male partner’s involvement in childcare. The corresponding dummy variables are equal to one if the man
proportionally took on more unpaid work during the lockdown, but it
does not indicate how much more unpaid work this corresponds to than
before the lockdown.Thus, the hours corresponding to the male part of
the couple “doing more than before” can vary to a large extent in terms of
hours. In other words, in this definition, every increase in the male partner’s
involvement in HW or CC counts equally, regardless of the corresponding
hours. As we are interested in whether WFH changed the pre-lockdown
division of unpaid work, conditional on covariates, we consider this to be the
appropriate specification. The main explanatory variable hence is working
from home (WFH), a factor variable measuring whether both, none, only
the woman or only the man of the couple was WFH during the lockdown. In
addition, we control for the division of unpaid work before the lockdown (D)
and other household and individual characteristics (X), specifically relative
income of partners, age, highest level of education completed, employment
status, full-time or part-time work, and the number of children and age of
any children living in the household.

April 22, 2021

9/49

3

Results

In this section we present the results of the descriptive and econometric
analysis and we discuss the findings in more detail.

3.1

Descriptive results

This subsection presents the descriptive results of two overlapping spheres:
the experience of WFH while coping with the increased demand for unpaid
work (see section 3.1.1) and its division during the lockdown (see section
3.1.2). We reveal how the blurring of boundaries between the public and
private domains and between work and family responsibilities have distinct
implications on different types of households and genders.

3.1.1

Working from home during lockdown restrictions

As stated in chapter 2.1, the legal basis to WFH whenever it was feasible
was enacted and communicated by the Austrian government starting in
March 2020. Since most facilities, especially public spaces (like schools,
universities, public buildings, libraries, restaurants, etc.) were closed, the
term feasible was interpreted as strongly advised for workers in “non-critical
infrastructure” (i.e. outside of supermarkets, elderly homes, hospitals, etc.).
Especially with childcare facilities being closed and meeting up with friends
and family being forbidden, Austrians spent most of their days at home.
WFH during the lockdown therefore cannot be compared with WFH in
non-pandemic and non-lockdown times. However, even by the end of 2020,
no legal agreement on how WFH should be implemented was enforced in
Austria. This implies that most employees had to manage WFH on their
own from the beginning, but with few guidelines from their employers.
WFH entails both advantages and disadvantages. The most propagated
benefits are not having to commute every day and an easier reconciliation
of family and (paid) work. At the same time, contact with supervisors,
managers or colleagues might be more limited. Another potential drawback
is the blurring of boundaries between paid work and leisure time. In the
survey, the respondents had to evaluate their current WFH situation by
answering a set of questions. The corresponding questions covered different
aspects, such as advantages and disadvantages of WFH, different forms of
childcare when WFH and the quality of working time and their workspace
at home. The respondents had to report how much they agreed or disagreed with statements on the quality of and their experience with WFH.
They had to “Strongly agree”, “Somewhat agree”, “Somewhat disagree” or
“Strongly disagree” with each of these statements. 419 respondents living in
couple households without children and 330 respondents living in couple
households with children (younger than 15), who worked either fully or
at least partially from home answered these questions. In this section,
we focus primarily on couple households with children under 15 years of
age. The findings are shown in Fig. 1, which captures the average agreement with different statements for fathers and mothers separately. The
smaller the distance on the axis to the centre, the more the respondents disagree with the statement. To inverse the stereotypical colours of the sexes,
blue areas represent answers from women and pink areas represent men’s

April 22, 2021

10/49

responses. We find apparent gender-specific differences in couple households with children, which interestingly almost vanish in couple households
without children (see Fig. S1). Hence, the presence of children seems to
make a vast difference in assessing the quality and (dis-)advantages of WFH.
Turning to the specific advantages and disadvantages of WFH, Fig. 1A
shows that mothers (blue area) in couple households with children found
it more difficult to concentrate while WFH, to complete tasks better at
home than at the office and to reconcile work and family life. Fathers
(pink area) found these aspects on average easier than mothers. By contrast, communication with supervisors, the supervisor’s recognition of their
work performance, as well as contact with colleagues does not show any
systematic relationship by gender. The results of the indicator on the
quality of working time and of the workspace are shown in Fig. 1B The
most striking gender differences concern the workspace and the separation
of work from leisure time. Fewer mothers (blue area) had their own room
to work from, where they could close the door, compared to fathers (pink
area). Furthermore, we find that, on average, slightly more mothers worked
outside the agreed working hours: more mothers stated that they were
accessible outside their agreed working hours, worked overtime and also at
weekends.

April 22, 2021

11/49

Fig. 1. Average agreement with statements on WFH from couple households with children
younger than 15 years by gender

Reading example: This radar chart displays the average agreement with different statements on WFH. The smaller the distance on
the axis to the centre, the more the respondents disagree with the statement. Blue triangles represent answers from women, pink
circles represent men’s responses. An example: on average, men (pink area) found “compatibility of free time and career” to be
more true than women (blue area).

April 22, 2021

12/49

Combining childcare and WFH during the lockdown was a difficult – and
sometimes even unfeasible – task. Fig. 2 displays different forms of childcare
available while WFH by gender. Among the 529 female respondents with
children under 15 years, 25% of mothers stated that their partner took care
of the children during their (paid) working hours, 30% reported that the
children took care of themselves, while 38% stated that they supervised the
children in the same room while working. However, 51% of men reported
that their partner was looking after the children, 27% that the children were
keeping themselves busy and only 19% stated that they were supervising
their children in the same room. These results might at least partially
explain why women have more difficulties concentrating on their work
compared to men, as they are more likely to supervise their children in the
same room.
Fig. 2. Main childcare arrangement during working hours by gender

Reading example: The pink area (1) indicates the share of respondents who stated that they supervise their children in the same
room while WFH. 38% of all women reported that they had to look after the children and work simultaneously, while only 19% of
all men had to share their workspace with their children.

Overall, the results show that WFH is experienced differently by mothers
and fathers. Since we only find minimal differences between the genders for
households without children under 15 years old, we conclude that childcare
is the most influential factor explaining difficulties in working from home.
This is confirmed by an additional analysis, which shows that mothers find
it more challenging than fathers to reconcile family and work and more commonly express feelings of guilt for neglecting their paid work and/or their
children (see Fig. S2). A likely explanation for this is the struggle for women
to combine the demands of the professional world with their role as the
primary caregiver, as gendered responsibilities still largely prevail in Austria.

3.1.2

Division of unpaid work

The conservative attitudes towards gender roles in Austria are also reflected
in the unequal division of unpaid work. Missing information on time use
before the pandemic prevents us from comparing absolute changes in hours

April 22, 2021

13/49

spent on different activities before and during the COVID-19 lockdown.
However, we asked respondents how they and their partner spent the previous working day during the lockdown (see Tab. S3). The results reveal
that women in working couples spend, on average, almost two hours more
on unpaid work than men (3h59 compared to 5h53) per day. The average
time spent on unpaid work by women amounts to 6h43 compared to 7h53
for men. This shows that unusual times do not translate into unusual time
use by gender.
Respondents also had to evaluate the change in division of housework
and childcare between both partners, before and during the stay-at-home
orders. This enables us to analyse which partner primarily carried out
which chores and whether the lockdown changed the division of work. Fig. 3
reveals this division of unpaid work in couple households. The height of
each bar refers to the number of couples per value on the 11-point scale
during the lockdown and the breakdown of the bars by colour and category
shows the number of couple households that indicated “The woman does
more during lockdown” (green), “Nothing changed” (blue) and “The man
does more during lockdown” (grey-purple) compared to before the lockdown
for each value on the 11-point scale.
Fig. 3. Division of housework (A) and childcare (B) before COVID-19 and subsequent changes
during lockdown.

Reading example: The height of the bars indicates the division of unpaid work before the lockdown. Regarding childcare (B): before
the pandemic 92 couples shared childcare equally (scale no. 5) and for 37 nothing changed (blue bar). In 40 couples the female
partner took on a larger share during the lockdown compared to before (green bar), whereas the opposite (male partner took on a
larger share) holds true for the remaining 15 couples (grey-purple bar). Moreover, the black line indicates the division of unpaid
work during COVID-19. At scale no. 5 for instance, it shows that fewer couples shared childcare equally during the lockdown
compared to before the pandemic (81 compared to 92).

April 22, 2021

14/49

Fig. 3A reveals three aspects: first, it shows that the distribution of
housework is right-skewed on the 11-point scale. Prior to the lockdown, in
55% of all couple households women did the majority of housework (scale
nos. 0–4), while it was equally divided in 30% of couples. In 15% of cases,
the male partner was mainly responsible for doing housework before the
outbreak of the pandemic. Hence, the data show that the division of housework complies with traditional gender roles in the majority of the observed
couples. Men in couple households who spend more time on housework
than their female partner are still an exception. Second, the solid black
line indicates the division of housework during the COVID-19 stay-at-home
orders. In comparison to the division before COVID-19, the data reveal a
slightly more polarized distribution. What stands out is that the number
of households where the woman does everything roughly doubled from 12
(before) to 25 (during) cases. Nonetheless, the lockdown measures did not
alter the overall distribution much. Third, we examine the changes within
couple households. The colours of the bars shown in Fig. 3A depict those
changes. In almost half of all households (47%), the division of housework
did not change. In 27% of all couples, women took on a larger share of
housework during the lockdown than before. The share of couples where
men increased their share amounts to 26%. Two findings stand out in this
respect: first, in households where the division of housework was traditional
(scale nos. 1–3) before COVID-19 and changed during the stay-at-home
orders, the division became more equal (i.e. men increased their share).
Second, we observe a tendency towards retraditionalization of gender roles
in households where housework was equally shared (scale no. 5) before the
pandemic. No change occurred in 63% of households that shared housework
equally. In couples where the division of housework did change, a retraditionalization (i.e. females doing now a larger share than before) occurred
in two out of three households.
The division of childcare is shown in Fig. 3B Again, we observe a
right-skewed distribution, indicating an unequal division of childcare. In
comparison to housework, the division of childcare is more unequally divided.
Before the COVID-19 restrictions, the main provider of childcare was women
(66%). One in every four couples stated that childcare was equally shared
between partners. Role reversal (i.e. fathers being the primary caregiver)
is the exception (10%). During the pandemic, the distribution of childcare
became slightly more polarized, but the overall distribution did not change
significantly. Women still bore most of the childcare responsibilities, also
during times of school closures. What is striking is that also for childcare,
the amount of households where women were the sole caregiver (scale no.
0) almost doubled during the lockdown from 11 to 20. At the same time,
there is no household (before or during the pandemic) that reports that
the man does or did all the childcare. Regarding within-couple changes, we
find that changes are more dynamic in the case of childcare compared to
housework. The division remained unaltered in 36% of couples. If changes
occurred, these were again almost equally split between men doing more
(31%) and women doing more (33%). The findings concerning changes to
the division of housework also hold true for the division of childcare: men
whose share of childcare was relatively low beforehand (scale nos. 1–3)
mostly increased their share during the pandemic, whereas when childcare
responsibilities were shared equally before COVID-19 (scale no. 5), a retraditionalization of gender roles can be observed. This is also the case

April 22, 2021

15/49

when women did slightly more than 50/50 (scale no. 4) before the lockdown.
To summarize, we find that the pandemic did not substantially change
the overall division of housework and childcare between men and women.
In general it is still the case, that women bear on average more unpaid
work than men. Nevertheless, for the majority of couples the measures to
reduce the spread of the COVID-19 disease had (at least) little effects on
the division of unpaid labour within the household (53% for housework and
65% for childcare). The descriptive analysis further suggests that whether
couples moved towards a more gender-equal division or not seems to depend
strongly on the initial division of unpaid and paid work before the pandemic.

3.2

Regression results

The descriptive results presented in the previous subsection show how couple
households divided the burden of unpaid work at the expense of women.
In this section, we explain the change in the division of housework and
childcare during as compared to before the lockdown. Thus, Table 1 shows
the results of the logistic regressions on the probability that the share of
housework and childcare done by the man of a heterosexual couple was
higher during the lockdown than before. We focus on households with
children younger than 15, as older children are usually not as care-intensive
as younger ones.
Model (1) explains the change in the division of housework. The binary
dependent variable indicates whether the male partner took on (at least
marginally) more housework than before. All heterosexual couples where
both partners are either employed, self-employed or in short-time work and
with full information on all covariates are included in the regression sample
(h=559)15 .
Model (2) checks whether the effects of the explanatory variables on
the probability that a man took on more housework during the lockdown
are different for couples with children younger than 15. The dependent
variable is the same as in model 1, however, the sample is different as couple
households without children under age 15 are excluded (h=300).
Model (3) explains the change in the division of childcare tasks (CC).
The binary dependent variable equals one if the father took on (at least
marginally) more childcare than before the restrictions. The sample is the
same as in model 2 (h=300).
We find a positive and significant effect on the probability that men took
on a higher share of housework than before the lockdown in the event that
both partners were WFH compared to the reference group where nobody
was WFH (see model (1) in Table 1). The effect of WFH is even larger
when only the male partner worked from home. Moreover, these effects are
also highly significant for households with at least one child younger than
15 years (see model (2) in Table 1). However, in both samples (model (1)
and (2)), we do not find any significant effects on the probability of men
doing relatively more housework than before in the event of only the female
partner was WFH. Model (3) shows the results for the probability of men

April 22, 2021

16/49

increasing their share of childcare tasks. We find no significant effects of
both parents WFH or solely the mother WFH. The effect of only a father
WFH, by contrast, is positive and significant. Thus, there are two main
results of the effect of WFH on the change in the division of unpaid work.
First, we find a higher probability of men doing relatively more housework
than before if both partners or only the male partner are WFH. Second,
the effect is larger for childcare if fathers are WFH alone, but vanishes if
mothers are also (or solely) WFH.
As a robustness test (see model (4) in Table S4), we estimate a model
based on the sample of couple households without children only, and in this
case, all coefficients of WFH turn insignificant. In other words, we do not
find evidence that WFH influences the probability of men increasing their
share of unpaid work within childless households. This also indicates that
the effects of model (1), based on households with and without children, are
driven by households with children, where either men do more housework
if both parents are WFH (but not more childcare), or fathers take on more
housework (and childcare) if they alone are WFH. As long as mothers are
at home, childcare seems to be mostly their responsibility, whereas fathers
are more likely to take on more household chores instead. There are several
potential factors that might drive this finding. In principle, it could be
that those households initially had a more unequal pre-lockdown division
of unpaid work. However, we control for the pre-lockdown division of
housework and childcare. The results may also be explained by a gendered
specialization for certain household tasks. Some studies [18, 30] show that
men’s share in grocery shopping increased during lockdown. The authors’
explanation for the increase in time devoted to shopping by men is that
this is an easy task, but a task that also carries a certain risk of infection.
Our results can also be interpreted as a change in the task specialization by
gender, to some extent. We find that both parents or only the mother WFH
does not alter the probability of men taking on more childcare tasks, but it
does have an impact on housework (if both partners are at home). This
indicates that especially childcare is still strongly separated into traditional
gender roles, even during (or rather also in) times of crisis.
With respect to the pre-lockdown division of housework and childcare,
we find a significant and substantial effect on the probability of men taking
on a higher share of unpaid work during the COVID-19 restrictions. The
corresponding variable is a categorical variable, derived from a ranking of
the female/male share of housework (HW) or childcare (CC) responsibilities
as described in section 2.3. We include the pre-lockdown division of HW only
in the regression explaining the change in the division of HW (model (1) and
(2)), and the pre-lockdown division of CC only in the regression explaining
the change in the division of CC (model (3)). Men and women who indicate
an equal division of tasks serve as the reference group in the regressions. We
find a both significant effect of women being primarily responsible for HW
and CC before the lockdown (compared to the reference group with an equal
division of these tasks) on the probability that the male partner does more
HW and CC during the restrictions. The effect is larger for couples where
the woman took on (i) much more unpaid work than her partner, compared
to households where the woman did just (ii) moderately more housework
and childcare tasks. This finding indicates that it is relatively “easier” for
men to do at least a little bit more of unpaid work during the lockdown
restrictions when they initially fulfilled none or only a few tasks. The results

April 22, 2021

17/49

hold true for all definitions of the sample (i.e. all couple households, couple
households with children younger than 15 years, couple households without
children). We hence conclude that these pre-lockdown division effects stem
from households with and without children. However, we find no significant
effect on men taking on more housework if they already took on a higher
share of unpaid work before the restrictions, which in general are rare
observations. Overall, these results show that changes in the division of
unpaid work during the lockdown are largely influenced by the pre-lockdown
division of HW and CC, and that change in times of crisis is easiest for men
in couples in which the woman formerly did most of the unpaid work herself.

Monthly net income: Bargaining models, especially the separate spheres
approach [12], assume that the division of labour in couple households is
the result of negotiations between the partners. Following this argument,
the individual income of each partner represents a power resource that
influences the division of labour. Therefore, the partner with the higher
individual income and thus the higher share in total household income has
more bargaining power and is able to influence the division of HW and CC
in his/her interest. To control for such a mechanism, we include the relative
income of the partners in the regression. The corresponding variable is a
categorical variable, with three categories: both partners have equal income
(reference group), the female outearns the male, or the male outearns the female partner. We find a significant and positive effect of the female partner
having a higher income on the probability of men doing more housework
than before the lockdown. This also holds true for the subsamples consisting
only of households with and without children. The results presented here
suggest bargaining power as an underlying mechanism: if women earn more
than their partners, their respective power (represented by income) transfers
onto other fields of negotiation as well, such as division of unpaid work.
However, we do not find a positive effect of higher female income on the
change in the division of CC. On top of that, we find that if men earn more
than their female partners, the probability of men doing more housework
rises (significantly) as well. At first, this may seem to be diametrically
opposed to the theoretical prediction of bargaining power models, arguing
that men should rather be doing less or the same amount of unpaid work if
they hold more power (i.e. income). We explain this contradictory finding
by the fact that households in which men outearn women are for the most
part couples whose pre-lockdown division of unpaid work was already very
unequal. Thereby, bargaining power could have determined the division of
housework before the pandemic hit in male breadwinner households. Stated
differently, male income power does not play a role in determining their
current levels of HW, but rather their pre-lockdown division of unpaid work.
For women, the bargaining power argument seems to also play a small but
significant role in determining current levels of HW. Childcare, however,
appears to remain the mothers’ responsibility, independent of bargaining
power.

Working hours: Time-availability approaches [10] argue that couples
face time pressure, and the partner spending fewer hours on paid labour
will thus spend more time on housework. In model (1) we find no significant
effect of working hours on the probability that the male partner takes on

April 22, 2021

18/49

more unpaid work. A separate regression, where we reduced the sample
to childless couples (see again model (4) in Table S4), shows that this
result stems from households without children. Based on the theory of
time availability, we expected to find that male partners working fewer
hours for pay would have a positive likelihood of taking on more unpaid
work as they have more free time. A differentiated picture emerges in
models (2) and (3), based on households with children younger than 15
years only. Male part-time work shows a positive and significant effect on
the change in the division of HW and CC, while male short-time full-time
indicates a negative and significant effect, and male short-time part-time is
insignificant. Stated differently, we find a positive effect of fewer working
hours for voluntary part-time fathers, but a negative effect for fathers who
were forced to work fewer hours in their full-time positions. The positive
effect of a man working part-time voluntarily might be driven by male
selection into part-time. Those men might do so because they are willing
to be actively involved in HW and/or CC. As the lockdown increased the
burden of unpaid work, male involvement increased in response in these
cases. With respect to the negative effect of male short-time full-time work
(as compared to the reference group of full-time workers), the result can be
interpreted as follows: in this group of workers, full-time work corresponds
to any hours worked above 20 hours a week. As the lockdown increased the
volume of unpaid work to be done within households, short-time full-time
workers rather continued their role as primary earners while mothers continued their role as primary caregivers, which, under an overall increase of
unpaid work, might imply that the share of unpaid work done by short-time
full-time workers even decreases. This means that a change in working
hours does not necessarily imply a change in involvement in unpaid work
for this particular group. This is also reflected in the largely insignificant
results on female working hours. Put differently, gender roles regarding the
division of unpaid work do not automatically change due to fewer working
hours. It seems that the majority of men do as much unpaid work as before
the lockdown, conditional on their hours of paid work. The only exception
is fathers voluntarily working part-time. As suggested by the gender display
approach [13], norms play an important role in determining the division of
work – also during crises.

Number of children: The number of children in different age categories
seems to have an equivocal effect on the probability of men taking on
more housework or childcare. Model (1) compares all couple households,
regardless of the number and age of children. In this case, we assigned
childless households zero children in each age group. In model (1), we find
no significant effect of an additional child in any age group compared to
no (or fewer) children within the same age group. In model (2) we find a
weakly significant and positive effect on men taking on more HW with each
(additional) child between 6 and 9 years of age, while in model (3) we find
a negative effect on men taking on more CC with each (additional) child
between 10 and 14 years of age. Even though the effects are weak, we interpret this to mean that children between 6 and 9 years old might represent
a special age group, as they need more attention and support regarding
homeschooling than younger or older age groups. More children between
6 and 9 years therefore means even more workload during lockdown, such
that the probability of fathers doing more housework increases, probably

April 22, 2021

19/49

leaving the childcare to the mothers. Relatively more children between 10
and 14 indicates, that there are likely older children in this group compared
with no or younger children of this age group. Older children might be more
likely to manage the additional workload (e.g. homeschooling) themselves
or even help their younger siblings. Overall, the absence of a clear and
significant pattern points to the importance of persisting gender norms
during the lockdown. The pre-lockdown division of unpaid work already
depends (implicitly or explicitly) on the number of children within the
household. That is to say, once we control for the pre-lockdown division of
unpaid work, there remains no separate effect caused by the number and
age of children.
We control for the age of the female and male partners, their highest
level of education completed and their employment status in terms of being
either employed (reference category) or self-employed. In model (1) we find
no significant effect of the employment status on the probability of men
taking on more HW than before the lockdown. Analysing the effect of the
employment status on HW in separate samples of couple households with
and without children (see model (2) and model (4) in Table S4), we do not
find an effect among parent households, but a small and significant negative
effect of male self-employment in the subsample of households without
children. With respect to the change in the division of CC in model (3),
both male and female self-employment has a negative and significant effect
on the probability of fathers taking on more CC tasks. Both being negative
suggests that different factors might be at play. For instance, the result
might be driven by self-selection into self-employment based on the division
of CC. Being self-employed frequently entails more flexibility, autonomy
and the possibility to WFH, which facilitates reconciliation of work and
family. This appears to be one reason why women with dependent children
are more likely to be self-employed [31, 32]. Thus, self-selection of mothers
into self-employment for family reasons might explain the negative and
significant effect of their partners being less likely to increase their share in
childcare activities.
We only find a small positive and significant effect of female age on the
probability that fathers take on more childcare, but it does not seem to
play a significant role in any other model. Finally, there is no significant
effect of education on the probability of men taking on more unpaid work
during lockdown restrictions. Characteristics and structures defining the
pattern of change in the share of unpaid work carried out by males are
embodied in other variables, such as income or WFH. These are factors
that explain the independent variable (of men doing more unpaid work)
better than education categories, ceteris paribus.

3.3

Robustness tests

We provide an extensive set of robustness tests in the supporting materials
(see section 6 for a detailed discussion). These checks alter the definition
of the sample, control for the gender of the respondents, and are based on
different specifications of the control variables and the dependent variable.
In addition, we present the results of the main models based on a linear
probability model, estimated by ordinary least squares. Stressing the

April 22, 2021

20/49

most important findings of these tests, first we find that the change in
the probability of a male taking on more housework is driven by couple
households with children. Second, different specifications of the income,
age, and working hours variables do not alter the results, while the cutoff
for classifying individuals as working either part-time or full-time matters.
Third, overall these tests do not alter the results presented in the main
text in any unexpected way. Hence we conclude that the main results are
robust.

April 22, 2021

21/49

Table 1. Average marginal effects of logistic regressions
Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(1)

0.19 (0.10)
0.11 (0.10)
0.06 (0.15)
−0.05 (0.12)
∗∗∗
∗∗
0.42 (0.14)
0.30 (0.12)

∗∗∗

0.15 (0.06)
∗∗∗
0.33 (0.08)
0.14 (0.11)

0.15 (0.07)
0.11 (0.10)
∗∗
0.23 (0.12)

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )

0.17 (0.05)
∗∗∗
0.32 (0.06)
0.07 (0.07)

Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )

0.17 (0.07)
∗∗
0.09 (0.04)

Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
AIC
BIC
∗∗∗

p < 0.01;

∗∗

∗∗

∗∗

∗∗∗

0.21 (0.06)
∗∗∗
0.36 (0.07)
0.03 (0.12)
∗∗

620h: ♀
0.01 (0.05)
620h (ST): ♀
−0.01 (0.08)
>20h (ST): ♀
−0.13 (0.15)
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
0.16 (0.10)
620h (ST): ♂
0.06 (0.09)
>20h (ST): ♂
0.01 (0.10)
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

more CC: ♂
(3)

∗∗

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

more HW: ♂
(2)

∗∗

0.21 (0.11)
∗
0.11 (0.06)

−0.01 (0.10)
0.06 (0.06)

−0.01 (0.06)
0.01 (0.09)
∗
−0.18 (0.11)

−0.11 (0.06)
−0.03 (0.09)
0.05 (0.22)

∗∗∗

∗

∗∗∗

0.35 (0.13)
0.03 (0.10)
∗∗
−0.19 (0.09)

0.46 (0.09)
0.14 (0.11)
∗∗
−0.24 (0.10)

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.09 (0.08)

−0.19 (0.07)

−0.08 (0.05)

−0.05 (0.07)

−0.18 (0.07)

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.06 (0.04)
0.06 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

0.03 (0.07)
−0.02 (0.05)
∗
0.09 (0.04)
−0.09 (0.06)

0.05 (0.07)
0.05 (0.06)
0.00 (0.05)
∗∗
−0.17 (0.07)

−0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.07)

0.00 (0.08)
0.01 (0.10)

0.09 (0.08)
0.16 (0.11)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.00 (0.06)

0.00 (0.06)
−0.02 (0.09)

0.06 (0.06)
−0.09 (0.08)

559
−299.90
653.81
770.61

300
−148.58
351.15
451.16

∗∗∗
∗∗∗

∗∗

300
−152.99
359.98
459.98

p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1

Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

22/49

4

Limitations

First, we stress that it is necessary to interpret the findings in the context
of the specific circumstances of the lockdown, specifically, the shift towards
WFH in combination with the closure of childcare facilities and schools. It
remains an open question how couples would have allocated unpaid work
and experienced WFH if childcare facilities and schools had been open.
Second, the average marginal effects of the main variables of interest (WFH
and the pre-lockdown division of housework and childcare) on the change
of within-household division are robust to different specifications and both
statistically significant and large in magnitude. However, the standard
errors of most of the control variables (the number of children per age
group, age, education and employment status of both partners) are large.
We interpret this in the sense that these controls have no considerable
additional effect on the change in the division of housework and childcare
once WFH, the pre-lockdown division of unpaid work and the hours worked
for pay are taken into account. Third, we emphasize that the dependent
variable depicts the change in the division of unpaid work, and not the
change in hours spent on childcare and housework, respectively. An increase
in male involvement in housework, may (and on average does) imply that
women still spend more hours on unpaid housework. Finally, the sample is
not representative of the Austrian working population. Compared to the
population, it includes a disproportionately high number of individuals with
a tertiary qualification. However, this is the group of couples that had to
WFH more frequently than those with primary or secondary qualifications,
who work more often in sectors considered “critical infrastructure”. Thus,
the sample stresses the change in the household division of unpaid work in
the group of highly educated couples. As higher educational attainment
is often associated with increased gender egalitarianism [33], we interpret
the results rather as upper bounds of the involvement of males in HW and
CC. The reason may be that constellations of she working part-time, and
he being the primary earner might be more common among couples where
neither partner has completed tertiary education [34].

5

Conclusion

In recent years, social scientists [27, 35, 36] have discussed the potential
effects of WFH on the reconciliation of family and work. This debate was
reopened following the COVID-19 pandemic that forced many individuals
to WFH. While some argued that men would increase their share of unpaid
work during the pandemic, others argued that gender roles and the gendered
division of labour would intensify. To the best of our knowledge, we present
the first study that closely examines the gendered aspects of the COVID-19
crisis in the overlapping spheres of paid and unpaid work and that explains
the (change in the) division of unpaid work in couple households as a result
of WFH. While pre-COVID-19 studies on the effects of WFH on the division
of unpaid work suffered from selection bias, we have been able to investigate
this effect by drawing on the very strict (and exogenous) lockdown. Even
though the data employed is not representative of the Austrian working
population, it focuses on the parts of the population most likely to be able to
WFH during the lockdown, and it contains rich information on the division
of unpaid work and the experience of WFH. A key strength of this study

April 22, 2021

23/49

is that it focuses on couples instead of individuals, thus offering unique
insights into the division of work within households in relation to both
partners’ characteristics. In addition, while several studies documented the
division of unpaid work during lockdowns, we are able to focus on how it
changed during these extraordinary circumstances. This allows us to test
whether a retraditionalization of gender roles can be observed in Austria,
a country where conservative gender norms are predominant. We want to
stress that the results show how couple households coped with the situation
of WFH and unpaid work during the lockdown, but the findings cannot be
transferred to WFH under “normal” conditions, with childcare institutions
and schools being open.
The descriptive results reveal that unpaid work, especially childcare, has
not been equally distributed within most couples either before or during
the lockdown. The results from the econometric models indicate that men
proportionally took on more housework during the lockdown than before
in the event that both partners were WFH, or in the event that men were
WFH alone (compared to those couples where nobody was WFH). Yet, this
does not imply that men on average did more housework than their female
partners in absolute terms, but simply that they took on a bigger share than
before the COVID-19 crisis. While the econometric results do not provide
information about how much more or which kind of housework was done by
male partners, the descriptive results indicate that the steps towards a more
equal distribution of unpaid work have been rather small. The descriptive
analysis also shows that in households where the man’s share of housework
was very low before the lockdown, the division became (at least a little
bit) more equal, whereas we observe a tendency towards a more traditional
division of gender roles in households where housework was shared equally
before the pandemic. This pattern is also confirmed in the econometric
analysis. Furthermore, we do not find a significant effect of both partners
WFH on the probability that fathers took on more childcare responsibilities
than before the pandemic. This was only the case for couples where fathers
were WFH alone. In addition, we find a significant effect of relative income
differences on the probability that men take on more housework, whereas
this does not seem to play a role for childcare. Strikingly, the results overall
indicate that the division of childcare tasks is even more rigid than the
division of housework. Given the massive increase in the volume of unpaid
work due to the lockdown, one might have expected a more equal and even
stronger involvement of males during these extraordinary circumstances.
WFH brings advantages and disadvantages for workers, but we find that
they differ strongly by gender and household type. Working from home
during the lockdown was very challenging, especially for mothers with children under 15 years. Mothers were more likely to find themselves stressed,
working overtime, at weekends and with blurred boundaries between work
and family time. Fathers were more likely to state that their concentration
at home was good and that they had their own room to work from. When
couples without children were asked about their experiences with WFH, the
gender gaps almost vanished: both halves of the couples regard WFH as
average equally good or bad. These findings are also reflected in the results
of mothers feeling guilty for neglecting both their children and paid work.
We rather confirm than reject the notion that gender roles prevail during

April 22, 2021

24/49

unusual times. The division of responsibilities for childcare tasks and the
right “to work undisturbed” is not divided equally within couples. Primarily
mothers had to watch the children during their working time, with fathers
more often being able to rely on their partners doing that. WFH should
therefore neither be regarded as a promising and automatic instrument
to improve the reconciliation between family and career, nor as a way to
promote more gender equity. Even though it might help some families to
better reconcile childcare and work, WFH during times where childcare
facilities are closed puts more burden on mothers than fathers. As the
sample focuses on well-educated, working couples in urban areas, the actual
situation might even be more conservative and traditional than in this
analysis. Therefore, the results should be regarded as “lower-bound” effects.
The findings, nevertheless, are a good reference point for policies that
question current conceptions of work and that aim at promoting gender
equality. Despite the data underlying this study being collected during
unusual times, they provide valuable insights. WFH is often said to be
a promising tool to improve the reconciliation between work and family
life. As this study has shown, this does not hold true during hard lockdowns. Thus, the results further highlight the importance of the expansion
of high-quality and affordable childcare facilities to ensure more gender
equality at home and in the labour market. By providing institutional and
publicly funded childcare, welfare states enhance gender equality, counteract
dependencies within couples by facilitating full participation in the labour
market and also improve the chances of children – especially from households that are economically worse off. Beyond the institutional setting, it is
also worth highlighting the importance of promoting more equitable gender
norms. Ideally this would start in kindergartens and schools, but should
also expand to other settings, such as businesses, etc.
Finally, we can conclude that no automatic change comes out of crisis,
and that nobody “lived happily ever after” without additional effort. In
fact, we want to stress that home could be much sweeter for (working)
mothers if they could rely on a more equitable division of unpaid work,
especially in difficult times when the volume of unpaid work increases. That
is to say, regarding the highly gendered specialization of tasks, in particular
childcare, we need to include men, if we all want to be better off in the future.

April 22, 2021

25/49

Notes
1 We define a lockdown as a “period of time in which people are not allowed to leave
their homes or travel freely, because of a dangerous disease, accompanied by the general
order to stay-at-home” [37].
2 For instance, as of March 10 2021, the National Bureau of Economic Research has
published 375 working papers on COVID-19.
3 The gendered labour market effects of lockdowns, for instance, depend on the specific
restrictions in relation to the sectoral composition of the economy, and the sectoral
composition by gender in particular. Early studies on the US, the UK, Australia and
Spain have shown that women were disproportionately affected by job loss, short-time
work and reduction of working time [18, 38–41] in the first months of the pandemic.
However, in Austria and Germany unemployment and short-time work hit women and
men to a similar extent in the first weeks of the pandemic (March to May 2020), while
male employment recovered quicker than female employment in the second half of the
year [42, 43]. Yet even in the latter countries, gendered effects of the pandemic were
noticeable early on: studies for Germany [43] have shown that the reduction in minor
employment, which is not covered by unemployment insurance and short-time work
schemes, was disproportionately notable for women.
4 These are individuals working outside essential sectors, such as grocery stories and
healthcare that were not shut down during the pandemic. Importantly, the definition of
“essential”, and correspondingly, of “non-essential”, varies by country, in the sense that
the sectors regarded as “essential” and unaffected by lockdown measures differ across
countries.
5 The expression “home office” is used to describe WFH in Austria.
6 The emergency ordinance BGBl. II Nr. 108/2020 declared that “professional activity
should preferably take place outside the workplace”.
7 We refrained from surveying time use before the lockdown for the following reasons:
first, several studies show that the respondents’ memory of past events decreases with the
time gap between the reference period and the timing of the interview, that is, recall bias
increases. Reliable answers on pre-lockdown time use are unlikely, as their last working
day was at least was four to five weeks before the survey was released. Second, as filling
out a time use model on a working day before the lockdown involves the provision of
mental capacities and time of the respondents, we expected that the share of attrition,
that is, the share of respondents not filling out the entire questionnaire, would be much
higher in that case. In addition, it might have decreased the accuracy of answers to
questions following the time use module substantially. Hence, the gains of the module
might not outweigh the effort costs of the respondents finishing the survey properly.
Especially when, third, respondents were surveyed online (not via face-to-face interviews)
and preferably had to report time use of their partners as well.
8 LimeSurvey is an online software tool for user-friendly implementation of different
types of online surveys. For more info please visit the LimeSurvey manual.
9 These groups were selected on the basis that we expected a high share of WFH
women to be members there.
10 We exclude all same-sex couples, as their number in the sample is too small to allow
for valid statements.
11 Respondents who worked partially from home were assigned to the WFH group
as well. In a robustness check, we excluded respondents who were WFH partially (see
Table S5), but the main regression results are not affected by this change in the sample.
12 In the case of the respondent’s own net income, for example, these brackets range
from “less than 6 e00” to “more than 8 e, 000”
13 We divided the sample into tertile categories of net income in order to differentiate
between couples in which both partners earn roughly the same (i.e. the reference group),
and couples in which either the female or the male partner has higher monthly earnings.
14 The short-time work scheme in place while the survey was in the field allowed a
reduction of working hours up to 90%.
15 The number of observations used in the regressions is lower than the target sample
of 730 couples due to missing values, especially the income variable.

April 22, 2021

26/49

References
1. Karamessini M, Rubery J, editors. Women and austerity: The
economic crisis and the future for gender equality. Routledge, New
York; 2014.
2. McKay A, Campbell J, Thomson E, Ross S. Economic recession
and recovery in the UK: What’s gender got to do with it? Feminist
Economics. 2013;19(3):108–123.
3. Neumayer E, Plümper T. The gendered nature of natural disasters:
The impact of catastrophic events on the gender gap in life expectancy,
1981–2002. Annals of the Association of American Geographers.
2007;97(3):551–566.
4. Denton F. Climate change vulnerability, impacts, and adaptation:
Why does gender matter? Gender & Development. 2002;10(2):10–20.
5. Nelson V, Meadows K, Cannon T, Morton J, Martin A. Uncertain
predictions, invisible impacts, and the need to mainstream gender in
climate change adaptations. Gender & Development. 2002;10(2):51–
59.
6. Collins AB, Bardwell G, McNeil R, Boyd J. Gender and the overdose
crisis in North America: Moving past gender-neutral approaches in
the public health response. International Journal of Drug Policy.
2019;69:43–5.
7. Annan J, Blattman C, Mazurana D, Carlson K. Civil war, reintegration, and gender in Northern Uganda. Journal of Conflict Resolution.
2011;55(6):877–908.
8. Charmes J. The Unpaid Care Work and the Labour Market. An
analysis of time use data based on the latest world compilation of
time-use surveys. International Labour Office – Geneva: ILO. 2019.
9. Laura A, Cattaneo U, Esquivel V, Valarino I. Care work
and care jobs for the future of decent work. International Labour Office – Geneva:
ILO. 2018.
Available
from: https://www.ilo.org/global/publications/books/WCMS_
633135/lang--en/index.htm (27.03.2021).
10. Bianchi SM, Milkie MA, Sayer LC, Robinson JP. Is anyone doing the
housework? Trends in the gender division of household labor. Social
Forces. 2000;79(1):191–228.
11. Lundberg S, Pollak RA. Separate spheres bargaining and the marriage
market. Journal of Political Economy. 1993;101(6):988–1010.
12. Lundberg S, Pollak RA. Family decision making. London: Palgrave
Macmillan UK. 2016; 1–8. doi:https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-34995121-52 551 − 1.
13. Brines J. Economic dependency, gender, and the division of labor at
home. American Journal of Sociology. 1994;100(3):652–688.
14. Greenstein TN. Economic dependence, gender, and the division of
labor in the home: A replication and extension. Journal of Marriage
and Family. 2000;62(2):322–335.

April 22, 2021

27/49

15. Bittman M, England P, Sayer L, Folbre N, Matheson G. When
does gender trump money? Bargaining and time in household work.
American Journal of Sociology. 2003;109(1):186–214.
16. Agarwal B. “Bargaining” and gender relations: Within and beyond
the household. Routledge; 1997.
17. Jenkins F, Smith J. Work-from-home during COVID-19: Accounting for the care economy to build back better.
The
Economic and Labour Relations Review. 2021;32(1):22–38.
doi:https://doi.org/10.11772F1035304620983608.
18. Farré L, Fawaz Y, González L, Graves J. How the COVID-19 lockdown
affected gender inequality in paid and unpaid work in Spain. 2020;
1–36.
19. Fodor É, Gregor A, Koltai J, Kováts E. The impact of COVID-19 on
the gender division of childcare work in Hungary. European Societies.
2020; 1–16. doi:https://doi.org/10.1080/14616696.2020.1817522.
20. Sevilla A, Smith S. Baby steps: The gender division of childcare
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Oxford Review of Economic Policy.
2020;36(S1):169–186.
21. Yerkes MA, André SC, Besamusca JW, Kruyen PM, Remery CL,
van der Zwan R, et al. ‘Intelligent’ lockdown, intelligent effects?
Results from a survey on gender (in)equality in paid work, the
division of childcare and household work, and quality of life among
parents in the Netherlands during the Covid-19 lockdown. PLOS
ONE. 2020;15(11):e0242249.
22. Xue B, McMunn A.
Gender differences in unpaid care work and psychological distress in the UK
Covid-19 lockdown.
PLOS ONE. 2021;16(3):e0247959.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0247959.
23. Hanzl L, Rehm M. Less work, more labor: School closures and work
hours during the COVID-19 pandemic in Austria ifso working paper
2021;12.
24. Kohlrausch B, Zucco A. Die Corona-Krise trifft Frauen doppelt. WSI
Policy Brief (40). 2020.
25. European Commission B. Special Eurobarometer 465: Gender equality 2017; 2017. Available from: http://data.europa.eu/88u/
dataset/S2154_87_4_465_ENG (06.02.2021).
26. Alon TM, Doepke M, Olmstead-Rumsey J, Tertilt M. The impact
of COVID-19 on gender equality. National Bureau of Economic
Research. 2020.
27. Lott Y. Work-Life Balance im Homeoffice: Was kann der Betrieb
tun? Welche betrieblichen Bedingungen sind für eine gute Work-Life
Balance im Homeoffice notwendig? WSI Report. 2020.
28. Statistics Austria. Standard-Dokumentation Metainformationen (Definitionen, Erläuterungen, Methoden und Qualität) zur
Zeitverwendungserhebung; 2016. Available from: https://www.

April 22, 2021

28/49

statistik.at/wcm/idc/idcplg?IdcService=GET_PDF_FILE&
RevisionSelectionMethod=LatestReleased&dDocName=060010
(17.03.2021).
29. EUROSTAT. EU - Statistics on Income and Living Conditions
microdata 2004–2018, release 2020, version 1. 2020.
Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/203647/
203704/EU+SILC+DOI+2020v1.pdf (17.03.2021).
30. Biroli P, Bosworth S, Della Giusta M, Di Girolamo A, Jaworska S,
Vollen J. Family life in lockdown. 2020.
31. Wellington AJ. Self-employment: The new solution for balancing
family and career? Labour Economics. 2006;13(3):357–386.
32. Walker EA, Webster BJ. Gender, age and self-employment: Some
things change, some stay the same. Women in Management Review.
2007;22(2):122–135.
33. Davis SN, Greenstein TN. Gender ideology: Components, predictors,
and consequences. Annual Review of Sociology. 2009;35:87–105.
34. Buschner A, Adam U, Schulz F. Relative education, parenthood, and couples’ division of paid work. Evidence from German
census data. Zeitschrift für Familienforschung. 2018;30(1):96–119.
doi:10.3224/zff.v30i1.06.
35. Lott Y. Does flexibility help employees switch off from work? Flexible
working-time arrangements and cognitive work-to-home spillover for
women and men in Germany. Social Indicators Research. 2018; 1–24.
36. Wheatley D. Good to be home? Time-use and satisfaction levels
among home-based teleworkers. New Technology, Work and Employment. 2012;27(3):224–241.
37. Press CU. Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary & Thesaurus; 2021. Available from: https://dictionary.cambridge.
org/dictionary/english/lockdown (06.04.2021).
38. Adams-Prassl A, Boneva T, Golin M, Rauh C. Inequality in the
impact of the coronavirus shock: Evidence from real time surveys.
2020; 1–49.
39. Collins C, Landivar LC, Ruppanner L, Scarborough WJ. COVID-19
and the gender gap in work hours. Gender, Work & Organization.
Supplement: Feminist Frontiers. 2020; 28(S1):101–112.
40. Richardson D, Denniss R. Gender experiences during the COVID-19
lockdown. The Australia Institute. 2020.
41. Hupkau C, Petrongolo B. Work, care and gender during the Covid-19
crisis. IZA Discussion Paper Working Series (13762). 2020.
42. Bock-Schappelwein J, Huemer U, Hyll W. COVID-19: Beschäftigungssituation – Bilanz nach einem halben Jahr COVID-19-Pandemie.
WIFO Research Briefs (16). 2020.
43. Schmieder J, Wrohlich K. Gleichstellungspolitische Antworten auf
die Arbeitsmarktwirkungen der COVID-19-Pandemie. DIW Berlin:
Politikberatung kompakt (152); 2020.

April 22, 2021

29/49

Supporting information
Fig. S1. Average agreement with statements on WFH from couple households without children
Fig. S2. Agreement with statements on reconciliation of family and WFH
by gender
Tab. S1. Survey sample size and key variables
Tab. S2. Division of unpaid work before and during the lockdown
Tab. S3. Average time spent per activity during the lockdown by gender

6

Robustness tests

We conduct a series of robustness tests to check whether the results presented in the main text are robust in terms of (A.i) the sample definition,
(A.ii) controlling for whether the questions on time use and characteristics
of a partner were answered by a male, (A.iii) different definitions of the
control variables, and (A.iv) modified definitions of the dependent variable.
In section (A.v) we present the results of models presented in the main
text based on a linear probability model, instead of a logistic regression.
Note that, as we present average marginal effects, this serves as an indirect
validation of the average marginal effects.

A.i Sample
In the main text, we work with two different samples. From the overall
sample of 730 heterosexual couples (1,460 adult individuals), we selected
the couples living in the same household, where both partners were either
(self-)employed or in short-time work at the point when the survey was
answered, and who answered the partner module of the questionnaire or
linked their responses via anonymous partner IDs. Due to missing information, mainly the income variable, the resulting sample corresponding to
model (1) of the main text consists of 599 couples. In models (2) and (3),
this sample is reduced to the 300 couples with children under 15 years of age.
Model (1), explaining the change in the division of housework, is based
on a sample consisting of households with and without children. Model (4)
presented in Table S4 is based on a sample of households without children.
Thereby, we can check whether the results presented in the main text
are driven by households with or without children. The effect of WFH
is insignificant in model (4). Thus, we do not find evidence that WFH
influences the probability of men increasing their share of unpaid work in
childless couple households. In other words, we do not find evidence that
WFH influences the probability of men increasing their share of unpaid
work within childless households. This also indicates that the effects of
model (1), as presented in the main analysis, and based on households with
and without children, are driven by households with children, where either
men do more housework if both parents are WFH (but not more childcare),

April 22, 2021

30/49

or fathers take on more housework (and childcare) if they alone are WFH.
In an additional robustness check (see Table S5), we excluded individuals
who worked only partly, and not entirely, from home, which does not have
a significant impact on the results.

A.ii Controlling for the gender of the survey respondent
This check concerns the fact that 78% of the couple questionnaires
were filled out by women. Therefore, we test whether the main results
change if we control for the gender of the respondent by including a binary
variable which takes the value one if the questionnaire was filled out by
the male partner (see Table S6). In fact, this variable is highly significant
for housework but not for childcare tasks. Moreover, the probability that
men take on more housework is no longer significant for the whole sample.
This is, however, no surprise as Table S4 already revealed that this effect is
driven by households with children.

A.iii Variations in the specifications of the control
variables
The variable defining the relative income of the partners presented in the
main text is based on categorical income variables. In Table S7 we employ
a variable that is based on a subjective assessment of the income difference
between partners. Respondents had to report the perceived difference from
their partners (low, equal, high). In this robustness test, we make use of
this variable. However, the results are not driven by the definition of the
income variable and related measurement errors.
Furthermore, we alter the specification of the working hours variable. In
one specification (see Table S8), we use continuous working hours instead of
a categorical variable. Although the results for each additional hour worked
are highly significant, they are small in magnitude. Thus, the effect of each
hour is very small, confirming the results obtained by measuring hours
worked for pay in categories. In a similar exercise, we vary the definition
of part-time work. In the analysis presented in main text, respondents are
classified as working part-time in the event that they worked fewer than
20 hours per week for pay. In the models presented in Table S9, those
working fewer than 35 hours are classified as working part time. We find
that men who work fewer than 35 hours a week without any short-time
work arrangement have a significantly higher probability of taking on more
housework and childcare during lockdown.
Controlling for age by means of age groups instead of a continuous
definition (see Table S10), we detect no major changes in the results.

A.iv Variations in the definition of the dependent
variable
We check the possibility that the results are driven by the definition
of the dependent variable. Thus, we change the dependent variable to a
dummy variable indicating whether the woman instead of the man within

April 22, 2021

31/49

a couple took on more unpaid work during the lockdown. The results
are presented in Table S11 and show that the main variable of interest –
working from home – is not significant for this specification. Moreover,
several other variables having a significant effect on the probability that
the male partner within a couple takes on a greater share of unpaid work
have no significant effect on the probability that a woman takes on more
housework or childcare tasks (such as income and employment status). The
only variable that remains highly significant is the pre-lockdown division of
unpaid work. We conclude that the unequal division of unpaid work prior
to the COVID-19 restrictions and the prevailing gender norms associated
with it appear to be the most important predictor.
Furthermore, we changed the dependent variable to a binary variable
that becomes one in the event that the division of unpaid work was more
equal 16 during the COVID-19 restrictions than before (see Table S12). The
results show that only the male partner WFH has a positive effect on the
probability that the division of unpaid work becomes more equal, even
though the effect for the whole sample is no longer significant (as in Table 1).
Also it has a positive and significant effect in all three model specifications if
both partners are WFH. In the models presented in the main text (Table 1),
the effect of both partners WFH on the probability that a man takes on
more childcare tasks is also positive but not significant. This could come
from the fact that this dependent variable also responds to the case where
the male partner took over a larger proportion of the childcare tasks before
the lockdown and the woman increased her share during the COVID-19
restrictions (see Fig. 3 in the main text). If the housework or childcare
activities had already been equally distributed before the lockdown, it has a
(highly significant) negative effect on the probability that unpaid work was
even more equally distributed during the COVID-19 restrictions compared
to households where the woman previously did much more unpaid work
than her male partner. This finding is in line with the main results. The
distribution of income within the couple has a positive significant effect on
the division of housework in family households if the male partner earns
more (similar to the base model), but is not significant for any other model
or category. The results for the remaining explanatory variables are similar to the base model, even though some covariates are no longer significant.

A.v Linear probability model
The results presented in the main text and the previous robustness tests
are based on a logistic regression, estimated by maximum likelihood. In the
corresponding tables, we report average marginal effects. In this section, we
estimated the models corresponding to Table 1 based on a linear probability
model specification estimated by ordinary least squares. This serves as
an indirect test, as the average marginal effects should correspond to the
effects of the linear probability model. Table S13 shows that the results do
not differ between these model specifications.

April 22, 2021

32/49

Tab. S4. Additional model (4): households without children
Tab. S5. Sample without people who work partly from home
Tab. S6. Additional control variable: information supplied by man
Tab. S7. Alternative income variable: subjective assessment
Tab. S8. Working hours: continuous working hours
Tab. S9. Working hours: part-time 6 35h
Tab. S10. Age variable: age groups
Tab. S11. Dependent variable: woman does more
Tab. S12. Dependent variable: more equal division
Tab. S13. Linear probability model

April 22, 2021

33/49

Fig. S1. Average agreement with statements on WFH from couple households without children

Reading example: This plot displays the average agreement with different statements on WFH. On average, men found
“compatibility of free time and career” to be more true than women.

April 22, 2021

34/49

Fig. S2. Agreement to statements with reconciliation of family and WFH by gender

Reading example: This bar chart shows the distribution of agreement (from left to right “strongly agree” to “strongly disagree” and
“No info”) with different statements by parents WFH. Statement 1 indicates that 39% of all women strongly disagree with “easy
reconciliation at home”, whereas only 22% of all men strongly disagree with this statement.

April 22, 2021

35/49

Table S1. Survey sample size and key variables
Couple and Household Characteristics (n = 730)
Change in the division of housework (HW): ♂ does more
n
%

True

Not true

NA

184
25.21

535
73.29

11
1.51

Change in the division of childcare tasks (CC): ♂ does more
n
%

True

Not True

NA

117
16.03

258
35.34

355
48.63

Both

No one

Only woman

Only man

470
64.38

62
8.49

140
19.18

58
7.95

∼ same

♂ more

NA

Working from home
n
%

Income situation
♀ more

n
%

94
12.88

271
37.12

295
40.41

70
9.59

Division of housework (HW) before lockdown
n
%

♀ much more

♀ more

126
17.26

268
36.71

equal

217
29.73

♂ more

♂ much more

♂ more

♂ much more

94
12.88

17
2.33

NA

8
1.10

Division of childcare (CC) before lockdown
n
%

♀ much more

♀ more

102
13.97

equal

145
19.86

92
12.60

Couple w/o
children <15

Couple with
children <15

Other

316
43.29

347
47.53

67
9.18

29
3.97

NA

8
1.10

354
48.49

Household type

n
%

Average number of children by age group
0 – 2 years

3 – 5 years

6 – 9 years

10 – 14 years

0.13

0.23

0.25

0.20

Burgenland

Carinthia

Lower
Austria

Upper
Austria

Salzburg

Styria

Tyrol

Vorarlberg

Vienna

Other

29
3.97

19
2.60

129
17.67

65
8.90

24
3.29

51
6.99

12
1.64

6
0.82

373
51.10

22
3.01

∅
Region

n
%

Individual Characteristics (n = 1460)
Average age
♀
∅
40.7

♂
43.5

Highest education completed
Primary/
lower second.

n
%

♀
104
14.25

Higher
second.

♂
158
21.64

♀
97
13.29

♂
572
78.36

♀
58
7.95

Tertiary

♂
157
21.51

♀
491
67.26

NA

♂
376
51.51

♀
38
5.21

♂
39
5.34

Employment status
Employed

n
%

♀
626
85.75

Self-employed

♂
102
13.97

Short-time work

♀
46
6.30

♂
56
7.67

Working hours: part-time (620h)
Full-time

n
%

♀
526
72.05

Full-time (ST)

♂
611
83.70

♀
5
0.68

♂
21
2.88

Part-time

♀
148
20.27

Part-time (ST)

♂
38
5.21

♀
41
5.62

♂
35
4.79

NA

♀
10
1.37

Note: ST=short-time; NA=not available

April 22, 2021

36/49

♂
25
3.42

Table S2. Division of unpaid work before and during the lockdown
Distribution of housework (HW) before lockdown
♀ does
1
2
3
4
everything
n
12
39
75
126
142
%
1.64
5.34
10.27
17.26
19.45
Distribution of childcare (CC) before lockdown

n
%

♀ does
everything
11
1.51

5

6

7

8

9

217
29.73

61
8.36

33
4.52

12
1.64

3
0.41

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

40
5.48

51
6.99

84
11.51

61
8.36

92
12.60

15
2.05

14
1.92

5
0.68

3
0.41

5

6

7

8

9

206
28.22

48
6.58

44
6.03

19
2.60

3
0.41

♂ does
everything
2
0.27
♂ does
everything
0
0

NA
8
1.10

NA
354
48.49

Distribution of housework (HW) during lockdown
♀ does
1
2
3
4
everything
n
25
36
86
127
126
%
3.42
4.93
11.78
17.40
17.26
Distribution of childcare (CC) during lockdown

n
%

♀ does
everything
20
2.74

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

44
6.03

54
7.40

70
9.59

61
8.36

81
11.10

14
1.92

18
2.47

12
1.64

2
0.27

♂ does
everything
2
0.27
♂ does
everything
0
0

NA
8
1.10

NA
354
48.49

Note: ST=short-time; NA=not available

April 22, 2021

37/49

Table S3. Average time spent per activity during the lockdown by gender
Male (N=687)

Activity
Paid work
Housework
Cooking, baking, grocery
shopping
Cleaning, laundry
Other: pet care, gardening,
repairs
Childcare
Physical care: feeding, washing, supervision
Learning, teaching
Leisure time: reading, playing, speaking with child
Personal care
Sleeping
Eating, drinking, washing,
breaks
Leisure time
Sports, hobbies, media use
Social contacts
Voluntary work
Helping high-risk group
Other: Red Cross, etc.
Other activity: Not specified
Total
Housework
Childcare
Unpaid work
Paid and unpaid work

Female (N=690)

∅

Participation
rateb

∅
participantsc

∅

Participation
rateb

∅
participantsc

hh:mm

%

hh:mm

hh:mm

%

hh:mm

07:53

97.8

08:03

06:43

98.8

06:48

00:53
00:41

75.4
75.7

01:10
00:54

01:27
01:09

95.5
93.6

01:32
01:14

00:40

56.8

01:10

00:30

56.5

00:52

00:36
00:17

42.6
23.1

01:25
01:12

00:53
00:37

49.3
34.9

01:48
01:46

00:53

48.5

01:49

01:16

52.3

02:26

07:13

100.0

07:13

07:14

100.0

07:14

01:45

97.7

01:47

01:42

96.7

01:45

01:58
00:45

83.1
71.9

02:22
01:03

01:16
00:47

74.6
82.6

01:42
00:57

00:05
00:03
00:19

9.6
3.6
21.4

00:54
01:25
01:28

00:08
00:02
00:16

15.7
3.8
21.2

00:50
00:44
01:14

02:13
01:46
03:59
11:52

92.7
55.5
97.4
100.0

02:24
03:11
04:06
11:52

03:06
02:47
05:53
12:37

99.1
58.8
99.4
100.0

03:08
04:44
05:55
12:37

a

a

Note: Estimates by self and by partner are taken into account. If both partners filled out the survey, only the self-reported estimates
are used.
a
Mean time spent by all individuals.
b
Share of individuals who spent some time on the activity.
c
Mean time of all individuals who spent some time on the activity.

April 22, 2021

38/49

Table S4. Additional model (4) households without children

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

<20h: ♀
<20h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
<20h: ♂
<20h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
more CC: ♂
(2)
(3)

more HW: ♂
(4)

0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.11 (0.10)
0.23 (0.12)∗∗

0.19 (0.10)∗∗
0.06 (0.15)
0.42 (0.14)∗∗∗

0.09 (0.11)
0.17 (0.13)
0.06 (0.16)

0.17 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.32 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.07 (0.07)

0.15 (0.06)∗∗
0.33 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.14 (0.11)

0.11 (0.10)
−0.05 (0.12)
0.30 (0.12)∗∗

0.22 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.35 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.06 (0.09)
0.21 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.36 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.03 (0.12)

0.17 (0.07)∗∗
0.09 (0.04)∗∗

0.21 (0.11)∗∗
0.11 (0.06)∗

−0.01 (0.10)
0.06 (0.06)

0.16 (0.09)∗
0.13 (0.07)∗∗

−0.01 (0.06)
0.01 (0.09)
−0.18 (0.11)∗

−0.11 (0.06)∗
−0.03 (0.09)
0.05 (0.22)

−0.01 (0.10)
−0.04 (0.13)

0.35 (0.13)∗∗∗
0.03 (0.10)
−0.19 (0.09)∗∗

0.46 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.14 (0.11)
−0.24 (0.10)∗∗

−0.03 (0.13)
0.07 (0.15)
0.07 (0.14)

−0.09 (0.08)

−0.19 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.03 (0.10)

−0.08 (0.05)

−0.05 (0.07)

∗∗∗

−0.18 (0.07)

0.05 (0.07)
0.05 (0.06)
0.00 (0.05)
−0.17 (0.07)∗∗

0.01 (0.05)
−0.01 (0.08)
−0.13 (0.15)
0.16 (0.10)
0.06 (0.09)
0.01 (0.10)

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.06 (0.04)
0.06 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

0.03 (0.07)
−0.02 (0.05)
0.09 (0.04)∗
−0.09 (0.06)

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)∗∗
0.00 (0.01)

−0.01 (0.01)∗
0.01 (0.01)

0.02 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.07)

0.00 (0.08)
0.01 (0.10)

0.09 (0.08)
0.16 (0.11)

0.09 (0.08)
−0.03 (0.10)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.00 (0.06)

0.00 (0.06)
−0.02 (0.09)

0.06 (0.06)
−0.09 (0.08)

0.06 (0.07)
0.02 (0.08)

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

559
−299.90
599.81
653.81
770.61

300
−148.58
297.15
351.15
451.16

300
−152.99
305.98
359.98
459.98

−0.16 (0.08)∗∗

259
−136.79
273.58
317.58
395.83

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

39/49

Table S5. Sample without people who work partly from home

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only female
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.10 (0.10)
0.25 (0.11)∗∗

0.20 (0.10)∗∗
0.05 (0.14)
0.43 (0.13)∗∗∗

0.18 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.30 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.06 (0.07)

0.14 (0.06)∗∗
0.30 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.12 (0.10)

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.11 (0.11)
−0.06 (0.12)
0.31 (0.12)∗∗

0.22 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.35 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.04 (0.12)
0.22 (0.11)∗∗
0.08 (0.06)

−0.01 (0.11)
0.04 (0.06)

0.03 (0.05)
0.01 (0.08)
−0.15 (0.14)

0.03 (0.06)
0.06 (0.10)
−0.19 (0.09)∗∗

−0.08 (0.06)
0.01 (0.10)
0.05 (0.23)

0.15 (0.10)
0.03 (0.09)
−0.03 (0.10)

0.35 (0.14)∗∗∗
−0.00 (0.10)
−0.20 (0.08)∗∗

0.47 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.12 (0.11)
−0.26 (0.09)∗∗∗

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.10 (0.08)

−0.19 (0.08)∗∗

−0.06 (0.05)

−0.04 (0.07)

−0.18 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.05 (0.06)
−0.07 (0.04)∗
0.07 (0.04)∗∗
−0.07 (0.04)

0.03 (0.08)
−0.02 (0.06)
0.10 (0.05)∗∗
−0.09 (0.06)

0.06 (0.08)
0.06 (0.06)
0.02 (0.05)
−0.16 (0.07)∗∗

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.00 (0.01)
0.01 (0.01)

−0.01 (0.06)
−0.06 (0.07)

−0.02 (0.08)
−0.04 (0.10)

0.07 (0.09)
0.12 (0.11)

0.05 (0.05)
0.04 (0.06)

0.03 (0.07)
0.06 (0.10)

0.08 (0.07)
−0.03 (0.09)

527
−279.44
558.89
612.89
728.10

282
−135.37
270.74
324.74
423.07

Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

No.
No.
No.
No.

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

0.19 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.07 (0.04)

0.02 (0.01)∗∗
0.00 (0.01)

282
−143.71
287.42
341.42
439.75

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

40/49

Table S6. Additional control variable: information supplied by man

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )
No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

Age: ♀
Age: ♂
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Info by man
Info by woman (= ref )
Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

0.16 (0.07)∗∗
0.14 (0.10)
0.18 (0.11)

0.20 (0.09)∗∗
0.11 (0.14)
0.37 (0.14)∗∗∗

0.17 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.34 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.05 (0.07)

0.14 (0.06)∗∗
0.34 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.11 (0.10)

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.12 (0.10)
−0.03 (0.12)
0.29 (0.13)∗∗

0.21 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.36 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.01 (0.12)
0.18 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.10 (0.04)∗∗

0.25 (0.10)∗∗
0.13 (0.05)∗∗

0.00 (0.11)
0.06 (0.06)

−0.04 (0.06)
0.02 (0.09)
−0.19 (0.10)∗∗

−0.11 (0.05)∗∗
−0.03 (0.09)
0.05 (0.23)

0.38 (0.12)∗∗∗
0.05 (0.10)
−0.20 (0.09)∗∗

0.47 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.15 (0.10)
−0.25 (0.10)∗∗

−0.07 (0.06)

−0.07 (0.08)

−0.18 (0.08)∗∗

−0.06 (0.05)

−0.02 (0.07)

−0.17 (0.07)∗∗

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.05 (0.04)
0.07 (0.03)∗
−0.06 (0.04)

0.01 (0.07)
−0.00 (0.05)
0.10 (0.04)∗∗
−0.09 (0.06)

0.04 (0.07)
0.05 (0.06)
0.00 (0.05)
−0.17 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.01 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)∗∗
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.06 (0.06)

−0.02 (0.07)
−0.02 (0.10)

0.07 (0.08)
0.15 (0.11)

0.04 (0.05)
0.01 (0.06)

0.03 (0.06)
0.00 (0.09)

0.07 (0.06)
−0.08 (0.08)

0.18 (0.05)∗∗∗

0.28 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.00 (0.05)
−0.02 (0.07)
−0.14 (0.14)
0.15 (0.10)
0.05 (0.09)
0.03 (0.11)

559
−293.99
587.99
643.99
765.12

300
−141.23
282.46
338.46
442.17

0.12 (0.07)
300
−151.74
303.48
359.48
463.18

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

41/49

Table S7. Alternative income variable: subjective assessment

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

0.14 (0.07)∗
0.09 (0.10)
0.25 (0.11)∗∗

0.20 (0.09)∗∗
0.10 (0.15)
0.45 (0.13)∗∗∗

0.17 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.34 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.08 (0.07)

0.14 (0.06)∗∗
0.35 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.11 (0.10)

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.08 (0.11)
−0.05 (0.12)
0.32 (0.12)∗∗∗

0.21 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.39 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.02 (0.12)
0.14 (0.07)∗∗
0.14 (0.06)∗∗

0.15 (0.10)
0.20 (0.08)∗∗∗

0.05 (0.10)
0.05 (0.09)

−0.01 (0.05)
−0.02 (0.07)
−0.13 (0.14)

−0.03 (0.06)
−0.00 (0.09)
−0.19 (0.11)∗

−0.09 (0.05)∗
−0.05 (0.09)
0.05 (0.23)

0.20 (0.09)∗∗
0.09 (0.09)
−0.00 (0.10)

0.43 (0.11)∗∗∗
0.08 (0.10)
−0.22 (0.07)∗∗∗

0.45 (0.10)∗∗∗
0.09 (0.10)
−0.25 (0.10)∗∗

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.04 (0.07)

−0.06 (0.09)

−0.15 (0.08)∗

−0.09 (0.05)∗

−0.07 (0.07)

−0.16 (0.07)∗∗

−0.04 (0.05)
−0.06 (0.04)
0.06 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

−0.03 (0.07)
−0.05 (0.05)
0.07 (0.05)
−0.10 (0.06)∗

0.01 (0.07)
0.02 (0.06)
−0.00 (0.05)
−0.18 (0.07)∗∗∗

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.01 (0.00)
0.01 (0.00)

−0.00 (0.01)
0.01 (0.01)

0.01 (0.01)∗
0.00 (0.01)

0.00 (0.05)
−0.02 (0.07)

−0.05 (0.07)
0.02 (0.10)

0.06 (0.08)
0.17 (0.11)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.01 (0.05)

0.00 (0.06)
−0.01 (0.08)

0.05 (0.06)
−0.10 (0.08)

Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

No.
No.
No.
No.

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

591
−316.40
632.80
686.80
805.11

313
−157.33
314.67
368.67
469.82

313
−161.51
323.02
377.02
478.17

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time
The sample is larger due to a smaller number of missing values in the alternative income variable.

April 22, 2021

42/49

Table S8. Alternative working hours variable: continuous working hours

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

0.1432 (0.0714)∗∗
0.0877 (0.0954)
0.2040 (0.1151)∗

0.1525 (0.1002)
0.0057 (0.1356)
0.3122 (0.1529)∗∗

0.1641 (0.0474)∗∗∗
0.3242 (0.0632)∗∗∗
0.0657 (0.0673)

0.1375 (0.0640)∗∗
0.3275 (0.0846)∗∗∗
0.1225 (0.1044)

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.0412 (0.1067)
−0.1394 (0.1042)
0.1483 (0.1291)

0.2422 (0.0606)∗∗∗
0.4100 (0.0619)∗∗∗
0.0461 (0.1159)
0.1561 (0.0696)∗∗
0.1008 (0.0444)∗∗

0.2229 (0.1081)∗∗
0.1188 (0.0579)∗∗

0.0066 (0.0987)
0.0948 (0.0597)

0.0000 (0.0022)
−0.0051 (0.0019)∗∗∗

−0.0002 (0.0031)
−0.0055 (0.0024)∗∗

0.0059 (0.0033)∗
−0.0126 (0.0032)∗∗∗

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.0641 (0.0609)

−0.0873 (0.0760)

−0.2027 (0.0692)∗∗∗

−0.0553 (0.0531)

0.0233 (0.0733)

−0.0528 (0.0543)
−0.0687 (0.0427)
0.0498 (0.0340)
−0.0643 (0.0416)

0.0232 (0.0741)
−0.0303 (0.0549)
0.0697 (0.0435)
−0.0835 (0.0581)

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.0048 (0.0044)
0.0034 (0.0041)

0.0053 (0.0070)
0.0029 (0.0055)

0.0141 (0.0077)∗
0.0022 (0.0059)

0.0234 (0.0553)
−0.0425 (0.0666)

0.0177 (0.0803)
0.0066 (0.1040)

0.0975 (0.0837)
0.1494 (0.1043)

0.0119 (0.0467)
−0.0074 (0.0557)

−0.0026 (0.0620)
−0.0328 (0.0846)

0.0524 (0.0632)
−0.1096 (0.0809)

Working hours: ♀
Working hours: ♂

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

559
−297.8869
595.7739
641.7739
741.2753

300
−150.0648
300.1296
346.1296
431.3166

−0.0576 (0.0768)
0.0365 (0.0710)
0.0350 (0.0548)
−0.0100 (0.0446)
−0.1523 (0.0630)∗∗

300
−149.3522
298.7045
344.7045
429.8914

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

43/49

Table S9. Alternative working hours variable: part-time 6 35h

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

635h: ♀
635h (ST): ♀
>35h: ♀ (= ref )
635h: ♂
635h (ST): ♂
>35h: ♂ (= ref )

more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.10 (0.10)
0.22 (0.12)∗

0.18 (0.10)∗
0.04 (0.14)
0.36 (0.15)∗∗

0.16 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.32 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.06 (0.07)

0.14 (0.06)∗∗
0.35 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.12 (0.10)

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.10 (0.10)
−0.06 (0.12)
0.23 (0.13)∗

0.23 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.39 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.04 (0.12)
0.16 (0.07)∗∗
0.09 (0.04)∗∗
0.01 (0.05)
−0.03 (0.08)
0.08 (0.05)
0.08 (0.08)

0.22 (0.11)∗∗
0.11 (0.06)∗
0.01 (0.07)
−0.04 (0.10)
0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.01 (0.10)

0.03 (0.11)
0.05 (0.06)
−0.01 (0.08)
−0.02 (0.11)
0.21 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.11 (0.10)

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.10 (0.08)

−0.21 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.07 (0.05)

−0.02 (0.07)

−0.12 (0.07)

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.07 (0.04)∗
0.05 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

0.02 (0.07)
−0.04 (0.06)
0.07 (0.04)
−0.08 (0.06)

0.03 (0.07)
0.01 (0.06)
−0.02 (0.05)
−0.17 (0.07)∗∗

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)∗∗
0.00 (0.01)

0.03 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.07)

0.01 (0.08)
0.02 (0.11)

0.11 (0.09)
0.15 (0.11)

0.02 (0.05)
0.00 (0.06)

0.01 (0.06)
−0.01 (0.09)

0.07 (0.07)
−0.07 (0.09)

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

559
−299.98
599.95
649.95
758.10

300
−150.60
301.20
351.20
443.79

300
−158.23
316.47
366.47
459.06

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

44/49

Table S10. Alternative age variable: age groups
more HW: ♂
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♂
(2)

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.10 (0.10)
0.22 (0.12)∗

0.19 (0.10)∗∗
0.04 (0.15)
0.43 (0.13)∗∗∗

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )

0.17 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.33 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.07 (0.07)

0.15 (0.06)∗∗
0.33 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.17 (0.11)

Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )

0.18 (0.07)∗∗
0.09 (0.04)∗∗

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age
Age

group
group
group
group
group
group
group
group
group
group

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

18 – 29:
40 – 49:
50 – 59:
>59: ♀
30 – 39:
18 – 29:
40 – 49:
50 – 59:
>59: ♂
30 – 39:

♀
♀
♀

♀ (= ref )
♂
♂
♂

♂ (= ref )

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

more CC: ♂
(3)
0.14 (0.10)
−0.03 (0.12)
0.35 (0.12)∗∗∗

0.20 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.35 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.05 (0.12)
0.24 (0.11)∗∗
0.10 (0.06)∗

−0.00 (0.11)
0.06 (0.06)

−0.02 (0.06)
0.01 (0.10)
−0.18 (0.11)

−0.13 (0.06)∗∗
−0.07 (0.09)
0.05 (0.21)

0.36 (0.13)∗∗∗
0.03 (0.10)
−0.18 (0.10)∗

0.49 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.16 (0.11)
−0.23 (0.11)∗∗

−0.05 (0.06)

−0.10 (0.08)

−0.19 (0.08)∗∗

−0.08 (0.05)

−0.03 (0.07)

−0.16 (0.07)∗∗

−0.05 (0.06)
−0.07 (0.04)
0.05 (0.04)
−0.07 (0.04)∗

0.01 (0.08)
−0.02 (0.05)
0.10 (0.05)∗∗
−0.07 (0.06)

0.02 (0.07)
0.04 (0.06)
−0.01 (0.05)
−0.15 (0.06)∗∗

0.06 (0.08)
−0.01 (0.06)
−0.08 (0.07)
−0.19 (0.10)∗

0.02 (0.15)
0.01 (0.07)
0.18 (0.15)

−0.07 (0.12)
0.06 (0.07)
0.25 (0.14)∗

−0.06 (0.08)
0.01 (0.06)
0.05 (0.08)
0.03 (0.13)

−0.19 (0.10)∗
−0.03 (0.07)
−0.04 (0.09)
0.22 (0.37)

−0.19 (0.12)
0.09 (0.07)
−0.06 (0.10)
0.21 (0.32)

0.03 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.07)

0.01 (0.08)
0.03 (0.11)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.01 (0.06)

0.01 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.08)

0.01 (0.05)
−0.01 (0.08)
−0.14 (0.15)
0.16 (0.10)
0.07 (0.09)
0.01 (0.10)

559
−298.83
597.65
663.65
806.41

0.12 (0.09)
0.23 (0.11)∗∗
0.08 (0.07)
−0.12 (0.08)

300
−147.55
295.09
359.09
477.62

300
−152.48
304.95
368.95
487.47

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

45/49

Table S11. Alternative dependent variable: woman does more
more HW: ♀
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♀
(2)

−0.11 (0.08)
−0.00 (0.08)
−0.03 (0.08)

−0.04 (0.11)
0.09 (0.12)
0.10 (0.14)

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: equal (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: equal (= ref )

0.05 (0.05)
−0.18 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.18 (0.06)∗∗∗

−0.01 (0.06)
−0.28 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.01 (0.09)

Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )

−0.05 (0.06)
0.04 (0.04)

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

more CC: ♀
(3)
−0.03 (0.10)
0.12 (0.12)
−0.03 (0.13)

−0.03 (0.06)
−0.38 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.02 (0.09)
−0.10 (0.09)
0.02 (0.06)

−0.04 (0.10)
0.07 (0.06)

0.05 (0.07)
0.11 (0.11)
0.28 (0.27)

0.06 (0.06)
0.02 (0.10)
0.31 (0.21)

−0.06 (0.08)
0.05 (0.08)
−0.09 (0.09)

−0.19 (0.10)∗
−0.05 (0.11)
−0.05 (0.17)

−0.22 (0.09)∗∗
−0.02 (0.10)
−0.02 (0.17)

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.01 (0.07)

0.04 (0.10)

0.07 (0.10)

0.06 (0.06)

0.07 (0.09)

−0.06 (0.08)

0.10 (0.05)∗∗
0.09 (0.04)∗∗
−0.03 (0.04)
0.06 (0.04)∗

−0.07 (0.08)
−0.04 (0.06)
−0.11 (0.05)∗∗
−0.04 (0.06)

−0.00 (0.08)
−0.06 (0.06)
0.07 (0.05)
0.08 (0.06)

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

0.01 (0.00)
−0.01 (0.00)∗

0.01 (0.01)
−0.02 (0.01)∗∗

−0.01 (0.01)
−0.01 (0.01)

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.04 (0.07)

−0.01 (0.09)
−0.02 (0.10)

−0.01 (0.09)
−0.04 (0.10)

0.04 (0.05)
−0.08 (0.05)

0.06 (0.07)
−0.11 (0.09)

−0.11 (0.06)∗
−0.11 (0.08)

Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

No.
No.
No.
No.

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

0.02 (0.05)
0.17 (0.09)∗
0.19 (0.28)

559
−297.29
594.58
648.58
765.39

300
−171.64
343.28
397.28
497.28

300
−160.49
320.97
374.97
474.97

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

46/49

Table S12. Alternative dependent variable: more equal division
more equal HW
(1)
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: equal
HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: ♀ much more (= ref )
CC before: equal
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: ♀ much more (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

620h: ♀
620h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
620h: ♂
620h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )
No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

Age: ♀
Age: ♂
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

0.11 (0.06)∗
−0.03 (0.08)
0.14 (0.10)
−0.34 (0.03)∗∗∗
−0.10 (0.04)∗∗∗
−0.12 (0.04)∗∗∗

Dependent variable:
more equal HW
(2)

more equal CC
(3)

0.16 (0.07)∗∗
0.01 (0.12)
0.33 (0.12)∗∗∗

0.22 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.06 (0.12)
0.28 (0.10)∗∗∗

−0.30 (0.03)∗∗∗
−0.13 (0.05)∗∗∗
−0.10 (0.05)∗
−0.39 (0.03)∗∗∗
−0.13 (0.05)∗∗
−0.11 (0.07)

0.01 (0.06)
0.05 (0.04)

−0.06 (0.10)
0.13 (0.05)∗∗∗

0.04 (0.11)
0.06 (0.06)

−0.01 (0.04)
−0.09 (0.05)∗
−0.22 (0.02)∗∗∗

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.09 (0.06)
−0.21 (0.02)∗∗∗

−0.04 (0.06)
−0.01 (0.09)
0.10 (0.18)

0.17 (0.09)∗
0.02 (0.08)
0.02 (0.09)

0.38 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.06 (0.10)
−0.11 (0.10)

0.26 (0.11)∗∗
0.02 (0.10)
−0.17 (0.11)

0.02 (0.06)

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.22 (0.06)∗∗∗

−0.08 (0.05)∗

−0.01 (0.07)

−0.14 (0.07)∗∗

−0.01 (0.04)
−0.07 (0.04)∗
−0.02 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

−0.03 (0.07)
−0.07 (0.05)
−0.02 (0.04)
−0.12 (0.06)∗∗

0.07 (0.07)
0.03 (0.05)
−0.03 (0.04)
−0.06 (0.05)

0.00 (0.00)
−0.00 (0.00)

0.00 (0.01)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.01 (0.05)
−0.02 (0.06)

0.04 (0.07)
0.11 (0.10)

0.05 (0.08)
0.09 (0.10)

0.04 (0.04)
0.02 (0.05)

0.03 (0.05)
0.00 (0.08)

0.00 (0.06)
0.00 (0.09)

559
−227.19
454.37
508.37
625.18

300
−106.98
213.96
267.96
367.96

300
−130.29
260.57
314.57
414.57

∗∗∗

p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

47/49

Table S13. Linear probability model

WFH:
WFH:
WFH:
WFH:

both
only ♀
only ♂
nobody (= ref )

HW before: ♀ more
HW before: ♀ much more
HW before: ♂ (much) more
HW before: ♀ much more (= ref )
CC before: ♀ more
CC before: ♀ much more
CC before: ♂ (much) more
CC before: ♀ much more (= ref )
Higher income: ♀
Higher income: ♂
Equal income (= ref )
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working
Working

hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours
hours

<=20h: ♀
<=20h (ST): ♀
>20h (ST): ♀
>20h: ♀ (= ref )
<=20h: ♂
<=20h (ST): ♂
>20h (ST): ♂
>20h: ♂ (= ref )

more HW: ♀
(1)

Dependent variable:
more HW: ♀
(2)

0.15 (0.07)∗∗
0.11 (0.10)
0.23 (0.12)∗∗

0.19 (0.10)∗∗
0.06 (0.15)
0.42 (0.14)∗∗∗

0.17 (0.05)∗∗∗
0.32 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.07 (0.07)

0.15 (0.06)∗∗
0.33 (0.08)∗∗∗
0.14 (0.11)

more CC: ♀
(3)
0.11 (0.10)
−0.05 (0.12)
0.30 (0.12)∗∗

0.21 (0.06)∗∗∗
0.36 (0.07)∗∗∗
0.03 (0.12)
0.17 (0.07)∗∗
0.09 (0.04)∗∗
0.01 (0.05)
−0.01 (0.08)
−0.13 (0.15)
0.16 (0.10)
0.06 (0.09)
0.01 (0.10)

0.21 (0.11)∗∗
0.11 (0.06)∗

−0.01 (0.10)
0.06 (0.06)

−0.01 (0.06)
0.01 (0.09)
−0.18 (0.11)∗

−0.11 (0.06)∗
−0.03 (0.09)
0.05 (0.22)

0.35 (0.13)∗∗∗
0.03 (0.10)
−0.19 (0.09)∗∗

0.46 (0.09)∗∗∗
0.14 (0.11)
−0.24 (0.10)∗∗

Self-employed: ♀
Employed: ♀ (= ref )
Self-employed: ♂
Employed: ♂ (= ref )

−0.06 (0.06)

−0.09 (0.08)

−0.19 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.08 (0.05)

−0.05 (0.07)

−0.18 (0.07)∗∗∗

−0.05 (0.05)
−0.06 (0.04)
0.06 (0.03)
−0.06 (0.04)

0.03 (0.07)
−0.02 (0.05)
0.09 (0.04)∗
−0.09 (0.06)

0.05 (0.07)
0.05 (0.06)
0.00 (0.05)
−0.17 (0.07)∗∗

Age: ♀
Age: ♂

−0.00 (0.00)
0.00 (0.00)

0.01 (0.01)
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.01)∗∗
0.00 (0.01)

0.02 (0.06)
−0.04 (0.07)

0.00 (0.08)
0.01 (0.10)

0.09 (0.08)
0.16 (0.11)

0.02 (0.05)
−0.00 (0.06)

0.00 (0.06)
−0.02 (0.09)

0.06 (0.06)
−0.09 (0.08)

No.
No.
No.
No.

children
children
children
children

Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.
Educ.

0 – 2 years
3 – 5 years
6 – 9 years
10 – 14 years

♀ : Higher sec.
♀ : Lower sec. | prim.
♀ : Tertiary (= ref )
♂ : Higher sec.
♂ : Lower sec. | prim.
♂ : Tertiary (= ref )

Observations
Log likelihood
Deviance
AIC
BIC

559
−299.90
599.81
653.81
770.61

300
−148.58
297.15
351.15
451.16

300
−152.99
305.98
359.98
459.98

∗∗∗
p < 0.01; ∗∗ p < 0.05; ∗ p < 0.1
Note: WFH=working from home; HW=housework; CC=childcare; ST=short-time

April 22, 2021

48/49

Acknowledgments
We thank numerous participants at various seminars and conferences at the
WU Vienna University of Economics and Business, the Research Institute
Economics of Inequality, the Institute for Advanced Studies Vienna, the
EFAS network, the Young Economists Conference 2020 and the Momentum
Congress for their helpful comments and feedback on previous versions of
this paper. In addition, we thank Wilfried Altzinger, Karin Heitzmann,
Petra Sauer and Mathias Moser for comments on the manuscript. We
thank Julia Hoffmann, Mathias Moser and Alyssa Schneebaum for their
comments on the questionnaire and survey design. Judith Derndorfer,
Vanessa Lechinger, Katharina Mader and Eva Six acknowledge funding
under grant number COV20-040 from the Vienna Science and Technology
Fund (WWTF) and from the Austrian Chamber of Labour (AK).

April 22, 2021

49/49

