How to Get Away with Spreading COVID-19:
Political Connections and Pandemic Response
Robert Kubinec, Haillie Lee, and Andrey Tomashevskiy
December 21, 2020
Abstract

While the aim of COVID-19 policies is to suppress the pandemic, many fear that
the burden of the restrictions will fall more heavily on less privileged groups.
We show one potential mechanism for COVID-19 responses to increase inequality by examining the intersection of business restrictions and business political
connections. Using an online survey of 2,735 business employees and managers
in Ukraine, Egypt and Venezuela over the summer of 2020, we show that businesses with political connections to government officials were significantly less
likely to shut down as a result of COVID-19 policies. This finding suggests that
measures designed to mitigate Covid-19 are less effective in countries with a
weak rule of law if politically connected firms are able to circumvent restrictions
by leveraging political connections to receive preferential treatment. In addition,
politically-connected firms are no more likely–and sometimes even less likely–to
engage in social-distancing policies to mitigate the pandemic despite the fact that
they are more likely to remain open.1

1
We thank Laron Williams and participants in the Public Policy, Opinions, Behavior, and Health Outcomes during the COVID Pandemic conference for helpful comments on this draft.

Introduction
While public health experts have called for restrictive measures to combat COVID-19, as
is so often the case, government leaders have often chosen to interpret these restrictions as
best fits their interests. While an increasing amount of research has shown how COVID-19’s
economic effects have fallen more harshly on lower-income individuals (Bonaccorsi, Pierri,
Cinelli, Flori, Galeazzi, Porcelli, Schmidt, Valensise, Scala, Quattrociocchi and Pammolli
2020; Adams-Prassl, Boneva, Golin and Rauh 2020), relatively little is known about whether
similar distortions exist among companies. From an efficiency standpoint, the companies
that should bear the burden of COVID-19 restrictions are those with extra cash on hand
and stable lines of credit to withstand the disruption to their basis. However, we contend in
this paper that companies can instead employ political connections to circumvent COVID19 restrictions so that businesses without connections bear the brunt of policies designed
to fight the pandemic. As we study these issues in countries known to have high levels of
corruption and relatively weak state institutions, we believe that these same issues are likely
occurring in other countries that lack strong and autonomous states.
To establish how politically-connected companies have been differentially affected by
COVID-19, we implemented an online survey of 2,567 business employees and managers in
Ukraine, Venezuela and Egypt during the late spring and summer of 2020. Our rich dataset
includes multiple measures for corporate political connections, the history of company interaction with bureaucrats (negative and positive), as well as patterns of political activity such
as funding campaigns, ordering employees to vote for candidates and holding rallies on behalf
of political parties. By combining this historical data on companies with questions about their
compliance with COVID-19 directives, we are able to understand with considerable precision
to what extent political connections enable companies to avoid pandemic-related business
restrictions.
The results are not encouraging in terms of the fairness of COVID-19 policy implementation. We show that the politically connections of companies, measured either via self-reported
2

scales or in terms of observed linkages between politicians and the company, are highly correlated with companies staying open during the pandemic. These companies also tend to
be larger on average. However, while it might be expected that these companies would be
more likely to implement social-distancing and other measures for employees considering that
they remained open, we find that this is not the case, and for some types of social distancing
measures, politically-connected firms’ employees are less likely to comply. For this reason,
we argue that companies are employing political connections to insulate themselves from
COVID-19 restrictions, potentially increasing infections in their countries and passing the
burden of business restrictions to less-connected, smaller and more vulnerable businesses.
This outcome has both equity and welfare consequences as politically-connected firms are
not necessarily those which should remain open from an efficiency standpoint.
This research also makes contributions to research on disaster response in governments
with extensive corruption (Atkinson, Hicken and Ravanilla 2014; Anbarci, Escaleras and
Register 2005; Escaleras, Anbarci and Register 2007). Our results speak to a growing literature on the relationship between politics, corruption, and disaster response. This study
suggests that governments with weak rule of law where state-business relations are driven by
informal ties are less effective in implementing public policy responses to disruptive natural
events such as the COVID-19 pandemic. Our findings also contribute to the literature on
politically connected firms; we show that political connected firms can capture a larger market share through preferential access access to club goods, such as exemptions from public
health restrictions (Fisman 2001; Faccio, Masulis and McConnell 2006). Firms’ heterogeneous experiences in accessing such club goods raise questions concerning the relationship
between state-business ties and inequality in high-corruption states.

3

Pandemics and Political Connections
Relatively soon after the pandemic started, a massive scholarly enterprise to measure the
economic consequences of COVID-19 restrictions put out a steady stream of studies. While
many if not most of these papers remain unpublished, and the ever-expanding literature is
difficult to characterize, we can already make some summary statements about how and to
what extent COVID-19 restrictions affected businesses. Brodeur, Gray, Islam and Bhuiyan
(2020) offer the most rigorous overview of this research, revealing that business restrictions
have had profound negative consequences for companies and their employees. At one point
early in the pandemic, each additional 10 days of lockdown restrictions was associated with
a 1.7 percent increase in unemployment in the United States (Brodeur et al. 2020, 28). These
numbers are unheard of outside of massive natural disasters like tsunamis and earthquakes.
In addition to the direct effect of policies, there are also indirect effects as consumers fear
becoming infected with the virus, choosing on their own to avoid retail establishments and
restaurants. Long-term, uncertainty over the state of the economy and the pandemic can
depress investment and lead to chronic unemployment depending on how the recovery from
the pandemic unfolds, assuming the pandemic ends at some point in the near future (Brodeur
et al. 2020, 27).
For these reasons, the pandemic poses a mortal threat to many companies, though some
will be much more affected than others in the immediate aftermath of the pandemic. For
example, Bartik, Bertrand, Cullen, Glaeser, Luca and Stanton (2020) revealed that as many
as 53% of U.S. retail and 70% of arts and entertainment businesses were closed as of the first
week of April 2020. However, only 19% of financial firms and 21% of professional services
firms reported closing. As such, the impacts of the early restrictions on COVID-19 were highly
heterogeneous and very detrimental to certain industries, though over time we expect the
macroeconomic shockwaves to hurt the performance of companies originally left unscathed.
This heterogeneity in the effect of COVID-19 on companies parallels the unequal effects
of the pandemic on workers. While there has been an overall deterioration in labor market,
4

lockdown policies have hurt the working poor more severely (Adams-Prassl et al. 2020).
Workers who rely on daily wages and in-person work have been more severely affected by
travel restrictions Bonaccorsi et al. (2020). On the other hand, workers who are able to work
remotely from home, in many cases high-income earners, have been affected in a more limited
manner by the pandemic.
Given the severity of the effects of COVID-19 restrictions on business, it makes sense
that these businesses would seek loopholes and other ways of circumventing restrictions. At
present, however, we have only informative yet isolated examples of businesses taking advantage of COVID-19. In one case, a former U.S. political fundraiser reached deals to sell
roughly $630 million in Covid-19 medical supplies to government entities after using Republican political connections to facilitate business, according to emails and contract documents.2
During summer 2020 Congressional Democrats sent a letter to the Trump administration
complaining about other contracts, including mask production and test tubes, which were
allegedly made to well-connected businesspeople.3 In a different vein, Brazilian President
Bolsonaro has spared evangelical churches from COVID-19 restrictions, which many believe
is due to the political connections of this group.4 These data points, while individually isolated, at least demonstrate the ease with which COVID-19 policies can be manipulated to
the benefit of well-connected allies.
We can expect that the ability of businesses to circumvent restrictions is a function of state
capabilities, potential customer blowback and business’ beliefs about what their competitors
might be doing. Customer preferences are often indeterminate as some customers would
prefer more social distancing while others prefer less, rendering the market an ineffective
check on business behavior. Knowledge of what other businesses are doing undoubtedly
plays a role in business compliance via coordination games and strategic complements, but
it is relatively difficult to know exactly how these beliefs change. Ultimately, the variable
2

See https://www.wsj.com/articles/coronavirus-gear-broker-used-political-ties-to-sell-goods-to-states-data-show-115948
See https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/507471-house-panel-probes-problematic-government-contracts-covid-19-supp
4
See https://www.ft.com/content/7c3a17c6-f130-4659-972f-0fe9ebc7102b
3

5

with the clearest positive or negative effect on business behavior are state policies mandating
compliance.
While the COVID-19 pandemic is a new phenomenon, business attempts to circumvent
state policies designed to counteract natural and other disasters are certainly not. To the
extent that COVID-19 restrictions impose costs on businesses, firms have an interest in minimizing the negative impact of these policies. Firms’ degree of success in escaping the costs
of restrictions depends to a large extent on state-business relations. In governments with
weak institutions, weak traditions of the rule of law and high levels of corruption, statebusiness relations are characterized by a high degree of informality (Fisman 2001; Faccio,
Masulis and McConnell 2006; Shleifer and Vishny 1993). Interactions between firms and
government agents are affected by informal connections, such as family, clan or geographical ties, professional and political histories of its owners and board members, or ongoing
informal/extralegal financial exchanges between the firm and government agents. Research
shows that firms’ experiences in high-corruption states vary as a function of the strength
and effectiveness of their political connections (Claessens, Feijen and Laeven 2008; Khwaja
and Mian 2005). This is reflected not only in preferential access to private goods such as
government loans, but also in access to club goods, such as exemptions from government
regulations.
Research shows that the existence of these types of politically connected club goods directly affects disaster response in high-corruption states (Atkinson, Hicken and Ravanilla
2014; Anbarci, Escaleras and Register 2005; Escaleras, Anbarci and Register 2007; Whittaker, Frühauf, Burthem, Parry, Kotikalapudi, Liang, Barker, Patel and Kelman 2018; Ambraseys and Bilham 2011). Since politically connected firms can evade enforcement of government standards, corrupt governments are associated with high earthquake fatalities due
to widespread substandard construction practices. Political connections and informal relationships also play a role in the distribution of disaster aid. With respect to COVID-19
restrictions, it is reasonable to expect that a similar pattern will hold, and there is some

6

evidence suggesting that informality and cronyism has worsened as a result of overwhelmed
bureaucracies (Gallego, Prem and Vargas 2020).
Based on this research, we believe that politically connected firms should be able to leverage their political connections to bypass lockdown restrictions and remain open. Politically
connected firms may also be less likely to comply with less stringent restrictions, such as
limited customer/employee capacity. Since politically unconnected firms are more likely to
comply with restrictions and shut down or reduce their capacity and output, connected firms
are then positioned to capture a larger share of the market. Given that political connections
often derive from social relations stratified by resource inequalities, we believe that it is
more likely that re-distribution of market opportunities to these companies will exacerbate
existing wealth and income inequalities.
Based on this prior research, we propose two hypotheses that reflect how political connections may enable companies to evade COVID-19 restrictions:
H1: Companies with more political connections are less likely to shut down
due to COVID-19 restrictions than non-connected businesses.
H2: Companies with more political connections are no more likely to implement internal policies mandating social distancing than non-connected businesses.

Data
Our data come from an online survey conducted in Egypt, Ukraine and Venezuela during
the summer of 2020. All three countries implemented wide-reaching lockdown measures in
March and April 2020 to combat the spread of COVID-19. From mid-March to the end
of April, Ukraine and Egypt required all non-essential business to shut down. In Ukraine,
only grocery stores, pharmacies, banks, and gas stations were permitted to remain open.
Egypt similarly required businesses in the entertainment, retail, hospitality, and other service
7

industries to shut down. Venezuela implemented a more restrictive lockdown, regulating the
movement of individuals as well as mandating the shutdown of all non-essential businesses.
Elements of these lockdown policies remained in place until July 2020 (Cheng, Barcelo,
Hartnett, Kubinec and Messerschmidt 2020).
Egypt, Ukraine and Venezuela are useful cases for this type of analysis since these are
high-corruption countries where firms face incentives to develop connections to government
agents as protection from government predation (Diwan, Keefer and Schiffbauer 2015).
There is also some institutional variance since Ukraine is a weak democracy, and Egypt
and Venezuela are authoritarian regimes. To recruit respondents, we employed Facebook ad
targeting at business managers and employees. This targeting method is quite similar to
business-to-business marketing strategies and is seen as an excellent way to reach managers
directly rather than have to use phone or email methods that are prone to being ignored by
businesses. Furthermore, Facebook ads allow managers to access the survey apart from their
work, permitting plausible anonymity that conventional firm surveys cannot provide.
In total we recruited 2,735 respondents who answered at least one of our COVID-19
related questions. A plot showing the distribution of responses by country and industry is
shown in Figure 8. This figure shows that there is heterogeneity across countries, although
pronounced concentrations in retail, transportation, health care and education. This is not
surprising as these sectors tend to absorb a lot of labor and firms. Manufacturing is relatively
low in Egypt and Venezuela but much higher in Ukraine. Given this heterogeneity in sector,
we think it is important to control for sector in all analyses as it represents potential sample
selection bias.
Figure 2 shows the proportion of managers versus employees in the different samples.
As can be seen, these values are quite similar across countries. Managers represent 30 to 40
percent of individual samples, reflecting the survey targeting towards higher-ups in companies. At the same time, it should be noted that the majority of the sample are employees.
For the purposes of this study, both employees and managers should have access to relevant

8

Figure 1: Distribution of Respondents by Sector
information, such as whether their firm implements social distancing and whether the firm
shut down due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In this survey, our main information about a company’s response to COVID-19 comes
from a series of questions that are shown in Table 1. As can be seen, we have data both
for whether the company shut down due to COVID-19 restrictions and internal company
enforcement of prudent social-distancing and mask-wearing policies. The modal responses
for these questions communicate some of the staggering effects of these policies on businesses:
the majority of the sample reports that their company had to shut down due to COVID-19
restrictions at some point. At the same time, a plurality of respondents still maintain that
the government could do more to combat COVID-19 in their country.
To measure political connections, we use both a self-assessment scale for connections in
addition to more objective linkages between the company and the state. The self-assessed
scale is a 0 to 10 slider that respondents place their company on, where 0 equals no known
political connections and 10 equals as connected as possible. The observed or objective
linkages are answers to a range of questions that asked respondents whether their company

9

Figure 2: Proportion Managers by Country
Table 1: COVID-19 Questions in Survey
Question

Answers

Modal Response

How satisfied are you with your
government’s response to the COVID-19
epidemic?
Has your company had to close down due
to COVID-19 restrictions?
How closely have employees been
following thes policies: face masks,
maintaining 2 meters space, working at
home, no group meetings
If your company has a warehouse or
factory, how has your company changed
working conditions in response to
COVID-19?

3-category Likert

Government is doing too little (43%)

Yes/No

Yes (52%)

All/some/none

Face masks (73% compliance)

The same/No. employees restricted/No
employees allowed in warehouse

No. restricted (51%)

had managers, board members or owners had specific types of relationship to the state.
The question can be seen in Figure 3, revealing the wide array of options presented to the
respondent.
Because this question produced a large number of indicators, aggregation is necessary to
use it as a predictor variable. To do so, we constructed a one-dimensional scale by employing an item-response theory model and aggregating the data to the sum of the number of
connections for each type of officer in the company (i.e., the rows in Figure 3). Correlation
10

Figure 3: Respondent Question for Observed Linkages Between Company and State
between this constructed measure and the self-reported score is reasonably high at 0.47,
indicating both measures are likely tapping into the same concept although there are still
clear differences between them.

Figure 4: Histogram by Country for Self-Reported Political Connections Score

This produced a single-dimensional score for each company. Histograms for the self11

Figure 5: Histogram by Country for IRT Observed Political Connections Score
reported political connections score and the IRT-produced observed political connections
score are shown in Figures 4 and 5. As can be seen, the distributions are relatively similar
across countries, with pronounced modes at 0 for companies without any self-reported or
observed political connections. One interesting empirical fact is that the Venezuela distribution for self-reported connections has a pronounced bi-modal distribution, while the Egyptian
and Ukrainian distributions show more variation in the middle of the political connection
categories.

Results and Discussion
Our main specification is a Bayesian logit model for the outcome of whether a company
shut down due to COVID-19-related issues. We fit the model with the R package brms
using default weakly informative priors (Bürkner 2017; Carpenter, Gelman, Hoffman, Lee,
Goodrich, Betancourt, Brubaker, Guo, Li and Riddell 2017). The primary advantage of using
a Bayesian logit model as opposed to a more conventional estimator is the ability to avoid
issues of perfect separation and to permit more straightforward derivation of marginal effects
12

and other useful quantities of interest.
We fit three separate models with varying numbers of controls, one set for each type of
measurement of political connections: the self-reported 1 to 10 scale and the IRT scale based
on observed company-state linkages. In the first model we only include country and sector
(2-digit NACE codes) fixed effects along with these predictors to estimate a straightforward
bivariate (or nearly so) regression model. We then also fit a model with a number of control
variables, including firm profit margin in the prior year, whether the company belonged
to a conglomerate, and the type of company (domestic, foreign, unregistered domestic, etc).
Finally, we also fit a model adding firm size proxied by the number of employees as a control.

Figure 6: Average Marginal Effects for Political Connection Scores

We report the effects of the two political connections variables across the three different
models in Figure 6. The effects are reported as sample-average marginal effects and so the
results can be interpreted as the percent marginal increase in probability of a company shutting down due to COVID-19 given a one-unit increase in the political connections scores. In
general, both observed and self-reported political connections tend to reduce the probability
13

Figure 7: Predicted Probability of Shutting Down for Political Connections (Bivariate Models)

of a company shutting down. For a 1-unit increase in the observed political connections score
(equivalent to a 1-SD change as the score is standardized), a company is about 4 percent
less likely to shut down due to COVID-19 in the bivariate model with fixed effects. For a
1-unit increase in the self-reported connections score, a company is 2 percent less likely to
shut down due to COVID-19. It should be noted that though the absolute size of the effect
for the observed political connections variable is larger, this is partly a scaling effect as the
observed connections score runs from approximately -2 to +2 while the self-reported political
connections score can take on a value from 0 to 10. As such, a company with a 0 self-reported
score would be about 20 percent less likely than a company with a 10 self-reported score
to shut down due to COVID-19 in the bivariate model. Figure 7, which shows predicted

14

COVID-19 shutdown rates given values of the two political connection scores, makes the
strength of the relationship clearer between the two variables.
A similar pattern can be observed across the two types of measurements for political
connections: the effect is the strongest in the bivariate model, and is smaller in the models
with all controls and without firm size as a control. Furthermore, the uncertainty intervals
indicate that the observed political connections variable is significantly noisier than the
self-reported political connection variable. In the specifications with controls, the observed
connections variable does not have a clear relationship with the outcome for this reason–
i.e., the point estimate is a null effect, but the wide uncertainty interval suggests the true
effect could be zero, positive or negative. Yet compared to the bivariate model, the observed
political connections variable clearly has a weaker effect on company shutdowns in models
with controls. While the self-reported variable shows a negative relationship with shutdowns
in the models with controls, the effect size is noticeably smaller. We probe this empirical
pattern later in this section to understand how the controls affect the relationship between
connections and shutdowns.
We report sample-average marginal effects for firm sector in Figure 8 and for firm profit
margin in Figure 9. The reference sector for Figure 8 is agriculture, and as such companies
in most other sectors were more likely to shut down with the exception of people working in
water (i.e. utilities) and transportation, both essential sectors. By comparison, respondents
in education and entertainment were nearly 40 percent more likely to shut down even when
accounting for political connections and other controls. This finding corresponds to our
expectation that high-contact sectors like education and entertainment were more vulnerable
to COVID-19 restrictions and thus more likely to shut down.
We show the sample average marginal effects for firm performance in Figure 9. The
baseline category for this categorical variable is a profit margin of 0-5%, i.e., companies that
were weakly profitable. These effects do not show a perfectly monotonic pattern, though it is
clear that companies that experienced greater losses in the year prior to the pandemic were

15

Figure 8: Average Marginal Effects on Shutting Down for Firm Sector (Agriculture as Reference Category)

subsequently more likely to shut down due to COVID-19 restrictions. Again, this finding
corresponds to what we might expect as companies with higher profit margins likely had
more cash on hand and were better positioned to survive a lengthy shutdown.
We now return to the finding reported earlier about the dilution of the effect of political
connections with controls. As can be seen by comparing the models without controls versus
all controls, the dilution in the effect of political connections is primarily due to the inclusion
of firm size as a control. We believe this is due to the fact that larger firms tend to be both
more politically connected in our data and are also more likely to stay open during the
pandemic. Figure 10 shows predicted COVID-19 shutdown rates by firm size taken from the
model with all controls. As can be seen, there is a very robust relationship with larger firms

16

Figure 9: Average Marginal Effects on Shutting Down for Firm Performance in Prior Year

more likely to stay open than smaller firms.
The question in interpreting this finding is whether firm size is here a confounding
variable–it can explain both political connections and resistance to COVID-19 shutdown
rates–or whether it is a so-called post-treatment variable, i.e. it is an effect of political connections. We adopt the second interpretation based on prior research about politically-connected
firms and knowledge about the countries in which we did this study (Saeed, Belghitar and
Clark 2015; Kang 2002; Faccio 2010; Khwaja and Mian 2005). Due to issues with corruption, poor governance and the difficulty companies have in obtaining necessary permits to
operate, it is very unlikely that companies in Ukraine, Egypt or Venezuela could grow to a
very large size without having political connections. As such, when we are comparing across
large firms, we are very unlikely to observe any large firms without political connections
17

Figure 10: Predicted Probability of Shutting Down by Firm Size (All Controls Model)

due to this selection effect. Large companies without any kind of political connections would
be cut apart by rivals competing for their market share and willing to exploit their own
relationships to bureaucrats to throw up obstacles to competitors (Markus 2015).
In addition, firm size independent of political connections does not appear to be a very
good explanation for why a company might not shut down. The effect on aggregate employment is largely the same for whether large or small companies are forced to close, and large
companies may have more resources to weather a shutdown than small businesses. Absent
any other reason to distinguish these companies, a policy maker would arguably prefer to pass
the burden of COVID-19 restrictions onto larger established companies and spare smaller,
more vulnerable companies. This is indeed the approach taken in the United States in its

18

Paycheck Protection Program (PPP) loans for small businesses.5 For this reason, we believe
that firm size is mediating the relationship between political connections and COVID-19
shutdown rates due to long-term selection effects in the distribution of companies.

Figure 11: Mediation Analysis for Political Connections Via Firm Size

To examine this proposed mediation relationship, we implement a mediation analysis by
fitting a model where we predict firm size with political connection scores and jointly fit
a model with firm size and political connection scores together predicting shutdown rates.
We can then use path analysis to calculate indirect, direct and total effects for political
connections given the values of coefficients in both models (Yuan and MacKinnon 2009). We
show these effects in addition to the proportion mediated, which is the ratio of indirect to
5

See https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/06/us/ppp-small-business-loans.html.

19

total effects, in Figure 11. The direct effect in this figure is the same as the marginal effect
from the model with firms controls reported in Figure 6. The indirect effect is the effect of
political connections mediated through firm size. As can be seen, the indirect effects are quite
substantial and large. They are as large as the direct effect for the self-reported score, and
even larger than the direct effect for the observed score. As a result, the total effects are quite
large for both the observed and self-reported scores. We note that the proportion mediated
for both variables is around 50 percent, though it is even higher for the observed political
connection score. It appears that firm size plays an important role in the relationship between
corporate political connections and the state. Political connections facilitate company growth
and consequently influence.
These also results suggest that the self-reported score is ultimately a better way to measure political connections of firms. Our aggregation of observed firm-state linkages is liable
to missing relationships between companies and state officials that do not fit into one of our
categories despite our efforts to capture a wide range of possibilities. The fact that the score
shows so much smaller variance suggests that it better encapsulates respondents’ knowledge of their companies’ political connections, permitting better inferences. However, once
mediation analysis is taken into account, it is very clear that both variables have a strong
association with reduced COVID-19 shutdown rates.
These results provide broad support for our hypotheses. We now turn to test Hypothesis
2: companies with more political connections are less likely to implement internal policies
mandating social distancing. We use a Bayesian linear model (OLS) with weakly informative
priors via the brms package. Tables 2 and 3 present results. As described in the data section,
we use four different variables to capture companies’ internal social distancing policies –
namely, whether employees wear face masks, maintain 2 meters distance in the workplace,
work from home, and hold no group meetings. All social distancing variables are in 3-point
Likert scale, with 3 indicating that ”all employees do this,” 2 indicating that ”some employees
do this,” and 1 indicating that ”no one does this.”

20

Table 2: Effect of Self-Reported Political Connections on Company’s Internal Social Distancing Policies
Face Mask
Predictors
Estimates
Intercept
2.65
Political Connection (Self-Reported) 0
Ukraine
-0.11
Venezuela
0.19
Observations
2497
R2 Bayes
0.036

CI (95%)
2.59 – 2.70
-0.00 – 0.01
-0.16 – -0.05
0.13 – 0.26

2 Meters
Estimates CI (95%)
2.37
2.30 – 2.44
-0.01
-0.01 – 0.00
-0.01
-0.08 – 0.05
0.22
0.14 – 0.30
2389
0.017

Work from
Estimates
1.89
-0.01
0.03
0.38
2401
0.042

Home
CI (95%)
1.82 – 1.96
-0.02 – 0.00
-0.04 – 0.09
0.30 – 0.46

No Group
Estimates
2.31
-0.02
-0.01
0.16
2408
0.013

Meetings
CI (95%)
2.24 – 2.39
-0.03 – -0.01
-0.09 – 0.07
0.07 – 0.25

Tables 2 and 3 use the self-reported measure “political connections” and the IRT scale
based on observed company-state linkages, respectively. We present simpler models just with
country fixed effects in these tables but we get similar results when we include controls used
to test Hypothesis 1 such as firm profit margin, firm size, firm sector, a conglomerate dummy,
and the type of company. Overall, results from both tables show that there is often no meaningful association between a company’s political connections and its internal social distancing
policies. While substantively there is a negative association between a company’s political
connections and four measures of internal social distancing policies, these associations are
statistically significant at 95 percent level for no group meeting policies and maintaining a
distance of 2 meters. In the latter case, the effect is only substantial for observed rather than
self-reported connections scores. In any case, the results are either negative or insubstantial.
Results from Tables 2 and 3 suggest that while politically connected firms are less likely
to comply with COVID-19 shutdown restrictions, there is no meaningful correlation between
a company’s political connections and its internal social distancing policies. When such a
relationship does exist, politically-connected companies are less likely to practice prudent
social distancing measures such as banning in-person meetings and maintaining a distance
of two meters between employees. This finding also rules out an alternative explanation to
our findings that politically-connected companies are better compliers and thus it would be
more prudent for policy-makers to let them remain open.

21

Table 3: Effect of Observed Political Connections on Company’s Internal Social Distancing
Policies
Face Mask
Predictors
Estimates CI (95%)
Intercept
2.66
2.62 – 2.70
political Connections (IRT) 0.01
-0.02 – 0.05
Ukraine
-0.1
-0.15 – -0.05
Venezuela
0.19
0.13 – 0.26
Observations
2682
R2 Bayes
0.035

2 Meters
Estimates
2.38
-0.05
-0.03
0.19
2566
0.018

Work from
CI (95%)
Estimates
2.33 – 2.43
1.86
-0.09 – -0.01 -0.01
-0.10 – 0.03 0.02
0.11 – 0.27 0.39
2566
0.018

Home
No Group
CI (95%)
Estimates
1.81 – 1.91 2.27
-0.05 – 0.03 -0.1
-0.05 – 0.08 -0.01
0.31 – 0.47 0.15
2566
0.018

Meeting
CI (95%)
2.21 – 2.33
-0.14 – -0.05
-0.09 – 0.06
0.05 – 0.24

Conclusion
We find that politically connected firms are significantly less likely to comply with
COVID-19 shutdown restrictions. As political connections are associated with firm size,
we find that the effect of connections is mediated through firm size for both of our political
connections measures. These findings imply that, first, governments with weak institutions
and high levels of corruption are less likely to effectively carry out public health measures
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Since politically connected firms leverage their
connections to escape public health restrictions, compliance with business-related measures
is likely to be low in states with corruption levels similar to that of Ukraine, Egypt and
Venezuela. Distortions and inefficiencies associated with corruption and weak institutions
thus affect the severity of natural disasters and public health crises not only by weakening
disaster-mitigation standards, but also by undermining disaster response policies.
Second, our findings suggest that COVID-19 restriction loopholes associated with political
connections are likely to contribute to market concentration in sectors with large numbers
of politically connected firms, increasing inequality more generally. Since larger firms are
more likely to be politically connected, our results show that large firms are less likely to
comply with business restrictions. If large, connected firms evade restrictions and stay open
while smaller, unconnected firms shut down, large firms may thus capture a larger share of
the market. Small and unconnected firms are more likely to be driven out of business as
they weather the costs of forced shutdown, in addition to the already existing problems of
government predation. This type of uneven enforcement of shutdown restrictions is likely
22

to contribute to increased inequality as small firms go out of business and large firms grow
larger.
These results are relevant for research on corruption, political connections, public health,
and disaster response. While most of the research on corruption and natural disasters focuses on factors that increase the destructiveness of disasters involving physical forces, such
as earthquakes or hurricanes, our findings show that corruption and weak institutions affect response to events like pandemics that do not involve direct physical destruction. More
firm-level research is needed to understand how corruption and political connections impact government disaster response. How do politically connected firms benefit from disaster recovery assistance? Do connection types matter? How do these relations vary across
types of natural events? Answers to these questions would be highly useful in understanding
government-business interactions during and in the wake of natural disasters.
Our research suggests some additional avenues for future work. Our findings imply that
inconsistencies in lockdown enforcement may lead to increased inequality and market concentration. While we are unable to test this hypothesis directly, future work ought to more
closely examine the relationship between inequality, politically connected firms and market
structure. If politically connected firms capture larger market shares through access to a
club good, such as lax enforcement of public health measures, high prevalence of politically
connected firms is likely to be associated with more monopoly and oligopoly. More research is
need to more fully understand if and how corruption affects inequality and the concentration
of capital in high-corruption states.

23

References
Adams-Prassl, Abi, Teodora Boneva, Marta Golin and Christopher Rauh. 2020. “Inequality in the Impact
of the Coronavirus Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys.” Journal of Public Economics 189:104245.
Ambraseys, Nicholas and Roger Bilham. 2011. “Corruption kills.” Nature 469(7329):153–155.
Anbarci, Nejat, Monica Escaleras and Charles A. Register. 2005. “Earthquake fatalities: the interaction of
nature and political economy.” Journal of Public Economics 89(9):1907–1933.
Atkinson, James, Allen Hicken and Nico Ravanilla. 2014. Pork and Typhoons: The Influence of Political
Connections on Disaster Response. Number ID 1911915.
URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=1911915
Bartik, Alexander W., Marianne Bertrand, Zoe Cullen, Edward L. Glaeser, Michael Luca and Christopher
Stanton. 2020. “The impact of COVID-19 on small business outcomes and expectations.” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 117(30):17656–17666.
URL: https://www.pnas.org/content/117/30/17656
Bonaccorsi, Giovanni, Francesco Pierri, Matteo Cinelli, Andrea Flori, Alessandro Galeazzi, Francesco Porcelli,
Ana Lucia Schmidt, Carlo Michele Valensise, Antonio Scala, Walter Quattrociocchi and Fabio Pammolli.
2020. “Economic and Social Consequences of Human Mobility Restrictions under COVID-19.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 117(27):15530–15535.
Brodeur, Abel, David Gray, Anik Islam and Suraiya Jabeen Bhuiyan. 2020. “A Literature Review of the
Economics of COVID-19.” IZA Institute of Labor Economics Discussion Paper Series .
URL: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract id=3636640
Bürkner, Paul-Christian. 2017. “Brms: An R Package for Bayesian Multilevel Models Using Stan.” Journal
of Statistical Software 80(1):1–28.
Carpenter, Bob, Andrew Gelman, Matthew D. Hoffman, Daniel Lee, Ben Goodrich, Michael Betancourt,
Marcus Brubaker, Jiqiang Guo, Peter Li and Allen Riddell. 2017. “Stan: A Probabilistic Programming
Language.” Journal of Statistical Software 76.
Cheng, Cindy, Joan Barcelo, Allison Spencer Hartnett, Robert Kubinec and Luca Messerschmidt. 2020.
“COVID-19 Government Response Event Dataset (CoronaNet v.1.0).” Nature Human Behavior .
Claessens, Stijn, Erik Feijen and Luc Laeven. 2008. “Political connections and preferential access to finance:
The role of campaign contributions.” Journal of financial economics 88(3):554–580.
Diwan, Ishac, Philip Keefer and Marc Schiffbauer. 2015. Pyramid Capitalism: Political Connections, Regulation, and Firm Productivity in Egypt. Policy Research Working Paper 7354 World Bank.
Escaleras, Monica, Nejat Anbarci and Charles Register. 2007. “Public sector corruption and major earthquakes: A potentially deadly interaction.” Public Choice 132(1):209–230.
Faccio, Mara. 2010. “Differences between Politically Connected and Nonconnected Firms: A Cross-Country
Analysis.” Financial Management 39(3):905–927.
Faccio, Mara, Ronald W Masulis and John J McConnell. 2006. “Political connections and corporate bailouts.”
The Journal of Finance 61(6):2597–2635.
Fisman, Raymond. 2001.
91(4):1095–1102.

“Estimating the value of political connections.” American economic review

24

Gallego, Jorge A., Mounu Prem and Juan F. Vargas. 2020. Corruption in the Times of Pandemia. SSRN
Scholarly Paper ID 3600572 Social Science Research Network Rochester, NY: .
Kang, David C. 2002. Crony Capitalism: Corruption and Development in South Korea and the Philippines.
Cambridge Studies in Comparative Politics Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Khwaja, Asim Ijaz and Atif Mian. 2005. “Do Lenders Favor Politically-Connected Firms? Rent Provision in
an Emerging Financial Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(4):1371–1411.
Markus, Stanislav. 2015. Property, Predation and Protection: Piranha Capitalism in Russia and Ukraine.
Cambridge University Press.
Saeed, Abubakr, Yacine Belghitar and Ephraim Clark. 2015. “Political Connections and Leverage: Firm-Level
Evidence from Pakistan.” Managerial and Decision Economics 36:364–383.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W Vishny. 1993. “Corruption.” The quarterly journal of economics 108(3):599–
617.
Whittaker, Charlie, Anna Frühauf, Samuel John Burthem, Rebecca Shoshanah Parry, Meghana Kotikalapudi,
Yihui Liang, Mary Moffett Barker, Parth Rohit Patel and Ilan Kelman. 2018. “A disaster diplomacy
perspective of acute public health events.” Disasters 42(S2):S173–S195.
Yuan, Ying and David P. MacKinnon. 2009.
14(4):301–322.

“Bayesian Mediation Analysis.” Psychological methods

25

