FAMILY STRUCTURE AND CONCERNS DURING
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC: A COMPUTATIONAL,
MIXED-METHOD APPROACH
Alexander Langenkamp*, Tomás Cano* & Christian S. Czymara*
*Goethe-Universitat Frankfurt am Main, Sociology, Frankfurt am
Main, Germany
Abstract
Family structure is a critical axis through which social inequality is reproduced. The COVID-19 pandemic can
exacerbate the already existing socio-economic gaps between family structures. To investigate this issue, we
analyze how experiences and concerns vary across living arrangements along two dimensions that may be
associated with social disadvantage: loneliness and care. In doing so, we employ quantitative text analysis on
open-ended questions from novel survey data on a sample of about 1,100 individuals living in Germany. We focus
our analyses on four different household structures: Living alone, shared living without children, living with a
partner and children, and single parents. We find that single parents (who are primarily single mothers) are at
the high risk of experiencing care-related worries, particularly regarding their financial situation, while
individuals living alone are most likely to report feelings of loneliness. Those living in shared houses, with or
without children, had the lowest risk of experiencing both loneliness and care-related worries. These differences
in the experiences of the COVID-19 pandemic can contribute to widening socio-economic gaps by family structure
in the upcoming years.
Zusammenfassung
Familiäre Strukturen sind zentrale Faktoren für die Reproduktion von sozialer Ungleichheit und
Widerstandfähigkeit gegen externe Schocks. Die COVID-19 Pandemie hat daher das Potential, die bereits
bestehenden sozio-ökonomischen Unterschiede zwischen Familien noch auszuweiten. Diese Arbeit
analysiert wie sich die Erfahrungen und Sorgen in den ersten Wochen der Pandemie in Deutschland

1

zwischen Haushaltstypen unterscheiden, welche sich idealtypisch hinsichtlich zweier während der
Restriktionen zentraler Dimensionen unterscheiden: Einsamkeit und Care-Arbeit. Hierzu werden offenen
Survey-Fragen mittels quantitativer Textanalyse von über 1100 in Deutschland lebenden Personen
ausgewertet. Hierbei differenziert die Analyse zwischen vier Haushaltsstrukturen: 1) alleine lebende
Personen, 2) Kohabitation ohne Kinder, 3) Partnerschaft mit Kindern und 4) allererziehende Personen.
Die Ergebnisse zeigen, dass alleinerziehende Personen (überwiegend alleinerziehende Frauen) besonders
häufig pflege- und betreuungsbezogene Sorgen haben, besonders in Zusammenspiel mit finanziellen
Sorgen. Alleine lebende Personen berichten hingegen, besonders von Einsamkeit und Isolation belastet zu
sein. Kohabitierende Haushalte (mit und ohne Kinder) berichten im Vergleich seltener von Einsamkeit oder
betreuungsbezogenen Sorgen. Diese systematischen Unterschiede des Erlebens der COVID-19 Pandemie
können als Indikator dafür gesehen, dass die Pandemie dazu beiträgt, sozioökonomische Unterscheide
zwischen Haushalten in den kommenden Jahren zu verstärken.
1.

INTRODUCTION

After the arrival of the COVID-19 crisis, living arrangements and family structure suddenly became of critical
importance for individuals’ wellbeing due to stay-at-home orders. But some types of living arrangements or family
structures might be less beneficial than others in helping individuals to cope with the negative effects of the
pandemic. For example, living alone or heading a single-parent family have been found to be at particular risk of
social disadvantage, before and during the COVID-19 pandemic (Burström and Tao 2020; Gray et al. 2020).
Therefore, documenting variations in how individuals experience the COVID-19 pandemic across different types
of living arrangements provides new insights into how family structure influences individual concerns in times of
crisis.
Studies on the social and economic impacts of the pandemic and the related countermeasures highlight
negative effects for most individuals and families across a wide range of outcomes: Declines in mental health
(Pfefferbaum and North 2020), increases in unemployment (Bauer and Weber 2020), time devoted to childcare
and housework (Möhring et al. 2020; Kreyenfeld et al. 2020), cultural capital (Jæger and Blaabæk 2020), social
trust and wellbeing (Sibley et al. 2020) or the cognitive labor of unpaid work (Czymara et al. 2020). We contribute
to this growing body of literature on COVID-19 and social inequality by exploring variations in concerns, worries
and experiences by living arrangements, focusing on Germany as a case study. Given the measures taken to control
the spread of the virus, e.g., stay-at-home orders, social isolation, studying how family structures and living
arrangements are associated with different types of experiences is of particular interest. This is because

2

understanding how the restrictions’ negative effects are unequally distributed across living arrangements is
essential to informing policy about who faces greater risks of psychological distress.
To analyze how worries, experiences and concerns linked to the COVID-19 crisis are associated with
living arrangements of individuals, we analyzed an online survey fielded at the beginning of the pandemic in
Germany (n=1,073). In this survey, we collected socio-demographic information together with an open question
where participants could describe how they were experiencing the COVID-19 pandemic in a narrative form. To
analyze these narratives, we employ quantitative network analysis of words and probabilistic topic models. The
four types of living arrangement we focus our analyses on are as follow: 1) single households, 2) parents living
with children, 3) single parents, and 4) individuals living with others, but without children, hereafter referred to as
shared living without children. Therefore, the aim of this study is to provide an empirical assessment on the
associations between four types of living arrangements and how individuals’ experiences of the COVID-19
pandemic vary across them.
The study is structured in four parts. First, we derive theoretical expectations about the relationship
between types of narratives and types of living arrangements. Secondly, we present the data and methods used in
the empirical assessment. Third, we present the results of the analyses conducted on the data collected from the
online survey. Finally, the discussion section summarizes the key insights, limitations and how the study speaks
to the current debate about how the pandemic relates to family structure, living arrangements and social inequality.

2.

COVID-19, SOCIAL DISTANCING AND THE NEW ROLE OF THE HOUSEHOLD

In March 2020, Germany introduced a variety of policies to slow the spread of the virus. These policies affected
great swaths of public life, prohibiting private gatherings and indefinitely closing many shops, restaurants and
childcare facilities (Bundesgesetzesblatt 2020; Bennhold, Katrin & Eddy 2020). In addition to these restrictions,
the countermeasures forced a large part of the labor force to relocate their working space to their own home
(Möhring et al. 2020). Therefore, the household became the central domain of social interaction and many working
families had to combine private life, work and childcare in the same space. In addition to challenges related to
harmonizing those spheres of life, many households faced issues due to the economic impact of the restrictions
and related job losses (Qian and Fan 2020). As a result, we expect our respondents to be especially concerned
about their social life, financial situation, childcare and conflicts at home. However, given the central role of the
household during the restrictions, we expect the type of living arrangements to be a key factor explaining variations

3

in concerns. Namely, the closure of childcare facilities and the restrictions of social life likely play a major role in
individual perceptions of the crisis. Thus, we expect that two aspects are core drivers of differences in worries
across groups: Whether another person lives in their household and whether children are present.
Conceptually, we distinguish groups along two corresponding dimensions: whether they have direct
responsibility for children and whether they have a higher risk of loneliness due to their living arrangement. Table
1 provides an overview of this conceptualization. Consequentially, our analysis differentiates between four groups:
1.) those living alone, who have less responsibilities for children but a higher risk of loneliness (upper left cell of
Table 1); 2.) single parents, i.e., individuals who have at least one child they have to take care of but who do not
live with their partner (upper right cell of Table 1); 3.) couples with child(ren), often regarded as the “standard
family” (lower left cell of Table 1); 4.) those who live together with another person (e.g., partner or roommate)
but do not have children (lower right cell of Table 1). We focus on these four types of living arrangements for two
reasons. First, they have the highest prevalence in contemporary Germany. Second, they provide different family
configuration types. Each of them provides distinct social, emotional and economic resources to compensate for
the plausible effects of the pandemic on individuals’ mental and physical wellbeing. Next, we review each of the
four categories in detail and derive expectations about how concerns can vary across those living arrangements
based on previous studies.

[TABLE 1]

First, we focus on single households without children. After the social distancing policies were put in
place, single household occupants were severely limited in their ability to meet family and friends. Although
epidemiologically necessary, social distancing conflicts with the human need for social interaction and intimate
social encounters (Baumeister and Leary 1995; Bavel et al. 2020). Social connections are an important emotional
resource and foster emotional stability, stress resilience and wellbeing. In contrast, decades of research highlights
that deprivation of social interactions has severe consequences for physical and mental health, including
diminished sleep quality, depression, anxiety or cardiovascular illnesses (Holt-Lunstad et al. 2015; Hawkley and
Cacioppo 2010). Consequentially, people are typically reluctant to renounce their social interactions and studies
show a surge in digital communication as well as an increase in stress symptoms during quarantine (Cellini et al.
2020). However, digital communication only partially compensates for the loss of face to face contacts (Helliwell

4

and Huang 2013; Verduyn et al. 2015). As digital communication seems insufficient to fully compensate for faceto-face contact we would expect that individuals living alone suffer from social isolation and loneliness in
particular, which is associated with a decline in mental health and an increase in symptoms of depression.
Second, we consider individuals who live with other adults and without children. This group includes a
diverse range of living arrangements such as romantic couples, roommates or intergenerational living
arrangements. While those living alone during the COVID-19 pandemic might be at a particular risk of suffering
from mental health issues linked to loneliness, shared living should protect individuals from loneliness.
Psychological literature shows that these individuals may be less psychologically affected by the COVID-19
restrictions as social relationships benefit interpersonal emotional regulation (Zaki and Craig Williams 2013;
Williams et al. 2018). Not only can cohabitants protect each other from isolation through more emotional support,
in some cases they can also compensate each other for income losses or unemployment spells. Indeed, research
has shown that especially intimate partnerships exert a positive influence on the ability to cope with personal crises
such as financial difficulties, war or illness (Benzies and Mychasiuk 2009; Pinkerton and Dolan 2007; Figley and
McCubbin 2016). In addition, cohabiting couples without children can avoid a particular source of stress during
the COVID-19 pandemic: increased levels of childcare needs due to school closures.
However, shared living can also raise stress levels that may ultimately lead to violence, a phenomenon
documented in the context of romantic relationships and families in particular (Schneider et al. 2016; Mazza et al.
2020; Kofman and Garfin 2020). For instance, social scientists have long studied the relationship between macroeconomic conditions and intimate partner violence (a classic study is Elder, 2018). Because intermittent income,
unemployment, stress and to some extent isolation are associated with an increased risk of domestic violence,
cohabiting childless couples may also experience more conflict during the COVID-19 crisis (Lucero et al. 2016;
Capaldi et al. 2012). Being “trapped” together at home without many outdoor activities may also be fruitful ground
for conflict, abuse and violence. In fact, several studies have already shown an increase in domestic violence during
lockdown conditions (Simonovic 2020; Zhang 2020). Therefore, we expect the topics covered in narratives of
individuals in cohabitation without children to be more diverse and less focused on social isolation but rather on
the positive as well as negative aspects of social life.
Third, we analyze the “standard” family, i.e., married or cohabiting couples with children. This type of
living arrangement primarily differs from the previous one by having children at home. There is clear consensus
that family stability and the “standard” family structure have a positive association with socio-economic status:
Higher income and better-educated individuals are more likely to live in this type of arrangement (Esping-

5

Andersen 2016; Esping-Andersen and Billari 2015). In light of recent findings indicating that marriage has a very
similar effect on subjective wellbeing as cohabitating with as a unmarried couple (Perelli-Harris et al. 2019), we
do not further differentiate between both groups. Because living in a standard family is skewed toward the higher
social strata, we expect group worries and concerns in this group to not be generally alarmistic about the COVID19 restrictions, as they likely have resources to compensate for the socio-economic shock ushered by the pandemic.
In addition, we also do not expect to find problems with worries of loneliness in this type of living arrangement.
Nevertheless, couples with children have a source of stress that childless couples do not have during the
pandemic: a massive increase of unpaid household labor (both childcare and housework) due to closures of schools
and day-care centers. Therefore, cohabitation with children during the pandemic entails unprecedented challenges
for these adults. Not only were schools, playgrounds and kindergartens closed, but childcare support by and even
contact with grandparents and other kinships was also limited. In addition, “standard” families, especially children
and mothers, face new challenges with limited outdoor activities and the lack of playing with friends and peers
(Huebener et al. 2020; Zinn et al. 2020). Children experience significant learning losses during school closures,
while parents devoted much more time and effort to unpaid work (Andrew et al. 2020; Czymara et al. 2020).
Likewise, potential financial struggles families might face during the crisis are more severe with increasing family
size. Thus, we expect narratives of cohabiting parents to cover worries and concerns related to childcare, work,
household conflict and financial issues in particular.
These challenges are expected to amplify for single parents who have to combine work and childcare
without the support of a partner, which is the fourth group of our analysis. While couples are potentially able to
partially offset for a partner’s loss of earnings, single parents might face severe financial problems as the sole
provider. In addition, single parents may see their time squeezed, as they face a double inability to distribute unpaid
work due to COVID-19 restrictions: they neither have a partner to contribute to unpaid work, nor can they leave
children with other relatives (mainly grandparents). Because time is constrained, single parents face important
obstacles in combining employment and care. Furthermore, roughly 90 percent of single-parent families in
Germany are female, a group that already held a disadvantaged position in the labor market before the outbreak of
the pandemic (BIB 2020; Dernberger and Pepin 2020). Single-mothers’ disadvantage on the labor market before
the outbreak of COVID-19 seems to have widened, as the current crisis is impacting feminized occupations more
than masculinized ones (Alon et al. 2020). Therefore, we expect narratives of single parents to be dominated by
reports of financial struggles, issues related to childcare and general distress.

6

3.

DATA AND METHODS

We draw upon an online survey fielded in Germany between March 27 and April 26, 2020, which were the first
weeks of the COVID-19-related restrictions, to examine personal experiences with these policies for different
living situations. We created the online questionnaire using SoSciSurvey (Leiner 2020). The data are registered at:
[BLINDED FOR REVIEW]; the underlying code is available at: [BLINDED FOR REVIEW]. The survey was
advertised in a press release by the University [BLINDED FOR REVIEW] that was shared on the Psychologie
Heute website and on official Facebook pages of German cities. Participation in the survey was voluntary and no
financial incentive was given. After a set of closed-ended questions, the participants were asked to answer an openended question about their personal experience with the COVID-19 related restrictions. This item was introduced
with: ‘Social life of many people has changed as the Corona virus spreads. Here you get the opportunity to report
your personal situation, your family life or your experience of being together in general.’ The question was
neutrally worded to avoid priming individuals to report only positive or negative narratives, and it does not hint at
our expected topics. In total, 2,274 individuals participated in the survey. Of those, 1,119 participants provided
answers to the open-ended question. After removing short, thus unusable, answers, our analysis is based on 1,073
respondents. While couples with children wrote the shortest answers (mean: 533.66), those living alone wrote with
an average length of 657.76 characters (see Table 2). For our analysis, we removed stop words and non-character
symbols from these answers, and stemmed words using Silge & Robinson (2016) and Benoit et al. (2018). For
topic models, we also removed words that occurred in more than 20 or less than 0.1 percent of all answers to
reduce dimensionality.
We are interested in differences in worries depending on people’s living arrangement. Our survey asked
respondents ‘Which of the following best fits your living situation?’ with six possible answers: ‘Living with partner
and children’ (hereafter: couples with child(ren)); ‘Living with partner’; ‘Living alone’; ‘Living without partner,
but with children’ (hereafter: single parents); ‘Living in another kind of shared apartment’; ‘None of the above
options’. Our analysis does not include those in the last category (52 observations) or with missing values (3
observations). In line with our conceptual model shown in Table 1, we combined couples without children and
those who share their apartment in another way into the category Shared living without children. Table 2 breaks
down the descriptive statistics for each of the four groups. 1

1

Note that the total numbers differ by a few cases from the n of the variables in Table 1. This is because some
variables that are not part of our statistical model (e.g., education or age) have missing values for a few respondents.
To draw upon as much information as possible, we decided against listwise deletion for those variables we show
to describe our sample.

7

[TABLE 2: Descriptive statistics]
As Table 2 shows, our survey oversamples women with higher education. In total, about 80 percent of
our final sample are women: 70 percent were between 30 and 59 years old and almost two thirds had completed
tertiary education. However, our main interest lies in comparing different types of living arrangements. Important
for this comparison, the distributions between the four types of living arrangements are mostly similar, with
roughly 75 to 80 percent being women and 62 to 68 percent having tertiary education. The only notable difference
is that woman even more strongly dominate the single parents category, as over 90 percent of single parents were
female. This outcome is in line with expectations from previous research, as women usually take care of children
after partnership dissolution (Geisler and Kreyenfeld 2019). The fact that central socio-demographics distribute
largely similarly across living arrangements is beneficial for our analysis because a given household type is not
confounded with, e.g., age. However, this study likely underreports, e.g., financial struggles, which correlate with
socio-economic status. Moreover, note that the number of observations for each group differs but is large enough
for meaningful results in every case. The number of observations ranges from 53 for single parents to 493 for
people not living alone but with children (see Table 1).
Our quantitative content analysis of the responses to the open-ended survey question is based on two
approaches: Word correlation networks and topic models.
Word networks
Word networks yield information about the connection of narratives by showing how word clusters relate to one
another. They are based on the correlations of words within each household. To this end, we calculated the pairwise
correlations of words that occurred at least 20 times in total. Below we show networks of words based on these
pairwise correlations (Silge and Robinson 2017). Figures 1 to 4 show the correlations between words, with each
line indicating a correlation larger than 0.25 and darker lines indicating stronger correlations (i.e., no line represents
a correlation below 0.25).
Topic models
We are also interested in the salience of different topics in the four household groups. Topic models are ideally
suited for this purpose (Boumans and Trilling 2016; Roberts et al. 2014). We use the structural topic model (stm)
package of Roberts et al. (2014) which defines topics as words that are more probable to appear together in a given
text (Boumans and Trilling 2016). STM calculates probability models to estimate how a pre-defined number of
topics (in this study, eight) distribute across the data. This results in two posterior probability distributions: the

8

distribution of terms within each topic (1) and the distribution of topics within each survey answer (2). The former
(1) indicates the likelihood that each term appears in a certain topic, theoretically ranging from zero (certainly does
not belong to this topic) to one (certainly belongs to this topic). The latter (2) shows the probabilities of each topic
in a given survey answer article, also potentially ranging from zero (does not appear in this answer at all) to one
(this answer consists only of this topic). The probabilities of all terms to belong to a survey answer sum up to one
and so do the probabilities of all topics to belong to an article (Boumans and Trilling 2016; Roberts et al. 2014).
The data were cleaned and analyzed separately for each group to get a clearer picture of how narratives generally
differ depending on one’s living arrangement.
Content analysis
Our data offer a rich qualitative component in form of narratives. We take advantage of these rich data to also
show exemplary answers of relevant topics to illuminate the topics’ content, separating by type of living
arrangement. These answers are taken from the most probable answers for each topic, defined by the second
probability distribution mentioned above. In other words, these are the answers that most represent a single topic.
This type of analysis allows to describe in a deeper way the most representing experiences associated with each of
the four household structures analyzed.

4.

RESULTS

Single parents
The word correlations in Figure 1 show that single parents (mainly single mothers) have several separate thematic
clusters. These clusters relate to caring for a child and worrying about health or employment. The results of the
topic models, which are shown in Table 3, confirm the importance of these issues for single parents. Most
importantly, the fourth topic of the model clearly relates to financial struggles with terms such as restrict, financial,
worries and difficulty. This topic dominates single parents, with a probability of 23.2 percent. Noticeably, none of
the other three living arrangement groups has one topic that stands out this strongly (see below).
[FIGURE 1]
[TABLE 3]
The most probable answers for the fourth topic illuminate its content. The answer with the highest probability for
this topic comes from a single mother who is between 45 and 59 years old and has medium education (secondary

9

level). She fears an existential crisis due to the COVID-19 restrictions, relating to her life as well as the life of
those for whom she cares:
“I work full time. I recently lost my second 450 Euro job because the […] is closed. Now I am scared that
I won't be able to keep my house without this side job. That would be a disaster. And I am really scared
about the future because my son-in-law and my son could also become unemployed thanks to the Corona
crisis.
The longer it lasts, the sooner I will lose my house and my children won`t be able to build a future.
Shocking. And I am very afraid for my old parents (91 and 85 years). We can only talk when one of us is
on the balcony and the other is in the courtyard. It`s absolutely terrible for all of us.” 2
However, single parents are also concerned about a lack of social interaction, as indicated by the eighth topic in
Table 3, which consists of terms such as together, meet, missing. This topic is the second most prevalent topic for
single parents, with a share of 14.9 percent. Single parents seem to struggle with the lack of social contacts, as the
two comments with the highest probability for this topic indicate. These answers come from two mothers who are
both between 30 and 44 years and have completed higher education. The first single mother is a full-time employee
and states that:
“I cannot leave the house together with my children and partner, who does not live with us… For single
parents, this 24h care work for weeks on end is an extreme burden, because all (single parents) lack a
social life.”
The second single mother, who was employed part-time at the time of the survey, says:
“As a single mom, my social life, even before the Corona crisis, consisted mainly of my contacts at work,
daycare and family life (parents and sister's family). Meeting friends, going to events, or traveling was
rarely possible for me even before.”
However, single parents are not only worried about their own social life. They are also concerned about their
children`s lack of social interactions, as the following answer from a single mother of the same age makes clear:

2

All translations were done with the free version of the neural machine translation service DeepL:
www.DeepL.com/Translator, with manual corrections in some cases to improve readability and to remove
information that could potentially reveal identities from the quoted answers.

10

“As a single parent, working from home with a child is exhausting. My child misses playing with other
children, which is really important.”
Some respondents tried to keep a more positive perspective, substituting the missing personal contact with phone
calls or online chats. For example, one single mother, who is between 45 and 59 years old, says:
"I miss personal contact, but there is always the telephone. Good friends are the best psychologists and
are always there."
The third most salient topic for single parents is the third topic of Table 3, which consists of terms such as burden,
suffer, and crisis, indicating that the situation indeed hit single parents hard. It reflects the combination of childcare
and work-related stressors and occurs in the group of single parents with a probability of 14.2 percent. Topic 3 is
illuminated by the answer of one single mother, who summarizes her worries in the following way:
“Social isolation is incredibly stressful, especially for my child. If the schools stay closed long-term, we`ll
have even more intra-family conflicts. Home schooling and a fulltime job is a double burden that is very
difficult to cope with under these circumstances. The social 'uncoupling' within my own circle of friends
is causing me to have strong mood swings and emotional stress.”
These worries are shared by a student in her twenties, who is a single mother and reports:
“The current situation is very stressful. My son cannot go to kindergarten and he is often in a bad mood
and bored. This stresses me out and I only feel irritated.”

Couples with children
In contrast to single parents, households where children live together with both parents (i.e., couples with
child(ren)) have one larger word cluster as Figure 2 shows. This cluster corresponds to organizing everyday life
with a child (playing together, going shopping, meeting as well as missing friends). However, they also talk about
financial worries or working from home.
[FIGURE 2]
[TABLE 4]
The topic models, shown in Table 4, confirm that couples with child(ren) mostly addressed childcare and familyrelated issues. In contrast to single parents, the distribution of topics for couples with child(ren) is more equal,

11

with every topic occurring with a probability of around 10 to 15 percent, while the three most prevalent topics
(topics 3, 4 and 5) all have a probability of about 15 percent. Topic 4 of Table 4 relates more to the general handling
of family-related duties, including negative (crisis, worry, burden) as well as more neutral to positive (together,
spending time) aspects of childcare. Examining the answers with the highest probabilities of this topic tends to
show a rather positive picture in this group. One answer is by a mother aged 30 to 44 and with a university degree,
who replied:
“The crisis became an opportunity to restructure family life. My husband's employer expanded their work
from home options so that we could set up a joint plan to care for of our children together. Now that the
kids aren`t going to school, which forced us to wake up early in the morning, we have been able to find
our own daily routine. The children sleep in and eat breakfast in peace and quiet before starting on their
homework. We can support them and answer their questions, while they get a new perspective on their
assignments. We eat every meal together, talk and discuss things in peace. In the evening, the children
are allowed to play together for a while (according to their rhythm). This has brought us closer together
as a family because many external factors have disappeared and we cannot escape from real life by going
on vacation. We personally would welcome working from home on a permanent basis.”
A father from the same age group reports a similar situation:
“Losing my job resulted, so to speak, in a kind of "forced vacation", so to speak, which has been positive,
however. I have more time for family (i.e. wife and child), housework, gardening, relaxation, walks and
for visiting one family friend (exclusive arrangement to meet privately only with one another and
otherwise to keep the contact ban).”
A functional family might even increase resilience to the personal and social consequences of the pandemic-related
restrictions. A self-employed father with higher education, aged 30 to 44 reports:
“Living with the family (my partner and her son) has a stabilizing function. I don't notice any loneliness
or isolation in everyday life. Rather, in this close circle, all of the demands can be stressful and there is
little time left for oneself. Nevertheless: We support one another and brighten up each other’s days.”
However, the situation was not exclusively positive for couples with children. This is shown by topic five in Table
4, which deals with family related concerns, indicated by terms like worry, parents, or missing. An exemplary
response from this topic is from a mother in the 45 to 59 age range, who is employed part-time and has a university
degree and a child in adolescence. She says:

12

“It is an emotional challenge sitting stuck in one's own home and working, with a teenager, who is being
digitally educated for the first time and who has to be forced to get fresh air, and simultaneously worrying
about my old and sometimes very sick parents. I'm almost certain that my 88-year-old father with
dementia will not recognize me if I'm allowed to visit him in the nursing home again at some point. Apart
from work and emotional processing, I feel like I am mainly occupied with food: Planning who wants to
eat what and when, when to go shopping (also for the needy elderly with special preferences), unpacking
the groceries from my bulk purchase, answering the question what we`ll be to eat, preparing meals,
eating, clearing up and washing up... it's a bit like the Stone Age.”
In contrast to single parents, however, couples with children seem less worried about their financial situation. This
is indicated by the fact that none of the topics identified by our topic model relates to materialistic worries or
financial struggles.

Living alone
Respondents living alone have one big word network that deals primarily with social contacts (keeping distance,
missing contacts, calling and/or visiting friends and/or family), as shown in Figure 3. This indicates the importance
of social isolation and loneliness for this group.
[FIGURE 3]
[TABLE 5]
The results of the topic models confirm that those living alone were mostly concerned about missing anything
social. This is reflected by several topics that occur in this group (see Table 5). Examples are topics 5 and 6, which
seem to relate to loneliness (topic 5: missing, alone) or social distancing (topic 6: restrict, call). Similarly, topic 7
relates to social life with terms such as meeting and alone. The three topics 5, 6 and 7 together make up about 42
percent of answers of those living alone, each occurring with about the same frequency. Topics 5 and 6 are
particularly relevant because they are what one would expect based on this group’s living situation. Noticeably,
the answers that fall under these topics are mostly from the elderly. A retired woman over 60 reports her severe
personal and psychological struggles from isolated living during the pandemic:
“My social contacts have been cut off due to choir and rehabilitation sport being cancelled. I have no
contact with this group of people via e-mail, telephone or circulars, and I don't dare to call anyone to just

13

chat. Neighbors are becoming more important. Sometimes it seems to me that the ban on external contact
has also led to an inner distancing. As a person with post-traumatic stress disorder, the situation
reinforces my generalized anxiety disorder. Right now, I can’t see my therapist. I would like for mentally
ill people to receive more care, such as a free therapy session by phone once a week. After [removed]’s
suicide, I called the pastoral care by phone on Sunday to rediscover my balance. Right now, I don’t want
to burden my friends with this.”
Another woman over 60 reports similar concerns, but also points to the possibilities of online communication:
“I am sad that I cannot see my family (children, grandchildren) at Easter, which is what I miss most. On
the other hand, I am glad that the Internet lets us see each other via regular video calls. I miss getting
together with friends, sitting in the cafe in the sun”
However, it is not just the elderly who face these problems. A man in his twenties reports:
“Personally, the current contact block is a major obstacle. I live alone and my partner lives further away.
The crisis has limited how often we see each other, especially since we are dependent on the train and we
want to use public transport as little as possible right now. I am also an active volunteer in a youth and
sports club, but all work is currently suspended there. Currently, life mainly consists of working from
home and the balance is missing, especially with a small apartment.”
A young student, who just started her bachelor’s degree, puts it rather bluntly:
“I'm super bored and I'd like to do something with friends, since it's my first real semester break. Plus,
I'm afraid I won't be able to start my semester abroad in Australia, which is supposed to start in July.”

Shared living without children
Similarly to single parents, those in shared living without children also address several distinct issues, as Figure 4
shows. These issues include the use of online media and telephone as a substitute for social contacts, or going out
for shopping or a walk.
[FIGURE 4]
[TABLE 6]

14

The topic models, shown in Table 6, reveal that those who share living without children were most concerned
about mundane issues such as missing sports or other free time activities (see Table 6). This is indicated by the
dominance of topic 5, which contains leisure related words such as sport or call. With a probability of 18.1 percent,
this topic stands out for those who share living without children. It is the dominating topic of 93 of the 493
respondents who are in shared living without children. The response of a woman in her twenties, who is living
with her parents, exemplifies this well:
“Personally, I really miss my regular hobby appointments. I play an instrument in two orchestras and
exercise twice a week. I also recently started lessons to get my motorcycle driver’s license together with
my brother. I really miss the regular schedule of activities. And there is so much free time on weekends.
This is completely unfamiliar. Of course, you’re happy when your weekend is completely free, but
normally I am also happy to have something to do. I also miss getting together with my friends. Instead,
we talk a lot on Skype. Still, I would like to go out to a restaurant, a bar, a cinema, a club etc. again. I
really hope that this is over soon. Plus, it’s exhausting that there is nothing else to talk about.”
However, there might even be a positive side of the restrictions caused by COVID-19 for those without children
yet not living alone, which is described by another woman of a similar age who seems quite optimistic:
“Due to the initial restrictions (no more commuting for two hours every day, no more evening activities)
I have plenty of time at home, which I have wanted for years. Now I can have it without missing anything
outside, since nothing is happening anyway. But I can pursue all of my hobbies without worries (student
and secure job, which can be easily done from home): reading, meditating, writing, playing computer,
yoga etc.”
While not all topics for those without children are positive, they, unsurprisingly, do not address childcare-related
problems. Moreover, financial worries also were less important in this group, with no topic occurring around such
a theme.

5.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

In this study we have analyzed the role of living arrangements on how individuals experienced the first weeks of
the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany. To do so we used topic modeling on narratives collected through an open
question of an online survey. This is a topic of key relevance for social stratification research because it is well-

15

known that different forms of family structures, like single-parent or two-parent families, are associated with
penalties and premiums, respectively, across several life’s outcomes. Yet, how living arrangements are associated
with experiencing the COVID-19 pandemic is still an under-researched topic. Therefore, with this study we
empirically contribute to the relevant current academic debate on the relationship between family structure and
social inequality, by showing under what conditions individuals are most concerned during the pandemic.
Our results show that narratives differ substantially in the topics they cover and their variability,
depending on the type of living arrangement. Those who live alone and couples with children seem to focus on a
few dominant topics (i.e., isolation and childcare), while single parents are most concerned about financial worries.
Adults living with others but without children are most likely to write about leisure activities. Hence, individuals
in shared living arrangements without children seem to cope best with the crisis and tend to report concerns that
could be regarded as more trivial. Interestingly, this group frequently reports positive and negative aspects of the
situation. Especially parents seem to struggle during the social restriction period due to issues related to childcare,
finances and the absence of a social support network. Finally, individuals living alone are mostly concerned with
their social isolation. While this topic is present in all four groups, it is most salient for the group of single
households.
Our study highlights that individual experiences varied greatly during the first weeks of the COVID-19
pandemic in Germany depending on individual living arrangements and how their families were structured. In line
with our expectations, depending on their living arrangement individuals are unequally susceptible to negative
social consequences of the pandemic. While those living alone are mostly at risk to suffer from social isolation
parents face issues related to childcare and finances, which is most pronounced for single parents who are usually
women. In contrast, those in shared living accommodation without kids seem to be mostly concerned with changes
in their leisure time and are coping best with the crisis. These results are evidence that cohabitation can increase
peoples’ resilience and wellbeing compared to individuals who live alone. However, the lack of childcare facilities
and social support networks can cause severe issues for parents during the crisis, especially for single parents. On
a practical level, our results imply that social policies should be specifically designed to help vulnerable groups
with their specific needs.
While we are confident that our study provides valuable insights, the results have some limitations. These
point towards potential avenues for methodological refinement and further scholarly inquiry. First, as the sample
is not representative of the entire German population and it oversamples young, highly educated respondents, we
expect that financial struggles and health concerns are considerably stronger among the elderly and less educated.

16

However, we believe this is a first important step in research analyzing the relationship between family structure
and experiences of the pandemic. Future studies might want to replicate our findings using nationally
representative data and observe if our conclusions change. Given that our sample is slightly biased towards upperclass, younger individuals, we expect results coming from representative data to find even stronger associations
that those reported in this study. This assumption is in line with representative data gathered during the first weeks
of the pandemic in Germany (Naumann et al. 2020). Second, in the household category of “shared living without
children” we are unable to distinguish between those individuals that were sharing a house with flat-mates (e.g.,
university students), those living in inter-generational households (e.g., grandparents and a grandchild) or those
who are couples, cohabiting or married, without children. This limitation means that in this category we have a
mix of family structures and living arrangements. However, even though we are not strictly comparing concerns
across family structures per se, we are confident that our results highlight important insights on how different types
of household structures might compensate for the negative effects of the pandemic. Future studies should carefully
distinguish types of households, living arraignments and family structures, and possible observe how coping
mechanisms and experiences vary across these dimensions. Third, we only captured the early stages of the
pandemic in Germany. Therefore, we cannot draw any conclusions about whether the results will change over the
course of the pandemic. We speculate, however, that the critical differences by family structure and living
arrangements we found in our study are likely to be even stronger the longer the pandemic’s restrictions are into
place. Our fieldwork was conducted in Germany when the country was among those hit the least by COVID-19 in
terms of both infections and restrictions. By the end of 2020, however, Germany flipped to be among the countries
with the highest rates of infections worldwide and, although not with a lockdown of the strictest type, regulations
were severely constraining every-day life and work for long periods. The evolution of such a crisis calls for new
research examining the long-term consequences of the pandemic by family structure. Furthermore, we only
differentiate between traditional household structures (i.e., single households, single parents, families with children
and shared living without children), which might ignore the growing diversity of families and household structures,
like same-sex couples, for instance. Moreover, an international perspective on how concerns vary between welfare
states is a promising field of investigation. Different contexts provide different resources for households and
families. For example, while shared physical custody is the norm in Scandinavia, this represents a rare resource in
our case study, Germany. Such difference is key to understand variations in concerns within a family structure
(i.e., single-parent families) between countries. Therefore, we expect some welfare states to provide greater
compensatory resources for those most concerned, like single-parent families. Ultimately, this would lead to the

17

hypothesis that in socio-democratic welfare states differences in concerns by family structure or living
arrangements will be smaller than the differences found in a conservative-type welfare state like Germany.
While we acknowledge these limitations, we are confident that our study provides important insights into
the research question at hand. The primary goal of our study lies in describing how individuals felt in the beginning
of the COVID-19 restrictions in Germany, differentiated by an important characteristic: their personal living
arrangement. This does not imply that living arrangements are the single cause of a certain phenomenon, such as
loneliness or financial hardship. Estimating such causal effects is usually limited to analyzing single, closed survey
items. In contrast, we analyze detailed, open answers of respondents that do not force people into a one dimensional
and pre-defined scale. Future studies might want to dig even deeper into how narratives of the pandemic vary
across family structures. Using techniques like in-depth interviews or focus groups should bring additional insights
into how different household configurations are associated with discourses, perceptions and possible family
strategies to cope with the consequences of the pandemic. However, such qualitative studies would unlikely be
able to cover the large number, and thereby variation, of individuals our data encompass.
In the broader picture, our study adds to growing body of studies that highlight how the COVID-19
pandemic fosters social inequality. In light of the issues that some respondents reported with childcare, our study
confirms that potential gender inequalities need special attention (Möhring et al. 2020; Kreyenfeld et al. 2020).
This concerns single parents, a group predominantly consisting of mothers. Furthermore, our study provides
insights into the issue of social isolation and loneliness. Given that initial empirical evidence confirms that
loneliness has surged during the pandemic, as have the manifold mental health issues associated with loneliness,
our study offers multiple insights into which living conditions prevent or foster loneliness during social restrictions
(Killgore et al. 2020).
The narrative analysis provides empirical evidence that private living arrangements are an important
factor in how respondents cope with the crisis and what central concerns they experience. Given that the pandemic
seems to burden already vulnerable social groups (i.e., the mostly female single parents), our study provides
additional evidence that social policies have to support these social groups in need even more.

18

6.

REFERENCES

Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michèle Tertilt. 2020. This time it’s different: The
role of women’s employment in a pandemic recession. NBER Working Paper Series No. 27660.
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27660.
Andrew, Alison et al. 2020. The gendered division of paid and domestic work under lockdown. Covid
Economics, Vetted and Real-Time Papers.
Bauer, Anja, and Enzo Weber. 2020. The Unemployment Impact of the COVID-19 Shutdown Measures in
Germany. Iab-Discussion Paper. https://doi.org/10.1080/13504851.2020.1789544.
Baumeister, Roy F., and Mark R. Leary. 1995. The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments as a
Fundamental Human Motivation. Psychological Bulletin. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.117.3.497.
Bavel, Jay J.Van et al. 2020. Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response.
Nature Human Behaviour. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z.
Bennhold, Katrin & Eddy, Melissa. 2020. Germany bans groups of more than 2 to stop coronavirus as merkel
self-isolates. The New York Times https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/world/europe/germanycoronavirus-budget.html.
Benoit, Kenneth et al. 2018. quanteda: An R package for the quantitative analysis of textual data. Journal of
Open Source Software. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00774.
Benzies, Karen, and Richelle Mychasiuk. 2009. Fostering family resiliency: A review of the key protective
factors. Child and Family Social Work. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2206.2008.00586.x.
BIB. 2020. Alleinerziehende mit minderjährigen Kindern nach Geschlecht und ihr Anteil an den Familien
insgesamt in Deutschland (1996-2018). https://www.bib.bund.de/Permalink.html?id=10308622.
Boumans, Jelle W., and Damian Trilling. 2016. Taking stock of the toolkit: An overview of relevant automated
content analysis approaches and techniques for digital journalism scholars. Digital Journalism.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21670811.2015.1096598.
Bundesgesetzesblatt. 2020. Gesetz zum Schutz der Bevölkerung bei einer epidemischen Lage von nationaler
Tragweite. Bundesanzeiger Verlag Teil 1 Nr1.
Burström, Bo, and Wenjing Tao. 2020. Social determinants of health and inequalities in COVID-19. European
journal of public health. https://doi.org/10.1093/eurpub/ckaa095.
Capaldi, Deborah M., Naomi B. Knoble, Joann Wu Shortt, and Hyoun K. Kim. 2012. A Systematic Review of
Risk Factors for Intimate Partner Violence. Partner Abuse. https://doi.org/10.1891/1946-6560.3.2.231.
Cellini, Nicola, Natale Canale, Giovanna Mioni, and Sebastiano Costa. 2020. Changes in sleep pattern, sense of
time and digital media use during COVID-19 lockdown in Italy. Journal of Sleep Research.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jsr.13074.
Czymara, Christian.S., Alexander. Langenkamp, and Tomas. Cano. 2020. Cause for concerns: gender inequality
in experiencing the COVID-19 lockdown in Germany. European Societies.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14616696.2020.1808692.
Dernberger, Brittany N., and Joanna R. Pepin. 2020. Gender flexibility, but not equality: Young adults’ division
of labor preferences. Sociological Science. https://doi.org/10.15195/v7.a2.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta. 2016. Families in the 21st Century. Stockholm, Sweden: SNS förlag.
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta, and Francesco C. Billari. 2015. Re-theorizing Family Demographics. Population and
Development Review. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2015.00024.x.
Figley, Charles R., and Hamilton I. McCubbin. 2016. Stress and the family: Volume II: Coping with catastrophe.
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315791814.
Geisler, Esther, and Michaela Kreyenfeld. 2019. Why do lone mothers fare worse than lone fathers? Lone
parenthood and welfare benefit receipt in Germany. Comparative Population Studies.
https://doi.org/10.12765/CPoS-2019-09en.

19

Gray, Darrell M., Adjoa Anyane-Yeboa, Sophie Balzora, Rachel B. Issaka, and Folasade P. May. 2020. COVID19 and the other pandemic: populations made vulnerable by systemic inequity. Nature Reviews
Gastroenterology and Hepatology. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41575-020-0330-8.
Hawkley, Louise C., and John T. Cacioppo. 2010. Loneliness matters: A theoretical and empirical review of
consequences and mechanisms. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-010-92108.
Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Huang. 2013. Comparing the Happiness Effects of Real and On-Line Friends.
PLoS ONE. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0072754.
Holt-Lunstad, Julianne, Timothy B. Smith, Mark Baker, Tyler Harris, and David Stephenson. 2015. Loneliness
and Social Isolation as Risk Factors for Mortality: A Meta-Analytic Review. Perspectives on
Psychological Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691614568352.
Huebener, Mathias, Sevrin Waights, C. Katharina Spiess, Nico A. Siegel, and Gert G. Wagner. 2020. Parental
well-being in times of Covid-19 in Germany. SOEPpapers. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11150-020-09529-.
Jæger, Mads Meier, and Ea Hoppe Blaabæk. 2020. Inequality in learning opportunities during Covid-19:
Evidence from library takeout. Research in Social Stratification and Mobility.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2020.100524.
Killgore, William D.S., Sara A. Cloonan, Emily C. Taylor, and Natalie S. Dailey. 2020. Loneliness: A signature
mental health concern in the era of COVID-19. Psychiatry Research.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113117.
Kofman, Yasmin B., and Dana Rose Garfin. 2020. Home Is Not Always a Haven: The Domestic Violence Crisis
Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1037/tra0000866.
Kreyenfeld, Michaela et al. 2020. Coronavirus & Care: How the Coronavirus Crisis Affected Fathers’
Involvement in Germany. SOEPpapers.
Leiner, Dominik J. 2020. SoSci Survey. https://www.soscisurvey.de.
Lucero, Jessica L., Sojung Lim, and Anna Maria Santiago. 2016. Changes in Economic Hardship and Intimate
Partner Violence: A Family Stress Framework. Journal of Family and Economic Issues.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10834-016-9488-1.
Mazza, Marianna, Giuseppe Marano, Carlo Lai, Luigi Janiri, and Gabriele Sani. 2020. Danger in danger:
Interpersonal violence during COVID-19 quarantine. Psychiatry Research.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2020.113046.
Möhring, Katja et al. 2020. The COVID-19 pandemic and subjective well-being : longitudinal evidence on
satisfaction with work and family. European Societies 0: 1–17.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14616696.2020.1833066.
Naumann, Elias et al. 2020. COVID-19 policies in Germany and their social, political, and psychological
consequences. European Policy Analysis. https://doi.org/10.1002/epa2.1091.
Perelli-Harris, Brienna, Stefanie Hoherz, Trude Lappegård, and Ann Evans. 2019. Mind the “Happiness” Gap:
The Relationship Between Cohabitation, Marriage, and Subjective Well-being in the United Kingdom,
Australia, Germany, and Norway. Demography. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-019-00792-4.
Pfefferbaum, Betty, and Carol S. North. 2020. Mental Health and the Covid-19 Pandemic. The New England
journal of medicine. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2008017.
Pinkerton, John, and Pat Dolan. 2007. Family support, social capital, resilience and adolescent coping. Child and
Family Social Work. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2206.2007.00497.x.
Qian, Yue, and Wen Fan. 2020. Who loses income during the COVID-19 outbreak? Evidence from China.
Research in Social Stratification and Mobility. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2020.100522.
Roberts, Margaret E. et al. 2014. Structural topic models for open-ended survey responses. American Journal of
Political Science. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps.12103.
Schneider, Daniel, Kristen Harknett, and Sara McLanahan. 2016. Intimate Partner Violence in the Great

20

Recession. Demography. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-016-0462-1.
Sibley, Chris G. et al. 2020. Effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and nationwide lockdown on trust, attitudes
toward government, and well-being. American Psychologist. https://doi.org/10.1037/amp0000662.
Silge, Julia, and David Robinson. 2017. Text Mining with R: A Tidy Approach. 1st ed. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly
Media, Inc.
Silge, Julia, and David Robinson. 2016. tidytext: Text Mining and Analysis Using Tidy Data Principles in R. The
Journal of Open Source Software. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00037.
Simonovic, Dubravka. 2020. States Must Combat Domestic Violence in the Context of COVID-19 Lockdowns UN Rights Expert. United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Geneva.
https://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=25749 (Accessed: 16. Oct.
2020).
Verduyn, Philippe et al. 2015. Passive facebook usage undermines affective well-being: Experimental and
longitudinal evidence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000057.
Williams, W. Craig, Sylvia A. Morelli, Desmond C. Ong, and Jamil Zaki. 2018. Interpersonal emotion
regulation: Implications for affiliation, perceived support, relationships, and well-being. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. https://doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000132.
Zaki, Jamil, and W. Craig Williams. 2013. Interpersonal emotion regulation. Emotion.
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0033839.
Zhang, Hongwei. 2020. The Influence of the Ongoing COVID-19 Pandemic on Family Violence in China.
Journal of Family Violence. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10896-020-00196-8.
Zinn, S., M Bayer, and . 2020. Subjektive Belastung der Eltern durch Schulschließungen zu Zeiten des Coronabedingten Lockdowns . SOEPpapers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data Research.
https://www.diw.de/documents/publikationen/73/diw_01.c.794185.de/diw_sp1097.pdf.

21

Table 1: Types of living arrangements

Higher

Living alone

Single parents

Lower

Risk of loneliness

Responsibility for children
Lower
Higher

Shared living without
children

Couples with child(ren)

22

Table 2: Descriptive statistics
Variable

N

Couples with
child(ren)
(n=328)
533.66

Living
alone
(n=199)
657.76

Shared living without
children (n=493)

1,073

Single
parents
(n=53)
623.60

Length of response (in
characters)
Gender
Men
Woman
Other
Age

224
841
6

9.43%
90.57%
0.0%

19.10%
80.04%
0.5%

19.82%
79.88%
0.3%

23.63%
75.56%
0.81%

0-17
18-29
30-44
45-59
60-74
Education
Primary level or less
Secondary level
Tertiary level
Financial satisfaction
Not satisfied
Rather unsatisfied
Rather satisfied
Satisfied

5
240
351
320
147

1.89%
5.66%
28.3%
56.6%
7.55%

0%
3.38%
55.38%
37.23%
4%

0.51%
21.83%
23.35%
30.96%
23.35%

0.61%
37.5%
22.54%
22.13%
17.21%

22
355
685

1.89%
43.4%
54.72%

0.92%
31.08%
68%

2.04%
31.12%
66.84%

2.87%
34.84%
62.3%

30
132
605
285

3.85%
17.31%
65.38%
31.46

1.55%
9.01%
58.39%
31.06%

3.13%
20.31%
54.69%
21.88%

3.5%
11.32%
57.2%
27.98%

526.65

23

Table 3: Topics of single parents (n=53)
Topic 1
live
enjoy
positive
see
important
possible
air

Topic 2
care
special
entertain
look after
get
difficult
grown-up

Topic 3
burden
feel
suffer
people
job
grown-up
crisis

Topic 4
Topic 5
Topic 6
restrict
feel
live
financial hope
week
since
find
healthy
son
fast
son
worries
see
sick
difficult
office
mas
healthy
home
important

Topic 7
Topic 8
find
together
school
shopping
shopping
phone
difficult
meet
help
keep
alone
missing
climb
part

24

Table 4: Topics of couples with child(ren) (n=328)
Topic 1
important
current
daughter
house
high-risk
group
school
hope

Topic 2
house
parents
social
suffer

Topic 3
house
person
home office
garden

Topic 4
together
crisis
person
worry

Topic 5
worry
shopping
parents
missing

Topic 6
see
home
corona
family member

Topic 7
strong
crisis
worry
home office

Topic 8
school
find
house
try

we
keep
shopping

enjoy
meet
week

childcare
spend time
burden

home office
find
do

alone
social
land

changed
everyday life
evening

possible
keep
visit

25

Table 5: Topics of those living alone (n=199)
Topic 1
find
restrict
corona
job
week
keep
home office

Topic 2
see
find
alone
fear
shopping
worry
corona

Topic 3
parents
fear
economy
worry
crisis
meet
hope

Topic 4
daughter
son
live
house
do
worry
visit

Topic 5
missing
shopping
crisis
phone
alone
inside
due to

Topic 6
together
restrict
house
home office
call
difficult
missing

Topic 7
meet
shopping
child
alone
find
see
financial

Topic 8
week
meet
keep
feel
see
most
bad

26

Table 6: Topics of those in shared living without children (n=493)
Topic 1
Topic 2
Topic 3
Topic 4
Topic 5
worry
child
social
mother
week
social
shopping
current
house
miss
changed
week
stop
shopping
sport
find
aware
corona
fear
home office
positive
parents
find
daily
call
before
public
safe
out
house
together
space
burden
go
keep

Topic 6
crisis
stop
positive
behave
meet
parents
heavy

Topic 7
house
partner
strong
corona
worry
fear
meet

Topic 8
restrict
worry
social
keep
see
home
office

27

Figure 1: Word correlation for single parents

28

Figure 2: Word correlation for couples with children

29

Figure 3: Word correlation for those living alone

30

Figure 4: Word correlation for those in shared living without children

31

