Calling in “Sick”: COVID-19, Opportunism, Pretext, and Subnational Democracy
Matthew Stenberg, Philip Rocco, and Safia Abukar Farole
April 6, 2021
As governments sought to manage the Coronavirus pandemic, many pursed a temporary
increase in centralized authority, a general tactic of crisis management. However, in some
countries, centralization in the name of public health was not the only motive. The
COVID-19 response coincided with broader worldwide trends towards democratic
backsliding and authoritarian consolidation. Some of these efforts happened while the
world was preoccupied with responding to the pandemic without concretely referencing
Coronavirus; however, in other cases, public health rationales are clearly and explicitly
invoked as a pretext for actions that instead aid the consolidation of regime authority.
This has been especially pernicious in subnational democracy, where efforts have been
made to undermine the ability of opposition parties to fairly contest in local and regional
politics. This paper looks at four cases in which political actors either opportunistically
used worldwide distraction from the COVID-19 pandemic or explicitly invoked public
health while seeking to undermine long-term domestic contestation in their jurisdictions:
Hong Kong, Hungary, Uganda, and the United States. We examine the use of public
health as a pretext for undermining opposition parties, recentralizing political authority in
dominant actors, and inhibiting the fair contestation of elections.

We would like to thank Kai Yui Samuel Chan, Laura Jakli, and Todd LaPorte for helpful comments.

Introduction
Organizational theory posits that even in the most horizontal organizations, a crisis will
centralize decision-making in the hands of a small group of leaders – even if this may
have some drawbacks (Hermann 1963; Holsti 1972; ’T Hart, Rosenthal, and Kouzmin
1993). States are no different, and we see even liberal, constitutional democracies
centralize in response to crises and emergencies (Lazar 2009). States may enact
temporary measures to resolve a crisis (Drabek 2012), which would otherwise be seen as
unacceptable to its citizens (Annas 2002; Davis and Silver 2004). Crisis can lead to new
powers for governments that endure beyond the resolution of the event itself.
The coronavirus pandemic, as a (hopefully) once in a century event, has been no different.
Indeed, the COVID-19 pandemic is one where some greater centralization of authority
seems necessary. Yet as necessary as many of these public health measures have been to
reduce the spread of the virus, in other cases the pandemic has led leaders to
opportunistically consolidate authority. In some cases, Coronavirus has been explicitly
invoked as a rationale for this accrual of power, as in the case of the ability to rule by
decree given to leaders in Ghana and Hungary (Addadzi-Koom 2020; Guasti 2020). In
other cases, like the imposition of the controversial National Security Law in Hong Kong
(Propper 2020) and moves against LGBTQ+ people in Poland (de Zavala et al. 2020),
COVID-19 was not invoked; however, national governments took advantage of the
situation to push through policies and reforms that would otherwise be staunchly opposed
by other countries, were their leaders not to be distracted by the immediate concerns of
stemming the spread of a life-threatening disease.
Scholars have rightly called attention to the significant impacts that measures taken to
reduce the spread of the coronavirus have had on democracy. They have resulted in
restrictions on the media, curtailments of the right to assembly, and the postponement of
elections – and many of these actions are temporary have been taken by governments
without an inclination towards democratic backsliding (Maerz et al. 2020). However, in
other cases where autocratization has been moving forward, there are likely to be
significant long-term impacts to democratic governance (Rapeli and Saikkonen 2020).
And while the impacts on the national level have garnered significant attention, COVID19 will also have significant long-term impacts on subnational democracy in countries
where we have seen autocratization, even from measures stated to be in the interest of
public health during a time of crisis. These changes will reduce the possibilities for the
opposition to fairly contest elections, to effectively govern, and to exercise oversight.
In this paper we identify two concrete mechanisms through which the Coronavirus
pandemic has furthered subnational democratic backsliding: opportunism and pretext.
First, building on the literature about crisis response and democratic backsliding, we
argue that autocratizing regimes have opportunistically using global community’s
distraction during the pandemic to push forth undemocratic reforms, while in other cases
public health concerns were used as a pretext to undermine the fair contestation of
subnational democracy. We then empirically examine our conceptualization in four
comparative cases, where we have seen governments take actions that will have long
term impacts on subnational democracy that were explicitly justified by public health

concerns: Hong Kong (China), Hungary, Uganda, and the United States. While several of
these cases also have undermined democratic governance at the national level, we
especially focus on subnational democracy, which is equally important for long-term
health of democratic societies but often neglected by the literature. Finally, we conclude.
Subnational Democratic Backsliding and COVID-19
As has been widely observed, over the past twenty years we have seen worldwide trends
towards autocratization and democratic backsliding (Lührmann and Lindberg 2019).
Autocratization is a more encompassing term, which also accounts for the hardening of
authoritarian and hybrid regimes in addition to backsliding democracies. Autocratization
often manifests as undermining judicial independence, restricting media freedom,
limiting the ability of the opposition to fairly contest elections, and weakening the
informal norms governing free societies (Bermeo 2016; Levitsky and Ziblatt 2018;
Curato and Fossati 2020). Such processes are often gradual erosions (Lührmann and
Lindberg 2019; Jakli and Stenberg 2020), with the true damage coming from the
accumulation of myriad smaller anti-democratic policies. While these are widely
discussed in the context of national politics and control of the national executive,
subnational tiers of government are also subject to autocratization and are crucial for a
backsliding regime to maintain its authority.
Subnational politics matter to autocratizing governments for both policy and political
reasons. In terms of policy, the past thirty years have resulted in significant political,
administrative, and fiscal decentralization, which has been promoted as a major
component of successful democratization (Blair 1998; Manor 1999; Grindle 2007; United
Cities and Local Governments 2009; Faguet 2014). Substantive policy making occurs in
subnational jurisdictions (Trounstine 2009; Hooghe et al. 2016). Subnational jurisdictions
are perhaps even more important in a pandemic, where geographic spread of the disease
is territorially uneven, and local and regional governments must dictate a substantial
amount of the public health response (OECD 2020). Subnational jurisdictions are often
responsible for implementing policy in many areas (public health, policing, public goods
provision) essential for pandemic response (Iverson and Barbier 2020; Rocco, Béland,
and Waddan 2020). Some national governments have also sought to shift blame to
subnational tiers of government (Smyth et al. 2020). As Greer et al. (2020) note, many
national governments pushed responsibilities onto regional and local governments by
minimizing or abdicating their own roles. The increasing complexity in
intergovernmental relations is an important background factor that shapes how the innate
centralizing, anti-democratic tendencies of crisis response will ultimately impact local
democracy.
Beyond their intrinsic importance as an area of policymaking and implementation,
subnational governments are politically valuable to backsliding regimes. They often
provide a proving ground for the actors trying to prevent a ruling party from pursuing an
anti-democratic agenda. Opposition parties can demonstrate their competence, helping
them to gain the credibility needed to compete against dominant parties (Lucardi 2016;
Farole 2020). Subnational politicians – for both the ruling party and opposition – often
pursue higher office, making it an important for training a pipeline of future political

talent to control (Scheiner 1999; Papp 2018; Cirone, Cox, and Fiva 2020). Subnational
governing units can also be crucial for resource distribution, to reward supporters and
maintain long-term political control (Stenberg 2018). Oftentimes reforms made to
undermine democracy in subnational politics get less attention, allowing anti-democratic
regimes the chance to solidify control at less cost (Jakli and Stenberg 2020). In all of
these cases, controlling subnational governments is crucial to ensuring the long-term
stability.
Given that 1) autocratizing and backsliding regimes often seek to centralize authority in
the executive and remove the fair contestation of politics, and 2) centralizing authority in
the executive is often seen as good practice for responding to crisis, crises are rife with
possibilities for abuse by governments wanting to limit the capacity of their opposition.
External crises and emergencies, therefore, create a structural opportunity to push
backsliding forward. The need to respond to rapidly developing situations coherently,
quickly, and authoritatively often leads to the centralization of authority – especially in
the executive. This can therefore aid in long-term efforts to recentralize authority in
national states in ways that limit future fair contestation. Pandemics may be crises that
are particularly vulnerable to this type of manipulation. The normal functioning of
democratic rule of law can often be suspended in some ways as a component of
government response. Even the most democratic regimes may curtail civil liberties in a
state of emergency or in their response to challenges caused by an external crisis.
Epidemics and pandemics have in the past led governments to respond to outbreaks by
curtailing civil liberties in the past to reduce the spread of disease (Barbisch, Koenig, and
Shih 2015; Rothstein 2015; Gostin and Hodge Jr. 2020; Lim and Sziarto 2020).
All of these restrictions are imposed with the assumption that things may return to
“normal” after the crisis or emergency ends. But this presupposes a government in favor
of the maintenance of democratic norms and principles. When that assumption is broken,
if we have an autocratizing government that is interest in accruing more power and
control, then crisis is an opportunity for further authoritarian consolidation. Democracies
become up to 75% more likely to erode during states of emergency (Lührmann and
Rooney 2020), demonstrating that an immediate crisis response can have long-term
reverberations for the future fair conduct of politics.
The V-Dem Pandemic Backsliding project has been systematically analyzing the impacts
of COVID-19 response on democracy. On average, they have found an easing of
democratic impacts as the crisis has persisted (Kolvani et al. 2020). But while some
policy choices (including well-intentioned suspensions of elections) may have
temporarily impacted the conduct of democracy without threatening its long-term
stability,1 others are poised to have more long-term pernicious effects. V-Dem’s PanBack
index looks at the specific likelihood of changes implemented under COVID-19 having
1

To be clear, the decision on whether to suspend an election or not is not intrinsically evidence of
backsliding. In French municipal elections, where second round elections were postponed, turnout was at
historic lows, and disease proximity negatively impacted turnout further. However, the decision to
postpone these elections was still a well-intentioned attempt to respond to the evolving public health
situation and did not clearly advantage or disadvantage any side (Noury et al. 2021).

long-term impacts furthering democratic backsliding. Hungary, Uganda, and the United
States are all scored as having a moderate-to-high risk of COVID-19 responses impacting
the country’s long-term trajectory.2 On a 0-1 scale, with 0.3 and above being considered
high risk, Hungary and the United States each are scored at 0.22, and Uganda is scored at
0.4 (Edgell et al. 2020). In these cases, there is a real risk that anti-democratic decisions
made during the Coronavirus crisis can have a real and enduring impact on democracy.
This can happen in one of two ways. First, as discussed above, the crisis can be used
opportunistically, to take advantage of the distraction of international actors and
potentially domestic opponents, who might otherwise mobilize to block reforms. Second,
governments can explicitly justify institutional changes and reforms as necessary to
respond effectively to the crisis: the crisis itself becomes a pretext.
Crisis as Opportunism
As David Lake notes, opportunism, where actors violate norms and agreements out of
self-interest, is widespread in international relations (Lake 1996, 13). Crises – or other
circumstances requiring a great deal of attention from organizations under threat –
minimize bandwidth to focus on other issues. Studies of firms have shown that when
organizational leadership is distracted, adversaries behave opportunistically (Ahmad and
Bollaert 2021). And in international relations, when the resources of powers are tied up,
there can be strategic motivation for opportunistic aggression from other states in pursuit
of their own foreign policy objectives (Brands and Montgomery 2020).
An international crisis therefore changes the strategic calculus of states, creating an
opportunity for governments to pursue actions that would otherwise attract international
outrage, as other states are consumed by managing the situation.3 Such “naming and
shaming” can be especially common in non-crisis situations as a response to human
rights abuses (Hafner-Burton 2008; Terman and Voeten 2018), though it can also apply
across other domains (Friman 2015). This can include antidemocratic reforms
(Sedelmeier 2017; Soyaltin-Colella 2020). This use of an adversary’s distraction to
pursue goals that they might otherwise object to is related to, but distinct from, a
domestic government using diversionary foreign policy to distract its citizens from its
own performance (for discussion of diversionary foreign policy, see Smith 1996;
Pickering and Kisangani 2005).
However, in responding to a major global crisis like COVID-19, national governments
logically have reduced bandwidth to focus on other international behavior that it would
normally draw attention to. This distraction, then, becomes an opportunity for states to
pursue policies that would otherwise attract more international outrage. This may be a
strategic opportunism, where states pursue objectives that might be unpalatable to
domestic actors or the international community. One sometimes discussed example of
such opportunism is Russia’s annexation of Crimea (Orttung and Zhemukhov 2017;
Hosaka 2018), which formally escalated immediately after the closing ceremonies of the
2
3

Hong Kong is not considered separately from mainland China in this index so is not discussed here.
In some cases, these actions may have been otherwise pursued, but they can be opportunistically timed.

2014 Sochi Olympics. The Russian government took advantage of its accrual of goodwill
to the Olympic hosts, the pre-existing consolidation of security personnel in the region,
and a major international event being in the news at the time.
The COVID-19 pandemic has several examples of this type of opportunism, where states
pursue objectives they know the international community would strongly object to. In
these cases, COVID-19 provides cover via the timing of the action, but the policy
changes are not justified using public health rationales. The most prominent example of
this is the Chinese government institution of the Law of the People’s Republic of China
on Safeguarding National Security in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
(hereafter National Security Law or NSL), which severely restricted civil liberties in
Hong Kong. This move came after one year of protest in Hong Kong (for more, see Ting
2020). The imposition of the NSL led to arrests of opposition politicians and dissidents
and had a general chilling effect on the freedom of speech and the press. In Poland, the
government amplified its already discriminatory rhetoric against the LGBTQ+
community and moved to severely restrict already limited access to abortion (de Zavala
et al. 2020). In Hungary, we have seen similar policies implemented, reducing the
possibilities for legal recognition for transgender individuals (Knight and Gall 2020) and
banning adoption by same-sex couples (BBC News 2020b). While in these cases we still
do see some international objections (for example, The Guardian 2020), they do not
come on the scale that we might see were pandemic response not the primary worldwide
governing objective.
Crisis as Pretext
The alternative to using the crisis opportunistically, while would-be critics are distracted,
is explicitly justifying increasing autocratization under the pretext of managing the crisis.
This does not merely seek to take advantage of critics’ distraction but provides a direct
rationale to respond to potential criticism. These actions then become justified as
explicitly necessary to effectively respond to the crisis. Scholars argue that governments
use pretext to justify a variety of policies and interventions: humanitarian interventions
(Goodman 2006), drug trafficking (Mercille 2011), threats from terrorism (Bamford
2005), and fears of domestic unrest (Paczkowski 2015). Perhaps the most famous
example of such pretext is the Reichstag Fire,4 the 1933 burning of the German
parliament in Berlin (Mommsen 1985). Adolf Hitler took advantage of the unfettered
emergency powers provided by Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution to crackdown on
the Communist Party opposition, fundamentally giving the Hitler the ability to directly
rule as dictator.
Both opportunism and pretext provide avenues for the consolidation of autocratization
and for the perpetuation of democratic backsliding during COVID-19. Pretext is,
however, especially pernicious: the abuse of public health rationales to undermine
democratic politics has a secondary effect of also undermining confidence in legitimate
public health measures needed to respond to an ongoing crisis. It is easy to justify actions

4

Which, of course, the Nazi Party may have been directly involved in starting (see Hett 2013).

in the name of public safety and public health that might otherwise be seen as
unacceptable (Annas 2002).
This abuse is readily apparent in the COVID-19 pandemic at both the national and
subnational levels. In Hungary, the ruling Fidesz party, holding a parliamentary
supermajority, gave Prime Minister Viktor Orbán the right to rule by decree without a set
end date to respond forcefully to the public health threat; Orbán used the opportunity to
restrict freedom of the press and to push an anti-LGBTQ+ agenda (Guasti 2020).
Opposition efforts to question the imposition of rule by decree were met with accusations
that they were impeding the government’s ability to stop the spread of coronavirus
(Kádár 2020). Ghanaian President Nana Akufo-Addo gained similar prerogatives from
the national parliament (Addadzi-Koom 2020), while the Indian government invoked the
Disaster Management Act to bypass democratic accountability (Thomson and Ip 2020).
In these cases, we can see national governments clearly pursuing actions designed to limit
democratic contestation and civil liberties under the guise of legitimate public health
concerns.
We, however, want to focus especially on the impacts of such measures on subnational
democracy, including measures taken at both the national and subnational levels. The
inherent centralizing tendencies of crisis and emergency response make subnational
jurisdictions especially vulnerable, as they are often forced to cede authority, autonomy,
and capacity to a national government (see, for example, Meneguzzo et al. 2013). And
the role of subnational tiers of government in the backsliding and autocratizing process
too often overlooked as an important location for regime consolidation and antidemocratic practice.
The following four cases (Hong Kong, Hungary, Uganda, and the United States) will
examine the ways that responding to the COVID-19 pandemic has been used both
opportunistically and as an explicit pretext for undermining subnational democracy.
While these cases differ in terms of level of democracy and types of institution,
governance in all four countries has been autocratizing over the past several years.
Hong Kong
In recent years, the Chinese national government has made concrete steps to bring Hong
Kong more tightly into its orbit. The agreement reached with the United Kingdom for its
1997 handover to China stipulated that Hong Kong would abide by the “one country, two
systems” principle until 2047, maintaining greater freedoms and civil liberties in the
Special Administrative Region of Hong Kong than the rest of the country. However,
concrete, incremental steps have been taken since 1997 to slowly bring Hong Kong more
into line, showing a clear pattern of democratic backsliding and authoritarian
encroachment (Fong 2020). As these steps have been taken, there have been increasing
movements among Hongkongers to assert their own political rights and to advocate for
further democracy.
These efforts significantly escalated in 2014 with the Umbrella Movement, a social
movement emerging in response to Beijing’s moves to restrict the freedom of pro-

democracy candidates to run in Hong Kong’s Chief Executive elections (Lo 2017). In
2019, protests erupted again, this time over a new proposed extradition law. This larger
movement, the Water Revolution, lasted several months, impacting economic activity
and ultimately forcing the withdrawal of the proposed law (Ting 2020). However, Beijing
also indicated they would be more actively involved in administering Hong Kong in the
future (Hui 2020a). In a show of dissatisfaction with the government’s response to the
protests, pro-democracy parties swept to power in the city’s November 2019 elections
across the 18 District Councils, with turnout up over 20% (Lai and Wu 2019).
With the onset of COVID-19, efforts to reassert central government control in Hong
Kong again escalated. These efforts have distinct phases that relate to both opportunism
and pretext. First, we see the June 2020 implementation of the National Security Law as a
clear move to take advantage of the international community being too preoccupied with
COVID response to respond as aggressively as they might otherwise. Second, we see the
invocation of public health measures as the rationale for suspending the Legislative
Council (LegCo) elections in September as an explicit use of pretext.
After the significant momentum of the Water Revolution, including in the District
Council elections, Beijing announced that a new National Security Law would go into
effect at the end of June 2020. The NSL sweepingly curtailed freedoms of speech and
assembly in Hong Kong, giving the state greater surveillance capabilities and functionally
declaring discussions of a democratic Hong Kong to be illegal. While it is entirely
possible such a law would be passed absent the pandemic, the PRC was opportunistic
with its timing: the announcement and implementation, strategically coordinated while
the rest of the world was heavily occupied with responding to the public health crisis,
meant that many countries did not respond as strongly as they might have otherwise.
Criticism was still widespread (for example, by the UK in The Guardian 2020), although
stronger measures were largely not pursued. The NSL’s passage predictably led many
opposition politicians and activists to limit their activities and/or self-censor. Prodemocracy parties disbanded and many activists were immediately detained (Hui 2020b).
However, subsequent restrictions on political rights in Hong Kong invoke public health
guidelines as an explicit pretext for interfering with the conduct of subnational
democracy. In September 2020, Hong Kong Chief Executive Carrie Lam suspended the
2020 LegCo elections for a year. She suspended the elections using emergency powers
and explicitly said that the vote could risk exacerbating the spread of COVID-19 in the
city (Cheung, Wong, and Chung 2020). The use of public health rationale to suspend the
LegCo elections builds on the demonstrably chilling effect that the NSL already on
Hongkongers publicly engaging in political discourse. LegCo rules already limit the
success of initiatives from the pandemocratic opposition (Smyth, Bianco, and Chan 2019),
meaning that the calculus to suspend the elections was more about fears of Beijing
appearing weak if the opposition was successful than about the likelihood of passage of
actual legislation that would impact PRC control. Moreover, the decision to suspend the
election came after twelve prominent opposition candidates were barred from running
(BBC News 2020a). This timing suggests that officials decided that suspending the
candidates would not sufficiently guarantee pro-Beijing candidates would win in

September, and further measures needed to be taken. It is unlikely that steps to suspend
the candidates would be taken if it was already known the election would be delayed for
legitimate public health reasons. Since the suspension of the election, many candidates
who organized and/or contested the unofficial pro-democracy primaries in July 2020
have been arrested for supposed NSL violations, including LegCo members and
academics (BBC News 2021; Human Rights Watch 2021).
The passage of the NSL itself did not rely on public health justification, and was instead
merely opportunistically timed to minimize international opposition, so the move to
invoke Coronavirus late in the crackdown seems to be a conscious strategic choice to
even further limit dissent. But the suspension of LegCo elections was not the only
instance of public health being used to limit anti-regime protest. Hong Kong’s COVID
lockdown was strategically extended to June 5, 2020 (Thiessen 2020), ensuring that the
traditional demonstrations in Victoria Park on the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square
crackdown could not be held at their typical scale (Hernández, Ramzy, and May 2020).
Hong Kong police also used public health rationale for justifying fines of student
reporters at public protests (Thomson and Ip 2020, 24). These trends suggest a clear use
of COVID-19 as a pretext to minimize public debate about Hong Kong’s democratic
future.
Hungary
Since taking power in 2010, the right-wing Fidesz party has consistently pursued policies
of democratic backsliding in Hungary, including constitutional reforms, changes to
election law, restrictions on the freedom of the press and the academy, and limits on
judicial independence (Scheppele 2013; Bíró-Nagy 2017; Krekó and Enyedi 2018,
among others). Such backsliding has also extended to subnational politics, where Fideszled city councils altered municipal regulations to reduce oversight and limit fair electoral
contestation (Jakli and Stenberg 2020). Hungary’s Prime Minister, Viktor Orbán, has
steadily consolidated control over the past 11 years, strategically using populist rhetoric
and government funds to ensure success in Hungary’s no-longer-fairly contested
elections. The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, however, led to a clear furthering of
Fidesz’s anti-democratic tendencies, at both the national and subnational levels.
In March 2020, Hungary’s Parliament, in which Fidesz holds a legislative supermajority,
declared a state of emergency in response to the COVID-19 (Novak and Kingsley 2020).
This state of emergency gave Prime Minister Orbán the ability to rule by decree; while it
could be revoked by the parliament at any time, Fidesz’s supermajority ensured that this
was a blank check. Moreover, the state of emergency was open-ended, not putting any
end date on Orbán’s ability to rule by decree. Orbán used these powers widely: the
Hungarian Helsinki Committee (2020) NGO tracked 147 uses during the period it was
active (March 30 - June 18, 2020). Among the most notable antidemocratic uses was the
imposition of a potential five year jail sentence for “disseminating misleading
information” (Guasti 2020, 53). Emergency powers were used for such concerns as
increasing the time needed to respond to public information requests to limit public
oversight (Kádár 2020), indicating a clear use of coronavirus as a pretext for other antidemocratic measures.

The Hungarian parliament “revoked” the state of emergency in June; however, it was
replaced by a state of medical crisis, which continued to allow the government to rule by
decree and which could not be revoked by the Hungarian Parliament (Bayer 2020). Orbán
strongly emphasized the public health rationale for the state of emergency, stating that it
was an enabling factor for Hungary’s rapid pandemic response (Bene and Boda 2021,
96–97). While these sequential “states” directly contributed to continued democratic
erosion at the national level, they were also used to further Fidesz’s long-standing goals
of consolidating control over subnational politics.
While Fidesz has had considerable success in municipal politics compared to many rightwing dominant party regimes (Stenberg 2018), a pan-opposition coalition managed to
defeat Fidesz-backed candidates in some of Hungary’s largest cities in 2019 (Hegedüs
2019). This created the opportunity for opposition mayors in cities like Budapest to gain
credibility and increase their prominence, ultimately paving the way to challenge the
regime. Fidesz and Orbán, however, have used the COVID-19 pandemic to restrict the
independence of municipalities, bringing them further under the control of the center and
undermining the ability of opposition mayors to both govern effectively and respond to
the public health crisis. This differs from many other cases of subnational democratic
erosion in the COVID-19 pandemic, where we have often seen public health used as a
pretext for the strategic manipulation of elections and campaigns. In Hungary we instead
see that responding to the pandemic was used as a pretext for municipal finance reform,
which can undermine subnational democracy non-electorally.
Several pieces of legislation implemented early in the stages of pandemic response had
concrete impacts on municipal finance: in almost all cases, responding to the pandemic
was used as the official rationale. Car tax revenues were shifted to a county-level
epidemic protection fund to aid pandemic response (Előd 2020a); county administration
is dominated by Fidesz. The collection of tourism taxes were suspended from April
through the end of 2020, ostensibly to help hotels endure fewer overnight guests
(Záborszky 2020). While in aggregate these taxes do not make up a significant portion of
municipal revenues (car taxes 1.2%, tourism taxes 0.6%), there is a great degree of
variance between municipalities, and some budgets are substantially impacted (Bucsky
2020). Parking fees, which are directly paid to municipalities, were also abolished,
officially to minimize transmission risk on public transportation (hirado.hu 2020). In 49
cities, largely controlled by the opposition, parking fees are on average another 2.6% of
total revenue, rising to 6.5% for districts in Budapest (Bucsky 2020). Wealthier
municipalities were also subjected to a solidarity tax, transferring money to other
municipalities even as their own tax revenues were curtailed (Rovó 2020). Orbán’s
legislation allowed for the creation of special economic zones, which remove selected
industrial sites from local business tax rolls and regulatory oversight – one notable such
zone was a Samsung facility in the opposition-controlled city of Göd (Dezső and Előd
2020). Mayors explicitly alleged that these policies were pretexts used to deprive cities of
funding (Csurgó and Sajó 2020); 41 independent and/or opposition mayors issued a jointstatement protesting the cuts and accusing the government of “bleeding local
governments” and weakening crisis response (Matalin 2020), as municipalities were also

incurring increased expenses due to the pandemic at the same time as experiencing a
government-imposed revenue shortfall. By depriving opposition-controlled cities of
funding, Orbán actively seeks to undermine their ability to govern effectively, weakening
opposition parties in any future electoral campaign.
While many of these decrees expired with the end of the initial state of emergency, the
financial shortfalls they caused had long term effects, and certain consequences, like the
special economic zones, were permanent, having long term fiscal impacts on
municipalities. Moreover, subsequent legislation, implemented under the state of medical
crisis, has gone on to further these goals. In December 2020, new economic measures
were announced that would halve the local business tax for small and medium sized
enterprises for the next two years (Előd 2020b). For municipalities smaller than 25,000
inhabitants, new intergovernmental aid measures from the central government would fill
this gap by right. However, for municipalities with over 25,000 residents, those larger
municipalities where the pan-opposition coalition had managed some limited success in
the 2019 municipal elections, government aid would only be disbursed on a case-by-case
basis. This is a much larger proportion of local revenue than the taxes reallocated in the
early stages of the pandemic. Local business taxes make up 26.2% of total local
government revenue (Bucsky 2020). This gives the national government a great deal of
leverage over opposition-controlled cities.
Orbán also used his bully pulpit, further aided by Fidesz’s widespread restrictions on
media freedom, to attack mayors directly, especially Budapest’s opposition-affiliated
mayor Gergely Karácsony. Orbán blamed Karácsony for an early COVID-19 outbreak at
a city-run retirement home, criticizing his personal leadership and threatening to hold him
legally culpable (Bene and Boda 2021, 99). Karácsony, for his part, has extensively
criticized national government on a host of issues, and stated that the governmentimposed revenue shortfalls would prevent Budapest from fully providing public services
at their typical levels (Tenczer 2020). As Karácsony is among the most viable panopposition Prime Ministerial candidates in the 2022 election, Orbán’s efforts to blame
shift and weaken Budapest’s ability to respond to the pandemic should be seen in light of
the 2022 election campaign.
Uganda
The events that unfolded in response to the global pandemic presented a particularly
unique opportunity for governments in developing countries seeking to undermine fair
competition at the subnational level. Long before the pandemic, Uganda experimented
with decentralization of political power from the central government to subnational units
(Green 2010). However, the ruling National Resistance Movement (NRM) party, led by
President Yoweri Museveni, understood that subnational democracy, and in particular the
opening of space for opposition contestation at the local level, could pose a threat to the
regime. The NRM’s dominance in local elections has slowly eroded over the years. At
the highest position in local government (the chairperson level), the NRM won 82 of 112
seats in the 2016 election (Gibb 2016). In urban local government, however, support for
opposition parties is markedly higher. In the January 2021 polls, opposition candidates
won the majority of council seats in the country’s eleven major cities (Daily Monitor

2021b). Recent developments in Ugandan politics have seen support for opposition
parties in local elections expand to other parts of the country. For instance, the popularity
of the prominent opposition figure Robert Kyagulani (Bobi Wine) and his new party the
National Unity Party is credited for the NRM’s loss of local government seats in
traditional strongholds in Central and Eastern Uganda in 2021 (Mufumba 2021). This
year’s election occurred in the context of an unprecedented global pandemic, with the
NRM-led government using pandemic related measures as a pretext to centralize
authority and to undermine opposition mobilization at the local level.
In the early phase of the pandemic, Uganda reported 284 cases of infections, and no
deaths (Reuters 2020). However, the government went on to implement one of Africa’s
strictest lockdowns, closing business, schools, banning public gatherings, severely
restricting the use of public transportation, and imposing an eight-and-a-half-hour nightly
curfew (Xinhua 2020). In the midst of these harsh and seemingly premature measures, the
president stress-tested the ability of political institutions in Uganda to counter his
authoritarian overreach. Early in the pandemic, the president hinted at the possibility of
delaying the elections (Biryabarema 2020). While the country’s Electoral Commission
declined to postpone the elections (Kirabo 2020), the measures introduced by government
ostensibly designed to fight the pandemic resulted in political double standards, and an
unequal playing field for the opposition at the subnational level.
After lockdown restrictions were gradually eased in Uganda in the summer of 2020, the
government announced a ban on political rallies (Ssenoga 2020). The government stated
that political rallies were banned as a way to fight the spread of the coronavirus, and
candidates were told to campaign by leaflet, radio, TV, or on the internet (Ssenoga 2020).
The enforcement of the ban on campaign rallies especially appeared to target local
governments where opposition parties are more popular. For instance, opposition
candidate Major General Mugisha Muntu was blocked from campaigning in the Entebbe
municipality (Adude 2020). Elsewhere, attempts by the opposition candidates to hold
rallies for local races were met with a violent police response (Amnesty International
2020; Grasse et al. 2020). On the other hand, NRM candidates successfully held rallies
throughout the country in different cities, with few wearing face masks, and not
practicing social distancing (Uganda Daily 2020). The suspension of in-person
campaigning was especially devastating to opposition party campaigns. In Uganda, as in
many African countries, most interaction between voters and parties for municipal
elections occurs at election rallies, as many voters do not have access to television or the
internet (Bleck and van de Walle 2018; Ssenoga 2020). While candidates for higher
political office tend to have more visibility through traditional media, candidates for local
elections are particularly reliant on face-to-face interactions with constituents.
After adopting a ban on mass rallies, Uganda’s Electoral Commission required candidates
to campaign through traditional media and online as a substitute for in-person
campaigning. Yet, when opposition candidates for municipal elections attempted to
access radio stations and TV networks, they were met with arrests and harassment (Draku
2020). In some municipalities, journalists were arrested from interviewing local
opposition candidates (Committee to Protect Journalists 2021). The government also

introduced pandemic-related restrictions that targeted non-traditional media. Specifically,
two days before the election, the government ordered several social media platforms
blocked, including Facebook, WhatsApp, and Twitter (Reuters 2021). This decision had
an impact on opposition campaigns in local government elections because the voter base
of opposition parties in Uganda is predominantly young, and opposition candidates rely
on social media campaigns to mobilize voters in local elections (Anguyo 2021).
Traditional media in Uganda is owned by government allies or is state-run, and
opposition candidates use social media to directly broadcast their campaign rallies and
news conferences to voters (Reuters 2021). In the context of widespread restrictions on
physical and digital campaigning, turnout was considerably depressed for local elections
(Daily Monitor 2021a).
Finally, another aspect of government policy during the pandemic that undermined local
democracy in Uganda was food relief distribution. Food insecurity increased in Uganda
as a result of the pandemic (Kansiime et al. 2021). Arguing that distribution efforts would
attract large crowds where the virus could spread (Anguyo 2020), the central government
interfered with the local government’s mandate to distribute food relief. This policy
particularly targeted opposition held municipalities (Anguyo 2020). While opposition
local leaders who attempted to distribute food to constituents were arrested, members of
the NRM party were unconstrained (Macdonald and Owor 2020). Not only did
partisanship play a role in the enforcement of pandemic-related rules, but the government
also used the politicization of food relief as a way to wrest power away from local
governments. After Parliament voted to allocate funds for Members of Parliament to
distribute food relief in their constituencies, President Museveni condemned this move as
a usurpation of the executive’s power. Instead of individual MPs distributing the food
relief, the president advised MPs to instead deposit the money in the coronavirus
taskforces in their districts (Anguyo 2020). This move would make it harder for voters to
attribute pandemic food relief to local leaders. The restrictions on food distribution
introduced by the Ugandan government in response to the pandemic is part of a broader
pattern in which the national government uses the pandemic as a pretext to further
hamper democratic consolidation at the local level.
United States
In the United States, the administration of core democratic rights, including though not
exclusively the right to vote, occurs at the subnational level. And while the 1965 Voting
Rights Act gave the federal government extensive capacity to oversee election
administration in jurisdictions with a history of racial disenfranchisement at the ballot
box, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the formula that supported this provision in
2013, allowing state officials in the Republican Party to introduce a wave of new
franchise restrictions at the subnational level. Voting rights protections in the U.S., as
Hasen (2020) notes, remain highly polarized and judicialized. The COVID-19 pandemic
also presented Republicans with opportunities––successfully leveraged or not––for
contesting electoral democracy in the United States. Given the Republican Party’s
generally skeptical public stance on the severity of COVID-19, especially during the
early days of the pandemic, party officials generally avoided using public-health
messaging as a pretext for democratic backsliding. Instead, Republicans attempt to

exploit pandemic election procedures to weaken turnout and to cast doubt on election
legitimacy.
Some of the clearest episodes of opportunism in the U.S. surrounded decisions whether
and how to delay spring elections, which were timed to occur as the first wave of
COVID-19 began to crest, before the development of widespread public-health protocols.
Both public health and election officials converged on the idea of delaying primaries as a
means of reducing the spread of COVID-19 from in-person voting and avoiding massive
reductions in turnout Between March 13––the date on which President Trump declared a
national emergency under the Stafford Act––and September 1, state officials ultimately
delayed 23 of 59 scheduled elections. Even so, lawmakers in several states took actions
that were calibrated to reduce turnout. When decisions by public health and election
officials in Ohio triggered a primary delay and a shift to all-mail balloting, Republican
leaders in the state’s legislature stepped in with a more restrictive set of ballot deadlines,
which caused thousands of absentee ballot requests to fail to arrive in time and led to a
decisive drop in turnout (Rakich 2020; Carr Smyth 2020).
The pattern in Wisconsin was even more acute, since the April 7 election featured not
only a Democratic presidential primary but a Supreme Court race in which Daniel Kelly,
an incumbent justice appointed by former Republican Governor Scott Walker, was
defending his seat against Jill Karofsky, a liberal with Democratic Party bona fides
(Epstein 2020). Governor Tony Evers, a Democrat, took executive action to delay the
election and extend the deadline for absentee ballots after Republicans in the state
legislature refused to act. Yet on the eve of the election both the Wisconsin Supreme
Court and the U.S. Supreme Court––both sharply divided along ideological lines––issued
rulings in suits brought by Republicans that reversed Evers’ decision (Wisconsin
Legislature v. Evers 2020; RNC v. DNC 2020).
The immediate result of the Wisconsin decision was Election Day chaos. The April 7
election a shortage of election officials led to the shuttering all but 5 of 180 polling places
in the city of Milwaukee (Spicuzza 2020). Thousands of Wisconsin voters who requested
absentee ballots never received them and decisions about counting absentee ballots varied
across jurisdictions (Bice 2020).
Polling place consolidation had the effect of suppressing votes, reducing overall turnout
in Milwaukee by 8.5 percentage points and turnout among the Black population by about
10.2 percentage points (Morris and Miller Forthcoming). Statewide, however, efforts at
voter suppression ran up against a highly mobilized Democratic electorate, which turned
out in record numbers during the 2018 midterms and Supreme Court elections in 2019
(Pildes and Stewart III 2020). Across the state, turnout in the April elections was 34%,
roughly equivalent to participation in the 2008 primaries and surpassing turnout in 2012.
In the end, this meant a decisive win for Judge Jill Karofsky, who beat out the
Republican-appointed incumbent with a decisive 55% of votes.
Chaotic experiences in the primaries––along with the persistent realities of the
pandemic––ultimately led officials in 39 states to modify voting procedures to expand

voting opportunities, including through early voting and no-excuse absentee balloting,
extended voter registration deadlines, and the extension of postmark deadlines for
absentee ballots (Ballotpedia 2020). While these changes likely helped to ensure voter
turnout did not crater in 2020, the significant increase in turnout during the general
election is likely due to increased voter interest in the election rather than these
procedural maneuvers (Yoder et al. 2021).
Nevertheless, even before all the votes were counted, President Trump and many––
though hardly all––Republican officials throughout the country leapt on pandemic-year
voting adjustments to support false claims of massive voter fraud. Trump would likely
have made these claims regardless of the circumstances, yet as it was his campaign
repeatedly anchored its claims about fraud on the widespread use of absentee balloting
(Parks and Karson 2020). Despite wide agreement among election officials that the 2020
elections were the “safest in history,” these claims of voter fraud persisted in the months
that followed the election (Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency 2020). By
January, Republican efforts discredit the 2020 election results eventually led to dozens of
post-election lawsuits––all of which were dismissed––attempts by members of Congress
to halt the certification of the election results, and an armed insurrection of the U.S.
Capitol. Several months later, Republicans in nearly 40 states had introduced legislation
to tighten voting restrictions, including the elimination of no-excuse absentee voting
(McCaskill 2021). In this case, it was not the pandemic itself––but state election officials’
initial reaction to it––that provided the impetus for opportunism.
Conclusion
Responding to the COVID-19 pandemic has required a great deal of attention and an
extensive outlay of resources from every government worldwide. The level of political
attention on public health has meant that governments have had the opportunity to pursue
objectives domestically that other states have not had the bandwidth to address. Some
states have pursued democratic backsliding, taking advantage of the innate centralizing
tendencies of crisis management to consolidate authority and undermine their opposition.
States have done this through two primary mechanisms: opportunism and pretext.
This has not only happened on the national level. We have seen governments use
COVID-19 as both an opportunity and a pretext to interfere with subnational politics,
including suspending or interfering with the free conduct of elections, depriving
opposition controlled municipalities of resources to interfere with their ability to govern,
and cracking down on social movements. These responses, either through the distraction
of the international community or through the pretext of a direct public health response,
have the potential to negatively impact the fair conduct of democratic governance well
beyond the resolution of the pandemic.
Works Cited
Addadzi-Koom, Maame Efua. 2020. “Quasi-State of Emergency: Assessing the
Constitutionality of Ghana’s Legislative Response to Covid-19.” The Theory and
Practice of Legislation 8 (3): 311–27.
https://doi.org/10.1080/20508840.2020.1777648.

Adude, Paul. 2020. “Gen Muntu Blocked from Campaigning in Entebbe.” Daily Monitor,
December 1, 2020. https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/gen-muntublocked-from-campaigning-in-entebbe-3215434.
Ahmad, Muhammad Farooq, and Helen Bollaert. 2021. “Investor Distraction and
Managerial Attention – International Evidence from Mergers and Acquisitions.”
SKEMA Business School. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3589309.
Amnesty International. 2020. “Uganda: Stop Killings and Human Rights Violations
Ahead of Election Day.”
https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2020/12/uganda-stop-killings-andhuman-rights-violations-ahead-of-election-day/.
Anguyo, Innocent. 2020. “The Politics of Food Relief in Uganda’s COVID-19 Era.”
Africa at LSE (blog). July 1, 2020.
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2020/07/01/politics-food-relief-aid-ugandacovid19/.
———. 2021. “Internet Shutdowns in Uganda Cannot Prevent Political Resistance.”
Africa at LSE (blog). February 3, 2021.
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2021/02/03/internet-shutdowns-ugandamuseveni-political-resistance-elections-bobi-wine/.
Annas, George J. 2002. “Bioterrorism, Public Health, and Civil Liberties.” The New
England Journal of Medicine, 1337–42.
Ballotpedia. 2020. “Changes to Election Dates, Procedures, and Administration in
Response to the Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic, 2020.” November 19, 2020.
https://ballotpedia.org/Changes_to_election_dates,_procedures,_and_administrati
on_in_response_to_the_coronavirus_(COVID-19)_pandemic,_2020.
Bamford, James. 2005. A Pretext for War: 9/11, Iraq, and the Abuse of America’s
Intelligence Agencies. Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.
Barbisch, Donna, Kristi L Koenig, and Fuh-Yuan Shih. 2015. “Is There a Case for
Quarantine? Perspectives from SARS to Ebola.” Disaster Medicine and Public
Health Preparedness 9 (5): 547–53. https://doi.org/10.1017/dmp.2015.38.
Bayer, Lili. 2020. “Hungary Replaces Rule by Decree with ‘State of Medical Crisis.’”
Politico, June 18, 2020. https://www.politico.eu/article/hungary-replaces-rule-bydecree-controversial-state-of-medical-crisis/.
BBC News. 2020a. “Hong Kong Bars 12 Opposition Candidates from Election,” July 30,
2020, sec. China. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-53593187.
———. 2020b. “Hungary Government Proposes Same-Sex Adoption Ban,” November 11,
2020. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-54902048.
———. 2021. “National Security Law: Hong Kong Rounds up 53 pro-Democracy
Activists,” January 6, 2021, sec. China. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asiachina-55555299.
Bene, Márton, and Zsolt Boda. 2021. “Hungary: Crisis as Usual—Populist Governance
and the Pandemic.” In Populism and the Politicization of the COVID-19 Crisis in
Europe, edited by Giuliano Bobba and Nicolas Hubé, 87–100. Cham: Springer
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66011-6_7.
Bermeo, Nancy. 2016. “On Democratic Backsliding.” Journal of Democracy 27 (1): 5–
19. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2016.0012.

Bice, Daniel. 2020. “Milwaukee Election Commission Votes to Count at Least 390
Absentee Ballots with Postmark Problems.” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, April 13,
2020.
https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/elections/2020/04/13/milwaukeevotes-count-absentee-ballots-postmark-problems/2980259001/.
Bíró-Nagy, András. 2017. “Illiberal Democracy in Hungary: The Social Background and
Practical Steps of Building an Illiberal State.” In Illiberal Democracies in the EU:
The Visegrad Group and the Risk of Disintegration, edited by Pol Morillas, 31–44.
Barcelona: CIDOB Editions.
Biryabarema, Elias. 2020. “‘Madness’ to Hold Uganda Vote If Virus Persists: Museveni.”
Reuters, May 12, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirusuganda-politics-idUSKBN22O10R.
Blair, Harry. 1998. “Spreading Power to the Periphery: An Assessment of Democratic
Local Governance.” 21. USAID Program and Operations Assessment Report.
Washington D.C.: Center for Development Information and Evaluation.
Bleck, Jaimie, and Nicolas van de Walle. 2018. Electoral Politics in Africa since 1990:
Continuity in Change. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brands, Hal, and Evan Braden Montgomery. 2020. “Opportunistic Aggression in the
Twenty-First Century.” Survival 62 (4): 157–82.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00396338.2020.1792129.
Bucsky Péter. 2020. “Már azelőtt padlóra kerültek az önkormányzatok, hogy a kormány
tovább ütötte volna őket | G7 - Gazdasági sztorik érthetően.” April 7, 2020.
https://g7.hu/kozelet/20200407/mar-azelott-padlora-kerultek-az-onkormanyzatokhogy-a-kormany-tovabb-utotte-volna-oket/.
Carr Smyth, Julie. 2020. “Ohio Sets All-Mail Primary April 28; in-Person Voting Off.”
Associated Press, March 27, 2020, sec. Primary elections.
https://apnews.com/article/77e1c1806b756e201ea22efe1af18583.
Cheung, Tony, Natalie Wong, and Kimmy Chung. 2020. “Hong Kong Leader Delays
Elections, Asks Beijing to Resolve Legal Questions.” South China Morning Post,
July 31, 2020, sec. News. https://www.scmp.com/news/hongkong/politics/article/3095461/hong-kong-legislative-council-elections-bepostponed.
Cirone, Alexandra, Gary W. Cox, and Jon H. Fiva. 2020. “Seniority-Based Nominations
and Political Careers.” American Political Science Review, September, 1–18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0003055420000416.
Committee to Protect Journalists. 2021. “Police Beat, Detain Journalists Covering
Opposition Candidates Ahead of Uganda Elections,” January 7, 2021.
https://cpj.org/2021/01/police-beat-detain-journalists-covering-oppositioncandidates-ahead-of-uganda-elections/.
Csurgó Dénes, and Sajó Dávid. 2020. “Polgármesterek: Orbán szándékosan vérezteti ki
az önkormányzatokat.” Index.hu, April 5, 2020.
https://index.hu/belfold/2020/04/05/baranyi_szerint_az_onkormanyzatok_kiverezt
etese_a_cel_az_ingyenes_parkolassal/.
Curato, Nicole, and Diego Fossati. 2020. “Authoritarian Innovations: Crafting Support
for a Less Democratic Southeast Asia.” Democratization 27 (6): 1006–20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13510347.2020.1777985.

Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency. 2020. “Joint Statement from Elections
Infrastructure Government Coordinating Council & the Election Infrastructure
Sector Coordinating Executive Committees.” November 12, 2020.
https://www.cisa.gov/news/2020/11/12/joint-statement-elections-infrastructuregovernment-coordinating-council-election.
Daily Monitor. 2021a. “Low Voter Turnout, Irregularities Mar Local Council Elections,”
January 21, 2021. https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/low-voterturnout-irregularities-mar-local-council-elections-3263940.
———. 2021b. “How Parties Shared Seats in City, Municipal Elections,” January 27,
2021. https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/how-parties-shared-seatsin-city-municipal-elections-3270418.
Davis, Darren W., and Brian D. Silver. 2004. “Civil Liberties vs. Security: Public
Opinion in the Context of the Terrorist Attacks on America.” American Journal of
Political Science 48 (1): 28–46. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0092-5853.2004.00054.x.
Dezső András, and Előd Fruzsina. 2020. “Pénz? Bosszú? Más oka lehet, hogy elvették
Gödtől a Samsungot.” Index.hu, April 22, 2020.
https://index.hu/belfold/2020/04/22/god_samsung_politika/.
Drabek, Thomas E. 2012. Human System Responses to Disaster: An Inventory of
Sociological Findings. Springer Science & Business Media.
Draku, Franklin. 2020. “Has Security Taken over Election Process from EC?” Daily
Monitor, November 27, 2020.
https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/has-security-taken-overelection-process-from-ec--3211930?view=htmlamp.
Edgell, Amanda B., Anna Lührmann, Seraphine F. Maerz, Jean Lachapelle, Sandra
Grahn, Ana Flavia Good God, Martin Lundstedt, et al. 2020. “Pandemic
Backsliding: Democracy During Covid-19 (PanDem), Version 5.” www.vdem.net/en/our-work/research-projects/pandemic-backsliding/.
Előd Fruzsina. 2020a. “34 milliárddal sarcolják meg az önkormányzatokat, de minek?”
Index.hu, April 7, 2020.
https://index.hu/gazdasag/2020/04/07/gepjarmuadot_elveszi_a_kormany_az_onko
rmanyzatoktol_koronavirus_alap_valsag/.
———. 2020b. “Négymilliárd forintos bevételig érvényes az iparűzési adó felének
elengedése.” Telex, December 23, 2020, sec. Gazdaság.
https://telex.hu/gazdasag/2020/12/23/kkv-koronavirus-iparuzesi-ado-elengedeseonkormanyzatok.
Epstein, Reid J. 2020. “Upset Victory in Wisconsin Supreme Court Race Gives
Democrats a Lift.” The New York Times, April 13, 2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/13/us/politics/wisconsin-primary-results.html.
Faguet, Jean-Paul. 2014. “Decentralization and Governance.” World Development 53
(January): 2–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2013.01.002.
Farole, Safia Abukar. 2020. “Eroding Support from Below: Performance in Local
Government and Opposition Party Growth in South Africa.” Government and
Opposition, no. Online first (May): 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1017/gov.2020.7.
Fong, Brian C. H. 2020. “Exporting Autocracy: How China’s Extra-Jurisdictional
Autocratic Influence Caused Democratic Backsliding in Hong Kong.”

Democratization, December, 1–21.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13510347.2020.1851202.
Friman, H. Richard, ed. 2015. The Politics of Leverage in International Relations.
London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137439338.
Gibb, Ryan. 2016. “The Elections in Uganda, February 2016.” Africa Spectrum 51 (2):
93–101. https://doi.org/10.1177/000203971605100206.
Goodman, Ryan. 2006. “Humanitarian Intervention and Pretexts for War.” American
Journal of International Law 100 (1): 107–41. https://doi.org/10.2307/3518833.
Gostin, Lawrence O., and James G. Hodge Jr. 2020. “Balancing Public Health and Civil
Liberties.” JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association 323 (12):
1131–32.
Grasse, Donald, Melissa Pavlik, Hilary Matfes, and Travis Kurtis. 2020. “Opportunistic
Repression: Patterns of Civilian Targeting by the State in Response to COVID-19.”
Working paper.
Green, Elliott. 2010. “Patronage, District Creation, and Reform in Uganda.” Studies in
Comparative International Development 45 (1): 83–103.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12116-009-9058-8.
Greer, Scott L., Elizabeth J. King, Elize Massard da Fonseca, and Andre Peralta-Santos.
2020. “The Comparative Politics of COVID-19: The Need to Understand
Government Responses.” Global Public Health 15 (9): 1413–16.
Grindle, Merilee S. 2007. Going Local: Decentralization, Democratization, and the
Promise of Good Governance. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Guasti, Petra. 2020. “The Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic in Central and Eastern
Europe: The Rise of Autocracy and Democratic Resilience.” Democratic Theory
7 (2): 47–60. https://doi.org/10.3167/dt.2020.070207.
Hafner-Burton, Emilie M. 2008. “Sticks and Stones: Naming and Shaming the Human
Rights Enforcement Problem.” International Organization 62 (4): 689–716.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0020818308080247.
Hasen, Richard L. 2020. “Three Pathologies of American Voting Rights Illuminated by
the COVID-19 Pandemic, and How to Treat and Cure Them.” Election Law
Journal: Rules, Politics, and Policy 19 (3): 263–88.
https://doi.org/10.1089/elj.2020.0646.
Hegedüs, Daniel. 2019. “Hungary’s Sudden Political Reshuffle Broke Orbán’s Power
Monopoly.” German Marshall Fund of the United States. Transatlantic Take
(blog). October 18, 2019. https://www.gmfus.org/blog/2019/10/18/hungaryssudden-political-reshuffle-broke-orbans-power-monopoly.
Hermann, Charles F. 1963. “Some Consequences of Crisis Which Limit the Viability of
Organizations.” Administrative Science Quarterly 8 (1): 61.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2390887.
Hernández, Javier C., Austin Ramzy, and Tiffany May. 2020. “Defying Beijing,
Thousands in Hong Kong Hold Tiananmen Vigil.” The New York Times, June 4,
2020, sec. World. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/06/04/world/asia/tiananmenhong-kong-china.html.
Hett, Benjamin Carter. 2013. Burning the Reichstag: An Investigation into the Third
Reich’s Enduring Mystery. New York: Oxford University Press.

hirado.hu. 2020. “Az ingyenes parkolás is a járvány lassítását szolgálja,” April 6, 2020.
https://hirado.hu/belfold/kozelet/cikk/2020/04/06/elo-ujabb-tajekoztatot-tart-azoperativ-torzs/.
Holsti, Ole R. 1972. Crisis, Escalation, War. Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press.
Hooghe, Liesbet, Gary Marks, Arjan H. Schakel, Sara Niedzwiecki, Sandra Chapman
Osterkatz, and Sarah Shair-Rosenfield. 2016. Measuring Regional Authority: A
Postfunctionalist Theory of Governance. Vol. 1. 5 vols. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hosaka, Sanshiro. 2018. “The Kremlin’s ‘Active Measures’ Failed in 2013: That’s When
Russia Remembered Its Last Resort—Crimea.” Demokratizatsiya 26 (3): 321–64.
Hui, Victoria Tin-bor. 2020a. “Beijing’s Hard and Soft Repression in Hong Kong.” Orbis
64 (2): 289–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.orbis.2020.02.010.
———. 2020b. “Crackdown: Hong Kong Faces Tiananmen 2.0.” Journal of Democracy
31 (4): 122–37. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2020.0060.
Human Rights Watch. 2021. “Hong Kong: Mass Arrests of Pro-Democracy Politicians.”
Human Rights Watch. January 8, 2021.
https://www.hrw.org/news/2021/01/08/hong-kong-mass-arrests-pro-democracypoliticians.
Hungarian Helsinki Committee. 2020. “HU COVID-19 Emergency Decrees Tracker.”
2020.
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1t27aU5QYW0pj8PfaNxWuajyPhrwpbO
6TxunRjPnrOhM/.
Iverson, Terrence W., and Edward B. Barbier. 2020. “National and Sub-National Social
Distancing Responses to COVID-19.” 8452. Munich: CESifo.
Jakli, Laura, and Matthew Stenberg. 2020. “Everyday Illiberalism: How Hungarian
Subnational Politics Propel Single-Party Dominance.” Governance, March.
https://doi.org/10.1111/gove.12497.
Kádár, András. 2020. “In Its Nature—How Stealth Authoritarianism Keeps Stealing
Along During the Pandemic, and How Can It Be Stopped?” Journal of Human
Rights Practice, October, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1093/jhuman/huaa034.
Kansiime, Monica K., Justice A. Tambo, Idah Mugambi, Mary Bundi, Augustine Kara,
and Charles Owuor. 2021. “COVID-19 Implications on Household Income and
Food Security in Kenya and Uganda: Findings from a Rapid Assessment.” World
Development 137 (January): 105199.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105199.
Kirabo, Jonah. 2020. “Electoral Commission Says 2021 Elections Will Take Place
despite Covid-19 Pandemic.” Nile Post, May 20, 2020.
https://nilepost.co.ug/2020/05/20/electoral-commission-says-2021-elections-willtake-place-despite-covid-19-pandemic/.
Knight, Kyle, and Lydia Gall. 2020. “Hungary Ends Legal Recognition for Transgender
and Intersex People.” Human Rights Watch. May 21, 2020.
https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/05/21/hungary-ends-legal-recognitiontransgender-and-intersex-people.
Kolvani, Palina, Martin Lundstedt, Seraphine F. Maerz, Anna Lührmann, Jean
Lachapelle, Sandra Grahn, and Amanda B Edgell. 2020. “Pandemic Backsliding:

Democracy and Disinformation Seven Months into the Covid-19 Pandemic.”
Policy Brief 25. Gothenburg: Varieties of Democracy Institute.
Krekó, Péter, and Zsolt Enyedi. 2018. “Orbán’s Laboratory of Illiberalism.” Journal of
Democracy 29 (3): 39–51. https://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2018.0043.
Lai, K. K. Rebecca, and Jin Wu. 2019. “Hong Kong Election Results Mapped.” The New
York Times, November 24, 2019, sec. World.
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/11/24/world/asia/hong-kong-electionresults.html.
Lake, David A. 1996. “Anarchy, Hierarchy, and the Variety of International Relations.”
International Organization 50 (1): 1–33.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S002081830000165X.
Lazar, Nomi Claire. 2009. States of Emergency in Liberal Democracies. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Levitsky, Steven, and Daniel Ziblatt. 2018. How Democracies Die. New York: Crown.
Lim, So Hyung, and Kristin Sziarto. 2020. “When the Illiberal and the Neoliberal Meet
around Infectious Diseases: An Examination of the MERS Response in South
Korea.” Territory, Politics, Governance 8 (1): 60–76.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21622671.2019.1700825.
Lo, Sonny Shiu-Hing. 2017. “Factionalism and Chinese-Style Democracy: The 2017
Hong Kong Chief Executive Election.” Asia Pacific Journal of Public
Administration 39 (2): 100–119. https://doi.org/10.1080/23276665.2017.1325620.
Lucardi, Adrián. 2016. “Building Support From Below? Subnational Elections, Diffusion
Effects, and the Growth of the Opposition in Mexico, 1984-2000.” Comparative
Political Studies 49 (14): 1855–95. https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414016666857.
Lührmann, Anna, and Staffan I. Lindberg. 2019. “A Third Wave of Autocratization Is
Here: What Is New about It?” Democratization 26 (7): 1095–1113.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13510347.2019.1582029.
Lührmann, Anna, and Bryan Rooney. 2020. “Autocratization by Decree: States of
Emergency and Democratic Decline.” Working Paper. Gothenburg: Varieties of
Democracy Institute.
Macdonald, Anna, and Arthur Owor. 2020. “Food Distribution and Corona-Politics in
Uganda.” Africa at LSE (blog). June 15, 2020.
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/africaatlse/2020/06/15/food-distribution-coronapoliticsuganda-lockdown-elections-kampala/.
Maerz, Seraphine F., Anna Lührmann, Jean Lachapelle, and Amanda B. Edgell. 2020.
“Worth the Sacrifice? Illiberal and Authoritarian Practices during Covid-19.”
Working Paper 110. Gothenburg: Varieties of Democracy Institute.
Manor, James. 1999. The Political Economy of Democratic Decentralization.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Matalin Dóra. 2020. “41 polgármester tiltakozik az önkormányzatok kivéreztetése ellen.”
Index.hu, April 7, 2020.
https://index.hu/belfold/2020/04/07/polgarmesterek_nyilatkozat_ellenzek_tiltakoz
as_forraselvonas/.
McCaskill, Nolan D. 2021. “After Trump’s Loss and False Fraud Claims, GOP Eyes
Voter Restrictions across Nation.” Politico, March 15, 2021.
https://www.politico.com/news/2021/03/15/voting-restrictions-states-475732.

Meneguzzo, Marco, Alessandro Sancino, Marcel Guenon, and Gloria Fiorani. 2013.
“New Development: The Crisis and European Local Government Reforms.”
Public Money & Management 33 (6): 459–62.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09540962.2013.836010.
Mercille, Julien. 2011. “Violent Narco-Cartels or US Hegemony? The Political Economy
of the ‘War on Drugs’ in Mexico.” Third World Quarterly 32 (9): 1637–53.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2011.619881.
Mommsen, Hans. 1985. “The Reichstag Fire and Its Political Consequences.” In Aspects
of the Third Reich, edited by H. W. Koch, 62–95. New York: MacMillan.
Morris, Kevin, and Peter Miller. Forthcoming. “Voting in a Pandemic: COVID-19 and
Primary Turnout in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.” Urban Affairs Review.
Mufumba, Isaac. 2021. “What Are Museveni’s Options as Buganda, Busoga Revolt?”
Daily Monitor, January 23, 2021.
https://www.monitor.co.ug/uganda/news/national/what-are-museveni-s-optionsas-buganda-busoga-revolt--3266182.
Noury, Abdul, Abel François, Olivier Gergaud, and Alexandre Garel. 2021. “How Does
COVID-19 Affect Electoral Participation? Evidence from the French Municipal
Elections.” Edited by Shang E. Ha. PLoS ONE 16 (2): e0247026.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0247026.
Novak, Benjamin, and Patrick Kingsley. 2020. “Hungary’s Leader Grabbed Powers to
Fight the Virus. Some Fear Other Motives.” The New York Times, April 5, 2020,
sec. World. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/05/world/europe/victor-orbancoronavirus.html.
OECD. 2020. “The Territorial Impact of COVID-19: Managing the Crisis across Levels
of Government.” Paris: OECD.
Orttung, Robert W., and Sufian N. Zhemukhov. 2017. Putin’s Olympics: The Sochi
Games and the Evolution of Twenty-First Century Russia. New York: Routledge.
Paczkowski, Andrzej. 2015. Revolution and Counterrevolution in Poland, 1980-1989:
Solidarity, Martial Law, and the End of Communism in Europe. Rochester:
University of Rochester Press.
Papp, Zsófia. 2018. “Challenging the Odds: Incumbency Disadvantage, Local Ties, and
Electoral Performance in Hungary, 1994–2010.” East European Politics and
Societies and Cultures 32 (3): 518–43.
Parks, MaryAlice, and Kendall Karson. 2020. “A Step-by-Step Look at Trump’s
Falsehoods on Mail-in Voting: Analysis.” ABC News, October 1, 2020.
https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/step-step-trumps-falsehoods-mail-votinganalysis/story?id=73354979.
Pickering, Jeffrey, and Emizet F. Kisangani. 2005. “Democracy and Diversionary
Military Intervention: Reassessing Regime Type and the Diversionary
Hypothesis.” International Studies Quarterly 49 (1): 23–44.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0020-8833.2005.00333.x.
Pildes, Richard H., and Charles Stewart III. 2020. “The Wisconsin Primary Had
Extraordinarily High Voter Turnout.” Washington Post. Monkey Cage (blog).
April 15, 2020. https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/04/15/wisconsinprimary-had-extraordinarily-high-voter-turnout/.

Propper, Eyal. 2020. “The National People’s Congress 2020: The Hong Kong National
Security Law and China’s Enhanced Presence.” INSS Insight 1329. Tel Aviv:
Institute for National Security Studies.
Rakich, Nathaniel. 2020. “What Went Down In Ohio’s Primary.” FiveThirtyEight, May 7,
2020. https://fivethirtyeight.com/features/what-went-down-in-ohios-primary/.
Rapeli, Lauri, and Inga Saikkonen. 2020. “How Will the COVID-19 Pandemic Affect
Democracy?:” Democratic Theory 7 (2): 25–32.
https://doi.org/10.3167/dt.2020.070204.
Reuters. 2020. “Uganda Detains Prominent Academic Protesting Coronavirus Lockdown,”
May 18, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-ugandaidUSKBN22U2JX.
———. 2021. “Uganda Bans Social Media Ahead of Presidential Election,” January 12,
2021. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-uganda-election-idUSKBN29H0KH.
RNC v. DNC. 2020.
Rocco, Philip, Daniel Béland, and Alex Waddan. 2020. “Stuck in Neutral? Federalism,
Policy Instruments, and Counter-Cyclical Responses to COVID-19 in the United
States.” Policy and Society 39 (3): 458–77.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2020.1783793.
Rothstein, Mark A. 2015. “From SARS to Ebola: Legal and Ethical Considerations for
Modern Quarantine.” Indiana Health Law Review 12 (1): 227–80.
Rovó Attila. 2020. “Orbán Balázs: Elvárható, hogy Budapest is támogassa a szegényebb
településeket.” Index.hu, June 11, 2020.
https://index.hu/belfold/2020/06/11/orban_balazs_elvarhato_hogy_budapest_is_ta
mogassa_a_szegenyebb_telepuleseket/.
Scheiner, Ethan. 1999. “Urban Outfitters: City-Based Strategies and Success in Post-War
Japanese Politics.” Electoral Studies 18 (2): 179–98.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0261-3794(98)00009-2.
Scheppele, Kim Lane. 2013. The Trajectory of Democracy—Why Hungary Matters.
Sedelmeier, Ulrich. 2017. “Political Safeguards against Democratic Backsliding in the
EU: The Limits of Material Sanctions and the Scope of Social Pressure.” Journal
of European Public Policy 24 (3): 337–51.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2016.1229358.
Smith, Alastair. 1996. “Diversionary Foreign Policy in Democratic Systems.”
International Studies Quarterly 40 (1): 133. https://doi.org/10.2307/2600934.
Smyth, Regina, William Bianco, and Kwan Nok Chan. 2019. “Legislative Rules in
Electoral Authoritarian Regimes: The Case of Hong Kong’s Legislative Council.”
The Journal of Politics 81 (3): 892–905. https://doi.org/10.1086/703068.
Smyth, Regina, Gulnaz Sharafutdinova, Timothy Model, and Aiden Klein. 2020. “The
Russian Power Vertical and the COVID-19 Challenge: The Trajectories of
Regional Responses.” PONARS Eurasia Policy Memo 646. PONARS Eurasia.
Soyaltin-Colella, Digdem. 2020. “(Un)Democratic Change and Use of Social Sanctions
for Domestic Politics: Council of Europe Monitoring in Turkey.” International
Political Science Review, June, 019251212092712.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0192512120927120.
Spicuzza, Mary. 2020. “‘A Very Sad Situation for Voters’: Milwaukeeans Brave Wait
Times as Long as 2 1/2 Hours, Top Election Official Says.” Milwaukee Journal

Sentinel, April 7, 2020.
https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/politics/elections/2020/04/07/wisconsinelection-milwaukee-voters-brave-long-wait-lines-polls/2962228001/.
Ssenoga, Geoffrey. 2020. “Why Uganda’s Ban on Open-Air Campaigns Could Tilt the
2021 Poll in Museveni’s Favour.” The Conversation, September 6, 2020.
http://theconversation.com/why-ugandas-ban-on-open-air-campaigns-could-tiltthe-2021-poll-in-musevenis-favour-144814.
Stenberg, Matthew. 2018. “The Subnational Imposition of a One-Party Regime: Hungary
Local Elections in National Context.” Conference Paper presented at the 114th
APSA Annual Meeting, Boston, August 30.
’T Hart, Paul, Uriel Rosenthal, and Alexander Kouzmin. 1993. “Crisis Decision Making:
The Centralization Thesis Revisited.” Administration & Society 25 (1): 12–45.
Tenczer Gábor. 2020. “Karácsony bizottságokat, pozíciókat szüntet meg, közműcégeket
von össze.” Telex, November 20, 2020, sec. Belföld.
https://telex.hu/belfold/2020/11/20/karacsony-gergely-kozmucegektakarekossagi-program.
Terman, Rochelle, and Erik Voeten. 2018. “The Relational Politics of Shame: Evidence
from the Universal Periodic Review.” The Review of International Organizations
13 (1): 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11558-016-9264-x.
The Guardian. 2020. “China Is Breaking Hong Kong Treaty with UK, Says Boris
Johnson,” July 1, 2020, sec. World news.
http://www.theguardian.com/politics/2020/jul/01/china-is-breaking-hong-kongtreaty-with-uk-says-boris-johnson.
Thiessen, Marc A. 2020. “China Is Using Covid-19 to Throttle Hong Kong’s proDemocracy Movement.” Washington Post, May 21, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/05/21/china-is-using-covid-19throttle-hong-kongs-pro-democracy-movement/.
Thomson, Stephen, and Eric C. Ip. 2020. “COVID-19 Emergency Measures and the
Impending Authoritarian Pandemic.” Journal of Law and the Biosciences,
September, lsaa064. https://doi.org/10.1093/jlb/lsaa064.
Ting, Tin-yuet. 2020. “From ‘Be Water’ to ‘Be Fire’: Nascent Smart Mob and Networked
Protests in Hong Kong.” Social Movement Studies 19 (3): 362–68.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14742837.2020.1727736.
Trounstine, Jessica. 2009. “All Politics Is Local: The Reemergence of the Study of City
Politics.” Perspectives on Politics 7 (3): 611–18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592709990892.
Uganda Daily. 2020. “‘Overwhelmed’ Police Looks on as NRM Hold Procession in
Gulu,” November 17, 2020, sec. Politics. https://ugdaily.com/overwhelmedpolice-looks-on-as-nrm-hold-procession-in-gulu/.
United Cities and Local Governments. 2009. Decentralization and Local Democracy in
the World: First Global Report by United Cities and Local Governments, 2008.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
Wisconsin Legislature v. Evers. 2020.
Xinhua. 2020. “Ugandan Security Agencies Start Enforcing Night Curfew to Contain
COVID-19 Spread,” April 1, 2020. http://www.xinhuanet.com/english/202004/01/c_138935918.htm.

Yoder, Jesse, Cassandra Handan-Nader, Andrew Myers, Tobias Nowacki, Daniel M
Thompson, Jennifer A Wu, Chenoa Yorgason, and Andrew B Hall. 2021. “How
Did Absentee Voting Aﬀect the 2020 U.S. Election?” Working paper. Stanford.
Záborszky Ede. 2020. “Minden, amit a gazdaságvédelmi akciótervről eddig tudni lehet.”
Index.hu, April 7, 2020.
https://index.hu/gazdasag/2020/04/07/amit_a_gazdasagvedelmi_akciotervrol_tud
ni_lehet/.
Zavala, Agnieszka Golec de, Kinga Bierwiaczonek, Tomasz Baran, Oliver Keenan, and
Adrian Hase. 2020. “The COVID-19 Pandemic, Authoritarianism, and Rejection
of Sexual Dissenters in Poland.” Psychology of Sexual Orientation and Gender
Diversity, 12.

