Impact of the first COVID-19 lockdown on scientific productivity and
workload in Denmark: a gender analysis
Claire Francesca Meehan1,2*, Ea Høg Utoft1,3*, Christine Parsons1,4*, Vanessa Jane Hall1,5, Mette Bendixen1,6,
Ida Vogel1,7, Katherine Patrice Gill1, Emma Louise Louth1,8 +
*Contributed equally
+ Corresponding author

Affiliations:
1. The Danish Association for Women in Science (DANWISE), Denmark
2. Department of Neuroscience, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark
3. Danish Centre for Studies in Research and Research Policy, Department of Political Science, Aarhus
University, Denmark
4. Interacting Minds Center, Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark
5. Group of Brain Development and Disease, Section Pathobiological Sciences, Department of
Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark
6. Department of Food and Resource Economics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
7. Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Denmark
8. Danish Research Institute of Translational Neuroscience (DANDRITE), Department of Biomedicine,
Aarhus University, Aarhus University, Denmark

Running title: COVID-19 on science workload in Denmark

Acknowledgements:
We would like to sincerely thank the entire DANWISE team for all of their hard work and contributions to our
organization. This manuscript represents one of the many projects that we work on together as a team and
could not be achieved without every member.
We are also indebted to Johanne Victoria Nedergaard Jensen from the Copenhagen University “Uniavisen”
and Maria Mortensen for their assistance in advertising the online survey.

1

Abstract
The first wave of the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent lockdown of Universities globally in the
spring of 2020 appears to have had a negative impact on female academics in countries studied to
date. Denmark is an exemplar country with clear legislative practices to support gender quality, and
differences between men and women with regards to unpaid house and care work are less
substantial than many other places. It is largely unknown whether Danish academics experienced
the same level of COVID-19-related disruption to productivity and whether women, or academics
with children in general experienced more serious disruption. To investigate the local effects of the
lockdown in Danish academia, we (i) performed an analysis of preprints in a single academic field
and (ii) surveyed academics employed at Denmark’s largest University. We found that parents with
young children worked less hours per day during the lockdown than academics with older or no
children and that this effect was more pronounced in women with young children. The vast majority
of both male and female scholars with teaching responsibility reported more time spent on
teaching. A larger proportion of junior academics felt their productivity decreased compared to
senior academics. Additionally, analyses of the number self-reported submitted grants and
manuscripts did not show any differences differ by gender or career level. However, the gender gap
did increase during the first month of the lockdown with respect to the number of manuscripts
submitted to preprint servers. This study contributes to emerging data on the impact of lockdowns
on academic productivity and highlights the negative impact on parents with young children that is
exacerbated in women with young children.

2

Introduction
Denmark ranks highly on indices concerning equality in the home. In 2018, an OECD study surveyed
28 countries and found that men in Denmark spend the most time on unpaid work, such as
household chores and grocery shopping compared to the other countries (OECD, 2018). Denmark
also has legislative policies allowing both fathers and mothers to share the parental leave of 52
weeks in total. A substantially government-subsidized childcare system is also available for families
with children. In addition, more women obtain a university education in Denmark than men (Danish
Ministry of Education and Science, 2020). Globally, the unequal distribution of domestic labour and
childcare is often cited as an explanation for the gender gap in senior management positions. Given
the Danish data on domestic labor and childcare, it could be expected that Denmark’s gender gap
in leadership positions might be smaller than in other countries.

However, the actual data presents a contradictory picture. Denmark ranks surprisingly low with
respect to female representation at the legislator, senior officials and manager level, ranking 95th
internationally (World Economic Forum, The Global Gender Gap 2018). This pattern is also observed
in science, with only 34% of associate professors and 23 % of full professors being women as of 2018
(Danish Ministry of Education and Science, 2020). These results are far behind many other countries,
including Denmark’s neighbors in Scandinavia, Sweden (46% and 28%), Finland (50% and 30%) and
Norway (48 % and 31%) (Danish Ministry of Education and Science, 2020). While Denmark has clear
legislature and government-financed childcare schemes, the traditional gendered family structures
still persist. Although Danish men perform more housework relative to men elsewhere, women
nonetheless still take on more house and care work than men (Cevea, 2016). Women also take more
parental leave, despite the possibility to equally share it (Statistics Denmark, 2019a).

There have been numerous discussions about the disproportionate burden of the pandemic on
women in general, and a concern that the COVID-19 lockdowns will amplify existing gender
inequalities in academic (Hansen 2020, Malish et al 2020, Oleschuk, 2020). Globally, data suggests
that female scientists may have been disproportionately affected by the COVID-19 lockdowns that
occurred during the first wave of the pandemic in 2020. In Denmark, the lockdown prevented
3

academic researchers from entering their work environments for two months, from 15th March to
15th May 2020. Scientific productivity is frequently judged by publication rates, which is one of the
main metrics used to evaluate scientists for funding, promotion and salary negotiations. In
Denmark, university hiring committees and granting bodies typically prioritize publication rates
when selecting candidates. As such, a reduction of academic productivity and output during COVID19 lockdowns is predicted to have serious consequences on career progression.

An initial analysis of publication rates found an overall increase in manuscript submissions to the
preprint servers arXiv and boiRxiv from 1st March to 30 April 2020 compared with both the January
to February 2020 or the same period in 2019 (Frederickson et al 2020). However, this increase was
more pronounced for male authors compared with female authors, irrespective if analyzed for all
authors, single authors or for corresponding authors. These results have been corroborated by
further studies focusing on author position showing a decrease in female first author submissions
across a larger range of preprint servers (including EarthAri, medRix, SoiArXiv and NBER) in March
and April 2020 compared to the same months in 2019 (Vincent-Lamarre et al 2020) and a decrease
in female corresponding authors in medRix relative to males (Wehner et al 2020).

While measures of pre-print uploads provide important insights into productivity, they do not
provide a comprehensive evaluation of the impact of the pandemic. Pre-print-based analyses
underestimate the pandemic effects, as many of the manuscripts were likely to have been in
preparation before the lockdown commenced. Furthermore, these global analyses do not account
for the different time windows of national lockdowns. To examine pandemic-specific effects, some
analyses have examined the number of manuscripts published specifically on COVID-19 because the
major

workload

for

these

(including

experimental

work,

analyses

and

manuscript

preparation/submission) would be more restricted to the COVID-19 lockdown period. An analysis of
papers listed in Pubmed mentioning COVID-19 revealed that, women constituted fewer first and
last authors (29 and 25% respectively, Pinho-Gomes et al 2020). When compared with an analysis
of medical publications from 2017 where females represented 40% of first authors, and 27% of
senior authors, these figures appear to reflect considerable reductions (Nielsen et al 2017).

4

Consistent with this, female first authors constitute a smaller proportion of COVID-19-related
submissions to preprint servers than in other research areas (Vincent-Lamarre et al 2020).

Overall, analyses of preprints and COVID-19-related research suggest disproportionate negative
effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on women in academia. In this study, we therefore asked: has
the pandemic had similar effects in Denmark relative to the global picture? Or does the greater
equality in unpaid work in Danish homes protect female researchers from the gender
disproportionate effects of COVID-19 on productivity? It is also unclear what happened to the
distribution of childcare and household tasks when state-assisted child care facilities closed for one
month during the lockdown. Despite the high levels of equality in Denmark, it is important to note
that a high number of children live with only one parent in Denmark (29% compared with an EU
average of 15%), and in these circumstances, the burden naturally falls more heavily on one parent.

Two different approaches were made to investigate the COVID-19 pandemic’s effects on female
academics in Denmark; The first approach consisted of an analysis of manuscript submissions to
BioRxiv, the preprint server for the biological sciences, with a focus on corresponding authors from
Danish institutions over a two month period during the first lockdown (15th March 2020 to 15 May
2020). Subsequently, we distributed a survey to researchers at the largest university in Denmark,
The University of Copenhagen, to estimate productivity. We defined “actual productivity” as the
numbers of manuscript and grant application submissions and “perceived productivity”, as the
amount of hours spent working including hours designated to teaching. In addition, participants
were asked to estimate their own productivity during the lockdown compared to the same time
period the year before. Preliminary results have been discussed in a correspondence piece in Nature
(Bendixen and Hall 2020). Here, we present and discuss the full data set.

The paper proceeds as follows: First, we introduce our methods, followed by a systematic review of
our empirical findings. Subsequently, the discussion offers a contextualization of our empirical
findings, based on feminist scholarship, under three subheadings: family structures, academic
organizing, and the Danish context vis-à-vis Denmark’s international reputation. In the concluding

5

remarks, we tie the study together and discuss its implications for institutional gender equality
efforts and future research.

6

Materials and Methods
Analysis using Preprint surveys
We catalogued author information for all preprints submitted to BioRxiV from the 15 th of March to
the 15th of May 2019 and the same months in 2020 (as described by Frederickson et al, 2020,
https://github.com/drfreder/pandemic-pub-bias/blob/master/README.me).

These

dates

correspond to the first two months of lockdown in Denmark. Open-source software, Genderize
(https://github.com/miriamposner/derive_gender/blob/master/derive-gender-from-a-column-offirst-names.md) was used to estimate the number of male and female corresponding authors from
the total submissions. Finally, we extracted any corresponding authors with a Danish affiliation to
determine if Danish authors showed the same trends as the rest of the international BioRxiV
submissions.

Survey
An online survey was performed using the platform “SurveyMonkey”, including questions regarding
actual and perceived productivity and time spent on domestic and teaching responsibilities (see
appendix Table 1). We recruited respondents from the University of Copenhagen via emails to
departments participating in equality programs at the University and via the online University
newspaper, Uniavisen. Survey responses were collected over a period of 35 days (the 20 th May to
24th June 2020).

Data analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software, USA). Data was
analyzed by Chi squared analysis or two-way ANOVA.

7

Results
The COVID-19 lockdown disproportionately affected preprint submissions for female
corresponding authors
The data analysis shows that the total submission rate for corresponding authors is higher in 2020
compared to the corresponding months in the previous year from across all countries analyzed
(Fig.1a). This result cannot be solely explained by the lockdown, as the general trend for submission
to BioRxiV has been increasing exponentially since 2014 (Abdill and Blekhman 2019), thus this rise
was to be expected. Although women make up a disproportionately smaller number of
corresponding authors (26-28.4%), there did not appear to be any clear difference between men
and women with respect to the proportion of corresponding authorships in the time period in 2020
compared to the same period in 2019 (Fig 1b). In contrast, when we examined the data for
corresponding authors with a Danish affiliation, an increase from 2019 to 2020 in total submissions
was observed for men but was not observed for women in the initial month of the Danish lockdown
(Fig. 1c). Consequently, the proportion of submission by gender, confirmed that for the first month
of the lockdown, female scientists constituted a much smaller proportion of the corresponding
authors (13%) compared to the same time period the year before (23%, Fig 1d). For the second
month however, the proportions were more similar for 2020 and 2019 (21% vs 18%, Fig 1d).
Figure 1. Analysis of corresponding
authors on BioRxiV during the
months of lockdown in 2020
compared to the same time in
2019. (A) The number of
corresponding
authors
with
typically male or female first
names for all submissions to
BioRxiV. (B) The number of
corresponding
authors
with
typically male or female first
names for all submissions to
BioRxiV expressed as a percentage
of the total submissions. (C) The
number of corresponding authors
with typically male or female first
names for submissions to BioRxiV
with a Danish affiliation. (D) The
number of corresponding authors
with typically male or female first
names for submissions to BioRxiV
with a Danish affiliation expressed
as a percentage of the total
submissions.

8

Survey results
The demographics of the respondents are shown in Fig 2. In total, 197 academics responded to the
survey. Ten were excluded because their career stage could not be determined. The remaining
responses from 75 men and 112 women were then analyzed. While all faculties were invited to
participate, 93% of respondents were from the Health or Science faculties (44.9% and 48.1%
respectively). The remaining participants were from law, humanities, theology and social sciences
(JUR, HUM, TEO and SAMF, respectively).

Respondents were from all career stages, with 15% being professors, 20% associate professors, 33%
assistant professors or postdoctoral scientists and 32% PhD students (Fig 2a). In this survey data,
there was a significant difference between the levels of academic seniority of the male and female
respondents (Chi-square analysis χ2 = 8.9, df =3 p = 0.03), with a higher percentage of the male
respondents being in later career stages (28% Associate professors and 20% professors, compared
to 15% and 12% for women respectively, Fig. 2b). However, this reflects the general representation
of women at the upper and lower career stages in Danish academia.

Figure 2. Demographics of Survey Respondents. (A) Career stage of respondents who indicated themselves as Ph.D. students (n
= 60), Postdoctoral Researchers/Assistant Professors (n = 61), Associate Professors (n = 38) and Professors (n = 28). (B) The
career stage was significantly different between men and women (p = 0.03). The number of respondents are as follows: for
women, Ph.D. students n = 40, Postdoctoral Researchers/Assistant Professors n = 42, Associate Professors n = 17 and Professors
n = 13. For men, Ph.D. students n = 20, Postdoctoral Researchers/Assistant Professors n = 19, Associate Professors n = 21 and
Professors n = 15. (C) Children living at home was highly dependent on career stage (p = 0.0001). (D) However, there was no
difference in the percentage of women vs. men with children living at home in our respondents (p = 0.6).

9

Approximately half of the respondents had children living at home and this proportion was similar
for men and women (Fig 2D. Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 1.0, df =2, p = 0.6). Those in the later career
stages were more likely to have children living at home as shown in Fig. 2C (Chi-square analysis χ 2 =
66.7, df =6, p = 0.0001), particularly those at the Associate Professor level. Some career stages had
relatively low numbers of some career stages having children living at home between the ages of 612 and 12-18, thus these were combined into one group (categorized as children ages 6+).

Teaching workloads increased irrespective of gender during the lockdown.
Roughly half of the respondents had teaching duties (44%). As the lockdown occurred during the
academic teaching calendar, those with teaching responsibilities were expected, with short notice,
to develop and provide new online teaching
replacements. Therefore, we asked if the lockdown
had caused their teaching duties to take more or less
time. The vast majority (83%) of those with teaching
responsibilities reported spending more time than
usual in teaching-related tasks (Fig.3). There also
appeared to be a trend towards more women than
men spending more time on teaching (89% vs 75%,
2

respectively (Chi-square analysis χ = 2.848, df =1, p =

Figure 3. Respondents with teaching responsibilities reported
more time spent teaching overall. For men with teaching
responsibilities n = 36 and for women n = 46.

0.0915, Fig. 3).

Reduced perceived productivity of early career researchers compared to more senior researchers.
We asked if people generally felt more or less productive during this time. A large majority of both
men (69%) and women (77.7%) reported being less productive than normal with only 6.7% men and
4.5% women perceiving themselves to be more productive (Fig 4a, Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 1.6, df
=2, p = 0.4). Having children did not, per se, appear to influence perceived productivity, with the
exception of those with children < 5 years old, with 92% reporting to feel less productive (Fig.4b,
Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 8.9, df =4, p = 0.06). Out of the 59 respondents with children between the
ages of 0 and 5 living at home, only 5 people reported feeling about the same level of productivity

10

(3 men and 2 women) while the remainder reported feeling less productive. Career stage had a
clearer and more significant effect on perceived productivity (Fig 4c, Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 66.7,
df =6, p = 0.0001), where some of those in the later, more stable career stages (associate professor
and professor levels) felt more productive, whereas those in the most precarious career stages
(Ph.D. student and postdoctoral researchers), felt less productive.

Figure 4. Self-rated productivity levels. (A) Both women (n = 112) and men (n =
75) tended to rate themselves as less productive overall and there was no gender
difference (p = 0.4). (B) Those with children under the age of 5 years old (n = 39)
showed a trend (p = 0.06) to more often rate themselves as less productive than
those with no children (n = 51) and children older than 6 years of age (n = 35).
(C) Those in earlier career stages, Ph.D. (n = 60) and Postdoctoral researchers (n
= 61) were much more likely (p = 0.0001) to rate themselves as less productive
than their more senior counterparts, the Associate (n = 38) and full Professors (n
= 28).

Female researchers with children had fewer working hours than others.
The respondents were asked to estimate the number of hours they were able to work during the
day during the lockdown. In general, both women and men estimated that they worked a similar
number of hours (Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 3.7, df =2, p = 0.2). However, for both men and women,
having children at home had a significant impact on their working hours (Fig 5A shows the data for
11

women: Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 26.6, df =4, p = 0.0001, Fig 5B shows the data for men: Chi-square
analysis χ 2 = 12.2, df =4, p = 0.02). Yet, if you compare the estimated working hours of men and
women with children at home, regardless of age, there is a significant effect of gender, where
women with children at home estimated that they were worked fewer hours at home than men
with children at home (Fig5c, Chi-square analysis χ 2 = 6.8, df =2, p = 0.03).

Figure 5. Estimated number of hours worked each day during the lockdown. (A) For women, those with children under the age of
5 years old (n = 35) estimated working less hours (p = 0.0001) than those with no children (n= 47) and children older than 6 (n =
29). (B) For men, those with children under the age of 5 years old (n = 21) also estimated working less hours (p = 0.02) than those
with no children (n= 37) and children older than 6 (n = 17). (C) By pooling together all women and men with children we can see a
clear curve where the majority of those without children estimated working between 6-8 hours a day and the majority of those
with children estimate being able to work only 3-5 hours a day

12

Grant submission remained constant during the first months of lockdown, while the number of
manuscripts submitted declined.
Finally, the respondents were asked to measure their productivity by research outputs in the form
of publications and grants. For this analysis, the PhD group was excluded as most did not submit any
publications (77%) or grants (83%) in 2019, as is typical at that career stage. With respect to the
number of publications (Fig 6a), there was no significant effect of gender (two-way ANOVA, F(1,248)
= 0.2, p = 0.6, ηp2 = 0.011), however, but there was a significant effect for year, indicating that fewer
publications were submitted overall in 2020 than in 2019 (two-way ANOVA, F(1,248) = 4.0, p = 0.047
, ηp2 = 0). There was no significant interaction between these two variables (two-way ANOVA,
F(1,248) = 0.02, p = 0.9, ηp2 = 0) nor any significance following following Sidaks post-hoc analysis.

For the number of grant applications submitted by postdoctoral researcher or more senior (Fig 6b),
there was no significant effect of gender (two-way ANOVA, F(1,248) = 0.6, p = 0.4, ηp2 = 0.03) or year
(two-way ANOVA, F(1,248) = 0.02, p = 0.9, ηp2 = 0) and there was no interaction between the two
variables (two-way ANOVA, F(1,248) = 0.07, p = 0.8, ηp2 = 0). No significant effects were found
following Sidaks post-hoc analysis.

Figure 6. Number of publications and grants submitted in the period of March 13 to May 10 in 2019 compared to the same period in
2020, during the lockdown. (A) The number of publications submitted by women (n = 72 respondents) and men (n = 54 respondents)
at the career level of postdoctoral researcher or more senior in 2019 was slightly higher than in 2020 (p = 0.047). There was no
significant effect of gender on this measure. (B) For the number of grants submitted by the same group of respondents there was
not significant effect of year or gender.

13

Discussion
Our results show that that there were clear differences on the consequences of the lockdown for
productivity depending on whether researchers had young children at home, whether they had
teaching responsibilities and, importantly, depending on their gender. To understand the reduction
in productivity of female researchers revealed by this study in context, below, we expand on three
contextual foci: family structures, academic organizing, and the Danish context vis-à-vis Denmark’s
international reputation.
Family structures
Firstly, the analysis showed that women submitted fewer preprints as corresponding authors than
men in the first month of the lockdown compared with the same time period the year before (13%
vs 23%). We further found that having children per se did not appear to influence perceived
productivity with the exception of those with children < 5 years old. 92% of this group reported
perceiving themselves as less productive. For both men and women, having children at home had a
significant impact on their working hours. However, women with children at home estimated that
they could worked less hours at home than men with children at home.
It is important to note that women living in heterosexual relationships with children by no means
account for the circumstances of all female researchers, however, this traditional family structure
remains the norm in Denmark (Borchorst, 2004). This traditional norm implies that, while both
partners work, the male’s career often takes precedence, and women continue to take on more
house and care work than men (Cevea, 2016). Disparity in care-related work is especially evident in
parental leave in relation to childbirth1 (Statistics Denmark, 2019a,b), which is known to influence
the division domestic duties, thus, reinforcing the traditional gender roles (Cederström, 2019;
Damm & Kirkbak, 2020). Finally, part-time work contracts, typically used to accommodate childcare
needs, are much more prevalent among Danish women than men2 (Teigen & Skeije, 2017). Although
part-time working arrangements are generally less prevalent in academia than in other occupations,
1

In 2018, Danish mothers held on average 278.9 days of maternity leave, whereas Danish fathers held on in average
40 days (Statistics Denmark, 2019)
2
In 2014, 15 per cent of Danish men worked part time compared with 35 per cent of Danish women (Teigen & Skeije,
2017).

14

they are not unheard of. Based on the above contextual factors, it is certainly plausible that during
the Danish COVID-19 lockdown, academic couples may have defaulted to a similarly skewed
arrangement with adverse consequences for women’s productivity. Although our survey data can
only inform us about the survey participants’ self-reported productivity and care work, it is further
important to mention that there is a tendency for Danish women and men to disagree on the level
of equality in the home. That is, men tend to overestimate their contribution to domestic duties
compared with women’s perceived estimation of their male partner’s executed domestic workload
(Cederström, 2019). Finally, we note that some of the surveyed participants would have been
international scholars employed at Copenhagen University. Family structures may differ based on
cultural norms, and individual families may organize themselves in non-traditional ways with
respect to professional and domestic/care work. Here, we can only speak to general tendencies to
interpret of the findings of this study.
That the difference between 2020 and 2019 in terms of women’s submissions of preprints as
corresponding authors evened out from March to April (13% compared with 20% for March, and
21% compared with 18% for April) could suggest that a re-negotiation of the division of labour
during lockdown may have taken place. However, we abstain from making any conclusions on this
point.
Academic organizing
Research versus teaching responsibilities
According to our analysis, of those participants with teaching obligations, the vast majority reported
spending more time on teaching, which is unsurprising given the short notice of converting face-toface lectures to online formats. However, feminist scholarship on gender inequalities in academia
makes evident that different aspects of academic work carry different gendered meanings, with
publication (masculine connotations of accomplishment and ambition) ranking highest and
undergraduate teaching (feminine connotations of care and communication) ranking lowest (Leta,
et al, 2013). It is further widely accepted that publications are more easily translatable into academic
career ‘capital’, which is not equally accessible to all (Ibid). Research points to a tendency that
female academics appreciate and prioritize teaching and supervision activities more than their male

15

counterparts (Winslow, 2010), and that teaching more often simply falls on women as the
‘housewives’ of academia (Angervall & Beach, 2017, 2020). Such factors are crucial to consider when
interpreting the result of our analysis, as different academic work tasks are already fundamentally
gendered and, based on this study, skewed. Other factors may also play a role in determining who
are affected by the transition to remote teaching, and how they are affected. For example, senior
scholars with decades of teaching experience may have an extensive catalogue of lecture content
to fall back on, whereas junior scholars may be more tech savvy.
While article manuscripts can be submitted all year round, the Danish lockdown occurred at a
pivotal time in the academic calendar, when many research foundations had critical annual
application deadlines for calls for potentially career defining grants (including starting and ascending
investigator grants). Despite this, this study found no difference in number of grants submitted in
2020 compared with 2019. Further research is therefore warranted to determine the extent to
which researchers may have prioritized grant applications over article submission during the
lockdown, as childcare and increased teaching-related pressures may not have permitted
undertaking both. Furthermore, over the last decade, Danish academia has changed considerably
with the emergence of focused research centers where researchers often have only minimal or no
teaching responsibilities. Researchers working in the same institutions but in the traditional
teaching departments with considerably higher teaching loads already must compete against these
centers for funding, and would thus being even further disadvantaged by the increased teaching
burden at this critical time. Based on the Swedish context, Angervall and Beach (2020) state that
women more likely to work in the less research-intensive centers and departments, as well as in –
what they term – ‘teaching intensive academic fields’ such the social sciences and humanities. As
the latter point certainly applies to the Danish academy (Danish Ministry of Education and Science,
2020), a gendered imbalance could be assumed that may affect the aggregate success rate for grant
applications. To date, there are no analyses have been published regarding the gender distribution
of staff at teaching versus research-intensive departments in Denmark, which warrants further
investigation.

16

Denmark’s international reputation
From the outset, Denmark seems to tick all the boxes to ensure gender parity, including appropriate
legislation and the structures necessary to facilitate women’s equal participation in the labour
market (Borchorst, 2009; Borchorst & Siim, 2008). However, when it comes to gender equality,
Denmark constitutes an interesting and contradictory case. It simultaneously tops international
gender equality rankings and falls noticeably behind with respect to on occupation-related metrics
(Utoft, 2020a), especially when compared with the other Nordic countries (Teigen & Skjeie, 2017;
Borchorst & Dahlerup, 2020). The gender distribution of parental leave days, as discussed above, is
one example, others include the low share of women in executive roles in the private sector, political
participation (World Economic Forum, 2019) and in the STEM fields (Danish Ministry of Education
and Science, 2020). Furthermore, the Danish culture pertaining to gender equality sets the country
apart. Danes demonstrate comparatively high levels of ‘perceived gender equality’, i.e., a trust that
gender discrimination is eliminated in all spheres of private and public life3 (Borchorst & Dahlerup,
2020; Utoft, 2020b), despite evidence to the contrary including the tentative results of this study.
The results regarding corresponding authors from Denmark did not mirror the international
averages for BioXriv with a clear reduction in the proportion of female corresponding authors
submitting papers in the first month of the lockdown. This difference, compared to the international
data might suggest that Danish female scientists were proportionally more affected by the initial
lockdown than in other countries. This conclusion, however, must be tempered by the fact that the
timing, duration, and severity of COVID-19 lockdowns differed across the globe. For example, in
Denmark, the first lockdown was comparatively short (2 months), which complicates analysis of
international data. Comparison of similar data in respect to corresponding authors from US
institutions submitting to BioRxiv did appear to confirm that Danish female scientists were more
affected than in the US. It is noteworthy that the total numbers of submissions were low, and, more
importantly, reflect manuscripts predominantly prepared prior to the lockdown. Therefore, it is

3

Also known as ‘modern sexism’ which is correlated with backlash and resentment towards gender equity demands
(such as gender equality interventions) (see Skewes, Fine & Haslam, 2018; Skewes, Skewes & Ryan, 2019).

17

important that further research is performed to follow-up on the data presented within this study
to determine the long-term effects of COVID-19 lockdowns on academic productivity.

Concluding remarks and implications
In this study, it was investigated whether female researcher in Denmark were disproportionately
affected by the first COVID-19 lockdown compared to men. This research question was examined
by an analysis of manuscript submissions to the preprint server BioRxiv, focusing on corresponding
authors from Danish institutions, and through a survey of researchers (ay different academic levels)
at the University of Copenhagen. The main results indicate that both men and women with younger
children as well as those with teaching responsibilities were disproportionally affected by the
lockdown. However, female researchers with younger children tended to be more affected than
their corresponding male colleagues.

In the above discussion, the findings were contextualized to unfold the structural and cultural
factors (domestic and institutional) that influence how and to what extent different researchers are
affected in the professional and personal life by such a disruption like a global pandemic. Whilst the
long-term consequences of the first lockdown upon female researchers is yet to be determined, the
more immediate consequences for individual women’s careers, especially early-career researchers
could soon be apparent. In general, Danish universities profess to ambitions of improving the
representation of women among tenured faculty, and most institutions work with gender equality
or diversity plans to realize this ambition (Danish Ministry of Education and Science, 2020). It is
worrisome that the pandemic may be magnify pre-existing inequalities. To counter this problem, it
will be crucial for universities to incorporate measures that fairly evaluate the qualifications of
candidates, takin the differential effects of the lockdowns into account.

Furthermore, this study presents a narrow focus on female researchers with an assumption that
women with children are in heterosexual relationships, which we admit does not represent the
whole picture. Singles, sole parents, and same-sex couples with children, may experience
18

disproportionate effects on professional productivity during the lockdown. However, in general, this
study demonstrates that the vast majority of researchers surveyed felt less productive during the
first lockdown, with more time spent on teaching commitments. Despite this, in general, many
managed to maintain grant submission, and eventually increase publication submission. This reveals
a real risk of burn-out amongst academics as a consequence of the radical changes to people’s
domestic and professional lives. Especially, it is noteworthy that the Ph.D. students and postdoc
scientists surveyed reported feelings of less productivity. While reduced perceived productivity is
different from burn-out, the consequence of both may result in a lack of motivation, increased stress
levels, and reduced research output. Reduced supervision or lack of access to laboratories and
necessary equipment during lockdown is likely to affect early-career researchers’ productivity. For
Ph.D. students and postdoc scientists in short, fixed-term contracts, publication success is critical
for employment. For these early career researchers, precarious working conditions are already
stressful, to which the lockdown may have amplified their feelings of performance anxiety and
career uncertainty. However, any further reflections on this point are beyond the scope of this
article.
This study presents a brief snapshot of the immediate impact of the first COVID-19 lockdown in
Denmark. Since this survey, Denmark has experienced its second lockdown and several of the largest
universities have announced predominately online teaching from January to April 2021. The effect
that we saw in our limited timeframe thus reflects the tip of the iceberg. Future research will be
needed to evaluate the long-term consequences of COVID-19 lockdowns not only in terms of
productivity but also the psychological impact on research and teaching staff.

19

References
Abdill RJ, Blekhman R. (2019). Tracking the popularity and outcomes of all bioRxiv preprints. Elife. 2019 Apr
24;8:e45133.
Angervall, P., and D. Beach. (2017). “The Exploitation of Academic Work: Women in Teaching at Swedish
Universities.” Higher Education Policy. Advance online publication. doi:10.1057/s41307- 017-0041-0.
Angervall P and Beach D. (2020) Dividing academic work: gender and academic career at Swedish
universities, Gender and Education, 32:3, 347-362
Bendixen M and Hall VJ ( 2020) How the pandemic could choke gender equity for female researchers in
Denmark. Nature. Career Column Sep 9.
Borchorst, A. (2004) Den kønnede virkelighed – den kønsløse debat. In: J. G. Andersen (ed.) Den
demokratiske udfordring (113-132). Copenhagen: Hans Reitzels.
Borchorst, A. (2009) Scandinavian gender equality: Competing discourses and paradoxes. Aalborg: Institut
for Historie, Internationale Studier og Samfundsforhold, Aalborg Universitet. FREIA's tekstserie, No. 69.
Retrieved from https://vbn.aau.dk/ws/portalfiles/portal/16672755/freia_wp_69.pdf
Borchorst, A., & Siim, B. (2008). Woman‐friendly policies and state feminism—Theorizing Scandinavian
gender equality. Feminist Theory, 9, 207–224.
Borchorst, A., & Dahlerup, D. (2020). Konflikt og konsensus: Det danske ligestillingspolitiske regime.
Copenhagen: Frydenlund.
Cederström, C. (2019) State of Nordic Fathers. Nordic Council of Ministers. Retrieved from:
http://norden.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1367228/FULLTEXT01.pdf. doi.org/10.6027/NO2019-044
Cevea (2016) Det kønsopdelte arbejdsmarked. Retrieved from https://cevea.dk/analyse/det-konsopdeltearbejdsmarked/
Damm EA & Kirkbak J (2020) Mødre bliver oftere hjemme, når børnene er syge. Arbejderbevægelsens
Erhvervsrå. Retrieved from: https://ae.dk/sites/www.ae.dk/files/dokumenter/analyse/ae_moedre-bliveroftere-hjemme-naar-boernene-er-syge.pdf
Danish Ministry of Education and Science (2020) Mænd og kvinder på de danske universiteter: Danmarks
talentbarometer 2019. Retrieved from: https://ufm.dk/publikationer/2020/maend-og-kvinder-pa-dedanske-universiteter-danmarks-talentbarometer-2019
Frederickson M, (2020). COVID-19’s gendered impact on academic productivity. Retrieved from:
https://github.com/drfreder/pandemic-pub-bias/blob/master/README.md
Hansen, D.S. (2020). Identifying Barriers to Career Progression for Women in Science: Is COVID-19 Creating
New Challenges?. Trends Parasitol. 2020 Oct;36(10):799-802.
Leta, J., G. Olinto, P. Batista, and E. Borges. (2013). “Gender and Academic Roles in Graduate Programs:
Analyses of Brazilian Government Data.” In Proceedings of ISSI 2013, Vienna, Volume 1, edited by J. Gorraiz,
E. Schiebel, C. Gumpenberger, M. Hörlesberger, and H. Moed, 796–810. Vienna: Facultas Verlags- und
Buchhandels AG.

20

Malisch JL, Harris BN, Sherrer SM, Lewis KA, Shepherd SL, McCarthy PC, Spott JL, Karam EP, MoustaidMoussa N, Calarco JM, Ramalingam L, Talley AE, Cañas-Carrell JE, Ardon-Dryer K, Weiser DA, Bernal XE,
Deitloff J. (2020). Opinion: In the wake of COVID-19, academia needs new solutions to ensure gender
equity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Jul 2020, 117 (27) 15378-15381.
Nielsen MW , Andersen JP , Schiebinger L , et al . One and a half million medical papers reveal a link
between author gender and attention to gender and sex analysis. Nat Hum Behav 2017;1:791–6.
Oleschuk, M. (2020). Gender Equity Considerations for Tenure and Promotion during COVID-19. Can Rev
Sociol. 2020 Aug;57(3):502-515.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD] (2018). Balancing Paid Work, Unpaid W
Retrieved from: https://www.oecd.org/gender/balancing-paid-work-unpaid-work-and-leisure.htm
Pinho-Gomes A-C, Peters S, Thompson K, Hockman C, Ripullone, K, Woodward M, Carcek C. (2020) Where
are the women? Gender inequalities in COVID-19 research authorship. BMJ Global Health2020;5:e002922.
Skewes, L., Fine, C. & Haslam, N. (2018) Beyond Mars and Venus: The role of gender essentialism in support
for gender inequality and backlash. PloS one, 13(7), 1-17.
Skewes, L., Skewes, J., & Ryan, M. (2019) Attitudes to Sexism and Gender Equity at a Danish University.
Kvinder, Køn & Forskning, 28(1-2), 71-85.
Statistics Denmark (2019a). Maternity benefits. Retrived from:
https://www.dst.dk/en/Statistik/emner/levevilkaar/offentligt-forsoergede/barselsdagpenge
Statistics Denmark (2019b) Ligestilling i Danmark – Familie. Retrived from:
https://www.dst.dk/da/Statistik/emner/levevilkaar/ligestilling/ligestillingswebsite#1
Teigen, M. & Skjeie, H. (2017) The Nordic gender equality model. In O. Knutsen (ed.) The Nordic models in
political science: Challenged but still viable? (125- 148). Oslo: Fagbokforlaget. Retrieved from:
https://www.samfunnsforskning.no/core/bilder/artikler/the-nordic-gender-equality-model.-comparingscores-%28short-version%29.pdf
Utoft, E. H. (2020a). Motivation, organisational gender equality work and the postfeminist gender regime: A
feminist approach (Politicas PhD Series). Department of Political Science, Aarhus University, Aarhus,
Denmark. Retrieved from https://politica.dk/politicas-phd-serie/
Utoft, E. H. (2020b). Manoeuvring within postfeminism: A study of gender equality practitioners in Danish
academia. Gender, Work & Organization. 27: 778-787
Vincent‐Lamarre, P. , Sugimoto C.R. and Larivière V.. 2020. The Decline of Women's Research Production
during the Coronavirus Pandemic.” Nature Index. Retrieved from:https://www.natureindex.com/newsblog/decline-women-scientist-research-publishing-production-coronavirus-pandemic.
Werner MR, Li Y, MS and Nead KT (2020). Comparison of the Proportions of Female and Male
Corresponding Authors in Preprint Research Repositories Before and During the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Research Letter. Medical Journals and Publishing. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3(9):e2020335.
Winslow, S. (2010). Gender inequality and time allocations among academic faculty. Gender &
Society, 24(6), 769-793.

21

World Economic Forum (2018). The Global Gender Gap Report 2018. Retrieved from
https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-gender-gap-report-2018

22

Appendix

Questions

Response options

Which faculty are you in

Health science
Natural Science
Humanities

What career stage are you?

Ph.D. student
Postdoctoral researcher/adjunkt
Associate Professor/lektor
Professor
Other

Gender

Male
Female
Non-binary
Prefer not to say

Do you have children living at home?

Yes, age 1-5
Yes, age 5-12
Yes, age 12 – 18
No

How many hours have you realistically been working per

Less than 3

day from home?

3-5
5-8
8-12
12+

If you have teaching obligations do you feel these have

More time than usual

taken

The same time as usual
Less time than usual
I do not have teaching obligations

During the dates of March 13 to May 10 this year how

Research papers (submitted yourself)

many of the following have you submitted:

Research papers (other author submitted)
Review articles (submitted yourself)
Review articles (other author submitted)
Book chapters
Grant applications (as main applicant)
Grant applications (as co-applicant)

23

During the dates of March 13 to May 10 last year how

Research papers (submitted yourself)

many of the following did you submit:

Research papers (other author submitted)
Review articles (submitted yourself)
Review articles (other author submitted)
Book chapters
Grant applications (as main applicant)
Grant applications (as co-applicant)

Do you generally feel you are:

More productive than usual
Less productive than usual
About as productive as before.

Table 1: Survey distributed to researchers at the University of Copenhagen.

24

