Viral Solidarity? EU Solidarity and Risk-Sharing in the
COVID-19 Crisis*
Björn Bremer (Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies)†
Theresa Kuhn (University of Amsterdam)
Maurits J. Meijers (Radboud University Nijmegen)
Francesco Nicoli (Ghent University)
March 2021
Abstract
Fiscal integration has long been regarded as a necessary condition to ensure the long-term stability of the euro.
In the aftermath of the euro crisis, concerns about a populist backlash of Eurosceptic voters constrained national
governments in their ability to pursue such integration. However, during the COVID-19 pandemic, national
leaders were able to agree to the Next Generation EU, a pandemic recovery fund of over 750 billion euro
establishing an unprecedented, far-reaching, albeit temporary, fiscal stabilization capacity. Still, we know very
little about citizens’ preferences towards the pandemic recovery fund? To answer this question, we conducted
an original survey experiment on public support for different designs of a European pandemic recovery fund.
We fielded the survey in five European countries (France, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands, and Spain) in July
2020, at the time that national leaders agreed on the recovery fund. Our results show that there is surprisingly
high support for a joint European fiscal instrument and that citizens react to different elements of the pandemic
recovery fund. They prefer a broad program that is directed at countries in need, but they are skeptical about
common debt. Yet, citizens’ skepticism towards common debt is not important enough for them to negatively
evaluate the program as a whole. Overall, the pandemic recovery fund agreed under ‘Next Generation EU’ is a
well-tailored instrument to generate widespread political support across European member states.

Keywords
Fiscal integration; risk sharing; solidarity; European Union; pandemic recovery fund; public opinion; conjoint
experiment

*

We are grateful for the financial support from the Amsterdam Centre for Inequality Studies (AMCIS) and the
Amsterdam Centre of European Studies (ACES) at University of Amsterdam, Ghent University, and the
Department of Political Science and the Europeanization of Policy and Law (EUROPAL) hotspot at Radboud
University Nijmegen.
†
Corresponding author: Björn Bremer, Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies, Paulstr. 3, 50767
Cologne, Germany. Email: bremer@mpifg.de

Introduction
The global COVID-19 pandemic has posed a major challenge to international solidarity and
cooperation in the European Union (EU). Countries like Italy and Spain, who were most severely
hit by the first wave of the pandemic, asked for medical and economic support from the other
member states, and many European leaders, most notably Angela Merkel, Emmanuel Macron, and
Ursula von der Leyen repeatedly called for European solidarity to tackle this unprecedented public
health and ensuing economic crisis. In turn, the governments of other member states, especially
the ‘frugal four’ – Austria, Denmark, Finland, and the Netherlands, were reluctant to provide
support to their southern neighbors. This opposition led to acrimonious intergovernmental
debates over the size, form, and conditions of economic support.
This conflict has exacerbated the historical North-South divide that has plagued European politics
since the beginning of the euro crisis in 2010. It had already been preceded by a long struggle to
make significant progress with fiscal integration, which many scholars and policy-makers see as a
necessary condition for ensuring the long-term stability of the euro area (De Grauwe 2018;
Copelovitch, Frieden and Walter, 2016; Jones et al., 2016). Indeed, policymakers faced the same
dilemma in response to the pandemic as they had done in response to the euro crisis: while a joint
European strategy to tackle the crisis and its dramatic and unequal economic consequences was
sorely needed, national leaders feared that other member states would take advantage of their
solidarity and were wary of a populist and Eurosceptic backlash among their voters. Existing
research shows that European governments were subject to a ‘constraining consensus’ (Hooghe
and Marks, 2009) or a ‘democratic constraint’ (Beramendi and Stegmueller, 2020) in the past
because voters in northern countries like Germany were said to oppose any fiscal risk-sharing that
involves substantial cross-border redistribution (Bechtel et al. 2014; Walter et al. 2020; Degner and
Leufen, 2020; Howarth and Schild, 2021).
Many observers were, therefore, surprised that the EU was able to agree on a pandemic recovery
fund, Next Generation EU, establishing a far-reaching, albeit temporary, fiscal stabilization
capacity in July 2020, only a few months after the pandemic had begun. The recovery instrument
involves unprecedented borrowing by the European Commission on the financial markets up to
€ 750bn, € 390bn of which will be distributed in the form of grants, to support member states
during the pandemic.1

1See

https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/recovery-plan-europe_en (accessed 2 March 2021).

1

To what extent are policy makers’ concerns about a Eurosceptic backlash against fiscal integration
in the pandemic recovery fund warranted? We actually know little about whether European
citizens support European reforms to tackle this crisis, and under which conditions such joint
responses are politically viable and perceived as legitimate. In particular, the different proposals
for a European recovery fund that were discussed by political leaders in summer 2020 raise the
question of what citizens across European countries think of different elements of such a program.
Which factors drive support for tackling the unequal economic and health care consequences of
the crisis at the European level? In addition, how does this support for the recovery fund differ
across countries and individuals?
To answer these questions, we use a novel conjoint experiment to assess public support for
European solidarity and risk-sharing in the fight against the coronavirus. A conjoint experiment is
suitable to test public support for alternative policy options that were on the negotiation table in
July 2020 because it allows us to gauge both the role that specific policy dimensions play in driving
support for a European recovery fund as well as the overall level of support for different options.
Rather than measuring public preferences for fiscal integration in the abstract or post-hoc, our
study measures individuals’ specific policy preferences along the different dimensions of a specific
fiscal instrument, the pandemic recovery fund, at a moment of high public salience.
The various policy dimensions in the conjoint experiment were derived from the EU-level
negotiations on the European recovery fund as well as previous research on public support for
risk-sharing and solidarity in the EU (i.e., Bechtel et al., 2017, Kuhn et al., 2020). The survey
experiment was then fielded in a two-week window in July during which European leaders
negotiated the fund at the decisive European Council summit. We estimate public support for
European solidarity and risk-sharing based on nationally representative samples in five EU
member states: France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, and Spain. These five countries were key
players in the European Council negotiations and they also represent relevant variation in the
negotiation positions on the recovery fund, and fiscal integration more generally.
Our results show that the policy design of the pandemic recovery fund affects citizen support and
that this varies across countries and individuals. The findings indicate that there is considerable
overall support for the pandemic recovery fund agreed under ‘Next Generation EU’ and that a
plurality of citizens believe a European pandemic recovery fund to have a positive impact.

2

Contested Fiscal Integration and Solidarity in the European Union
Fiscal integration is often said to be a prerequisite for the survival and thriving of the EU, and the
European Monetary Union (EMU) in particular (e.g. Mundell, 1961; De Grauwe, 2018). Yet, both
the need for and approach to fiscal integration is highly contested across the European Union.
Crucially, this political contestation over fiscal integration occurs in a critical moment of European
integration. The EU no longer enjoys the silent public support that characterized earlier phases of
integration (Hooghe and Marks, 2009). Even more so than other international organizations, the
EU has become increasingly subjected to widespread politicization in domestic politics (Hutter et
al., 2016; De Wilde and Zürn, 2012). The widening and deepening of the EU is now subject to
democratic constraints as widespread public support is needed for substantial steps forward in
integration (Hooghe and Marks, 2009; Beramendi and Stegmueller, 2020). The fragmented nature
of the European polity makes it difficult to forge viable political agreements.
On matters of fiscal integration, voters in northern Europe are typically opposed to risk-sharing
and cross-border redistribution in the EU (Bechtel et al., 2014; Walter et al., 2020; Beramendi and
Stegmueller, 2020; Degner and Leufen, 2020; Howarth and Schild, 2021). Voters in southern
Europe are increasingly prone to blame their countries’ economic woes on the shortcomings of
the EMU design, as the prolonged eurozone crisis substantially increased dissatisfaction with the
EU (Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2016; Hobolt and de Vries 2016; de Vries 2018). In the North
and the South alike, Eurosceptic forces have thus gained ground. Eurosceptic challenger parties
have secured sizeable parliamentary representation (de Vries & Hobolt, 2020) and mainstream
parties have toned down their support for European integration in response to Eurosceptic parties
(Meijers, 2017) and public opinion (Hagemann et al. 2017; Spoon and Williams, 2015). As national
governments respond to public opinion in intergovernmental bargaining (Schneider, 2018), these
developments have significantly narrowed member states’ opportunities for political compromise
on EU fiscal integration.
Despite the increasing success of Eurosceptic forces, there is some degree of public support for
risk-sharing and solidarity among Europeans. Even though Europeans are more inclined to show
solidarity towards co-nationals than towards citizens of other member states (Lahusen and Grasso,
2018, Kuhn and Kamm, 2019), there is in principle widespread support for some form of
international and European solidarity (Gerhards et al. 2019; Ferrera and Burrelli 2019;
Vasilopoulou and Talving, 2020). Yet public support for European solidarity is not unconditional.
It is higher if solidarity and risk-sharing are linked to clear conditions of coverage (Vandenbroucke
3

et al., 2018), it varies across policy areas, and it is higher in case of temporary and exogenous
shocks, such as natural disasters or a pandemic (Bremer, Genschel, and Jachtenfuchs, 2020; Cicchi,
Genschel, Hemerijk, and Nasr, 2020). As a result, initial evidence suggests that European solidarity
in the COVID-19 crisis is high across the EU, including crucial member states such as Germany
(Dennison and Zerka, 2020; Leuffen and Koos, 2020). In principle, respondents in northern
countries still oppose fiscal integration through eurobonds or ‘coronabonds’, but this opposition
wanes when joint borrowing averts the breakdown of the eurozone (Baccaro, Bremer, and
Neimanns, 2020).

The Multidimensionality of Public Opinion on the Pandemic Recovery Fund
In sum, research on public opinion towards European solidarity and fiscal integration comes to
quite opposite conclusions. On the one hand, there is mounting empirical evidence that citizens
are reluctant to support cross-national risk-sharing (Bechtel et al., 2014; Beramendi and
Stegmueller, 2020). On the other hand, a large body of research shows that there is lingering
potential for public support for EU solidarity, especially in times of crisis (Gerhards et al. 2019;
Kuhn and Kamm, 2018; Vasilopoulou and Talving, 2020). How can we make sense of these
inconclusive findings in support of risk-sharing and solidarity in the EU?
We argue that European fiscal integration is multidimensional and public support depends on
specific features of the policy instrument and the political context at play. In a nutshell, Europeans
are ready to help citizens of other member states in need, but they are fiscally conservative and
oppose making (joint) debt. Existing research shows that support for European bailouts (Bechtel
et al., 2017), European unemployment insurance (Vandenbroucke et al., 2018), euro membership
(Franchino and Segatti, 2019), and fiscal integration (Beetsma et al., 2020) depend on the specific
design of these policies. As a form of fiscal integration par excellence, we expect public opinion on
the pandemic recovery fund to similarly hinge on the specific policy features of the recovery fund.
The recovery fund is a complex and highly politicized program, which is constituted by several
policy dimensions that cannot be easily reduced to broad matters of principle. In this context, we
investigate public preferences on the specific policy dimensions of this unique and unprecedented
EU policy initiative as they were debated in the EU-level negotiations in the summer of 2020. We
explore which specific features of the European pandemic recovery fund matter to citizens, and
which combinations of policy dimensions find overall political support. We distinguish three
aspects that were pivotal in the intergovernmental negotiations, and that reflect theoretically salient
4

aspects of public opinion on EU politics: the scope of the recovery program, the degree of risksharing, and the governance mechanism of the program (see also Bénassy-Quéré et al., 2020).2
Scope
First, the scope of the pandemic recovery fund relates to the purpose and the duration of the
program. Both reflect key divisions in public opinion as well as divisions between member states
during the negotiations in July 2020. In terms of purpose, previous research on fiscal integration
shows that while support for EU spending on healthcare is high in all countries, divisions in public
support emerge when we look beyond healthcare, for instance on education or economic support
(Beetsma et al., 2020). These divisions likely reflect pre-existing differences in public perceptions
on policy priorities. Public opinion data from a 2018 Eurobarometer survey shows that important
divergences exist among European publics regarding the most important issues on the table, with
Germany and the Netherlands prioritizing the environment, and France, Italy, and Spain
highlighting concerns about unemployment and the broader economic situation (European
Commission, 2019). While some governments favored a narrow program that would be solely
used to support member states’ healthcare systems, others wanted the recovery fund to address
broader economic and political challenges. The latter supported an expansive instrument that
would not only focus on support for countries’ health care challenges but also provide support for
member states’ economic recovery from the pandemic. Others also supported linking the
pandemic recovery fund with the European Green Deal, the EU’s flagship program to support a
green turn in the economy which had been agreed upon just before the beginning of the pandemic
in 2019.3
In addition, the duration of the program is a salient characteristic of the recovery fund (Gocaj &
Meunier, 2013). The question of whether to install a temporary or permanent recovery instrument
is likely important for citizens, as it could entail a significant deepening of integration in times of
crisis. The issue was also hotly debated in the negotiations. Some member states argued in favor
of establishing a permanent facility that could be reactivated in future crises, while others, such as
the Netherlands, insisted that the program be temporary, limited to the COVID-19 pandemic
(Howarth & Schild, 2021). This division mirrored discussions from the Eurozone crisis when
policy-makers disagreed over whether permanent institutions would be required to ensure the

While we pre-registered expectations about the country- and individual-level variation in support for certain policy
attributes, we did not pre-register expectations about the average support for policy attributes across the five
countries.
3 See https://ec.europa.eu/info/strategy/priorities-2019-2024/european-green-deal_en (accessed online 17 March
2021)
2

5

stability of the Eurozone (De Grauwe 2018). Early proposals, for instance by Carnot et al. (2017),
Beblavy et al. (2017), and Lenarčič and Korhonen (2018) attempted to find a middle ground by
proposing ‘rainy-day’ funds. These funds, inspired by the US fiscal capacity designs, are permanent
collective insurance institutions that force member states to save in good times and remain
‘dormant’ until an economic downturn activates a trigger, after which the collective insurance
begins disbursements. Several of the original schemes proposed by Beblaby et al. (2017) allow for
the emission of joint debt, therefore a representing hybrid model whereby a debt-emitting
institution is kept on standby to deal with future crises.
Overall, we expect that voters are more likely to support a more expansive recovery program rather
than a recovery fund with a narrowly defined purpose. The COVID-19 pandemic presents a large,
exogenous, and symmetrical shock causing an unprecedented economic crisis in all European
democracies. In this context, it is likely that citizens support a broad program, as a narrowly defined
program likely would provide little overall stabilization and would overlook challenges related to
economic recovery and combating climate change (Nicoli, 2019). In addition, benchmarking
theory suggests that citizens’ preferences for EU integration are benchmarked against possible
alternative states (De Vries, 2018; 2020). Arguably, the Eurozone crisis provided an example of
how hesitant and reluctant fiscal decision-making harmed member states (Guzman et al. 2016),
against which citizens evaluate the recovery fund.
For similar reasons, we also expect that citizens favor a permanent solution to the problem of
economic stabilization in the EU (and especially in the EMU). In part, citizens may prefer to reduce
the future political and economic uncertainty associated with new negotiations in future crises
should the solution be not permanent (see Thygesen et al. 2020). Some citizens may also be aware
of the weakness of a monetary union without mechanisms of internal stabilization, not last through
the experience of the euro crisis.
Risk-Sharing
Second, the extent of risk-sharing through fiscal integration is a salient question to both citizens and
policymakers. Citizens in different European countries differ in their preferences for EU risksharing, with citizens from northern countries more likely to be more opposed to cross-country
risk-sharing than their southern counterparts given the substantial distributive implications. In the
EU Council meetings in the summer of 2020, questions of risk-sharing and redistribution were
central to the negotiations and reproduced long-standing divisions between the member states –
pitting the ‘North’ against the ‘South’.
6

Broadly speaking, the extent of risk-sharing is a function of three dimensions: (i) how the program
is financed; (ii) how the funds are distributed; and (iii) how the money is repaid. In terms of
financing, the pivotal question is whether existing funds from other areas of EU expenditure are
to be repurposed, or whether the recovery fund is endowed with additional resources financed by
joint borrowing. With respect to distribution, the fund could support all countries equally, based
on population size, or it could primarily support countries in need. Finally, risk-sharing is also a
function of how the money is repaid. This was in fact the most contested issue in recovery fund
negotiations: Do countries repay exactly what they received or do countries repay together, i.e., do
more affluent countries repay relatively more than what they received and less affluent countries
less? This discussion has been commonly referred to as a debate of loans vs. grants. Arguably, only
the latter option would constitute far-reaching fiscal integration, but the former would also
facilitate counter-cyclical stabilization given that repayment happens in the future and given that it
allows countries to access funds more easily compared to a national solution due to better
borrowing conditions.
We expect the issue of risk-sharing to be contentious, and we expect little agreement among
European citizens. Yet, on average, we expect citizens to support some form of risk-sharing, but
not others. Government debt, and especially joint European debt, is often considered unpopular
(Peltzman 1992). We, therefore, expect that support for a European recovery program is higher
when it is financed by existing resources, such as the EU’s Multiannual Financial Framework
(MFF) rather than financing it through additional debt.
The extent to which citizens support redistribution of these funds from high-income to lowincome countries depends to a large extent on the strength of European solidarity. Given EU
citizens’ tendency to support European solidarity, especially in times of crisis and to avert worse
consequences (Cicchi et al. 2020; Baccaro et al, 2020), we expect that voters prefer distribution as
a function of need, increasing the likelihood to support a recovery fund that assists countries hit
hardest by the pandemic, rather than a distribution that reflects population size.
The joint liability and repayment of these funds are expected to be unpopular, on average. The
hotly contested debate about loans vs. grants was influenced by questions of moral hazard that
surfaced during the Eurozone crisis (Rathbun et al, 2019; Warren, 2018). In a nutshell, people fear
that net beneficiaries do not have enough incentives to responsibly manage the funds if they do
not have to pay them back. Based on notions of deservingness and reciprocity which influence

7

public opinion preferences (Baute et al. 2021),4 we expect that voters prefer funds to be paid out
in the form of loans rather than grants, i.e. that each country repays exactly what it receives from
the program.
Governance
Finally, a third key polarizing issue concerned the question of governance, i.e., who takes decisions
about the pandemic recovery fun. Public opinion is often divided on the extent to which different
national and European institutions are trusted (De Wilde, 2021; Talving and Vasilopoulou, 2021),
and the role that European or national policy-makers should play in the governance of the
European economic institutions is a debated issue (Vandenbroucke et al., 2018; Beetsma et al.,
2020). Which institution holds decisional power ultimately impacts who is able to control, monitor,
and eventually suspend the recovery program in case of non-compliance.
The question of governance is, therefore, one of the most critical aspects of fiscal integration,
touching on the very core of moral hazard, conditionality, and national sovereignty. The different
logics of decision-making – supranational, intergovernmental, or national – each have their
advantages and disadvantages, and the issue played a key role in the pandemic recovery fund
negotiations. On the one hand, delegating powers to the European institutions affect perceptions
of national sovereignty democratic legitimacy, which are particularly salient when it comes to fiscal
integration (Schmidt, 2005; Majone, 2014; Nicoli, 2017). On the other hand, national veto-players
in intergovernmental decision-making might paralyze the system and prevent effective and timely
use of the instrument, as has been documented in the case of the ESM (Kreilinger, 2019). A third
option would be to give full autonomy to individual national governments, but this comes with
the risk of moral hazard deemed highly problematic in northern European countries.
We expect that citizens are unlikely to support a unilateral national governance structure. Not only
do voters in northern countries worry about moral hazard (Rathbun et al. 2019), but citizens in
countries that experience a lower quality of government are also more likely to reject sole national
governance of the fund as they benchmark the EU against their national government’s
performance (De Vries 2018, 55). In contrast, supranational decision-making by the European
Commission may suffer from a lack of legitimacy and trust (Schafheitle et al, 2020). Hence, we
expect that the intergovernmental option is likely to be the least controversial option, given that it

4

According to Baute et al. (2021) public support for social policy in multilevel polities tend to be higher when both
benefits and responsibility increase hand-in-hand (reciprocity) and when recipients are seen as deserving, i.e. in need
of support for reasons that are outside their control.

8

retains some form of national control while reflecting the desirability for joint decision-making of
European programs.

Variation Across Countries and Individuals
Public opinion is likely to vary by country, and differences across countries may cancel each other
out. In particular, national sociotropic considerations vis-à-vis the recovery fund may play a role.
Sociotropic evaluations pertain to people’s perceptions of how the country as a whole is affected
by certain policy decisions (Mutz 1992; Mansfield & Mutz, 2009). As not all countries are equally
likely to directly benefit from the recovery fund, such assessments of collective self-interest are
therefore prone to vary across our selection of five countries. Public opinion in northern member
states is expected to reflect that they are more likely to be net contributors to the recovery fund
than southern or eastern member states. In addition, given the distinct advantages of joint
borrowing for southern member states, it is likely that public opinion in these countries is more
accepting of joint European debt instruments. We, therefore, expect that public support for a
recovery package with a broader purpose, a permanent structure, debt-based financing, joint
repayment, and redistribution is on average higher among respondents from Italy, France, and
Spain than among respondents from the Netherlands and Germany.5
We also anticipate individual-level differences to affect support for a pandemic recovery fund. We
expect differences between citizens to emerge due to differences in ideological attitudes and
because of evaluations of personal economic self-interest. Following the literature on the
dimensionality of the European political competition (Hooghe et al. 2003; Kriesi et al. 2008; Hutter
et al. 2016), we postulate that ideological preferences for the recovery fund are structured on two
dimensions: the pro-EU/anti-EU dimension and the left-right dimension. The extant literature
highlights the importance of non-material preferences and cultural dispositions for European
solidarity and risk-sharing. Individuals who identify as European, who hold cosmopolitan world
views, and who are more open towards immigration tend to be more supportive of European
solidarity (Bechtel et al 2014, Verhaegen 2018, Kuhn et al. 2018, Bauhr and Charron 2020, Nicoli
et al. 2020). Support for a European recovery fund should therefore be strongly guided by
individual attitudes toward the EU. More specifically, we expect respondents with more proEuropean orientations to be more supportive of a recovery fund that is permanent and serves a
The country-level and individual-level expectations were pre-registered as hypotheses in the pre-analysis plan:
https://osf.io/hc3tr
5

9

broader purpose. Pro-EU respondents are also expected to support risk-sharing more than their
anti-EU counterparts – displaying higher levels of support for debt-based financing, distribution
by need (i.e. redistribution), and joint repayment (i.e. grants). In addition, pro-EU respondents are
more likely to support supranational governance of the fund by the Commission.
Left-right orientations of citizens also likely affect their preferences for the recovery fund. Citizens
with a left-wing orientation are generally more supportive of redistribution and government
intervention in the economy. Existing research also shows that citizens’ left-right orientations
influence support for fiscal integration. Bechtel et al. (2017) find that left-wing Germans are more
supportive of EMU rescue packages than right-wing respondents. Kuhn et al. (2020) find that leftwing supporters are most likely to prefer generous EU-level unemployment benefits featuring
strong cross-country redistribution. We, therefore, expect respondents with a left-wing orientation
to be more supportive of a recovery fund with a more ambitious scope (i.e. broader purpose and
permanent structure) and more risk-sharing (i.e. debt-based financing, redistribution, and joint
repayment).
Finally, support for the pandemic recovery fund can stem from egotropic evaluations of personal
economic self-interest (see Singer & Carlin, 2013). Although the exogenous shock of the pandemic
affected the lives of virtually all European citizens, it had uneven consequences. The personal
economic situation of some people was more negatively affected by the pandemic than others
(Adams-Prassl et al., 2020). Exposure to the pandemic’s adverse economic consequences likely
affects people’s preferences for the recovery fund. We anticipate that people whose personal
economic situation is more affected by the crisis to be more supportive of a broad European
response to address these consequences. We, therefore, postulate that people who are more
exposed to the economic risks of the COVID-19 pandemic are more supportive of a recovery
fund that entails a broad scope (i.e. broader purpose and permanent structure) and a high degree
of risk-sharing (i.e. debt-based financing, redistribution, and joint repayment) than respondents
who are less exposed.

Overall Support for the Pandemic Recovery Fund
Establishing which policy characteristics increase and reduce support for the pandemic recovery
fund is important to determine the effects of policy design on policy package favorability. However,
it tells us little about citizens’ overall support for the recovery fund and the extent to which they
10

believe the recovery fund to have a positive impact on themselves and society as a whole. The key to
successful steps of fiscal integration is that there is sufficient public support across member states
for the compromise struck in intergovernmental negotiations. In a descriptive analysis, we thus
explore how the individual-level preferences for different policy characteristics of the recovery
fund aggregate to overall support for different scenarios of the recovery fund, including the
compromise struck by governments on July 21, 2020. How much overall support is there for the
recovery fund, and how does this vary across countries? Furthermore, we examine whether
respondents believe that a European pandemic recovery fund has a positive impact on their
household, region, country, and the EU as a whole, and how this varies across respondents.

Data and Methods
We fielded our survey experiment in July 2020 (10 July to 28 July). During the fieldwork, EU
governments agreed on the European pandemic recovery plan on 21 July 2020. In the period
immediately preceding our fieldwork, public debate about a supranational European response to
the crisis induced by the COVID-19 pandemic was highly salient. As such, we fielded our survey
experiment at a crucial juncture of the public discussions about a pandemic recovery fund.

Country Selection
We surveyed respondents in five European countries: France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, and
Spain. This selection of countries includes the most important countries involved in the
negotiations for the European pandemic recovery fund. Moreover, these countries have been
selected to ensure sufficient variation on country-level variables such as the likely net
recipient/contributor position from the recovery fund and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic. Italy and the Netherlands arguably represent the two opposing poles in the European
negotiations, where Italy represents the ‘southern bloc’ demanding pan-European solidarity, while
the Netherlands represents the ‘northern bloc (and more specifically the ‘frugal four’) that is
reluctant to engage in cross-border transfers. Germany and Spain also belong to the northern and
southern camps, respectively, but have taken more moderate negotiation positions – showing a
willingness to compromise. Finally, France is often a mediator between the northern and southern
bloc.

Sampling
In each of the five countries, we recruited 1,500 respondents, leading to a sample of 7500
respondents. The sample was drawn from a large online panel provided by the survey company
11

IPSOS. Sampling quotas were used to ensure that each country sample is nationally representative
of the following categories: age, gender, education level, and region of residence (NUTS1).6 The
survey was conducted in the countries’ main languages; in the Spanish region of Catalonia,
respondents could choose between taking the survey in Spanish or Catalan.

Design of the Survey Experiment
We use a conjoint experiment to study citizens’ preferences for different designs of a pandemic
recovery fund. Policy preferences have traditionally been measured with simple survey questions.
Yet, legislative proposals are usually constituted by multiple policy dimensions, which
unidimensional survey questions cannot capture appropriately. Moreover, citizens’ policy
preferences are highly contingent on the trade-offs that accompany each policy. In other words,
measures of policy preferences that do not vary across key policy components suffer from omitted
variable bias (Baccaro et al. 2020). For these reasons, conjoint experiments are increasingly used
to elicit respondents’ preferences on multi-dimensional issues (Hainmueller et al., 2014). They
allow researchers to study multiple treatment components simultaneously, enabling researchers to
study the relative influence of multiple theoretical components of interest in the same design
(Bechtel et al. 2017; Fesenfeld et al., 2020).
Before the experiment, respondents read a short introduction about the recovery fund negotiations
(see appendix A.1). We then asked respondents to evaluate three pairs of randomly assigned policy
packages. Each package consisted of the six policy dimensions related to scope, risk-sharing, and
governance laid out in the theory section with two or three levels each (Table 1)7 The six attributes
with two or three levels produce a conjoint design of 144 possible profiles (3*2*2*2*2*3).8 After
each iteration of the experiment, respondents were asked three questions.9 A forced-choice
question asked respondents which of the two proposals they prefer, resulting in a dichotomous
proposal choice variable. This binary proposal choice variable is our main dependent variable. Second,
respondents were asked to which degree they support the first and second proposal, with five
The quotas for the demographic categories are derived from Eurostat statistics. The quotas used and data on their
successful implementation is reported in the Appendix.
7 Appendix A provides a detailed explanation of the six policy dimensions.
8 We randomly select six profiles to be shown. There are no excluded combinations, i.e., we use a fully randomized
set-up except for the following restrictions. The same profile is not allowed to be shown twice on a screen, and the
same comparison will not be shown twice, independent of the order. Respondents get all levels of all attributes in
more or less the same proportion (i.e., if an attribute has three levels (A, B, C), the respondent will receive each A, B,
and C two times). On 60 percent of all profiles, there is a random change of one level on one attribute, making a small
adjustment to the profile. This is to ensure there will be no dependency in the data when analysing interaction effects
of attributes. It should be noted that the order of the attributes is fixed for each respondent so that the order in which
the attributes are shown to a particular respondent does not change across the three iterations of the experiment.
9 Figure A.1 in the appendix shows a screenshot of the conjoint experiment (in English) and the response questions,
which we introduce below.
6

12

answer categories ranging from ‘strongly oppose’ to ‘strongly support,’ resulting in a proposal rating
variable. We use respondents’ scores on the rating variable as an alternative dependent variable to
test the robustness of our results and to assess overall levels of support for specific recovery fund
scenarios. The policy package levels form the key explanatory variables. The levels are measured
as dummy variables – resulting in 14 dichotomous variables indicating the presence (absence) of
in any given policy package (see Table 1). After respondents had completed the three iterations of
the conjoint experiment, we also asked them a few follow-up questions. Specifically, we asked
them to abstract from the details and tell us how a European pandemic recovery fund would, in
their opinion, overall ‘affect the situation of’ themselves, their region, their country, and Europe
as a whole.10
Table 1. Overview of conjoint experiment dimensions and characteristics.
Policy Dimension

Attribute Description

What is the purpose of this program?

Duration

How long does the program last?

Financing

How is the program financed?

Repayment

How is the money repaid?

Distribution

How is the money distributed?

Governance

Risk-sharing

Scope

Purpose

Governance

Who decides how the money is spent?

Policy features
1. Support for healthcare only
2. Support for healthcare and
the economy
3. Support for healthcare and
measures against climate
change
4. The program is fully
terminated once the
coronavirus crisis is over
5. The program is maintained,
ready to be used in future
crises
6. Existing money is taken
from European resources
such as the EU budget
7. Additional money is
borrowed by the EU on the
financial markets
8. Each country repays exactly
what it receives
9. All countries repay together,
i.e., rich countries pay more
and poor countries pay less
10. Every country receives the
same per inhabitant
11. Countries hit harder by the
coronavirus crisis receive
more
12. The European Commission
13. Finance ministers of the
member states together
14. Finance ministers of the
member states individually

The question was asked in the following way: ‘You have seen many alternatives for a EU support program. You
might have supported some and opposed others. Overall, could you tell us how a European support program
would, in your opinion, affect the situation of: <yourself personally> , <your region>, <your country>, <Europe as
a whole>’.
10

13

The empirical section proceeds as follows. First, we test our expectations on the average effects of
six policy features on recovery fund support across all five countries. We then estimate the
heterogeneous treatment effects testing our expectations regarding country-level differences as
well as individual-level variation. Subsequently, we explore overall levels of support for a selection
of recovery fund scenarios, and we probe citizens’ assessment of the impact of a pandemic
recovery fund and variation therein.

Average Effects of Variations in Policy Features on Support
To assess the impact of policy characteristics on support for the pandemic recovery fund, we
estimate the average marginal component effects (AMCEs) of the policy levels (Hainmueller et al.,
2014). The AMCEs measure the average impact of a difference of policy level on the probability
to support a policy package. The three iterations of the experimental task result in six policy
package decisions per respondent. We stack our data so that the policy package k of choice task j
to respondent i represents a unique observation. For our 7501 respondents, this results in 45006
distinct observations. We use OLS regression analysis to predict the dependent variable on the
dummy variables representing the policy levels, with a value of 1 representing the presence of the
policy level in question. As such, the models assessing average main effects take the following
form:
𝑌!"# = 𝑋!"# 𝛽 + 𝑒!"#
where the dependent variable 𝑌!"# refers to policy package choice for any given respondent i
presented with policy package k in choice task j; 𝑋!"# represents a vector with the attributes of the
policy package presented to the respondent, and 𝑒!"# denotes the error term. As respondents’ cast
a judgment on six policy packages, we cluster our standard errors by respondents.11

In all of our models, we consider p-values of 0.05 to be the threshold of statistical significance. We use two-tailed
tests for all hypotheses.
11

14

Figure 1. Estimate AMCEs from the conjoint survey experiment

Note: The figure shows the average component-specific marginal effect (ACME) of a change in the value of one of
the six dimensions on the probability that the respondent choose the European support package. Responses from the
full sample are included and 95-percent confidence intervals are shown.

Figure 1 shows the marginal effects of the different policy levels vis-à-vis the baseline categories
for each policy dimension in a pooled analysis across the five countries included with 95 percent
confidence intervals. Overall, we see that almost all levels of the various policy dimensions have a
statistically significant, and rather sizeable, effect on policy package support. This strongly suggests
that respondents’ policy preferences on the recovery fund are indeed multidimensional and that
policy design impacts public support, suggesting that a conjoint design is suitable for assessing
respondents’ preferences on the recovery fund.
First, we turn to the scope of the recovery fund and examine preferences for the fund’s purpose
and duration. In line with our theoretical expectations, we find that respondents, on average, favor
a recovery fund with a purpose that is more expansive in scope than when the policy scope is less
ambitious. Specifically, the probability to support a policy package increases by 11.4 percentage
points if the purpose of the fund is to offer support for both healthcare and the economy
compared to support for healthcare only. Policy packages that offer support for healthcare and
15

climate change policy find higher support than packages with a sole focus on health care, but less
so than healthcare and economic support. Also in line with our expectations, the probability to
support the policy package increases by 4.75 percentage points when the recovery fund is
maintained to be used in future crises than when the program is fully terminated once the COVID19 crisis is over.
Second, policy features related to risk-sharing also steer public support. In terms of financing of the
recovery fund, the probability to support a policy package is reduced by 4.24 percentage points
when the EU borrows additional money on the financial markets as opposed to redeploying
existing EU resources. This is in line with our expectations. In terms of the distribution of the
funds, we find that the probability to support a policy package drops by 8.53 percentage points
when the funds are distributed by size, i.e. when all countries receive the same per capita as
opposed to a distribution by need. As expected, respondents thus tend to prefer a recovery fund
that distributes the money to those countries that have been hit hardest by the COVID-19
pandemic. In line with our expectation, respondents from the five countries, on average, show
support for a recovery fund in which each country repays exactly what it receives – rejecting
mutualization or fiscal transfer between EU countries. The probability of supporting a policy
package drops by 3.17 percentage points when it includes grants.
Third, with respect to the governance of the fund, we find that respondents’ average probability to
support a package increases by 3.38 percentage points when the fund is administered by the finance
ministers of the EU member states compared to a fund overseen by the European Commission.
This is for instance possible in the framework of the ECOFIN. By contrast, no statistically
significant difference between unilateral member-state spending and Commission oversight is
found.
All in all, these results provide strong evidence that citizen preferences on the recovery fund are,
indeed, multidimensional. On average, the preferences of citizens in some policy dimensions point
to support for further European integration. Citizens prefer a recovery fund that is broader in
scope in terms of purpose and duration, and in which the distribution of funds is determined by
financial need. At the same time, the average results still show that there is some reluctance for
deeper fiscal integration within the framework of the recovery fund as loans are preferred over
grants and joint borrowing on the financial markets is supported less than repurposing existing
resources. Citizens’ preference for the intergovernmental administering of the funds is equally
indicative of the nuanced nature of public opinion on the recovery fund – as both the national and
the supranational options are eschewed.
16

Heterogeneous Treatment Effects Across Countries and Individuals
Public opinion on European integration and its future is not uniform across EU member states
(De Vries, 2018) or social groups. Therefore, we estimate heterogeneous treatment effects (HTEs)
across countries. Previous studies have also relied on AMCEs to assess HTEs in subgroup
analyses. Yet, Leeper et al. (2020) argue that the use of AMCEs for subgroup analyses can be
problematic as the estimates of AMCEs are always relative to the baseline category for each
subgroup. To assess the different levels of favorability for policy levels across countries and
individuals, we thus estimate Marginal Means (MMs) which denote the predicted probability of
support for a package if it contains the level in question – irrespective of all other levels (Leeper
et al., 2020).

Variation Across Countries
Especially when it comes to preferences regarding risk-sharing and fiscal transfers, public
preferences on EU policy strongly diverge across the EU (Vasilopoulou & Talving, 2020). Hence,
the average results in Figure 1 likely mask important country-level variation. Juxtaposing Dutch
and German citizens against French, Italian, and Spanish citizens, we formulated the expectation
that the latter prefer policy packages with a wider scope and long-term duration (scope) as well as
debt-based financing, joint repayment, and redistribution (risk-sharing) vis-à-vis the former.
Figure 2 shows the marginal means by country. For three out of six policy dimensions, the
estimates, indeed, show significant variation across countries. Contrary to our hypotheses,
however, the preferences of respondents from France, Italy, and Spain do not form a cohesive
cluster. Instead, French respondents join Dutch and German respondents in their preferences for
some policy features and coalesce with Italian and Spanish respondents for others. This resonates
with narratives of France being both a ‘northern’ and a ‘southern’ member-state.
The policy dimension in which sociotropic evaluations of collective self-interest come to the fore
most markedly is ‘repayment’. While Italian and Spanish respondents are supportive of a fund
constituted by grants, respondents from the remaining three countries tend to reject grants.
Especially respondents from the Netherlands show strong opposition to grants. In terms of
distribution, respondents from all five countries support a need-based. Yet, the level of support
for a fund in which the money is distributed to countries hardest hit by the pandemic is statistically
significantly higher in Italy and Spain. Whereas the permanency of the program did not
significantly affect support among German and Dutch citizens, respondents in France, Italy, and
Spain are positively disposed to a recovery fund that can be reactivated in possible future crises.
17

To our surprise, respondents from all five countries prefer the repurposing of existing funds over
the EU borrowing additional money on the financial markets. Contrary to the expectation that
policy packages in which the EU collectively borrows on the financial markets find more support
in ‘southern’ member states, respondents tend to support policy packages relying on existing
resources to a greater degree. Lastly, with respect to the purpose of the program, it is worth noting
that Dutch respondents are statistically significantly more likely to support programs with a more
limited ‘health care only’ scope than their counterparts, including Germany.

Figure 2. Estimated marginal means from the conjoint survey experiment by country

Note: The figure shows the conditional marginal means and 95-percent confidence intervals for all levels of the
attributes by country. The marginal means measure how favorable respondents are to a given feature of the European
support package.

18

Variation Across Individuals
Citizens’ preferences for EU-level policy proposals are not formed in a vacuum. Instead, their
ideological orientation on the EU dimension and the left-right dimension likely affect processes
of preference formation. Specifically, we postulated that respondents with pro-EU orientations are
more supportive of packages including a wider scope and long-term duration (scope) as well as debtbased financing, joint repayment, and redistribution (risk-sharing), and supranational governance. In
order to assess the conditioning effect of respondents’ preferences for EU integration on policy
level preferences, we employ a standard measure asking: ‘Generally speaking do you think
[country’s] membership is…’ with the answer categories ‘a good thing’, ‘a bad thing’, ‘neither a
good thing nor a bad thing’.12 Figure 3 shows the marginal means for subgroups of respondents
who believe their country’s EU membership is a ‘good thing’, a ‘bad thing’, or ‘neither good nor
bad’.
In line with our expectations, pro-EU respondents show greater support for a recovery fund with
a broader purpose (i.e. support for ‘healthcare and the economy’ or ‘healthcare and climate policy’)
than in comparison to anti-EU respondents. Also in line with our expectations, respondents with
pro-European dispositions are more likely to support a recovery fund in which the funds are
distributed by need, issued as grants, and which takes a permanent character. In addition, as
expected, anti-EU respondents are less likely to support packages in which the European
Commission takes control of the spending decisions. Contrary to our expectation, however, there
is no significant difference between the preference for EU borrowing among pro- and antiEuropean respondents. This suggests that respondents’ wariness of borrowing additional funds
on the financial markets takes precedence over risk-sharing opportunities at the European level.
We also expected that respondents with more left-wing economic orientations are more supportive
of packages that serve a broader purpose and include long-term duration (scope) as well as debtbased financing, joint repayment, and redistribution (risk-sharing) than respondents with more
right-wing economic orientations. To estimate the heterogeneous treatment effects of economic
left-right ideology we measure respondents’ economic left-right self-placement on an 11-point
scale ranging from 0 to 10. To examine the HTEs in subgroup analyses we recode this variable
into a categorical variable with three categories: left (from 0 to 3), center (4 to 6), and right (7 to
10). Figure 4 shows marginal means for these three subgroups.

12

We recode the answer categories ‘I don’t know’, and ‘I prefer not to answer’ as missing values.

19

Figure 3: Estimated marginal means from the conjoint survey experiment by support for
European integration

Note: The figure shows the conditional marginal means and 95-percent confidence intervals for all levels of the
attributes by support for European integration. The marginal means measure how favorable respondents are to a
given feature of the European support package.

We find support for the expectation that left-wing respondents, compared to right-wing
respondents, prefer policy packages in which the funds are distributed according to need; in which
the funds are issued as grants to the receiving countries; and in which the program is maintained
for future crises. We find partial support for the hypothesis that left-wing respondents display
greater support for policy packages that are wider in scope: in line with our expectations, rightwing respondents are statistically significantly more likely than left-wing respondents to support
policy packages aiming to support member states’ health care systems only. Left-wing respondents
are more likely than right-wing respondents to support policy packages that aim to assist member
states’ health care systems and climate policy measures. Yet, contrary to our expectation, rightwing respondents are more likely to support packages that address health care as well as the
economy. Hence, the more expansive the policy scope, the higher political support seems to be
among left-wing respondents. Right-wing respondents have a clear preference for a program that
20

supports both the health care system and the economy. Contrary to our expectations, we do not
find support for the supposition that left-wing respondents favor packages that include borrowing
additional funds. This suggests that left-wing respondents are also reluctant to accept new
European debt.

Figure 4. Estimated marginal means from the conjoint survey experiment by left-right position

Note: The figure shows the conditional marginal means and 95-percent confidence intervals for all levels of the
attributes by left-right position. The marginal means measure how favorable respondents are to a given feature of the
European support package.

Given that citizens are differently exposed to the economic risks and health risks associated with
the COVID-19 crisis, we posited that egotropic evaluations of their personal economic situation
and their health situation may affect their preferences for the recovery fund. Economic risk is
measured with a question on how concerned respondents were about the financial impact of the
COVID-19 crisis on their household. Specifically, we asked the following question: ‘How

21

concerned are you about the effects that the coronavirus might have on the financial situation of
your household?’13
The marginal means plot in Figure A.3 in the appendix shows the subgroup analysis for
respondents who are concerned about the impact of the pandemic on the financial situation of
their household, and those who express no concern. While we see small significant effects of
individual economic risk exposure on support, economic risk exposure does not change the
direction of the effects. We find, for instance, that those concerned about their economic situation
are more inclined to support borrowing additional resources at the EU level. Respondents
concerned about their financial situation are also more likely to support the issuance of grants
rather than loans compared to those not concerned. In addition, those concerned about their
financial well-being are more supportive of a permanent program than a temporary program.
Contrary to our expectations, we find no statistically significant differences among those
concerned about their finances and those not expressing concern regarding the purpose of the
recovery fund and the method of distribution.

Overall Support for the Pandemic Recovery Fund
Establishing which policy characteristics increase and reduce support for the pandemic recovery
fund is important to determine the effects of policy design on policy package favorability. However,
these findings tell us little about citizens’ overall support for the recovery fund and the extent to
which they believe the recovery fund to have a positive impact on themselves and society as a whole.

Support for Selected Packages
To assess citizens’ support for the recovery fund as a whole we examine the degree of support for
selected scenarios of the recovery fund. Specifically, we calculate the support for three scenarios:
the least-supported scenario, the most-supported scenario, and the ‘Next Generation EU’
scenario. The least- and most-supported packages were determined by the lowest/highest relative
average support for each policy level. The ‘Next Generation EU’ package closely resembles the
agreement struck between EU government leaders on July 21, 2020, titled Next Generation EU.

Respondents answered on an 11-point scale ranging from 0 (‘Not at all concerned’) to 10 (‘Extremely concerned’),
or ‘I prefer not to answer’. To conduct subgroup analyses, this variable is coded to a dichotomous variable
distinguishing those ‘Not concerned’ (from 0 to 5) from those ‘Concerned’ (from 6 to 10).
13

22

Relying on unprecedented borrowing by the EU on the financial markets, it concerns a temporary
€750bn fund largely administered by the European Commission which primarily aims to assist the
health care systems and the economy of those EU member states in financial distress due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. €390bn of the fund are distributed as grants as opposed to loans. The
operationalization of the three policy packages is shown in Table A.1 in the appendix.
Respondents were asked to indicate their support for each package on a 5-point Likert scale, which
we recode to a dichotomous variable of support.14 Figure 5 shows the estimated level of support
for the three selected scenarios. We see that for all three scenarios, including the least-liked variant,
more respondents express overall support than opposition. The scenario that mirrors the
European Council agreement of July 2020 finds overall support with 69 percent respondents
expressing support.

Figure 5. Estimated levels of support for selected recovery fund scenarios

Support

0.75

0.50

0.25

EU
n
io
er
at

os

N
ex
t

G

en

M

Le

as

t−

lik
ed

t−
lik
ed

0.00

Package
Note: The figure shows the predicted share of supporters for three selected packages (as shown in Table A.1) when
respondents that express neutral judgments are dropped. 95-percent confidence levels are shown.

Ratings below 3 are coded as opposition (‘0’), rating above 3 are coded support (‘1’). Neutral ratings of ‘3’ are
excluded from this analysis. An alternative operationalization of support in Figure A.4 and A.5 in the appendix show
a more conservative estimate where neutral ratings are coded as opposition.
14

23

Figure 6. Estimated levels of support for Next Generation EU per country

Support

0.75

0.50

0.25

r la

n
ai

he

Sp

s
nd

ly
Ita

m
er

N

et

G

Fr
an

ce

an
y

0.00

Country
Note: The figure shows the predicted share of supporters for the Next Generation EU package when respondents
that express neutral judgments are dropped. 95-percent confidence levels are shown.

Given the importance of intergovernmental decision-making in the EU, it is important to consider
whether the Next Generation EU compromise is supported by respondents in all five countries in
our sample. Figure 6 repeats the procedure for estimating overall support displaying the predicted
levels of overall support for the Next Generation EU per country. The Next Generation EU is
appreciated in most European countries in our sample. While support for the recovery fund in the
Netherlands is significantly lower than in the four other countries, on par respondents tend to
support the Next Generation EU compromise. This suggests that even though the Next
Generation EU agreement falls short of the most-preferred recovery fund scenario, it can garner
a majority of support in all five countries under study.

Expected Impact of the Recovery Fund
Support for a European recovery fund seems to be relatively high in the five countries. Yet, how
can we explain these levels of support? One reason may be that respondents expect the recovery
fund to have a beneficial impact on themselves and their surroundings. We, therefore, explore how
respondents evaluate the impact of a possible pandemic recovery fund. After the three iterations
of the conjoint experiment, we asked respondents to indicate on a 5-point scale how the recovery
fund affects the situation of their household, region, country, and Europe as a whole. Most
respondents give a neutral assessment of the recovery fund on their household and region, i.e. a
24

score of 3 (see the violin plot in Figure A.5 in the appendix). Nevertheless, a plurality of 44.8
percent and 48.8 percent of the respondents believe the recovery fund positively affects their
country and Europe as a whole, respectively. At the same time, those who believe the recovery
fund to have a negative impact on their surroundings remain below 25 percent across all categories.
What are the individual-level determinants of the perceptions on the impact of the recovery fund?
Figure 7 shows the results from four OLS regression models with the respondents’ evaluation of
the impact of the fund on each category of surroundings as the dependent variable: household
(Model 1), region (Model 2), country (Model 3), and Europe (Model 4). In addition to individuals’
country (baseline: France), EU orientations (baseline: pro-EU), left-right positions (baseline: leftwing), and economic risk perception (baseline: not concerned), we include independent variables
measuring gender (baseline: male), education in three categories (baseline: low), and income in
three categories (baseline: low).
We highlight a number of important findings from the four models. Compared to French
respondents, respondents in Spain believe the recovery to have a more positive effect on all
categories, while those in the Netherlands are more likely to believe it to have a more negative
impact. German and French respondents also differ in their impact assessments. Compared to
respondents from France, those in Germany are more positive about the recovery fund’s impact
on Europe, but more negative about the impact on their own country. These country effects
suggest some sociotropic evaluations of net-payer/net-receiver effects, with Dutch and German
respondents being concerned about north-south financial transfers. In terms of ideology, those
with neutral and anti-EU positions believe the fund to have a negative effect compared to their
pro-EU counterparts in all four models. Left-right orientations only seem to matter for
respondents’ country-level and EU-level impact assessments, in which centrist and right-wing
respondents evaluate the funds’ impact more negatively than left-wing respondents. With respect
to socio-demographic determinants, higher educated respondents are likely to evaluate the fund’s
impact on Europe more positively.
Strikingly, those concerned about the impact of the COVID-19 crisis on their financial situation
are more likely to perceive the fund to have a positive impact on their household and their region.
Hence, while left-right orientations and educational level affect respondents’ impact assessment
about the recovery fund at the politically more salient country- and supranational-level, personal
economic concerns drive positive evaluations of the fund’s impact closer to home.

25

Figure 7. Individual-level determinants of the evaluation of the impact of the program on different
levels
Gender: Female

Age

Age squared

Education: Middle

Education: High

Income: Middle

Income: High

Income: Refused

Dependent variable
Household
Region

EU position: Bad thing

Country
Europe

EU position: Neither good nor bad

LR position: Center

LR position: Right

COVID: Economic concern

Country: Germany

Country: Italy

Country: Netherlands

Country: Spain

−0.5

0.0

0.5

Coefficient estimates

Note: The figure shows a coefficient plot for four OLS regression models with different dependent variables. All
dependent variables are measured on a five-point scale, where higher values imply a more positive assessment. The
full regression table is included in Appendix B.

26

Robustness Tests
We conduct several robustness checks. First, we replicate our analyses using the continuous
variable with which respondents indicate their level of support for each policy package on a 5point Likert scale. These analyses yield the same substantive results (see Figure A.8 and A.9 in the
appendix). Second, we find that excluding respondents who failed an attention check does not
affect our results (see Figure A.10-12). Moreover, an analysis of survey dropout will be conducted
to examine whether respondent characteristics are related to survey completion and whether
dropout occurs at specific points in the survey. Moreover, we find no carry-over effects, i.e.
respondents did not evaluate packages differently in the first, second, or third tasks (see Figure
A.13), and profile ordering did not affect our estimates (see Figure A.14). In addition, there are no
differences between people who took more or less time to complete the survey (see Table/Figure
A.15).

Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic has wreaked havoc in the EU’s member states. To address the public
health and economic challenges of the pandemic, the European Council agreed in July 2020 on
the ambitious €750bn recovery package ‘Next Generation EU’. Financed by unprecedented
borrowing by the European Commission and involving significant redistribution across member
states, the recovery fund is a significant step in the fiscal integration of the EU. Given widespread
public skepticism for fiscal integration in some member states (Bechtel et al. 2014; Beramendi and
Stegmueller 2020; Walter, Ray and Redeker 2020; Howarth and Schild 2021), this is rather
surprising. Our study examines how European citizens think about an EU pandemic recovery
fund.
Employing a conjoint experiment fielded in France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, and Spain during
a key stage of the recovery fund negotiations in July 2020, we find that citizens’ support for a
pandemic recovery fund is driven by the design of recovery fund. On the one hand, our results
indicate that there is an appetite for European solidarity as citizens, on average, support a
permanent recovery fund with a broad purpose aimed at assisting the member states most affect
by the COVID-19 crisis. On the other hand, citizens are hesitant to support fiscal integration as
they on average reject a recovery fund financed by joint EU borrowing, constituted by grants to
less affluent member states that are administered by the European Commission or by individual
27

member states themselves. This suggests that preferences for European solidarity and risk-sharing
are more complex than often assumed in the European integration literature. This is especially the
case as citizens’ preferences for the recovery fund vary across the five countries under study. As
likely net beneficiaries, Italian and Spanish respondents are keener on European risk-sharing
through grants and on redistribution to countries in distress. By contrast, sociotropic projections
of collective self-interest lead Dutch and German respondents to be more hesitant about these
aspects. As our sample was limited to five countries, we could not formally test macro-level
explanations of recovery fund support pertaining to a country’s economic competitiveness, and
whether it is a net-payer or net-receiver into the EU budget.
Our results point to significant variation in the recovery fund preferences between citizens who
identify as left-wing or right-wing as well as between citizens who hold pro- and anti-EU positions.
Right-wing and anti-EU citizens are less keen on an expansive recovery fund with re-distributional
consequences than their left-wing and pro-EU counterparts. Variation between countries and
citizens, notwithstanding, our descriptive estimates show surprisingly high levels of overall citizen
support for the Next Generation EU scenario of the recovery fund. Support for the Next
Generation EU agreement is high even though it includes elements that prove to be unpopular,
such as joint borrowing and EU Commission governance. A plurality of respondents, moreover,
believe that a recovery fund will have a positive effect on their household, region, and country as
well as on Europe as a whole.
Future research should address whether these citizen preferences are genuine. As questions
pertaining to fiscal integration are complex, citizens may be primarily steered by political cues of
political parties and other elites As the enthusiasm for European solidarity is found to be
particularly outspoken during crises and exogenous shocks, it remains a question whether the
support for risk-sharing and fiscal integration remains high when the urgency of the COVID-19
crisis dissipates.

28

References
Adams-Prassl, Abi, Toedora Boneva, Marta Golin, and Christpher Rauh. 2020. “Inequality in the
impact of the coronavirus shock: Evidence from real time surveys.” Journal of Public Economics
189: 104-245.
Baccaro, Lucio, Björn Bremer, and Eric Neimanns. 2020. “Reassessing the democratic constraint
of the eurozone: Strategic interdependence and preference for fiscal integration in Germany and
Italy”
Bauhr, Monika, and Nicholas Charron. 2020. “The EU as a savior and a saint? Corruption and
public support for redistribution.” Journal of European Public Policy 27(4): 509–527.
Baute, Sharon, Frank Vandenbroucke, and Francesco Nicoli. 2021. “Conditionality, reciprocity
and deservingness in multilevel social policy: Evidence from a conjoint experiment on European
unemployment risk-sharing in 13 EU countries.”
Bechtel, Michael M., Jens Hainmueller, and Yotam Margalit. 2017. “Policy design and domestic
support for international bailouts.” European Journal of Political Research 56(4): 864–886.
Bechtel, Michael M., Jens Hainmueller, and Yotam Margalit. 2014. “Preferences for international
redistribution: The divide over the eurozone bailouts.” American Journal of Political Science 58(4):
835–856.
Beetsma, Roel, Brian Burgoon, Francesco Nicoli, Anniek de Ruijter, Frank Vandenbroucke.
2020. “What kind of EU fiscal capacity? Evidence from a randomized survey experiment in five
european countries in times of corona.” CESifo Working Paper No. 8479
Beramendi, Pablo, and Daniel Stegmueller. 2020. “The political geography of the eurocrisis.”
World Politics 72(4): 639–678.
Bénassy-Quéré, Agnès et al. 05 April 2020. “COVID-19 economic crisis: Europe needs more
than one instrument.” VOX EU. https://voxeu.org/article/covid-19-economic-crisis-europeneeds-more-one-instrument.
Bremer, Björn, Philipp Genschel, and Markus Jachtenfuchs. 2020. “Juncker’s curse? Identity,
interest, and public support for the integration of core state powers.” JCMS: Journal of Common
Market Studies 58(1): 56–75.
29

Carnot N, M Kizior and G Mourre (2017), “Fiscal stabilisation in the euro area: A simulation
exercise”, CEB Working Paper, N°17-025, Université Libre de Bruxelles.
Cicchi, Lorenzo, Philipp Genschel, Anton Hemerijck, and Mohamed Nasr. 2020. “EU solidarity
in times of COVID-19.” Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies Policy Brief 2020/34.
Copelovitch, Mark, Jeffry Frieden, and Stefanie Walter. 2016. “The political economy of the euro
crisis.” Comparative Political Studies 49(7): 811–840.
De Grauwe, Paul. 2018. Economics of monetary union. Twelfth edition. Oxford; New York, NY:
Oxford University Press; Oxford University Press.
De Vries, Catherine E. 2018. Euroscepticism and the future of European integration. 1st edition. Oxford;
New York: Oxford University Press.
De Vries, Catherine E. 2020. “Public opinion in European union politics.” In Oxford research
encyclopedias, ed. William R. Thompson. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Vries, Catherine E. de, and Sara B. Hobolt. 2020. Political entrepreneurs. Princeton University
Press.
De Wilde, Pieter. 2021. “Rebound? The short- and long-term effects of crises on public support
and trust in European governance.” In The Palgrave handbook of EU crises, Palgrave studies in
european union politics, eds. Marianne Riddervold, Jarle Trondal, and Akasemi Newsome. Cham
Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, p. 667–683.
De Wilde, Pieter, and Michael Zürn. 2012. “Can the politicization of European integration be
reversed?” JCSM: Journal of Common Market Studies 50: 137–153.
Degner, Hanno and Dirk Leuffen. 2020. “Crises and responsiveness: Analysing German
Preference Formation During the Eurozone Crisis.” Political Studies Review 18(4): 491-506.
Dennison, Susi, and Pawel Zerka. 2020 Together in trauma: Europeans and the world after covid-19.
European Council on Foreign Relations.
European Commission, Brussels. 2019. “Eurobarometer 90.3 (2018).” GESIS Datenarchiv,
Köln. ZA7489 Datenfile Version 1.0.0, https://doi.org/10.4232/1.13254.

30

Ferrera, Maurizio, and Carlo Burelli. 2019. “Cross–national solidarity and political sustainability
in the EU after the crisis.” JCSM: Journal of Common Market Studies 57(1): 94–110.
Fesenfeld, Lukas Paul, Michael Wicki, Yixian Sun, and Thomas Bernauer. 2020. “Policy
packaging can make food system transformation feasible.” Nature Food 1(3): 173–182.
Franchino, Fabio, and Paolo Segatti. 2019. “Public opinion on the eurozone fiscal union:
Evidence from survey experiments in Italy.” Journal of European Public Policy 26(1): 126–148.
Genschel, Philipp, and Markus Jachtenfuchs. 2018. “From market integration to core state
powers: The eurozone crisis, the refugee crisis and integration theory.” JCSM Journal of Common
Market Studies: 56(1): 178–196.
Gerhards, Jürgen, Holger Lengfeld, Zsófia Ignácz, Florian K. Kley, and Maximilian Priem.
2019 European Solidarity in Times of Crisis: Insights from a thirteen-country survey. Routledge
Gocaj, Ledina, and Sophie Meunier. 2013. “Time will tell: The EFSF, the ESM, and the euro
crisis.” Journal of European Integration 35(3): 239–253.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2016. “Long-term persistence.” Journal of the
European Economic Association 14(6): 1401–1436.
Guzman, Martin, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2016. Too little, too late: The quest
to resolve Sovereign debt crises. Columbia University Press,
Hagemann, Sara, Sara B. Hobolt, and Christopher Wratil. 2017. “Government responsiveness in
the European union: Evidence from council voting.” Comparative Political Studies 50(6): 850–876.
Hainmueller, Jens, Daniel J. Hopkins, and Teppei Yamamoto. 2014. “Causal inference in
conjoint analysis: Understanding multidimensional choices via stated preference experiments.”
Political Analysis 22(1): 1–30.
Hobolt, Sara B., and Catherine E. de Vries. 2016. “Public support for European integration.”
Annual Review of Political Science 19(1): 413–432.
Hooghe, Liesbet, and Gary Marks. 2009. “A postfunctionalist theory of European integration:
From permissive consensus to constraining dissensus.” British Journal of Political Science 39(1): 1–
23.

31

Hooghe, Liesbet, Gary Marks, and Carole J. Wilson. 2002. “Does left/right structure party
positions on European integration?” Comparative Political Studies 35(8): 965–989.
Howarth, David, and Joachim Schild. 2021. “Nein to ‘transfer union’: The German brake on the
construction of a European union fiscal capacity.” Journal of European Integration 43(2): 207–224.
Hutter, Swen, Edgar Grande, and Hanspeter Kriesi, eds. 2016. Politicising Europe: Integration and
mass politics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Jones, Erik, R. Daniel Kelemen, and Sophie Meunier. 2016. “Failing forward? The euro crisis
and the incomplete nature of European integration.” Comparative Political Studies 49(7): 1010–
1034.
Koos, Sebastian, and Dirk Leuffen. 2020. “Beds or bonds?: Conditional solidarity in the
coronavirus crisis” University of Konstanz , The Politics of Inequality Cluster, Policy paper no.
01.
Kreilinger, Valentin. 2019. “National parliaments in the European stability mechanism: The third
rescue package for Greece in 2015” ed. Les Cahiers Européens de Sciences Po.
Kriesi, Hanspeter, Edgar Grande, Romain Lachat, Martin Dolezal, Simon Bornschier, and
Timotheos Frey. 2008. West European politics in the age of globalization. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Kuhn, Theresa, and Aaron Kamm. 2019. “The national boundaries of solidarity: A survey
experiment on solidarity with unemployed people in the European union.” European Political
Science Review 11(2): 179–195.
Kuhn, Theresa, Francesco Nicoli, and Frank Vandenbroucke. 2020. “Preferences for European
unemployment insurance: A question of economic ideology or EU support?” Journal of European
Public Policy 27(2): 208–226.
Kuhn, Theresa, Hector Solaz, and Erika J. van Elsas. 2018. “Practicing what you preach: How
cosmopolitanism promotes willingness to redistribute across the European union.” Journal of
European Public Policy 25(12): 1759–1778.
Lahusen, Christian, and Maria T. Grasso, eds. 2018. Solidarity in Europe: Citizens’ responses in times of
crisis. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
32

Lenarčič and Korhonen (2018) A case for a European rainy day fund. ESM Discussion Paper Series
5, European Stability Mechanism
Majone, Giandomenico. 2014. “From regulatory state to a democratic default.” JCMS: Journal of
Common Market Studies 52(6): 1216–1223.
Mansfield, Edward D., and Diana C. Mutz. 2009. “Support for free trade: Self-interest,
sociotropic politics, and out-group anxiety.” International Organization 63(3): 425–457.
Mundell, Robert A. 1961. “A theory of optimum currency areas.” The American Economic Review
51(4): 657–665.
Mutz, Diana C. 1992. “Mass media and the depoliticization of personal experience.” American
Journal of Political Science 36(2): 483.
Nicoli, Francesco. 2017. “Democratic legitimacy in the era of fiscal integration.” Journal of
European Integration 39(4): 389–404.
Nicoli, Francesco. 2019. “Integration through crises? A quantitative assessment of the effect of
the eurocrisis on preferences for fiscal integration.” Comparative European Politics 17(3): 397–425.
Nicoli, Francesco, Theresa Kuhn, and Brian Burgoon. 2020. “Collective identities, European
solidarity: Identification patterns and preferences for European social insurance.” JCMS: Journal
of Common Market Studies 58(1): 76–95.
Peltzman, S. 1992. “Voters as fiscal conservatives.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2): 327–
361.
Rathbun, Brian C., Kathleen E. Powers, and Therese Anders. 2019. “Moral hazard: German
public opinion on the Greek debt crisis.” Political Psychology 40(3): 523–541.
Schafheitle, Simon, Antoinette Weibel, Nadine Meinert, and Dirk Leuffen. 2020. “The road to
trust. A vignette study on the determinants of citizens’ trust in the European commission.”
JCSM: Journal of Common Market Studies 58(2): 256–275.
Schmidt, Vivien A. 2005. “Democracy in europe: The impact of European integration.”
Perspectives on Politics 3(4): 761–779.

33

Schneider, Christina J. 2020. “Public commitments as signals of responsiveness in the European
Union.” The Journal of Politics 82(1): 329–344.
Singer, Matthew M., and Ryan E. Carlin. 2013. “Context counts: The election cycle,
development, and the nature of economic voting.” The Journal of Politics 75(3): 730–742.
Talving, Liisa, and Sofia Vasilopoulou. 2021. “Linking two levels of governance: Citizens’ trust in
domestic and European institutions over time.” Electoral Studies 70: 102289.
Thygesen, Niels et al. 26 October 2020. “Reforming the EU fiscal framework: Now is the time.”
VOX EU. https://voxeu.org/article/reforming-eu-fiscal-framework-now-time.
Vandenbroucke, Frank et al. 2018. “Risk sharing when unemployment hits: How policy design
influences citizen support for European unemployment risk sharing (EURS).” Amsterdam
Institute for Social Science Research, Policy report.
Vasilopoulou, Sofia, and Liisa Talving. 2020. “Poor versus rich countries: A gap in public
attitudes towards fiscal solidarity in the EU.” West European Politics 43(4): 919–943.
Verhaegen, Soetkin. 2018. “What to expect from European identity? Explaining support for
solidarity in times of crisis.” Comparative European Politics 16(5): 871–904.
Walter, Stefanie, Ari Ray, and Nils Redeker. 2020. The politics of bad options: Why the eurozone’s
problems have been so hard to resolve. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Warren, Thomas. (2018). Framing the eurozone crisis: a case of limited ambition. Journal of
European Integration, 40(1), 67-82.
Williams, Christopher, and Jae-Jae Spoon. 2015. “Differentiated party response: The effect of
euroskeptic public opinion on party positions.” European Union Politics 16(2): 176–193.

34

ONLINE APPENDIX
to

Viral Solidarity? EU Solidarity and Risk-Sharing in the
COVID-19 Crisis
Björn Bremer (Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies)
Theresa Kuhn (University of Amsterdam)
Maurits J. Meijers (Radboud University Nijmegen)
Francesco Nicoli (Ghent University)
March 2021

1

Appendix A: Information about the survey
Introductory frame:
“Many countries in the European Union have independently launched large support programs to fight the economic
and healthcare consequences of the COVID-19 (“coronavirus”) pandemic. The size of these national programs
varies from country to country, depending on the impact of the pandemic and the spending capacities of each state.
In addition, European governments are discussing an additional support program to be jointly implemented at the
European level. This program would complement any action already undertaken at the national level and would
ensure a common European response.
We would like to know your opinion on what such a program should look like. Therefore, you will be shown
alternative policy proposals in the next few pages. You will be asked to indicate which options you prefer, and how
much you are in favor or against any given proposal.”

Description of policy dimensions
Each policy package differs on six attributes that have two or three different levels each (see
Table 1). The attributes reflect the key dimensions in the negotiations on the European pandemic
recovery fund. The first dimension focuses on the purpose of the recovery fund. Its three levels
capture whether the fund should only cover expenditures related to healthcare, or whether its
scope should be broader by also supporting the economy, or the fight against climate change.
The second dimension concerns the financing of the fund. The two levels reflect the trade-off
whether existing funds should be used such as the EU budget, or whether the EU should issue
loans on the financial market. The third dimension relates to the repayment mechanism capturing on
the discussion whether the funds are distributed as loans or as grants. The two levels specify
whether countries either repay exactly what they receive (loans), or whether countries repay
collectively (grants). The fourth dimension concerns the distribution of the fund capturing the
discussion whether countries in financial distress should be the primary recipients of the fund.
The two levels cover whether all EU countries are supported equally (per inhabitant), or whether
EU countries hit hardest by the pandemic should receive more support. The fifth dimension
pertains to the time horizon or duration of the recovery fund. The two levels distinguish between
a program that is limited in time or one that is maintained after the pandemic. Finally, the sixth
dimension pertains to the governance structure of the proposed EU action focusing on who
administers the fund. The three levels distinguish three modes of political oversight: the
European Commission (supranational), or the finance ministers of the member states collectively
(inter-governmental) or individually (national).

1

Figure A.1. Screenshot of the conjoint experiment (in English).

2

Appendix B: Additional results
B.1. Marginal means
Figure A.2. Estimated marginal means for the full sample

3

Figure A.3. Estimated marginal means from the conjoint survey experiment by COVID
economic risk exposure

Note: The figure shows the conditional marginal means and 95-percent confidence intervals for
all levels of the attributes by COVID economic risk exposure. The marginal means measure how
favorable respondents are to a given feature of the European support package.

4

B.2. Levels of Support
Table A.1. Package composition of three selected packages

Policy Dimension
Purpose
Financing

Repayment

Distribution
Duration

Governance

Least-liked
package

Most-liked package

Next Generation
EU

Support for
healthcare only

Support for
healthcare and the
economy
Existing money is
taken from European
resources such as the
EU budget
Each country repays
exactly what it
receives

Support for
healthcare and the
economy
Additional money is
borrowed by the EU
on the financial
markets
All countries repay
together, i.e., rich
countries pay more
and poor countries
pay less
Countries hit harder
by the coronavirus
crisis receive more
The program is fully
terminated once the
coronavirus crisis is
over
The European
Commission

Additional money is
borrowed by the EU
on the financial
markets
All countries repay
together, i.e., rich
countries pay more
and poor countries
pay less
Every country
receives the same per
inhabitant
The program is fully
terminated once the
coronavirus crisis is
over
The European
Commission

Countries hit harder
by the coronavirus
crisis receive more
The program is
maintained, ready to
be used in future
crises
Finance ministers of
the member-states
together

5

Figure A.4. Estimated levels of support for selected recovery fund scenarios (conservative
estimate)
0.6

Support

0.4

0.2

EU
n
io
en
N
ex
t

G

Le

M

er
at

os

as
t−

lik
ed

t−
lik
ed

0.0

Package
Note: The figure shows the likelihood of supporting for the Next Generation EU package when respondents that
express neutral judgments are counted as opposition. 95-percent confidence levels are shown.

Figure A.5. Estimated levels of support for Next Generation EU per country (conservative
estimate)

Support

0.6

0.4

0.2

he
rla

ai
n

N
et

Sp

nd
s

ly
Ita

an
y
m
er
G

Fr
an
ce

0.0

Country
Note: The figure shows the likelihood of supporting for the Next Generation EU package when respondents that
express neutral judgments are dropped. 95-percent confidence levels are shown.

6

B.3. Impact of the Pandemic Recovery Fund
Figure A.6. Violin plots for the evaluation of the impact of the European support program on
different levels

Note: The figure illustrates the distribution of respondents on a 5-point scale from 1 to 5. The
red points show of all respondents.

7

Figure A.7. Distribution of the evaluation of the impact of the program by level

8

Table A.2. Individual-level determinants of the evaluation of the impact of the program on
different levels

Gender: Female
Age
Age squared
Education: Middle (Ref.: Low)
Edu: High
Income: Middle (Ref: Low)
Income: High
Income: Refused
EU position: Bad thing (Ref: good thing)
EU position: Neither good nor bad
Left-right position: Center (Ref: left)
Left-right position: Right
COVID: Concerned (Ref: Not concerned)
Country: Germany (Ref: France)
Country: Italy
Country: Netherlands
Country: Spain
Constant
Observations
R2
Adjusted R2
Residual Std. Error (df = 6143)
F Statistic (df = 17; 6143)
Note:

Household
(1)
0.006
(0.020)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.00003
(0.00004)
-0.010
(0.025)
-0.024
(0.028)
0.009
(0.025)
0.024
(0.029)
-0.090*
(0.040)
-0.499***
(0.030)
-0.192***
(0.025)
-0.022
(0.025)
0.014
(0.028)
0.095***
(0.022)
-0.030
(0.032)
0.008
(0.033)
-0.125***
(0.032)
0.351***
(0.033)
3.220***
(0.095)
6,161
0.106
0.104
0.782
43.058***

Dependent variable:
Region
Country
Europe
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.012
0.030
-0.022
(0.022)
(0.025)
(0.024)
0.0003
-0.005
-0.011*
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
0.00000
0.0001
0.0001**
(0.00004)
(0.00005)
(0.00004)
0.014
0.035
0.076*
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.030)
0.007
0.023
0.110***
(0.031)
(0.035)
(0.033)
-0.001
-0.036
-0.008
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.029)
0.014
-0.011
0.004
(0.032)
(0.036)
(0.034)
-0.067
-0.052
-0.118*
(0.044)
(0.050)
(0.047)
-0.571***
-0.834***
-0.828***
(0.034)
(0.038)
(0.036)
-0.293***
-0.409***
-0.453***
(0.028)
(0.031)
(0.029)
-0.062*
-0.074*
-0.109***
(0.027)
(0.031)
(0.029)
-0.031
-0.096**
-0.112***
(0.031)
(0.035)
(0.033)
**
0.065
0.040
-0.020
(0.024)
(0.027)
(0.026)
-0.041
-0.207***
0.115**
(0.036)
(0.040)
(0.038)
0.018
0.073
-0.065
(0.036)
(0.041)
(0.038)
-0.244***
-0.405***
-0.132***
(0.035)
(0.040)
(0.038)
0.443***
0.447***
0.319***
(0.037)
(0.041)
(0.039)
3.400***
3.752***
3.995***
(0.106)
(0.119)
(0.113)
6,161
6,161
6,161
0.131
0.175
0.156
0.129
0.173
0.153
0.869
0.976
0.925
***
***
54.582
76.666
66.585***
* p<0.05, **p<0.01; ***p<0.001

9

Appendix C: Robustness checks
C.1. Conjoint analysis with rating variable
Figure A.8. Estimated AMCEs with the rating variable

10

Figure A.9. Estimated marginal means with the rating variable

11

C.2. Excluding respondents who failed the attention check
The question asked for this attention check is as follows: “On a scale of 0 to 10 (where 0 is not at all
important and 10 is extremely important), how important are these issues for you? To ensure that you are
still paying attention, we ask that you choose the value 7 for ‘Focus’.” Subsequently, respondents will be
asked to indicate the importance, on a scale from 0 to 10, for ‘organized crime,’ ‘gay rights,’ ‘taxation,’
‘national sovereignty’ and ‘focus.’ Respondents are considered to have failed the attention check if they
choose a different value than 7 for the item ‘focus.’

Figure A.10. Estimated AMCEs excluding respondents who failed the attention check

12

Figure A.11. Estimated marginal means excluding respondents who failed the attention check

13

Figure A.12: Estimated marginal means by response to the attention check (1=passed, 0=failed)

14

C.3. Additional robustness tests
Figure A.13. Estimated marginal means by task
(Purpose)
Healthcare and climate change
Healthcare and economy
Healthcare
(Financing)
Borrowing
Existing resources
(Repayment)
Grants
Loans
(Distribution)
By size
By need
(Duration)
Permanent
Temporary
(Governance)
Finance ministers individually
Finance ministers collectively
European Commission
0.40

0.45

0.50

0.55

0.60

Marginal Mean
Task

1

2

3

15

Figure A.14. Estimated marginal mean by profile order
(Purpose)
Healthcare and climate change
Healthcare and economy
Healthcare
(Financing)
Borrowing
Existing resources
(Repayment)
Grants
Loans
(Distribution)
By size
By need
(Duration)
Permanent
Temporary
(Governance)
Finance ministers individually
Finance ministers collectively
European Commission
0.40

0.45

0.50

0.55

0.60

Marginal Mean
Profile

A

B

16

Figure A.15. Estimated marginal mean by time of survey completion
(Purpose)
Healthcare and climate change
Healthcare and economy
Healthcare
(Financing)
Borrowing
Existing resources
(Repayment)
Grants
Loans
(Distribution)
By size
By need
(Duration)
Permanent
Temporary
(Governance)
Finance ministers individually
Finance ministers collectively
European Commission
0.40

0.45

0.50

0.55

0.60

Marginal Mean
Time

1st Quartile

2nd Quartile

3rd Quartile

4th Quartile

17

