PEER
REVIEWED

FINAL REPORT NO. 343

Policy coordination
and housing outcomes
during COVID-19

Authored by
Chris Mason, Swinburne University of Technology
Michael Moran, Swinburne University of Technology

Publication DateNovember 2020

Amber Earles, Swinburne University of Technology

DOI10.18408/ahuri5125801

Title

AHURI

Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

AHURI is a national independent research network with an
expert not-for-profit research management company, AHURI
Limited, at its centre.

Authors
Chris Mason, Swinburne University of Technology
Michael Moran, Swinburne University of Technology
Amber Earles, Swinburne University of Technology
ISBN
978-1-922498-09-0
Key words
Housing and the economy; COVID-19; housing assistance and
social policy; homelessness; crisis response; housing system.
Series
AHURI Final Report
Number
343
ISSN
1834-7223
Publisher
Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute Limited
Melbourne, Australia
DOI

AHURI’s mission is to deliver high quality research that
influences policy development and practice change to improve
the housing and urban environments of all Australians.
Using high quality, independent evidence and through active,
managed engagement, AHURI works to inform the policies
and practices of governments and the housing and urban
development industries, and stimulate debate in the broader
Australian community.
AHURI undertakes evidence-based policy development on
a range of priority policy topics that are of interest to our
audience groups, including housing and labour markets,
urban growth and renewal, planning and infrastructure
development, housing supply and affordability, homelessness,
economic productivity, and social cohesion and wellbeing.
Acknowledgements
This material was produced with funding from the Australian
Government and state and territory governments. AHURI
Limited gratefully acknowledges the financial and other
support it has received from these governments, without
which this work would not have been possible.

Format

AHURI Limited also gratefully acknowledges the contributions,
both financial and in-kind, of its university research partners
who have helped make the completion of this material possible.

PDF, online only

Disclaimer

URL

The opinions in this report reflect the views of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect those of AHURI Limited, its
Board, its funding organisations or Inquiry Panel members.
No responsibility is accepted by AHURI Limited, its Board
or funders for the accuracy or omission of any statement,
opinion, advice or information in this publication.

10.18408/ahuri5125801

https://www.ahuri.edu.au/research/final-reports/343
Recommended citation
Mason, C., Moran, M. and Earles, A. (2020) Policy coordination
and housing outcomes during COVID-19, AHURI Final
Report No. 343, Australian Housing and Urban Research
Institute Limited, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/
research/final-reports/343, doi: 10.18408/ahuri5125801.

AHURI journal
AHURI Final Report journal series is a refereed series
presenting the results of original research to a diverse
readership of policy-makers, researchers and practitioners.
Peer review statement
An objective assessment of reports published in the AHURI
journal series by carefully selected experts in the field
ensures that material published is of the highest quality. The
AHURI journal series employs a double-blind peer review of
the full report, where anonymity is strictly observed between
authors and referees.
Copyright
© Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute Limited
2020
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License,
see http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

i

Contents
List of tables

iii

4. Crisis accommodation

34

List of figures

iii

4.1 Crisis accommodation: policy context

35

Acronyms and abbreviations used in this report

iii

4.1.1 Crisis and emergency accommodation:
domestic and family violence

35

4.2 Levels and degree of coordination

36

4.2.1 Initiatives

36

4.3 Opportunity in a crisis

39

5. Social housing

40

5.1 Social housing policy context

41

5.1.1 Overview of social housing governance
and its effects

41

5.2 Levels and degree of coordination

41

5.2.1 Initiatives

42

5.3 Opportunity in a crisis

46

6. Private rental

48

Glossaryiv
Executive summary

1

Key findings

2

Policy development options

4

The study

5

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic

6

1.1 Policy context

7

1.1.1 The housing system in policy context

7

1.1.2 Housing system policy during the
COVID-19 outbreak

8

1.1.3 Absorbing emergent shocks on the
housing system

9

1.1.4 Alleviating existing problems

10

6.1 Private rental policy context

49

1.2 Research methods

10

6.1.1 The private rental sector

49

1.2.1 Research method and approach

10

6.2 Levels and degree of coordination

49

2. Overview of housing-related policy
interventions during the pandemic

6.2.1 Initiatives

50

13

6.3 Opportunity in a crisis

53

2.1 Contextual framing

14

7. Policy development options

54

2.1.1 The housing system in historical context

14

2.1.2 Multi-level governance of the
contemporary housing system

7.1 How did interventions address negative
housing outcomes?

54

14

2.1.3 Instruments

15

7.2 Was there coordination between levels
of government and across sectors?

55

2.1.4 A typology of initiatives and instruments
in a pandemic

16

7.3 Coda: from crisis footing to (re)building
back better

56

2.2 Mapping the housing system policy
response to the pandemic

7.4 Opportunities for future research

57

18

7.5 Concluding remarks

58

2.2.1 Scale

18

2.2.2 Scope

20

2.2.3 Prioritisation

22

3. Homelessness

27

3.1 Homelessness in and across Australia:
the policy context

28

References59
Appendix 1: Key search terms

68

3.1.1 Homelessness funding: policy through
networks28
3.1.2 Health, homelessness and pandemics

29

3.2 Levels and degree of coordination

30

3.2.1 Initiatives

30

3.3 Opportunity in a crisis

33

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

ii

List of tables

Acronyms and abbreviations
used in this report

Table 1: Interventions used in the pandemic’s
early phases

16

Table 2: Summaries of initiatives and amount
allocated: by jurisdiction and housing outcome

19

Table 3: System-wide initiatives affecting
housing outcomes

22

Table 4: Homelessness initiatives
by jurisdiction and instrument type

31

Table 5: Crisis accommodation initiatives
by jurisdiction and instrument type

37

Table 6: Social housing initiatives by jurisdiction
and instrument type

43

Table 7: Private rental initiatives by jurisdiction
and instrument type

50

List of figures
Figure 1: PRISMA diagram

ACT

Australian Capital Territory

AHURI

Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute Limited

AIHW

Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare

APO

Analysis and Policy Observatory

CHP

Community Housing Provider

COVID-19

Coronavirus disease of 2019

CRA

Commonwealth Rent Assistance

CSHA

Commonwealth-State Housing
Agreement

DFV

Domestic and family violence

HPAP

Homeless Persons Assistance
Program

NAHA

National Affordable Housing
Agreement

NFP

not-for-profit organisation

11

Figure 2: Indicative amount allocated
by jurisdiction ($ millions)

20

NHFIC

Figure 3: $ (millions) announced per housing
outcome 17 March–16 June 2020

National Housing Finance and
Investment Corporation

21

NHHA

Figure 4: Housing outcome investment
by jurisdiction

National Housing and Homelessness
Agreement

22

NPAH

Figure 5: Timeline of initiatives March 2020

23

National Partnership Agreement
on Homelessness

Figure 6: Timeline of initiatives April 2020

24

NRAS

National Rental Affordability Scheme

Figure 7: Timeline of initiatives May 2020

25

NSW

New South Wales

Figure 8: Timeline of initiatives June 2020

26

NT

Northern Territory

Figure 9: Amount allocated by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Homelessness

PRS

Private Rental Sector

30

RBA

Reserve Bank of Australia

Figure 10: Amount allocated by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Crisis accommodation

36

SA

South Australia

Figure 11: Amount allocated by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Social housing

SAAP

42

Supported Accommodation
Assistance Program

Figure 12: Amount allocated by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Private rental

SARS-CoV-2

50

Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Coronavirus 2

SHARP

Social Housing Acceleration and
Renovation Program

SHS

Specialist Homelessness Services

WA

Western Australia

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

iii

Glossary
A list of definitions for terms commonly used
by AHURI is available on the AHURI website
www.ahuri.edu.au/research/glossary.
Commonwealth Rent Assistance (CRA)
A non-taxable Australian Government supplementary
payment added on to the benefit or family payment
of people who rent in the private rental market above
applicable rent thresholds.
direct assistance
Government policies and programs that are directly
focussed on boosting housing supply or demand,
such as providing public housing or the First Home
Owners Grant.
homelessness
The Australian Bureau of Statistics definition
states that when a person does not have suitable
accommodation alternatives they are considered
homeless if their current living arrangement: is in a
dwelling that is inadequate and which has no tenure,
or if their initial tenure is short and not extendable and
does not allow them to have control of, and access to
space for social relations.
household
One or more persons, at least one of whom is at least
15 years of age and usually resident in the same private
dwelling. The people in a household may or may not be
related. They must live wholly within one dwelling.
indirect assistance
Government policies and programs that, while not
directly focussed on housing supply or demand, do
impact on the housing system (e.g. tax policies that
exempt housing from certain taxes, such as home
ownership is exempted from the capital gains tax).
land tax
Land tax is an annual tax levied on owners of vacant
land, a holiday house, investment properties or
primary production land close to a city.
low-income household
A household with income in the bottom 20 per cent
of all household income distribution.

National Affordable Housing Agreement (NAHA)
From 1 January 2009, government response to
homelessness is administered under the NAHA
and the National Partnership Agreement on
Homelessness (NPAH).
National Partnership Agreement on Homelessness
(NPAH)
The National Partnership Agreement on
Homelessness (NPAH) commenced in January 2009.
Under the current agreement the Australian and state
and territory governments have committed to provide
$1.1 billion in funding. It contributes to the National
Affordable Housing Agreement outcome, to help
people who are homeless or at risk of homelessness
achieve sustainable housing and social inclusion.
National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS)
An Australian Government scheme that commenced
on 1 July 2008, providing annual incentives (tax
credits—if paying tax, grants—if not paying tax) to
investors for 10 years to create 50,000 new affordable
rental properties rented to low-income and moderateincome households at 20 per cent below local area
market rents. The scheme was stopped for new
property incentives in 2014, and as a result 37,142
dwellings will be built.
public housing
Housing, other than employee housing, that is owned
and managed by government directly.
social housing
Rental housing that is provided and/or managed
by government or non-government organisations,
including public and community housing.
supply side assistance
Forms of housing assistance given to providers, not
consumers, of housing to help increase the quantity
or quality of housing (e.g. National Rental Affordability
Scheme).
tenancy support services
Services provided to assist those at risk of homelessness
with existing tenancies in the public and private rental
sectors. These are early intervention services that aim
to stop homelessness from occurring.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

iv

Executive summary
Key points
•

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic the housing system in Australia was
under strain.

•

Policy makers in Australia were braced for severe, detrimental
impacts arising from the unfolding global pandemic.

•

The response from all tiers of Australian government to these
threats was rapid and comprehensive, and where required,
coordinated.

•

Broad estimates suggest that > $4 billion was allocated for new and
expedited policy interventions at key points of the housing system.

•

Good outcomes were achieved through coordinated action in some
key policy areas, which provides broader lessons for how policy
makers can address existing challenges in the housing system
and respond to future crises with system-level implications.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

1

Executive summary

Key findings
The COVID-19 pandemic created an unprecedented crisis facing the housing system and the people who depend
upon it. So large was the potential risk arising from the crisis, that a comprehensive and coordinated, whole-ofgovernment response was required.
This scoping study was driven by the need to understand the scale and scope of policy interventions in the
housing system—a critical first step for on-going assessment of the outcomes and impacts of the broad suite of
initiatives deployed by governments in response to the pandemic. This will help build a preliminary evidence base
to assess the whole-of-government response going forward and to prepare policy makers for future crises with
similar system-wide implications.
The multi-level response to pandemic impacts on the housing system were rapid, large in scale and scope, and
generally well-coordinated. In total, 98 Australian Government and state/territory government initiatives were
announced between March and June 2020, supported by $4 billion of new or expedited funding.
Below we detail the key findings across four key housing outcome areas that were targeted by governments to
address the public health and associated social and economic issues arising from COVID-19.

Homelessness
•

National effectiveness in rapidly accommodating some of the most disadvantaged and at-risk groups in
Australia is widely seen as one of the early ‘successes’ of governments’ response.

•

By some estimates 8,000 people across Australia were provided with accommodation to create safe spaces
to self-isolate and recover if presenting symptoms.

•

For the first time rough sleeping was briefly eliminated with the majority housed in a combination of hotel/
motel accommodation.

•

In line with the National Cabinet, responses followed a common approach—rapidly identify the homeless
using the resources and networks of specialist homeless services (SHS); house people in temporary
accommodation and provide ‘wrap-around’ support.

•

Several governments—New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia—are using the opportunity to
transition homeless into long-term and secure accommodation through additional investments in housing
and assertive care.

•

What is evident is the growth of approaches modelled on ‘housing first’ (or rapid housing) as the strategy
for tackling long-term homelessness (Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012).

•

It has thus illustrated the potential to address one of society’s most enduring and intractable problems—and
illustrates the potential for policy and social innovation in a crisis.

•

The total number of policy initiatives announced by all Australian governments for homelessness is 22 and
we estimate that the volume of funding committed by mid-June 2020 was $192m.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

2

Executive summary

Crisis accommodation
•

Social distancing measures created an environment for what the United Nations described in April as
a ‘shadow pandemic’: potential for increased violence against women and girls (Mlambo-Ngcuka 2020).

•

Stay-at-home measures have placed strain on services and increased the need for expanded services, and
early research has shown increased use of services and severity of domestic and family violence (Pfitzner,
Fitz-Gibbon et al. 2020a; 2020b).

•

In response, we found that state/territory governments developed at least nine initiatives, evenly spread
except for the Northern Territory (no discrete response) and Queensland and WA (two each). The Australian
Government provided funding support ($150m).

•

We estimate that approximately $204m has been committed to crisis accommodation since the pandemic began.

Social housing
•

As with prior economic downturns, social housing has featured as a key plank of the economic recovery
platform of governments—the context of the pandemic has had some impact but not substantively altered
the shape of the response.

•

Approximately $1.57 billion was earmarked for social housing outcomes across most states and territories.

•

Most state governments committed new and/or expedited funding for maintenance and upgrades of existing
social housing stock as a form of ‘shovel ready’ economic stimulus.

•

Five states expedited and/or committed new funding to increase supply of social housing to stimulate
construction and, in some cases, meet the needs of those housed in temporary accommodation to support
‘housing first’ models.

•

NSW, WA and Victoria provided funds specifically for Indigenous communities.

•

At this point in the pandemic there has been no new direct allocation of funding for social housing by the
Australian Government, which contrasts with the Global Financial Crisis, where $5.2b ($6.5b in 2020 dollars)
was allocated to the Social Housing Initiative (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: 95).

Private rental
•

Approximately $1.2 billion has been earmarked for the Private Rental Sector (PRS) housing outcomes during
the early stages of the crisis.

•

Due to the distribution of responsibilities under the federation much activity was driven by the states/
territories with regulatory oversight of residential tenancy legislation and control over core revenue policies
such as land tax and stamp duty.

•

A plurality of states also provided transfers/payments in the form of rent relief for those experiencing hardship
due to the suppression of economic activity associated with social distancing measures and adverse labour
market conditions associated with the economic downturn.

•

The PRS was nonetheless a key focus of the National Cabinet early in the pandemic and there was multilevel coordination as evidenced by harmonisation of laws to protect tenants through eviction moratoria and
suspension of rental increases.

•

Each level of government and jurisdiction was actively involved in policy interventions or emergency activities
except for the Northern Territory.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

3

Executive summary

Policy development options
There are several opportunities for policy development arising from the scoping study. Primarily, these relate to
learning from the whole-of-government approach to better understand the ‘fitness-for-purpose’ of the housing
system. The pace of change and speed of coordinated collaborations throughout the system, in such a short
timeframe, means there is a lot of new knowledge to capture around working across policy silos, institutional
frameworks and across jurisdictions. Very simply, policy actors need to capture this knowledge to harness new
ways of pulling together to improve the housing outcomes for Australians.
Through the early phases of the pandemic, new and expanded initiatives were announced and implemented in
a largely coherent and efficient way. Some existing constraints, prevalent in the complex housing system, were
circumvented, which shows that rapid action can be taken through a whole-of-government approach to address
the risks to Australians, including some of the most vulnerable people in our society. This therefore presents
an opportunity to explore how some of the existing problems present in the Australian housing system can
be addressed—and to expand investment in the housing system that can stop people experiencing negative
housing outcomes.
Alongside the system level learnings, it is evident that in some outcome areas, especially social housing, declining
investment relative to population growth, and a lack of appropriate supply, left Australia underprepared to meet
the increased demand for housing and housing services from diverse cohorts: vulnerable groups, including
survivors of domestic and family violence (DFV), people experiencing or at risk of homelessness for the first time
due to the economic downturn, and rough sleepers, requiring long-term housing following largely successful rapid
housing response to people into hotel accommodation. Policy actors need to address the systemic challenges
evident in a housing system that was under strain as the pandemic began.
Secondly, there are several policy opportunities relating to individual housing outcomes. The pace of change
meant that jurisdictions were regularly announcing new interventions across housing continuum and lessons
learned could be applied to address existing challenges in the housing system.
Below we briefly detail the policy recommendations for key points on the housing continuum (more detailed
discussion is at Chapter 7).
•

Homelessness: direct interventions and an approach that was characterised by close-coordination between
the states/territories and frontline SHS assisted in getting rough sleepers and people at risk of homelessness
into safe, if temporary in many instances, accommodation.

•

Crisis accommodation: Direct interventions, especially increased Australian Government and state/territory
funding support for DFV programs and increased support for referral services and mental health support
provided an expanded capacity to help DFV survivors and perpetrators.

•

Social housing: Direct supports came in the form of improving social housing stock through upgrades and
maintenance programs. Investments in new supply of social housing stock were announced but comparatively
small in value, targeted in areas where future demand was likely to be and to provide long-term housing to
those in temporary accommodation.

•

Private rental: COVID-19 has shown that the federation can rapidly respond with ‘stop-gaps’ to mitigate the
short-term impacts on tenants, the challenges of housing insecurity and homelessness present for public
health and hinder the effects of a pandemic-induced recession on individual and household stress.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

4

Executive summary

The study
This scoping study forms part of the COVID-19 AHURI funding round, focussing on a suite of applied research
concerning the impacts of the COVID-19 crisis on housing outcomes. The pandemic has created intense and
unanticipated pressures on policy makers and systems to respond swiftly and effectively to ways in which the
crisis is affecting Australian households. While the crisis and its effects continue to unfold, our study is framed by
a larger policy issue. Policy makers need support, both now and in the future, to understand how and where their
policy interventions are coordinated—or not coordinated—across governments.
Therefore, our goal was to make sense of the rapid rate of policy interventions in housing outcome areas during
the early phases of the crisis. Understanding the degree of coordination between levels of government helps
policy makers to learn how well their actions have impacted on those considered most vulnerable to the effects
of the pandemic. Further, it also helps by building a ‘bigger picture’ of the housing outcome interventions across
jurisdictions, as well as illustrating depth in coordination between policy actors and not-for-profit service agencies.
In the study we report on in the following chapters, we explain how we conducted a systematic mapping of
policies and programs directly or indirectly impacting housing and homelessness issues facing Australians due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Within this broad scope, we focussed the study on three linked research questions that
supported the systematic policy mapping:
•

RQ1: What initiatives, interventions, policies and regulatory reforms have been developed and implemented
by governments at all levels to directly and indirectly address housing outcomes due to COVID-19?

•

RQ2: How do these existing and emergent policies and activities intend to address negative housing
outcomes caused and exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic?

•

RQ3: Is there coordination between levels of government and across sectors (including with not-for-profit
service providers)?

In so doing, we conducted a systematic search to collate all relevant policy interventions and measures across
Australian jurisdictions and housing outcomes. Thus, our data comprised media releases and policy materials
detailing the nature of these interventions and measures, between March and June 2020. This data allowed us to
map out the roll-out of interventions across the timeframe, illustrating prioritisation, aims, and scale and scope
of each and all interventions. Furthermore, this data was collated into a COVID-19 housing system policy corpus,
allowing for the interrogation and original analysis of the coordinative, and direct/indirect impacts of the policy
making. We illustrate this analysis through case study vignettes. Furthermore, the corpus provides research
stakeholders with a policy clearinghouse—hosted on the Analysis and Policy Observatory (APO), creating a
resource for further policy analysis.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

5

1. The housing system
and the 2020 pandemic
•

•

Analysts of housing policy in Australia increasingly view housing
as a complex system (Burke 2012; Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020)
•

The system was under significant strain at the onset of the
pandemic.

•

Challenges were evident across the housing continuum (AHURI
2017), with persistent and entrenched homelessness, inadequate
supply of social and affordable housing, growing rental insecurity,
and home ownership increasingly out of reach for key segments
of Australian society.

•

Each of these has presented challenges for policy makers during
COVID-19 – and also opportunities.

In response to the pandemic the Australian Government in concert
with state and territory governments acted swiftly.
•

Collectively governments deployed 98 initiatives to directly address
housing outcomes and indirectly support households and the
extant housing system, with an estimated $4b in funding announced
between March and June.

•

Governments deployed diverse policy instruments—from provision
of emergency accommodation to transfers/payments to renters and
tax relief for landlords—to absorb emerging shocks and to alleviate
existing challenges.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

6

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

1.1 Policy context
The rapid emergence and spread of the COVID-19 global pandemic created deep and enduring impacts
throughout Australian society and the economy. As events gathered pace from February 2020, policy makers
across all levels of government began developing and announcing a raft of major interventions to interrupt and/
or absorb the deepening economic and social shocks. We estimate that more than $4 billion was allocated to
housing initiatives, from the provision of temporary accommodation for rough sleepers to the maintenance or
construction of social housing, the extension of first home owner grants and beyond.

1.1.1 The housing system in policy context
Housing represents a complex system (Muir, Moran et al. 2017). While this contextual summary cannot do justice
to the rich academic and sector analysis of Australian housing systems and policy (Burke 2012; Dodson, de Silva
et al. 2017; Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012; Pawson and Mares 2020; Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020), we aim to
provide broader context to the complex and interrelated issues facing the housing system in Australia prior to the
pandemic and the interventions that followed (Pawson and Mares 2020).
As Pawson, Milligan et al. (2020: 1) have documented, existing social and economic pressures had, prior to the
pandemic, exposed commonly held myths surrounding Australia’s ‘housing narrative’. Rather than sustaining
the notion that Australia’s housing system was able to meet housing needs for all, the system reflects a complex
form of multi-level governance (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). For example, conceptualising the system involves
considering how multiple tiers of government, agencies and policy actors interact with the housing system
(Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). System complexity does not only reflect the formal institutional arrangements
—legislation, regulation and other policy settings etc.—that seek to influence housing outcomes across the
federation (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). It also reflects the interplay between non-state, ‘market’ actors—
demand-side participants such as buyers and renters, and supply-side actors from sellers to more powerful
agents such as developers and their interest groups—to social actors—including community housing providers
(CHPs), specialist homelessness services (SHS) and charities and other not-for-profit (NFP) organisations
engaged in service delivery and policy advocacy (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). These actors wield increasing
influence on the housing system and are central to a system of governance that is ‘fragmented across a range
of federal and state governmental department fiefdoms’ (Randolph, cited in Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: vi).
This complexity, and the broader social and economic shifts driving and entrenching inequities among a range
of demographic groups, make the goal of stable, secure and affordable housing aspirational for greater numbers
of Australians. Indeed, it is questionable whether large parts of the housing system remain fit-for-purpose given
the number of homeless people across Australia remains stubbornly high and despite the coordinated efforts of
governments, SHS and other actors (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015), national per capita rates remained stable between
2001–2016, while the absolute numbers continue to grow (Parkinson, Batterham et al. 2019). Furthermore, a sense
of dysfunction prevails over the continued shortage of affordable private rental housing, and increasing median
rents is exacerbating insecurity (Parkinson, Batterham et al. 2019), a greater proportion of Australians are renters,
while the supply of affordable options is decreasing (Hulse, Reynolds et al. 2019). Homeownership, the foundation
of Australia’s housing narrative, while remaining constant over the past four decades is projected to decline as
younger and low and lower-middle income groups are priced out (Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020). Finally, household
debt has grown enormously over the past few decades in Australia (Kearns, Major et al. 2020), in part driven
by mortgages (Kohler and Hobday 2019) but also casualisation of the labour market, leading people to draw on
consumer debt to bolster consumption (Kolios 2020). The spectre of economic contraction presents challenges
on both fronts as households may struggle to service high levels of debt which could in turn have implications for
financial stability if we see a reduction in house prices (Kearns, Major et al. 2020; Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020).
The pandemic thus presents challenges and vulnerabilities for a system already under acute stress (Pawson and
Mares 2020) and at risk of becoming further dysfunctional.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

7

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

Framed as such, we therefore view an analysis of the housing system as an opportunity to explore two key and
linked features: first, the ability of the system, and policy actors working within it, to respond effectively in times
of crisis, and second, the propensity of the housing system to demonstrate ‘anti-fragility’ (Taleb 2018)—that is,
the necessity for systems to undergo stressors (i.e. pandemic crisis) in order to grow stronger.
The first feature relates to important accounts of what happened during the crisis, which governments and
departments were involved, which regulations and legislation were invoked, and how government(s) and agencies
worked together to accomplish emergency aims. Much of our analysis focusses on this aspect of the system
(Chapters 3–6), detailing the chronological unfolding of housing system interventions and measures and what
this resulted in following implementation. We follow Schmidt (2010) by understanding this process as involving
an interplay between communicative and coordinative discourses—and the iterative (and emergent) shaping
of policy by policy actors to defray external uncertainties affecting the system and its participants. This aligns
with extant analysis of the housing system in Australia which as noted analyses this through a lens of multi-level
governance (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017; Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020).
The second feature asks a higher-order question of the housing system, revealing a core assumption: Can
policy systems remain fit-for-purpose while undergoing major stressors, while also strengthening the system
as a result? Our analysis reveals that policy development opportunities did arise from the emergency responses
between March–June 2020, thus we indicate both suggested metrics in each analysis chapter (Chapters 3–6) and
suggest potential areas for deeper and sustained investment in the future. By doing so, we can offer a pathway
to assessing the impact of the rapid and large-scale interventions initiated in response to COVID-19 on a housing
system that had existing ‘flaws to be fixed’ (Pawson and Mares 2020).
All of which is to suggest that although the system is flawed, it is not irrevocably dysfunctional. The levels of
investment in the housing system in Australia and the work of both the Australian Government and the state/
territory governments reflect a long-standing commitment to the values and provision of affordable and suitable
housing. Rather, our point is to show that prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, Australia’s housing system was
already under strain, leading to systemic fractures and fragmentations, inequalities of opportunity and inequities
of access, and growing disparities between the housing needs of Australians and the ability to sustain levels of
fiscal investment across each housing outcome. This frames the policy context to show the broader systemic
antecedents to housing system interventions post COVID-19. As we show throughout this report, the scale of
interventions are sizeable and indicate what is both possible through targeted investments and coordinated action
(e.g. rough sleeping in metropolitan areas), while also illustrating how housing system stressors exposed the underinvestment in key housing areas (e.g. social housing maintenance and supply of social and affordable housing).

1.1.2 Housing system policy during the COVID-19 outbreak
Between March and June 2020, some of the most significant and far-reaching interventions announced by
governments in response to COVID-19 were targeted directly and indirectly on housing outcomes (AHURI 2017).
Ninety-eight Australian Government and state/territory government initiatives, approximating some $4 billion of
new and expedited investments in housing outcomes, were announced.
Governments recognised early that the most vulnerable in our society required rapid and effective actions to
minimise (or eliminate) the threat of worsening housing inequities because of the pandemic. It should be noted
that alongside direct housing system supports, government interventions, such as through JobSeeker increases
and the creation of JobKeeper, helped to reduce the knock-on effects of the sudden drop in wage income seen
by many Australians. Both responses were mobilised quickly and effectively. In the case of Job Seeker, $14.1
billion was set aside to provide a temporary $550 per fortnight supplement to existing payments (Martin 2020).
Job Keeper, meanwhile, dubbed ‘quick, dirty and effective’ (Hamilton, Preston et al. 2020), was accessed by an
estimated 6.6 million Australians, at a revised cost of $70 billion (Grattan 2020). Both schemes were enacted
rapidly at scale—thereby helping to defray the very clear impacts on households of drops in earned income from
employment. Thus, in the short-term, both JobSeeker and JobKeeper were appropriate, targeted and effective.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

8

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

These successes have provided supporters of a mandated, on-going increase in JobSeeker (and now of
JobKeeper) evidence of just how effective such measures are in bridging the income gap in many Australian
households where the basic cost of living outpaces their ability to experience a basic standard of living. Indeed,
the ‘paring-back’ of the JobKeeper in September 2020 and its proposed wind-up in March 2021 means that
some groups, for example part-time and casual workers, will feel the after-effects of the economic recession
after all. The implications will be felt even more acutely for those who become unemployed as businesses fail
due to further economic contraction or as so-called ‘zombie businesses’ kept alive by JobKeeper close their
doors once the program concludes (Alberici 2020). Both the long-term and newly unemployed will be affected
by the reduction of JobSeeker payments (notwithstanding that it will be higher than pre-pandemic levels). Such
challenging outcomes are more than hypothetical possibilities—they will be felt by households and they will be
long-lasting, posing ramifications for the housing system, especially affordable housing and private rental.
Related to the above, in addition to significant household income supports, Australia’s independent central bank,
the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), has pumped significant liquidity into the financial system, while adjusting
the cash rate downwards (RBA 2020). This has enabled banks to extend loan repayment holidays to both owneroccupiers and investors who have lost income due to the crisis (the latter of which can in turn extend that
flexibility to tenants). As with other forms of household supports, these will invariably be wound back and pose
systemic risks to households and the wider housing system.
However, similar to the broader income supports during the pandemic, the approach to housing system policy
was characterised by responsiveness, both in terms of identifying priority areas for emergency interventions and
measures, along with the scale of fiscal investments deemed appropriate to achieve intervention aims. Another
defining feature of housing system policy making during the pandemic was coordination, in terms of the ability for
levels of government to coordinate actions and activities within existing legislative frameworks and/or national
agreements. This responsive and coordinated approach to the housing system broadly resulted in two major
impacts: absorbing shocks and alleviating existing problems. We discuss both in turn, below.

1.1.3 Absorbing emergent shocks on the housing system
The principal goal of emergency housing policy making was to intervene directly in housing outcomes to disrupt
the emergent and significant impacts facing two major groups: first, our most vulnerable Australians already
experiencing inequity and disadvantage across the housing continuum, and second, Australians previously
not deemed as experiencing disadvantage or housing outcome inequities but now at significant risk of doing
so. The first group were prioritised by policy makers, at Australian Government and state/territory government
levels, to ensure requisite funding and implementation supports were in place to protect vulnerable populations
at particular risk of COVID-19 due to a combination of factors including mobility, conditions of overcrowding,
poor health and co-morbidities (Tsai and Wilson 2020). This included people experiencing homelessness and
‘rough sleeping’, where responsive approaches helped front-line SHS to not only transition people into safe,
temporary accommodation, but also created an opportunity to collect much-needed data on these populations
to better help them in moving forward. This is an exemplar in how cross-sectoral collaborative approaches can be
mobilised quickly and effectively to protect the most vulnerable.
The second group—Australians newly at risk of experiencing disadvantage and inequities across the housing
continuum—were also protected from the seismic economic and social shocks arising from the pandemic.
The supports available were both direct and indirect in nature. Direct supports such as private rental support
(such as freezes on rent increases and eviction moratoria) and support for landlords helped to alleviate further
shocks to individuals who were already undergoing major social changes to their lives through increasing social
distancing and work-from-home arrangements. Alongside such measures, there were major supports for crisis
accommodation, families experiencing, or newly at risk of experiencing, domestic and family violence. Indirect
supports, such as utilities and income protection measures (including Job Seeker and Job Keeper) aimed to
sustain household incomes and spending on construction projects in the interim period.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

9

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

1.1.4 Alleviating existing problems
The second major impact relates to the impacts of sudden and major investments into housing outcome areas
already experiencing significant challenges. Indeed, the impacts of long-term market failure have now been
brought to the immediate attention of policy makers. The inability of the market to meet the basic housing
needs of so many continues to provide the contextual backdrop for any study of the housing system in Australia
(Flanagan, Martin et al. 2019). Indeed, many have called for deeper government engagement in the housing
market because of systemic market failure, particularly in private rental and the social housing system (Flanagan,
Martin et al. 2019, Sharam, Moran et al. 2018). The suddenness of the pandemic brought this intervention in a
rapid and targeted way.
For example, in Victoria the scale of rapid investment in the maintenance of existing social housing stock laid
bare the under-investment in previous decades. The emergence of the pandemic brought this under-investment
into sharp focus for policy makers. The crisis brought forward approximately $1.57 billion for social and affordable
housing projects, largely through state and territory government initiatives. Yet the crisis exposed a social housing
system deeply under strain, lacking a supply pipeline to meet current (and future) demand. Indeed, the future
systemic impacts on Australians resulting from the 2020 pandemic will create significant demands on the housing
system as we begin our anticipated lengthy social and economic recovery. This includes anticipating investments
in the supply of social housing and the related infrastructures required to implement such projects. That includes
both Australian Government and state government strategic policy and sizeable, long-term fiscal commitments.
Furthermore, in terms of home ownership, given the projected decline in home ownership rates in Australia
(Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020), the deepening economic impacts will accelerate this trend by weakening household
income, while first home buyers will continue to compete with investors with greater access to capital. This
existing challenge has therefore been exacerbated by the crisis. As noted above, government responses such
as JobSeeker and JobKeeper relieved pressures on household income, along with rate and utilities freezes and
additional grants for first home buyers/owners in several states/territories.

1.2 Research methods
1.2.1 Research method and approach
We conducted a systematic search process to comprehensively ‘map’ housing-related policy making in Australia
during the COVID-19 pandemic. We aimed to create an original data set from the research showing the degree
of coordination among policy actors. The resulting data set comprises a COVID-19 and housing policy making
corpus—a collection of all policy announcements and related materials—hosted on the Analysis and Policy
Observatory (APO).
To accomplish our aim, the systematic search proceeded in a series of steps, first exploratory, then specific
following an interpretive analysis. The search process followed the PRISMA (Moher, Liberati et al. 2009)
methodology for systematic reviews, and responded to the first of our three core research questions:
RQ1: What initiatives, interventions, policies and regulatory reforms have been developed and implemented
by governments at all levels to directly and indirectly address housing outcomes due to COVID-19?
The search process collated a large selection of digital sources, extracted from government and other official
websites using the Capital Monitor database. This was driven by the creation of a search protocol—a list of
key policy, geographic and jurisdictional terms that were entered into the search engines to capture data
(see Appendix 1). Figure 1 shows the number of documents captured at each stage of the systematic process.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

10

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

Figure 1: PRISMA
diagram
Figure
1: PRISMA diagram

Source: PRISMA Source: PRISMA

The policy materials comprised official media releases rather than official policy documents, explainable by the
rapid and emergent nature of interventions during the early phases of the crisis. These documents provided
timely descriptions of key policy intervention details, such as:
•

housing outcome area

•

level(s) of government

•

jurisdictional and geographic foci

•

the scale, scope, duration and type of fiscal commitments

•

policy motivations and goals

•

type of impact measurement and evaluation (if applicable).

Since our aim was to develop a policy making corpus, this data forms only part of the overall corpus we will create.
The suddenness of the rising crisis created a policy vacuum, meaning policy materials are delayed following the
announcements and implementation of emergency measures. Once the data is hosted on APO, we can enhance
the corpus by including policy materials once they emerge. This step supported our second and third research
questions:
RQ2: How do these existing and emergent policies and activities intend to address negative housing
outcomes caused and exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic?
RQ3: Is there coordination between levels of government and across sectors (including with not-for-profit
service providers)?

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

11

1. The housing system and the 2020 pandemic 

To respond to RQ2, we used the data to determine a chronology of policy interventions and coded this data
according to jurisdiction and across housing outcomes. This chronology is shown in Appendix 2. This helped us
to see the chronological sequence of emergency interventions and policy measures, especially the order in which
they were announced.
As such, we established a clear overview of pandemic-related housing-related interventions and the importance
of sequencing for key housing outcomes where crisis and complexity require clear coordination and rapid
implementation. We then coded each initiative according to programs (second order code) and policy instruments
(third order codes). Drawing from this, we conducted a deeper, interpretive reading of the policy announcements
and developed narrative policy summaries of the data for each jurisdiction and housing outcome. This provided a
‘big picture’ overview of what the policy initiatives were (and how many), the scale of fiscal commitments, intended
outcomes, and any regulatory reforms that occurred during the period covering March–June 2020.
Finally, in response to RQ3, we enhanced our analysis of processes (i.e. RQ2) through an interpretive analysis of
the corpus. This step helped us to interrogate the data to understand:
•

coordination and collaboration between levels of government and non-state policy actors and service
providers

•

jurisdictional control over policy implementation.

To execute this step, we used an inductive coding process to identify housing outcomes, level of government,
and instrument types. This allowed us to frame the entire analysis by delineating the processes, coordination and
direct/indirect impacts in a clear and logical structure and create exemplar case ‘vignettes’ to illustrate examples
of coordination and direct impacts.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

12

2. Overview of housing-related
policy interventions during
the pandemic
•

•

This chapter illustrates the wider patterns and flow-on impacts of
housing-related policy making and investments during COVID-19.
•

Each level of government and jurisdiction was actively involved
in policy or emergency interventions on the housing continuum.

•

Some interventions, e.g. rough sleeping, were effective—presenting
a unique opportunity to address an intractable social problem.

•

Others exposed challenges, e.g. inadequate supply and quality of
social housing stock—but presented opportunities for investment
through construction stimulus.

The response unfolded in a distinct chronological order extending
from emergency public health measures to medium-term
interventions to mitigate macro-economic impacts of the downturn.
•

Scale—approximately $4 billion was earmarked for housing
outcomes during the early stages of the crisis. This included
both ‘new’ fiscal interventions and existing projects expedited.

•

Scope—homelessness involved 22 initiatives, at a projected
cost of $192m; investments in private rental and social housing
(21 initiatives, $1.21b and 28 initiatives, $1.57b respectively, while
indirect measures aimed to stabilise individuals and households
(e.g. JobKeeper and JobSeeker increases, utilities freezes, etc.)

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

13

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

2.1 Contextual framing
This chapter is organised in two parts: contextual framing and mapping the housing system. The first section
provides an overview of governance of the housing system in Australia and how policy actors—state and nonstate—interact through multi-level governance to implement instruments in the Australian housing system.

2.1.1 The housing system in historical context
Although there is not the scope to address the historical evolution of housing policy in Australia in detail, it
is widely recognised that housing policy has undergone two major transformations with significance for how
governments influence and participate in the housing system. The post-war era—stretching from the end of the
second world war in 1945 to the 1970s has been described as a ‘foundational era’ (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020:
3). Following the devastation of both the Great Depression and war, governments began to play an active role
in the provision of housing through Australia’s public housing system (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). They also
marshalled ‘fiscal interventions’ and ‘governance instruments to mobilise state and private sector coordination of
housing provision and support the capacity of households to purchase housing’ (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017: 15).
This occurred within a wider context of welfare statism and Australian governments’ active support of households
through a range of indirect social policy interventions with implications across the continuum.
A ‘very different institutional environment’ began to emerge in the 1970s (Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020: 2) with
wider deregulation of the financial sector combined with a shift from Keynesianism to neo-liberalism gathering
pace in Australia from the 1980s. The impact on the housing system was on multiple fronts. First, the reshaping
of social policy from a system of universal provision to one of increasing residual rhetoric (Stokes 2014) led to a
restructuring of direct and indirect supports for households. Entitlements and statutory payments have remained
critically important but are subject to stricter parameters around access and new service delivery modalities.
Second, the significant post-war era investments in social housing that were a pillar of national industrial strategy
and development slowed (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). Third, deregulation of financial markets in turn contributed
to a commodification of housing and, through a process of financialisation, housing has increasingly come to be
viewed as an asset-class (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). This has had implications for how Australians navigate
housing (Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020) and is also intricately linked to the political economy of taxation and public
policy settings as they relate to investment (Hulse, Reynolds et al. 2019).
Thus, neo-liberalism is a ‘policy paradigm within which arguably all housing strategy thinking and interventions have
been subsequently contained’ (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: 3). A by-product of this focus has been the expanded
centrality and influence of non-government actors. Market actors, from banks to developers, are increasingly
delegated with major aspects of supply, while shaping demand (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). At the same time,
social actors are embedded as a central feature of service delivery and management of social housing stock.

2.1.2 Multi-level governance of the contemporary housing system
The cross-sectoral and networked composition of contemporary housing policy making has led analysts to
describe it as a system of multi-level governance (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017). First, it reflects Australia’s
federated system comprised of the Australian Government and six self-governing states and territories. While
the Australian Constitution does not designate housing as an Australian Government ‘head of power’—and many
housing responsibilities from planning and homelessness are within the jurisdiction of the states and territories—
the Australian Government has historically played a ‘significant, and sometimes leading role, in housing policy
making’ (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: 21).This can be attributed to the powers accorded to the Australian
Government with respect to taxation and the responsibilities accorded to the states/territories with respect to
service delivery obligations (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). The states and territories are reliant on the revenueraising powers of the Australian Government, while it in turn uses the states/territories as a service delivery arm
(Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

14

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Second, due to shifts in policy philosophy noted above and the growth of outsourcing and contracting out,
governments in turn increasingly draw on CHPs, SHSs and other non-governmental actors to obtain policy goals
(Flatau, Wood et al. 2015). For example, over time there has been a gradual transfer of social housing stock to
not-for-profit CHPs who are responsible for ownership and maintenance and receive a patchwork of funding
largely through capital grants from the states/territories, a small stream via the National Affordable Housing
Agreement (NAHA), and small ad hoc contributions from local government and philanthropy (Sharam, Moran
et al. 2018). Homelessness services are now almost entirely delivered by SHS with funding from the states/
territories and the Australian Government through the NAHA (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015).
Third, given the role of the financial services sector, developers and other market participants, as well as other
private agents play a central role in the housing system (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). Policy makers consider their
interests in the governance and regulation of housing, while the broad policy settings from negative gearing and
tax concessions and monetary policy shape investment decisions of these actors, which in turn have system-level
implications (e.g. with respect to supply). Finally, and related to the proceeding points, the ‘quasi-autonomous’
RBA (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020) is a central actor. As the key determiner of monetary policy, it sets the cash
rate, and steps in to ensure stability in the financial system by providing liquidity. It is a central institutional actor
in housing markets, including in a crisis. The contemporary housing system is therefore shaped by a range of
institutional factors, interests and forces. As a diffuse and composite form of governance, Australia’s housing
system is seen by some as ‘weakly coordinated both horizontally and vertically’ (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017: 22).
Nonetheless ‘as a complex ecosystem, where failings and stress in one part of the system has consequences
for other parts of the system’ (Muir, Michaux et al. 2018: 14), governments both at national and sub-national level
can use a range of instruments and levers to influence housing outcomes, including in a crisis. Thus, although
we summarise the Australian housing system as complex, diffuse and in some ways dysfunctional, it was still
equipped to respond to emergent needs arising from the pandemic.

2.1.3 Instruments
From a review of the extant literature, we located two key studies that illustrate at a macro-level how governments
affect the housing system in Australia. These include Dodson, de Silva et al. (2017) who devised an ‘inventory of
policy instruments’ and a recent contribution by Pawson, Milligan et al. (2020) who have developed a classification
of policy interventions (other studies cf. Muir, Moran et al. 2017) have focussed on ‘levers’).
Dodson, de Silva et al. (2017) have developed an inventory at national, state and local levels. Their typology
focusses on the mechanism—e.g. direct housing supply; key actors—e.g. state housing agencies, public housing
tenants; impact on economic activity—direct support of vulnerable groups; productivity effects—additional social
housing, and spatial scale—state, local. Several instruments identified in this inventory have been deployed in
the response to COVID-19. For example, home buyer grants have been extended in some states and tenancy
regulations have been modified to accommodate the impact of the pandemic on renters.
Pawson, Milligan et al.’s (2020: 10–11) classification focusses on a number of dimensions including whether the
intervention impacts the demand-side (e.g. income support for low-income renters); the supply-side (e.g. direct
provision of affordable rental), or is a regulatory measure (e.g. residential tenancy regulation). The target sector
denotes the target tenure (e.g. rental or generic), while administering agency references levels of government.
The table below identifies interventions in Pawson, Milligan et al.’s (2020) classification that have been used
by governments during the early phases of the pandemic.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

15

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Table 1: Interventions used in the pandemic’s early phases
Intervention type

Target sector

Intervention form

Foremost instrument/responsible

Demand side

Rental

Income support for low-income renters

Rent Assistance payments to low-income
private renters

Home purchase

First home owner assistance

State first home buyer grants, stamp duty
exemptions

Supply side

Rental

Direct provision of public housing

National Housing and Homelessness
Agreement 2018 and predecessor programs

Regulation

Rental

Regulation of landlord and tenant
relations

State-based residential tenancies legislation
affecting tenancy terms, consumer rights,
rent setting, disputes, etc.

Source: Adapted from Pawson, Milligan et al. (2020)

Pawson, Milligan et al. (2020) make a helpful distinction between direct and indirect measures. Direct measures
include policies and initiatives that are explicitly labelled as housing interventions. An example of a direct measure
would be the public provision of affordable rental accommodation, while an example of an indirect measure
would be policy settings such as the preferential treatment of capital gains for homeowners and investors
(Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). As outlined in our method, this distinction is important for an understanding of how
governments responded to the crisis. Some measures have been direct—moratoria on evictions for example.
Others are in support of individuals and households and indirectly support the housing system through the crisis
such as JobSeeker payments.
Existing typologies elucidate how policy makers shape the housing system. However, the crisis has presented
a unique context and policy makers deployed a wide range of initiatives across the housing continuum (AHURI
2017). We consequently developed a typology of instruments as they relate to housing policy responses in a crisis.

2.1.4 A typology of initiatives and instruments in a pandemic
In developing a typology, we inductively analysed government policies. This was a three-step process. First, we
located an initiative through CapitalMonitor using the key terms from the housing continuum (e.g. homelessness)
(AHURI 2017). Second, we then coded each example according to the program or initiative-level (e.g. rough
sleepers). Finally, we determined the instrument used to obtain the program goals (e.g. emergency funding—
accommodation).
Below we explain the problems in the housing system that governments were aiming to address and the key
initiatives, tools and instruments used by governments to remedy them.
Homelessness
Homelessness presents acute challenges during a pandemic (Tsai and Wilson 2020) and as states and territories
moved toward broadly uniform social distancing measures, an unprecedented operation to provide emergency
accommodation took place across major cities and regional centres.
For homelessness, we found that the responses fell under the umbrella of two broad initiatives: the immediate
need to address rough sleeping, and preventative measures to tackle the problem over the medium and longterm. Instruments included ‘emergency funding—accommodation’ to house people. In terms of prevention,
‘emergency funding—frontline services’ was deployed to provide wrap-around supports for those recently
housed. As the pandemic unfolded, initiatives focussed on how ‘emergency funding—frontline services’ could be
extended, while some jurisdictions committed funding to house those temporarily housed to address the problem
in the long-term.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

16

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Initiatives

Instruments

Rough sleeping

Emergency funding
—accommodation

Prevention

Emergency funding
—frontline services

Long-term housing

Crisis accommodation
Social distancing measures created an environment for what the United Nations described in early April as a
‘shadow pandemic’: violence against women and girls (Mlambo-Ngcuka 2020). At the initiative level, governments
aimed to tackle the problem through domestic violence emergency accommodation. The instruments used
included ‘emergency funding—frontline services and accommodation’ and ‘emergency funding—to the states
and territories’ from the Australian Government.

Initiatives

Instruments

Domestic violence emergency accommodation

Emergency funding – frontline services
and accommodation

Payment to states and territories

Social housing
Australia entered the crisis with a chronic shortage of social and affordable housing with the number of properties
relative to the size of the Australian population having halved since 1991 (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). Across
Australia waiting lists average approximately 150,000 (AIHW 2019), while in some estimates Australia is going
to require an extra 1 million units in the next decade.
For social housing, we witnessed three principal initiatives aimed at maintenance and upgrades of existing stock;
funding to increase supply, and regulatory initiatives including use of regulatory instruments for a ‘rent freeze’
and, in one instance, ‘planning regulations’ to facilitate the development of social housing. These were deployed
primarily as instruments to provide construction stimulus and in some jurisdictions to provide long-term housing
for those rough sleepers recently placed in temporary accommodation.

Initiatives

Instruments

Regulation

Existing stock

Increase supply

Rent freeze

Expedited funding

Expedited funding

Planning regulation

Funding expansion

Funding expansion

Rental accommodation
Prior to COVID-19, around 1.3m Australians were experiencing rental stress (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020),
while four in 10 low-income renters were struggling to pay rent, despite access to statutory payments such as
the Commonwealth Rent Assistance (CRA) (Productivity Commission 2020). Social distancing measures and
the subsequent suppression of economic activity have exacerbated the rental crisis (Martin 2020), with those
made redundant or on reduced working hours having even less for essentials after rental payments (Pawson
and Mares 2020).
Governments deployed two major initiatives to protect renters. First, eviction moratoria were agreed through
the National Cabinet and then implemented using ‘regulatory and legislative’ instruments by state/territory
governments. In addition, several states/territories established initiatives to provide rent relief. This included
instruments such as ‘transfer/payments’ for those suffering hardships as well as ‘tax relief’ for landlords providing
rent relief for tenants.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

17

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Initiatives

Instruments

Eviction moratoria

Regulation/legislation

Rent relief

Transfer/payment

Tax relief

Homeownership and assisted home ownership
Home ownership rates in Australia have remained broadly constant over the past 40 years (68% in 1976 and 67%
in 2016) (Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020; 1). However, research suggests that ownership rates are projected to decline
to roughly 63 per cent in 2040 and close to 50 per cent (from 60% in 1981) ‘for households in the 25–55 age
bracket’ (Burke, Nygaard et al. 2020: 1). Despite leading to a decline in dwelling prices, COVID-19 will accentuate
this trend by weakening household income, while first home buyers will continue to compete with investors with
greater access to capital. COVID-19 also places stress on existing home owners who experience a reduction in
household income due to unemployment and underemployment.
Governments used a range of initiatives to directly support existing households and, in turn, indirectly
homeownership. These included initiatives using instruments such as freezes on rates and levies, land tax
delays, and initiatives targeting upgrades and maintenance. In relation to assisted home ownership, governments
extended first home owner initiatives using grants. The most prominent initiative was the Australian Government’s
HomeBuilder program which included a grant of $25,000 for upgrades and maintenance for existing home
owners. In addition to HomeBuilder, the ACT, Queensland, Tasmania, Victoria and WA announced separate
assisted home ownership initiatives.

2.2 Mapping the housing system policy response to the pandemic
This section outlines the remaining structure of the report, providing an overarching descriptive analysis of two
key aspects of emergency interventions into Australia’s housing system: a chronological unfolding of interventions
and measures to illustrate the scale and scope of interventions into the housing system, and their prioritisation.
Policy makers and other policy actors moved with speed to mobilise financial and non-financial interventions in
response to the crisis, drawing from the relevant instruments described above. In this sense, we can say that,
collectively, governments were successful in their responses to the crisis on the housing system. This observation
is based on different angles on the whole-of-government response:
•

the scale and scope of interventions

•

the prioritisation of interventions

•

the degree of alignment and coordination between government levels (see Chapters 3–6).

2.2.1 Scale
At a national level, the type, scale and scope of interventions and measures appears to be well-coordinated. As
Table 2 shows, from 98 Australian Government and state/territory government initiatives, $4 billion of new and
expedited investments in housing outcomes were announced between March and June 2020.1

1 These estimates are wholly indicative. To generate these figures, we drew on media releases and disaggregated the figures by
jurisdiction and housing outcome to minimise double accounting. At the time of publication not all forward estimates were available and
many states/territories and the Australian Government had not yet handed down their 2020–21 budgets. The Victorian figures in media
releases were verified and are aligned with the figures reported by the Public Accounts and Estimates Committee in July (PAEC 2020).
They should nonetheless be treated with caution and reassessed in 2021.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

18

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Table 2: Summaries of initiatives and amount allocated: by jurisdiction and housing outcome
Australian
Government

ACT

NSW

NT

QLD

SA

TAS

VIC

WA

Total
Initiatives

Indicative
Amount ($)

Home ownership

1

1

1

2

-

1

1

1

1

9

$60m +

Assisted home ownership

1

1

-

-

1

-

2

1

1

7

$817m +

Private rental

2

2

2

-

3

3

3

2

4

21

$1.21b +

Social housing

-

1

4

2

1

2

5

7

7

29

$1.57b +

Crisis accommodation

1

1

1

-

3

-

1

1

2

10

$206m +

Homelessness

2

2

6

-

3

2

3

2

2

22

192m +

Total initiatives

7

8

14

4

11

8

15

14

17

98

$856.9m

$1.875m +

$638.3m +

$60m +

$533.4m +

$76m +

$201m +

$1.039b +

$662.1m +

Indicative amount ($)

$4.08b + (approx.)

Source: Authors.

Thus, the scale of interventions was understandably appropriate to both the emergency at hand, the size of the combined housing system, and the size of fiscal commitments
already in play in the system. Australian Government commitments totalled $859m until June 2020, covering each housing outcome except for social housing (due to existing
agreements over the division of governance of different elements of the social housing system—see Chapter 5). Combined commitments from the states dwarfed this figure
—a total of $3.2b committed across all jurisdictions. There were skews in this distribution—the bulk of funding was injected by Victoria, Western Australia, New South Wales and
Queensland—which also reflects the responses to anticipated economic and social risks in those jurisdictions, especially where the fall-out would have been disastrous to the
economic and social wellbeing of the state as well as creating ripple-effects across the country. Figure 2 illustrates the spread of investment scale across Australia.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

19

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Figure 2: Indicative amount allocated by jurisdiction ($ millions)
Figure 2: Indicative amount allocated by jurisdiction ($ millions)

Source: Authors.

Thus, the scale of interventions reflects how seriously all levels of government anticipated the impacts of the
pandemic on the housing system and, more importantly, the everyday and future lives of Australians.

2.2.2 Scope
The sheer scope of interventions (and associated policy work and collaborations) was unprecedented and
covered every housing outcome, within the prevailing regulatory and governance arrangements while ensuring
rapid agency. In other words, existing governance structures did not appear to slow down efforts to respond
swiftly, even between or across jurisdictional arrangements for service delivery. Figure 3 illustrates how the
scope of investments across housing outcome areas were distributed across the March–June timeframe:

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

20

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Figure 3: $ (millions)
announced
per housing
outcome
17March–16
March–16
June
Figure 3 $ (millions)
announced
per housing
outcome 17
June
2020 2020

Source: Authors.

Indeed, the nature of responses across the housing system were large in number as well as in fiscal
commitments.2 For example, the combined responses to homelessness involved 22 initiatives, at a projected
cost of $192m. These interventions, as Chapter 3 explores in more depth, depended as much upon rapid
collaborations through multi-level governance arrangements as they did on the availability of financial resources.
Each housing outcome received some level of support, as Figure 3 shows.

2 Home ownership and Assisted Home ownership outcomes were largely buttressed by the HomeBuilder initiative, which was announced
at the very end of the search timeframe and was not enacted by some states until July. Thus, analysis on these outcome areas is limited
in this report.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

21

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

Figure 4: Housing
outcome investment by jurisdiction
Figure 4: Housing outcome investment by jurisdiction
Australian Government

rental

homeownership

housing

accommodation

Source: Authors.

There was a clear clustering of high-value fiscal investments in private rental and social housing (21 initiatives, $1.21b
and 28 initiatives, $1.57b respectively), reflecting the costs of supporting economic stability in at-risk households,
and upgrades and maintenance works as well as expedited social housing stock builds (see Chapters 5 and 6). As
with the scale of emergency interventions and investments, the scope was also reflective of the need for a wholeof-system approach to minimise the risks of households experiencing increased housing stress through economic
and social upheaval. This is further demonstrated by the indirect measures implemented by the Australian
Government and state governments to stabilise household income shocks (e.g. JobKeeper and JobSeeker
increases) and utilities supports. Table 3 illustrates the number of these initiatives across levels of government.
Table 3: System-wide initiatives affecting housing outcomes
Australian
Government

ACT

NSW

NT

QLD

SA

TAS

VIC

WA

Total
Initiatives

Utilities

3

2

1

1

1

-

3

1

5

17

Income

10

1

-

-

-

1

2

1

-

15

Total Initiatives

13

3

1

1

1

1

5

2

5

32

Source: Authors

2.2.3 Prioritisation
While the scale and scope of policy interventions were large, of equal importance is when these interventions
were announced/implemented. Indeed, understanding the priorities afforded to housing outcomes are critical to
any assessments of the quality of the government responses to the crisis. Thus, the timelines below illustrate the
sequencing of interventions that unfolded rapidly between March and June.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

22

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

March 2020

Figure 5: Timeline of initiatives March 2020
Social housing

Homelessness

Homelessness

Social housing

Home ownership

Social housing

Upgrades and maintenance

Rough sleepers

Rough sleepers

Upgrades and maintenance

Rates and levies

No rental increase

NSW

Federal

QLD

TAS

Homelessness

Homelessness

Homelessness

VIC

Federal

Rough sleepers

Rough sleepers

TAS

SA
Crisis accom.

Rough sleepers

Social housing

No rental increase

Homelessness
Prevention

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

QLD

TAS

NSW

NSW

17th

31st

ACT

QLD

Home ownership

Homelessness

Rates and levies

Rough sleepers

NT

Federal

Home ownership

Private Rental

Upgrades and maintenance

Rent relief

TAS

SA

Federal

WA

Crisis accom.

Home ownership

Private Rental

Homelessness

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

Land tax relief

TAS

TAS

Private Rental

Social housing

Eviction moratorium

Increase supply

Eviction moratorium

WA
Social housing

No rental increase

Rough sleepers

WA
Crisis accom.

Emergency accom.

Source: Authors.

In March, the first priorities were laid out across state governments, especially social housing, private rental, and homelessness. Governments thus proceeded with a strong
prioritisation focus, afforded to those most vulnerable to deepening housing (and social) inequities. This was shown by the considerable efforts to protect rough sleepers and
people experiencing homelessness (for an illustrative example, see Vignette 1, Chapter 3).
Additionally, priority was given to defray the potential impacts on Australians at risk of experiencing some level of distress on the housing continuum in private rental and social
housing. This was illustrated through the creation of, and increase in existing transfer payments, including JobKeeper and JobSeeker, as well as aligned activities in the private
rental space (rental increase freezes and eviction moratoria). Furthermore, in some jurisdictions, e.g. Western Australia and Victoria, further prioritisation was given to remote and
Indigenous communities at further risk of negative housing outcomes, and some funding was announced specifically targeting improving housing outcomes in those communities.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

23

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

April 2020

Figure 6: Timeline of initiatives April 2020
Crisis accom.

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

Social housing

Social housing

Private Rental

Private Rental

Homelessness

Private Rental

Private Rental

Homelessness

No rental increase

Upgrades and maintenance

Eviction moratorium

Rent relief

Prevention

Rent relief

Rent relief

Rough sleepers

NSW

QLD

NSW

WA

SA

TAS

Federal

VIC
Private Rental

Private Rental

Private Rental

Eviction moratorium

Eviction moratorium

Eviction moratorium

QLD

WA

ACT

Private Rental

ACT
Homelessness

Rent relief

Rough sleepers

VIC

Private Rental

Private Rental

Homelessness

TAS

QLD

TAS

Rent relief

Rent relief

ACT

Rough sleepers

4th

30th

VIC

NSW

Crisis accom.

Social housing

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

QLD
Crisis accom.

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

NSW
Private Rental

Homeownership

Eviction moratorium

Increase supply

VIC

ACT

Homelessness

Private Rental

Rough sleepers

NT

Rent relief

Upgrades and
maintenance

VIC
Private Rental

Eviction moratorium

ACT

VIC

SA

TAS

Crisis accom.

Assisted
homeownership

Eviction moratorium

Private Rental

Homelessness

Domestic violence
emergency accom.

NSW
Homeownership
Rates and levies

First home

WA
Private Rental

Eviction moratorium

WA
Private Rental
Rent relief

Rough sleepers

SA
Homelessness
Rough sleepers

Source: Authors.

From April, the intensity of new interventions peaked, and March’s prioritisation had laid the foundations for significant political activity to respond to the now rapidly unfolding
crisis. A clearer emphasis here was initially on crisis accommodation, followed by several interventions in the private rental space through rent relief and the enactment of
eviction moratoria across several states, for example. Further announcements were made across state jurisdictions in April to reinforce homelessness prevention measures
and rough sleepers (e.g. ACT, SA and Tasmania).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

24

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

May 2020

Figure 7: Timeline of initiatives May 2020
Homeownership

Social housing

Social housing

Social housing

Private Rental

Crisis accom.

Rates and levies

Increase supply

Increase supply

Increase supply

Rent relief

Domestic violence emergency accom.

WA

WA

VIC

VIC

TAS

Homelessness

Homelessness

Prevention

SA

Social housing

Social housing

Rough sleepers

Upgrades and maintenance

NSW

QLD
Social housing

Upgrades and maintenance

Upgrades and maintenance

WA

ACT

VIC

8th

31st

VIC

NSW

Social housing

Homelessness

Increase supply

Transition to permanent housing

VIC

WA

NT

Social housing

Social housing

Social housing

Upgrades and maintenance

Increase supply

Increase supply

WA

NSW

VIC

NSW

SA

VIC

Crisis accom.

Homelessness

Social housing

Social housing

Social housing

Homeownership

Domestic violence emergency accom.

Rough sleepers

Upgrades and maintenance

Increase supply

Upgrades and maintenance

Rates and levies

Source: Authors.

By May, the intensity of announcing new interventions had slackened, most likely due to the impacts of March and April activities beginning to be felt by households and people
at risk of housing stress. As such, priorities had turned to addressing longer-term issues that required stimulus—such as announcements to increase supply of social housing
stock (e.g. Victoria, NSW, WA and SA). Further emphasis on protecting rough sleepers through more secure temporary accommodation was also announced in a wide-ranging
package in NSW, and in SA.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

25

2. Overview of housing-related policy interventions during the pandemic 

June 2020

Figure 8: Timeline of initiatives June 2020
Assisted homeownership

Homelessness

Private rental

Social housing

Assisted homeownership

New builds

Rough sleepers

Rent relief

Increase supply

First home

TAS

WA

SA

WA

QLD

Social housing

Assisted homeownership

Increase supply

New builds

TAS

Homelessness

Social housing

Transition to permanent housing

Upgrades and maintenance

Federal

NSW

WA

4th

16th

TAS

Federal

Social housing

Homeownership

Increase supply

Upgrades and maintenance

WA

QLD

Social housing

Social housing

Upgrades and maintenance

Increase supply

TAS

ACT

NSW

WA

Assisted homeownership

Assisted homeownership

Homelessness

Assisted homeownership

Renters to owners

Duties

Rough sleepers

New builds

Source: Authors.

Finally, by June many of the immediate priority areas had received the bulk of their support, with demonstrable impacts being seen in some areas, such as homelessness
and rough sleeping, and supports for the private rental system. Most interventions during the early stages of June focussed on assisted homeownership, including rentersto-owners’ schemes and new builds. Meanwhile, attention in the homelessness space turned to the importance of more sustainable accommodation for rough sleepers
transitioning into more secure housing. Social housing saw continued increases in support for increasing supply of housing stock.
In summary, the scale and scope of housing system initiatives were very clearly phased in delivery. March and April saw the most interventions across key areas of housing
continuum vulnerability—homelessness and rough sleeping, and private rental. Once these emergency measures had been put in place, and as the national pandemic crisis
response gathered pace, housing system interventions shifted in May and June. Importantly these later initiatives necessarily followed the most pressing need for help for the
most vulnerable, allowing governments to coordinate further supports to social housing and assisted homeownership to deepen the impact of the overall stimulus package.
The following chapters (3–6) address key housing outcome areas in much more detail, focusing on the levels of coordination between levels of government.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

26

3. Homelessness
•

National effectiveness in rapidly accommodating some of the most
disadvantaged and at-risk groups in Australia is widely seen as one
of the early ‘successes’ of the response.

•

By some estimates 8,000 people across Australia were provided
with accommodation to create safe spaces to self-isolate and
recover if presenting symptoms.

•

For the first time, rough sleeping was briefly eliminated with the
majority housed in a combination of hotel/motel accommodation.

•

In line with the National Cabinet, responses followed a common
approach—rapidly identify the homeless using the resources and
networks of specialist homeless services (SHS); house people in
temporary accommodation and provide ‘wrap-around’ support.

•

Several governments—NSW, Victoria, WA—are using the
opportunity to transition people who are homeless into long-term
and secure accommodation through additional investments in
housing and assertive care.

•

What is evident is the growth of approaches modelled on ‘housing
first’ (or rapid housing) as the strategy for tackling long-term
homelessness (Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012).

•

It has thus illustrated the potential to address one of society’s most
enduring and intractable problems—and illustrates the potential for
policy and social innovation in a crisis.

•

The total number of policy initiatives announced by Australian
governments for homelessness is 22 and we estimate that the
volume of funding committed by mid-June 2020 was $192m.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

27

3. Homelessness 

3.1 Homelessness in and across Australia: the policy context
Homeless Australians, and those at-risk of homelessness, are among the most disadvantaged groups in Australia
(AIHW 2019).
Estimates of homelessness are drawn from the Australian Census (AIHW 2019). At last Census night more than
116,000 people were homeless across Australia (AIHW 2019: 1). A majority were male (58%), with those identifying
as Indigenous Australians substantially over-represented (20%) (AIHW 2019).
The Census found approximately 8,200 were in improvised dwellings, tents or ‘rough sleeping’; 21,235 were in
supported accommodation operated by specialist homeless services (SHS); 17,725 were temporarily staying with
other households; 17,503 were in boarding houses; 678 in other temporary lodgings, while 51,088 were living in
severely crowded dwellings (AIHW 2019).

3.1.1 Homelessness funding: policy through networks
As established, housing policy in Australia is a ‘complex form of multi-level governance’ (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020:
21). Homelessness typifies this characterisation of governance through networks with Australian Government, state/
territory governments and local agencies working alongside non-governmental actors, notably SHSs.
Australian Government
Until the 1970s homelessness services were operated and funded almost entirely by faith-based organisations
and other charities (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015). Public funding only commenced in a ‘systematic way’ with the
introduction of the Homeless Persons Assistance Program (HPAP) in 1974 (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015: 7). The
HPAP provided direct support to frontline service providers with a focus on chronically homeless men and
typical homeless shelters. In the early 1980s a review of crisis accommodation found it was ‘fragmented,
uncoordinated and overly restricted to specific target groups’ (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015: 7). This led to the adoption
of the Supported Accommodation Assistance Act 1984 (C’wlth) (Parkinson, Batterham et al. 2019: 9) and a new
funding mechanism through the Supported Accommodation Assistance Program (SAAP) (Flatau, Wood et
al. 2015). Further funding was delivered through inclusion of homelessness in Commonwealth-state housing
agreements (CSHAs) and a new Crisis Accommodation Program to fund capital investment in expanded crisis
accommodation (Flatau, Wood et al. 2015).
In 2009, the National Partnership Agreement on Homelessness (NPAH), part of the National Affordable Housing
Agreement (NAHA), adopted through the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), superseded the SAAP
(Flatau, Wood et al. 2015). Following ‘a period of uncertainty’ beginning in 2013, in which homelessness funding
was subject to a series of provisional agreements, the Australian Government negotiated a three-year agreement
in 2017–18, the National Housing and Homelessness Agreement (NHHA) (Parkinson, Batterham et al. 2019: 9).
In 2019–20 NHHA allocated $125m for homelessness services (Department of Social Services 2020a). Under the
agreement, which reflects the federated nature of Australian governance (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020), states and
territories are required to match this funding (Council on Federal Financial Relations 2020a). The institutional and
fiscal rationale for this model is two-fold. First, such funding agreements reflect the ‘high degree of vertical fiscal
imbalance in Australia’—or the limited taxation powers among the states/territories compared to their service
delivery obligations (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: 23). Second, there is a ‘logic’ in a ‘constitutionally responsible
arm of government (federal) providing funding for the service delivery tier (state/territory)’ (Pawson, Milligan et al.
2020: 23).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

28

3. Homelessness 

States and territories
As observed by Parkinson, Batterham et al. (2019: 9) the distribution of powers under the Australian Constitution
shapes ‘the capacity of states, territories and local governments to effectively respond to homelessness’.
As a product of the ‘sovereignty of the federal government’, it can use the lever of funding to shape priorities
(Parkinson, Batterham et al. 2019: 9).
This vests the Australian Government (or Commonwealth Government) with influence, which is reflected in
the federal policy framework laid out under the NHHA (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). To access homelessness
funding, the states and territories must establish publicly accessible homelessness strategies (Department of
Social Services 2019). Given the relationship between homelessness and the extant housing system—social
housing, rental markets, affordable housing etc.—these strategies address how the states/territories aim to
‘improve housing outcomes across the housing spectrum’ (Council on Federal Financial Relations 2020a). This
is reflected in the Bilateral Agreements between the Australian Government and each sub-national jurisdiction
which are completed on an annual basis (Council on Federal Financial Relations 2020b). To access its tranche of
ongoing, indexed and matching funds, the respective jurisdictions detail the funding, strategies and initiatives that
comprises that jurisdiction’s public policy in relation to homelessness and the relationship to service providers
(AIHW 2019).
Specialist homelessness services (SHS)
The principle of subsidiarity that informs this division of responsibilities extends beyond delegation to lower tiers
of government. It also extends to inclusion of non-government actors who ‘exert influence on how the housing
system operates’ (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017: 6). As noted at Chapter 2, these comprise market actors ‘such as
major financial and property organisations’…as well as social actors such CHPs (Dodson, de Silva et al. 2017: 6).
A core feature of this multi-level governance mix is the SHS (AIHW 2019).
According to the AIHW (2019: 5) which reports annually on the SHS, there are 1,583 agencies in Australia that in
2018–19 serviced more than 290,000 clients. SHS provide a wide variety of services from those targeted at rough
sleepers through to specific cohorts including youth, family and domestic violence and prevention for those atrisk of becoming homeless. Service types range from short-term interventions, including advice, meals and other
services such as laundry, through intensive, wrap-around supports that aim to tackle homelessness over the longterm. They thus play a fundamental part in the multi-level governance of homelessness and, given their direct
linkage to people on the frontline, are critical to the response during a pandemic.

3.1.2 Health, homelessness and pandemics
The linkage between homelessness, housing insecurity and poor physical and mental health outcomes is firmly
established (Wood, Flatau et al. 2016). Rates of morbidity and premature death are higher among those experiencing
homelessness, while the homeless are also over-represented in hospitalisation and presentation at emergency
departments (Limaa, Souzab et al. 2020). At the same time, they are underrepresented in primary care provision and
early intervention (Limaa, Souzab et al. 2020). Homeless populations are thus susceptible to both communicable
diseases as well as non-communicable diseases that in turn increase vulnerability to infectious diseases (Fazel,
Geddes et al. 2014).
The ‘bi-directional and compounding relationship between homelessness and health’ occurs across different
categories of homelessness (Wood, Flatau et al. 2016: 12). People experiencing ‘primary’ homelessness (‘rough
sleeping’) can be transient and geographically mobile (Perri, Dosani et al. 2020); those experiencing ‘secondary’
homelessness are moving between different forms of accommodation, whether family, friends or SHS, while the
‘tertiary’ homeless are in shared, often short-term and insecure accommodation, that can be cramped (Zaretzky,
Flatau et al. 2013). These are not conducive to social distancing, quarantining and isolation (Perri, Dosani et
al. 2020). Moreover, they are ideal environs for the transmission and diffusion of viruses such as SARS-CoV-2.
Homelessness thus presents acute and unique challenges during a pandemic, accentuated by higher risk factors
for severe COVID-19 among homeless populations (Tsai and Wilson 2020).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

29

3. Homelessness 

3.2 Levels and degree of coordination
Given these pressing challenges, as the states and territories moved toward broadly uniform social distancing
measures through the National Cabinet, an unprecedented operation to provide emergency accommodation took
place across major cities and regional centres. By some estimates, 8,000 people across Australia were provided
with accommodation to create safe spaces to self-isolate and recover if presenting symptoms (Knight 2020). This
meant that for the first-time rough sleeping was briefly eliminated with the majority housed in a combination of
hotel/motel accommodation.
In keeping with the institutional framework governing homelessness policy in Australia, in which the Australian
Government provides ancillary funds to the service delivery tiers in the states and territories, most initiatives
and interventions were coordinated at the state/territory level in partnership with SHS and other charities.

3.2.1 Initiatives
The total number of policy initiatives announced by Australian governments for homelessness is 22 and we estimate
that the volume of funding committed at mid-June in the pandemic was approximately $192m. Figure 9 illustrates
the spread of those funds across Australian jurisdictions.
Figure
9: Amountby
allocated
by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Homelessness
Figure 9: Amount
allocated
jurisdiction
($ millions)—Homelessness

Australian Government

Australian Government

Source. Authors.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

30

3. Homelessness 

Table 4: Homelessness initiatives by jurisdiction and instrument type
Jurisdiction
Initiative
Principal instruments

Funding
Rough sleeping
Emergency funding
—accommodation

Prevention
Emergency funding
—frontline services

Australian Government
NSW
Victoria

Long-term housing
$26.9m
$73m
$174.6m

Queensland

$24.7m

Western Australia

$34.5m

South Australia
Tasmania

$6m
$4.3m

Northern Territory
ACT

$1.16m

Source: Authors.

NSW
NSW provided the second largest amount of funding (approx. $80m equating to $9.84 per capita), with three
tranches announced. The first included $34m in ‘new’ funding to support frontline SHS to help those at-risk
or experiencing homelessness, with assertive outreach resulting in 1,200 people being temporarily housed
(Department of Treasury 2020). A second tranche of $3m was provided to charity Neami to provide ‘wraparound’ services to support the transition of the cohort in Greater Sydney into long-term housing (Department
of Communities and Justice 2020a). A third tranche built on these initiatives. Part of the largest investment in
housing in the state’s history (see Vignette 3), Together Home will provide $36m to deliver stable housing and
support for those housed as part of the response to COVID-19 (Department of Communities and Justice 2020d).
Victoria
At an aggregate level, Victoria provided the largest amount of funding (approx. $174.6m). Early in the pandemic the
government announced $6m for the expansion of emergency temporary accommodation in hotels and motels
(Department of Health and Human Services 2020c). A network of SHS, under the Launch Housing Rough Sleeper
Initiative, tracked down and recruited rough sleepers (Sacred Heart Mission 2020). In April, a further $8m was
allocated to the COVID-19 Isolation and Recovery Facilities Program (Department of Health and Human Services
2020e). In late June, the government extended its commitment to temporary accommodation with a further $9.8
and committed an additional $150m for longer term housing (Department of Premier and Cabinet 2020b) (see
Vignette 1).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

31

3. Homelessness 

Vignette 1: Victoria’s pandemic response to rough sleeping in Melbourne
One of the Victorian Government’s immediate responses to the COVID-19 pandemic was to address the
issue of rough sleeping in the Melbourne metropolitan area. On 18 March 2020, the state government
announced that rough sleepers would be temporarily housed in hotels or motels around inner Melbourne
with an initial $6 million allocated to the initiative (Department of Health and Human Services 2020c). As
one commentator said, ’You can’t stay home if you don’t have one’ (Killeen 2020).
Homelessness service providers banded together, with Sacred Heart Mission, the Salvation Army,
and VincentCare providing support to the Launch Housing Rough Sleeper Initiative by way of human
resourcing to help track down and recruit rough sleepers into the program (Sacred Heart Mission
2020). At the end of July 2020, the Council to Homeless Persons indicated that over 2,000 people were
accommodated in hotels and motels as part of the program (Topsfield 2020b). This figure included
over 220 children, over 500 women and more than 1100 single households (Topsfield 2020b). Research
released by Launch Housing in July indicated that there was low overall public awareness of the initiative,
however (Forethought 2020).
In addition to providing hotel and motel accommodation for rough sleepers, on 10 April 2020, the Victorian
Government allocated $8.8 million to repurpose four of its unused aged care centres in unspecified
locations across inner Melbourne, to become places for rough sleepers to isolate and recover from
COVID-19 (Department of Health and Human Services 2020e). The centres were capable of accommodating
200 people and the COVID-19 Isolation and Recovery Facilities Program was managed in partnership with
Anglicare Victoria, the Brotherhood of St Laurence, Launch Housing, Sacred Heart Mission and VincentCare
Victoria, with St Vincents Hospital providing healthcare (Department of Health and Human Services 2020e).
When Victoria was reporting low community transmission of COVID-19, the mission of these centres was
expanded to cater to homeless people with a range of acute health conditions (Department of Health and
Human Services 2020d).
The intended outcome of these two initiatives was that COVID-19 wasn’t spread through a vulnerable
community that had no capacity to isolate. One of the positive unintended outcomes, according to Launch
Housing CEO Bevan Warner, was that ’we’ve got these people in our grasp for the first time…It’s shown
that homelessness is solvable. For the first time, we’ve got an opportunity to work with them from rough
sleeping into a permanent home and a good life’ (Knight 2020). The homelessness services sector began
to lobby the state government not to waste this opportunity to end homelessness in the state once and for
all (Topsfield 2020a).
Perhaps in response, on 13 June 2020, the Victorian Government committed $9.8 million to extend
the temporary accommodation scheme until April 2021. Additionally, on 28 July 2020, the government
committed $150 million to find long-term housing solutions for people in temporary housing (Department
of Premier and Cabinet 2020b). This was to be achieved by, among other means, leasing 1100 properties
from the private rental market and the completion of new social housing units (Department of Premier
and Cabinet 2020b). Ultimately, says Bevan Warner, CEO of Launch Housing, ‘it is cheaper for the
taxpayer to provide a home than it is to bear the cost of emergency ward presentations and to police
homelessness’ (Warner 2020).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

32

3. Homelessness 

Queensland
Queensland’s Rapid Housing Response program involved several initiatives including providing safe
accommodation to self-isolate, increased outreach capacity to support rough sleepers and brokerage funds to
help SHS provide crisis accommodation (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020c). Although a substantial
commitment ($24.7m), with the intention ‘to use the opportunity to support these Queenslanders into suitable,
permanent accommodation’ by August, no additional funding had been announced to support a housing first
approach (Boseley 2020).
Western Australia
WA’s response included placing 40 rough sleepers in a recreational centre and a pilot placing 30 more in hotels
(Boseley 2020). The government also used COVID-19 to bring forward an already announced initiative, the
Housing First Homelessness Initiative in Bunbury which, in keeping with NSW and Victoria, uses a rapid housing
model (Department of Communities 2020d). The $34.5m committed to this initiative was equivalent to $13.07 per
capita.
South Australia
Initiatives took two forms in South Australia. The first focussed on providing an unknown amount of funding
to support accommodation for rough sleepers through a hotel/motel program (Nielsen 2020). The second,
announced prior to the pandemic, was a Homelessness Prevention Fund, part of a wider $550 million housing
and homelessness strategy, Our Housing Future 2020–2030 (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020i). This
took the form of an Expression of Interest for organisations able to help reduce homelessness in SA (Department
of the Premier and Cabinet 2020i).
Tasmania
Tasmania’s Minister for Housing, Roger Jaensch, announced $4.3 million to support three core areas: expanding
both the Safe Night Space pilot program to shelter rough sleepers and Housing Connect’s capacity to provide
emergency accommodation via hotels/motels as well as services to support young people presenting at
homeless shelters (Department of Communities 2020e).
Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory
The ACT announced two streams of emergency funding to support temporary accommodation for rough sleepers
($832k), and support for front line services ($330k), while NT announced no specific initiatives (Community
Services Directorate 2020).

3.3 Opportunity in a crisis
•

The coordinated response to tackle rough sleeping and other forms of homelessness in the early stages of
the pandemic is widely seen as a successful public health operation.

•

Australia was well-positioned due to the multi-level governance of housing and homelessness. The states/
territories could coordinate with frontline SHS who could use their existing networks and expertise to
transition people into hotel accommodation.

•

At a broader national and systemic-level, COVID-19 has provided a window of opportunity to better
understand homeless populations and develop an enhanced understanding of individual homeless persons
across jurisdictions. Support workers no longer needed to locate clients to provide access to services.

•

This has provided an opportunity to use models such as Housing First and rapid housing to break the cycle
of homelessness by providing secure housing (Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012).

•

Some jurisdictions have capitalised on this opportunity by expediting or extending funding for social housing
to accommodate those temporarily housed.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

33

4. Crisis accommodation
•

Social distancing measures have created an environment for what
the United Nations described in April as a ‘shadow pandemic’:
potential for increased violence against women and girls (MlamboNgcuka 2020).

•

Stay-at-home measures have placed strain on services and
increased the need for expanded services and early research has
shown increased use of services and severity of domestic and family
violence (Pfitzner, Fitz-Gibbon et al. 2020a; Pfitzner, Fitz-Gibbon et
al. 2020b).

•

In response, we found that state/territory governments developed at
least nine initiatives, evenly spread except for the Northern Territory
(no discrete response) and Queensland and WA (two each). The
Australian Government provided funding support ($150m).

•

We estimate that approximately $204m has been committed to
crisis accommodation since the pandemic began.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

34

4. Crisis accommodation 

4.1 Crisis accommodation: policy context
The pandemic created a significant upswing in demand for crisis and emergency accommodation. The policy
responses aimed to anticipate this rising demand for services, supporting individuals at risk of or experiencing
homelessness (see Chapter 3), as well as families experiencing domestic and family violence (DFV). Indeed, over
4,400 family violence offences were reported during both COVID lockdown periods in Victoria alone, leading to
over 500 arrests and an 11 per cent increase in men accessing support services.

4.1.1 Crisis and emergency accommodation: domestic and family violence
A principal concern for emergency interventions in housing outcomes was to focus on DFV, which is a leading
cause of homelessness for women and children. The government responses seen in the early stages of the crisis
saw an increase in the scope and provision of support services—Specialist Homelessness Services (SHS)—
to meet the rising prevalence of DFV, as well as supporting interventions aiming to break the cycle of violence
(Spinney and Blandy 2011).
Like governance across the breadth of the housing continuum, the legislative, strategic and operational context
for emergency and crisis accommodation is complex. Jurisdictional approaches to the governance of DFV are
arranged in different ways, depending on the prevailing state infrastructures and service provision processes.
Despite the different approaches, one commonality is the focus each jurisdiction has taken to ‘draw different
perspectives and policies together….[emphasising] connected and collaborative approaches, consistency of
practice and capacity building with non-specialist agencies, particularly police’ (Flanagan, Blunden et al. 2019:2).
This harmonisation is driven by the national strategy on preventing violence against women and children
adopted by COAG, The National Plan to Reduce Violence Against Women and Children 2010–2022, to ensure
the desired consistency of approach and outcomes. This means that jurisdictions have developed their own
combination of laws and strategies drawing from the Family Law Act 1975 and the Australian Government’s
National Plan.3 Legislation ranges from the specific (e.g. ACT’s Family Violence Act 2016) to amended existing
(WA’s Restraining Orders Act 1997) legislation, all of which aim to expand the capacity for legislatures to define
family violence accordingly, often including children as well as women classed as vulnerable persons. Strategies
follow a consistent path—from Victoria’s Ending Family Violence: Victoria’s Plan for Change (November 2016)
to Tasmania’s Safe Homes, Safe Families: Tasmania’s Family Violence Action Plan 2015–2020. All of which is to
briefly summarise that a wider framing for the need to intervene in DFV is supported by efforts to provide housing
support. Such approaches follow integrated models, with the aim of securing safe, long-term housing for women
and children surviving DFV.
The prevailing context pre-pandemic was that the system did not always provide safe, secure and long-term
housing for these survivors. Part of this challenge has been exacerbated by limits to social housing stock and
availability—being unable to place all such families into safe accommodation at short notice and over the longterm underscores both the dearth of investment and supply, as well as the inability of the system to intervene
in a timely fashion through SHS.

3 An excellent summary of different legislations and strategies across governments can be found in K. Flanagan, H. Blunden, K. Valentine,
and J. Henriette, (2019) Housing outcomes after domestic and family violence, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute,
Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0026/37619/AHURI-Final-Report-311-Housing-outcomes-after-domesticand-family-violence.pdf.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

35

4. Crisis accommodation 

4.2 Levels and degree of coordination
There were interventions at state/territory levels into increasing the provision of crisis and emergency
accommodation among vulnerable populations with some funding support provided by the Australian
Government. As Chapter 3 discussed, the coordination of temporary crisis and emergency accommodation for
people experiencing or at risk of experiencing homelessness was rapid and largely effective. In this chapter, the
focus is on the range of initiatives to address the rising dangers of DFV, directly or indirectly associated with
measures arising from the COVID-19 public health response. Concerns had been raised that the imposition of
social/physical distancing measures, work-from-home requirements and increased household income pressure
could lead to an increase in DFV (Pfitzner, Fitz-Gibbon et al. 2020b).

4.2.1 Initiatives
Overall, approximately $204m funding was committed across most states and territories, with substantial
financial support earmarked to flow through the increased provision of front-line services. The spread of this
funding across jurisdictions is illustrated in Figure 10.
Figureallocated
10: Amount allocated
by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Crisis accommodation
Figure 10: Amount
by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Crisis
accommodation

Australian Government

Source: Authors.

Most of the instruments used aimed to provide short-term supports where it was anticipated there would be
rising demand on front-line responses and services for those surviving DFV as indicated in Table 5.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

36

4. Crisis accommodation 

Table 5: Crisis accommodation initiatives by jurisdiction and instrument type
Jurisdiction
Initiative
Principal instruments

Funding
Domestic violence emergency accommodation
Emergency funding—frontline
services and accommodation

Payment to states and territories

Australian Government

$150m

NSW

$14.3m

Victoria

$36.4m

Queensland

$8.7m

Western Australia

$3.1m

South Australia
Tasmania

$2.7m

Northern Territory
ACT

$0.350m

Source: Authors

Australian Government
On 4 April, Federal Minister for Women, Senator Marise Payne, and Minister for Families and Social Services,
Senator Anne Ruston, announced that $150 million had been earmarked for domestic violence emergency
accommodation ‘that is innovative and flexible particularly in light of health requirements for quarantine and
self-isolation that may prevent women and children being able to stay with friends or family’ (Department of
Social Services 2020b). The funding included a fixed 3 per cent payment to states and territories with the
remainder provided on a per capita basis with a small contingency set aside.
New South Wales
NSW Attorney General and Minister for the Prevention of Domestic Violence, Mark Speakman, announced an
intention to increase the supply and flexibility of domestic violence emergency accommodation across NSW
through the provision of $14.3 million in emergency funding for accommodation (Department of Communities
and Justice 2020b).
Victoria
Victoria provided the largest quantum of funding (which also equated to the largest amount committed per capita
at $5.47) with $36.4 million in emergency funding for accommodation, specifically domestic violence emergency
accommodation and specialist services for people suffering or at risk of family violence (Department of Premier
and Cabinet 2020d). The funding included $20 million for short-term accommodation for family violence survivors
and nearly $10.4 million to help women and children escaping family violence get access to accommodation and
related support. The funding was in addition to $6 million provided by the Australian Government to meet the
needs of Victorians experiencing family violence during COVID-19.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

37

4. Crisis accommodation 

Queensland
The Queensland government announced $1.7 million in emergency funding to frontline services to address
domestic violence emergency accommodation needs on 8 April (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020b).
On 6 May, a further $2 million for emergency funding to frontline services for domestic violence emergency
accommodation was announced to assist with increased demand and costs (Department of the Premier and
Cabinet 2020n). On 28 May, the Minister for Child Safety, Youth and Women and Minister for the Prevention
of Domestic and Family Violence, Di Farmer, announced how $5 million in Australian Government funding
would be distributed to address domestic violence emergency accommodation needs (Department of the
Premier and Cabinet 2020f). The emergency funding to frontline services would enhance crisis and post-crisis
accommodation, help women from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds with crisis accommodation,
and provide support to domestic and family violence services regarding tenants’ rights under COVID-19.
Vignette 2: Domestic violence emergency accommodation in Queensland
In Queensland, there was the same concern as across the rest of Australia at the outset of the COVID-19
pandemic. The cause for concern was the potential for an increase in instances of domestic violence
resulting from a range of new stresses on households and increased proximity between household
members for prolonged periods of time. Cathy Crawford, Coordinator of the Townsville Women’s Centre,
said, ’We are extremely concerned that women who have to quarantine…will remain in violent homes’
(Queensland Domestic Violence Services Network 2020a).
Data from the Coroners Court of Queensland shows that 38 Queenslanders lost their lives as a result
of domestic and family violence between 1 April 2019 and 30 April 2020 (Queensland Domestic Violence
Services Network 2020b). As COVID-19 took off across the country, the state was still reeling from the
horrific death of Hannah Clarke and her three children at the hands of her estranged husband in February
2020 (Gleeson 2020). In their report, Responding to Queensland’s ‘shadow pandemic’ during the period
of COVID-19 restrictions, authors Pfitzner, Fitz-Gibbon et al. (2020a) find that the COVID-19 pandemic
contributed to:
•

an increase in domestic violence services’ client numbers

•

an increase in the complexity of client needs

•

an escalation in controlling behaviour and manipulation reported by women

•

an increase in reported perpetrator anger/violence allegedly due to reduced income or loss of job due
to COVID-19.

On 8 April 2020, the Queensland Government announced $5.5 million to boost domestic violence
services, of which $1.7 million was earmarked for crisis accommodation in shelters, hotels or residential
properties as shelters struggled to cope with demand (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020b).
The $1.7 million complemented $24.7 million that the state had already committed to housing and
homelessness in March 2020 and $150 million the Australian Government had committed nationally
to address the needs of those experiencing violence, including through the provision of emergency
accommodation (Department of Social Services 2020b; Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020c).
Further to the $5.5 million directly targeting domestic violence services, on 6 May 2020, as part of
Domestic Violence Remembrance Day, Queensland Premier. Annastacia Palaszczuk. announced a further
$2 million would be made available for domestic and family violence service providers to help at-risk
families into alternative accommodation (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020n). These funds
were in addition to the $45.5 already committed to Family and Child Connect Services in the 2019–20
budget which included funds for parents to seek support to access housing, among other government
services (Queensland Government 2020).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

38

4. Crisis accommodation 

Western Australia
The Government of Western Australia announced $159 million in funds to be used for, among other things,
emergency accommodation (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020d). This was to be achieved through
emergency funding to frontline services. On 11 May, Prevention of Family and Domestic Violence Minister, Simone
McGurk, announced how $3.1 million from the Australian Government for emergency funding to frontline services
would be distributed (Department of Communities 2020a). One of the four areas highlighted was domestic
violence emergency accommodation.
Tasmania
In Tasmania, $2.7 million was earmarked for domestic violence emergency accommodation to be delivered
through emergency funding to frontline services (Department of Premier and Cabinet 2020g). This equated
to a commitment of $5.03 per head of population in the state.
Australian Capital Territory
The ACT announced funding to provide domestic violence emergency accommodation to people experiencing
domestic and family violence arising from the COVID-19 pandemic. This was in the form of emergency funding
to frontline services (Community Services Directorate 2020).

4.3 Opportunity in a crisis
•

The emergency funding and wider supports for survivors of DFV were a critical response in the first pandemic
phase.

•

This needs to be built on and extended since the flow-on effects from the crisis, into households and the
family home, will continue in the coming years. Not least, as some commentators are observing, that families
are increasingly seeking safe and secure accommodation during the pandemic (Bamford 2020).

•

This includes the much-needed increase in capacity for social housing to provide accommodation options
for families surviving DFV.

•

Further supports announced for perpetrators and their accommodation need to also form part of expected
support packages, to keep families in their homes where feasible and safe.

•

Measurement of increases in referrals for DFV front-line services also need to feed demand data back into
the wider system to support increased need for financial and programmatic supports.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

39

5. Social housing
•

As with prior economic downturns, social housing has featured as
a key plank of the economic recovery platform of governments—the
context of the pandemic has had some impact but not substantively
altered the shape of the response.

•

Approximately $1.57 billion was earmarked for social housing
outcomes across most states and territories.

•

Most state governments committed new and/or expedited funding
for maintenance and upgrades of existing social housing stock as
a form of ‘shovel ready’ economic stimulus.

•

Five states expedited and/or committed new funding to increase
the supply of social housing to stimulate construction and,
in some cases, meet the needs of those housed in temporary
accommodation to support ‘housing first’ models.

•

NSW, WA and Victoria provided funds specifically for Indigenous
communities.

•

At this point in the pandemic there has been no new direct allocation
of funding for social housing by the Australian Government, which
contrasts with the Global Financial Crisis, where $5.2b ($6.5b in
2020 dollars) was allocated to the Social Housing Initiative (Pawson,
Milligan et al. 2020: 95).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

40

5. Social housing 

5.1 Social housing policy context
5.1.1 Overview of social housing governance and its effects
Social housing, its quality standard and availability, has been a critical component of government responses
to alleviating pressures on housing outcomes during the pandemic. Powell, Meltzer et al. (2019: 6) define social
housing as ‘relatively secure and affordable rental housing provided to eligible applicants by state and territory
housing authorities (public housing), non-profit community organisations (community housing) and Indigenous
organisations (Indigenous housing)’. In Australia, social housing (comprising public, community and Indigenous
housing) makes up approximately 5 per cent of Australia’s total stock (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020).
Over the past two decades, we have witnessed a steadily increasing demand for social housing, which, in turn, has
increased pressures on funding models to maintain standards of existing stock while seeking to secure a suitable
pipeline of new stock in places where it is most needed (Powell, Meltzer et al. 2019). Of course, this is also framed
by the significant, systemic challenges posed by decreasing housing affordability, driven by housing price inflation
(Burke, Stone et al. 2014) and rising generational inequalities concerning the availability of secure employment
and affordable housing. This increases housing stress on households where income levels struggle to keep
pace with rental increases and cost of living and also increases the risks of individuals and families experiencing
negative housing outcomes, leading to rising demand for social housing (Sharam, Moran et al. 2018).
The system for facilitating efficient social housing pathways is complex, since it is required to meet the
(increasingly unmet) rising demands of various vulnerable groups and low/medium income households
seeking short/long-term housing. Jurisdictional governance of social housing is shared between the Australian
Government and states/territory governments. Implementation of social housing pathways occurs at state
and territory level and is covered by the National Housing and Homelessness Agreement (NHHA), which sets
priorities for social housing initiatives across states and territories. Further, it outlines the agreed funding
commitments to individual states. From this point, responsibility has been bifurcated where the Australian
Government takes responsibility for the provision of rental subsidies through the social security system, and
state/territory governments have responsibility for the task of increasing social housing supply. As Pawson,
Milligan et al. (2020) note, the increasing residualisation of a national commitment to progressive investment and
governance of the social housing system creates some ambiguity over accountability and political tensions that
create another layer of complexity on top of an already unwieldy system.
The complexity of the system is underscored by the range of potential and actual users of social housing, covering
survivors of DFV, rough sleepers and people experiencing degrees of homelessness, low-income households
excluded from affordable housing options, people considered to be socially and economically disadvantaged
(itself caused by systemic failures to address social inequity and inequality). However, invariably a common thread
among these needs and groups is a need to transition from absent or insecure housing to much more suitable,
safe, and secure housing.

5.2 Levels and degree of coordination
Australia entered the crisis with a chronic shortage of social and affordable housing with the number of properties
relative to the size of the Australian population having halved since 1991 (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). Most
jurisdictions lack the supply required to serve the transition to long-term housing for those temporarily housed
in hotel accommodation (Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012). Also, the ‘hard lockdown’ of towers in inner Melbourne
exposed the challenges presented by a pandemic for high-density social housing with shared community spaces
and the need for much greater investment in upgrades and maintenance.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

41

5. Social housing 

5.2.1 Initiatives
In total, 28 policy initiatives related to social housing were announced across the states and territories, with
approximately $1.57b in funding committed. The spread of this funding across jurisdictions is illustrated in Figure 11.
Figure 11: Amount
allocated
by
jurisdiction
($ millions)—Social
housing
Figure
11: Amount
allocated
by jurisdiction
($ millions)—Social housing

Source: Authors.

There was no direct funding allocated for social housing by the Australian Government and responsibility lay
with the states/territories to tackle emergent challenges related to the pandemic (indirectly, the Australian
Government assisted the states with funding to provide shelter to self-isolate for rough sleepers and people
caught in the cycle of homelessness some of whom were housed in social housing). This sub-national delegation
of responsibilities is consistent with the social housing governance arrangements between the Australian
Government and the state/territories, especially the enactment of national frameworks and existing funding
structures (Lawson, Pawson et al. 2018).
The interventions have taken three main forms: upgrades and maintenance of existing stock, commitments
to increase supply, and use of regulatory instruments to freeze rents and planning regulations to facilitate
development. This is illustrated in Table 6. Increasing supply is, as others have long argued, an ongoing challenge
where fiscal commitments have not kept pace with population growth (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020). As such, it
is notable that most fiscal commitments involved maintenance and upgrades (at least $900m). Supply initiatives
involved smaller fiscal commitments of new funding, but did provide an opportunity to expedite existing projects
involving new builds, while some states expanded funding as a form of construction stimulus and as a pipeline to
house the homeless in temporary accommodation.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

42

5. Social housing 

Table 6: Social housing initiatives by jurisdiction and instrument type
Jurisdiction
Initiative
Principal instruments

Funding
Regulation
Rent
freeze

Existing stock

Increase supply

Planning Expedited Funding Expedited Funding
regulation
funding
expansion
funding
expansion

Indigenous
communities

Australian Government
NSW

$324m

Victoria

$488m

Queensland

$100m

Western Australia
South Australia
Tasmania

$477.5m
$10m
$174m

NT
ACT

$0.365m

Source: Authors.

New South Wales
A range of measures were announced in NSW, using new and expedited funding to support supply, maintenance
and Aboriginal communities (Department of Premier and Cabinet 2020a). This totalled approximately $324m
of new and expedited investments, approximately $39.86 per capita. For example, $60.5 million was provided
for maintenance on public housing, as well as $250 million for maintenance, in separate initiatives (Department
of Communities and Justice 2020c; Department of Premier and Cabinet 2020a). $13.5 million in new funding
was made available to increase supply of social housing for Aboriginal communities and a Pilot Program was
fast-tracked to deliver new social housing stock (Department of Communities and Justice 2020c; Department
of Communities and Justice 2020e). NSW was also the only jurisdiction to explicitly indicate it would be using
planning regulations to fast-track planning processes with the goal of quicker delivery of a project with over
200 social housing units (Department of Finance 2020).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

43

5. Social housing 

Vignette 3: Increasing the supply of social housing in NSW
A report by Equity Economics (2020) released in May 2020 explained that the NSW social housing system
was ‘at capacity’ and, as such there was ‘an urgent need to secure, in the short term, additional social and
affordable housing to provide permanent, stable accommodation for people currently homeless or housed
in temporary or crisis accommodation’.
Increasing the supply of social and affordable housing has been closely linked to the injection of funds into
the economy and the creation of jobs in New South Wales during the COVID-19 pandemic.
On 15 April 2020, a $60.5 million program to deliver maintenance works and upgrades on existing social
housing stock was announced (Department of Communities and Justice 2020c). The bulk of this was to go
towards revitalising the mostly-abandoned Arncliffe Estate (earmarked for redevelopment) in partnership
with the Billbergia Group and Evolve Housing (Department of Communities and Justice 2020c). It was
expected that the work would deliver more than 100 units for emergency accommodation during the
COVID-19 crisis for people on the public housing priority list (Department of Communities and Justice
2020c). NSW Minister for Housing, Melinda Pavey, said the ‘program delivers important public housing
upgrades and new supply, while generating vital employment and economic relief at this critical time’
(Department of Communities and Justice 2020c).
Also increasing the supply of social and affordable housing in NSW was the Planning System Acceleration
Program, announced on 3 April 2020 (Department of Finance 2020). The program was intended to reform
the planning system, thus enabling economic growth. The first tranche of projects approved under the
program were announced on 28 April 2020 (Department of Planning Industry and Environment 2020a).
They included approval for Ivanhoe Estate in Macquarie Park, an initiative of the Aspire Consortium of
Frasers Property Australia and Mission Australia Housing. Ivanhoe Estate is one of the NSW Government’s
Communities Plus Program communities where social housing blends with private and affordable housing
(Land and Housing Corporation 2020). The first stage of Ivanhoe Estate will comprise of 740 total dwellings,
including 259 units of social housing (Lewis Boucher 2020). It is expected to contribute $303 million to the
state’s economy and result in 572 jobs (Department of Planning Industry and Environment 2020a). Further to
this, the second and third tranches of projects approved under the Planning System Acceleration Program,
released on 22 May 2020 and 21 June 2020, included 8 and 41 affordable housing units, respectively
(Department of Planning Industry and Environment 2020b; 2020c.
In late April 2020, reports of NSW Government deliberations on the purchase of unit complexes or unsold
units in a complex as part of a $500 million stimulus emerged courtesy of a leaked cabinet briefing paper,
prepared by the Land and Housing Corporation (Smith 2020). The paper suggested the government might
‘negotiate with the developer’ to buy dozens of units to boost its social housing stock (Smith 2020). A
concrete plan in regard to the acquisition of existing housing stock has not yet materialised.
On 19 May 2020, the NSW Government announced the Fast-Tracked Social Housing Program (Department
of Communities and Justice 2020e). The program, which forms part of the NSW Government’s Future
Directions Policy for Social Housing and delivers social housing stock in an expedited fashion, will
provide 100 additional small-scale dual occupancy homes and manor houses on 50 sites (Department of
Communities and Justice 2020e). According to the Minister for Housing, Melinda Pavey, the ‘pilot program
will not only provide well-designed quality homes for those in need, it will help stimulate the NSW economy
and create much-needed construction jobs’ (Department of Communities and Justice 2020e).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

44

5. Social housing 

Finally, on 9 June 2020, the Together Home project was announced. The Together Home project
included $13.6 million to head lease properties in the private rental market, providing existing clients
of homelessness services and priority social housing applicants with access to secure stable housing
(Department of Communities and Justice 2020f). In order to achieve this swiftly, the NSW Government
partnered with 19 community housing providers and specialist homelessness services (Housing Trust
2020). The homes will provide stable accommodation for vulnerable people, as well as an address, without
which it is difficult to be a fully-functioning member of society. One man from NSW says that now he has ‘a
base and an address to put on my CV and on other documents; it makes other things possible’ (Probono
Australia 2020).
In total, new social housing stock in the order of 1,100 properties could result from these initiatives.

Victoria
Victoria’s interventions in social housing were focussed on both supply and maintenance, with more funding
allocated for the latter. Importantly, the initiatives were spread to cover a range of vulnerable groups and made
use of funding to support existing housing initiatives.
Regarding maintenance and upgrades of existing stock, the scale and rapid deployment of funding to public,
community and Indigenous housing followed longstanding calls for improvements in the upkeep and quality
of Victoria’s ageing social housing stock. As such, $155m was targeted for maintenance on 15,000 social
housing units, in addition to $110m committed for renovations to 2,100 housing stock (Department of Health
and Human Services 2020a). In addition, $50m was allocated to Community Housing Providers (CHPs) for
maintenance of properties they manage as part of the wider maintenance and upgrades program (Department
of Health and Human Services 2020a). Regarding the social housing needs of Indigenous communities, ‘rapid
housing responses’ received $115m that was also targeted at supporting transitions out of government services
(Department of Health and Human Services 2020a).
Alongside this, $58m in funding was allocated to support the construction of new social housing, targeted to
suburbs where demand was deemed to have increased (Department of Health and Human Services 2020a).
There was a further announcement of a commitment to construct 780 new social housing dwellings across
Melbourne and regional Victoria through the Social Housing Growth Fund (Department of Health and Human
Services 2020b). The $488m committed formed a significant proportion of the $2.7b infrastructure investment
program announced in May that focussed on ‘shovel ready’ projects to stimulate the economy (Department of
Health and Human Services 2020a). It equated to a commitment of $73.37 per capita.
Queensland
As part of its economic stimulus program, Unite and Recover for Queensland Jobs, the Queensland Government
announced a $100m Works for Tradies initiative designed to support employment through the construction of
215 social housing dwellings (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020e). This commitment equated to $19.49
per capita. The project used existing government landholdings in areas identified as high need. It announced no
expedited funding, but Works for Tradies was linked to its existing Housing Construction Jobs Program. Upgrades
and maintenance of existing stock have not featured in its response to the pandemic.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

45

5. Social housing 

Western Australia
Several initiatives were announced by the Western Australian Minister for Housing, comprising a total of $477.5m
of new and expedited investment worth $180.93 per capita (Department of Communities 2020a; 2020b; 2020e;
2020f). These initiatives comprised disallowing COVID-19 payments as sources of income during the eligibility
assessment for social housing and increasing supply of social housing through several tranches of funding. This
included $8.5 million to complete 30 new homes already under construction; $150 million to build 500 social and
affordable housing units and upgrade/maintain existing stock. Premier Mark McGowan announced a range of
measures: $97 million to kickstart the construction of social housing stock, $142 million for refurbishment of 1,500
social housing units; and $80 million to maintain housing stock in remote Aboriginal communities.
South Australia
The South Australian Premier announced new funding of $10m for upgrades and maintenance of 1,400 existing
social housing dwellings as part of its $1b economic stimulus package (Department of the Premier and Cabinet
2020l). It also announced regulatory measures including a rent freeze for social housing tenants (Department of
Human Services 2020). It did not announce any increases to supply.
Tasmania
Tasmania introduced a series of initiatives, totalling $174m of new and expedited funding worth $324.02 per capita
(Department of Premier and Cabinet 2020f; 2020g). Initiatives focused on increasing supply, restricting rental
increases and upgrades and maintenance. Increasing supply in social and affordable housing has been supported
by at least $100 million in new funding and $24 million in existing funding brought forward. The aim is to create
1,220 social houses under the Affordable Housing Strategy and Community Housing Providers. Rental increases
were halted, while $50 million was set aside for maintenance and upgrades to public housing stock.
Northern Territory
The intervention announced in the NT was the Safe Stay Plan for Remote Community Visitors (Department of
Local Government Community Development and Housing 2020). The plan focussed on accommodation provision
and included a new accommodation facility in Darwin as part of an effort to increase supply of safe places for
vulnerable Territorians to stay when visiting during the coronavirus pandemic.
Australian Capital Territory
The ACT announced $365k in expedited funding to upgrade and maintain existing social housing stock
(Environment Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate 2020).

5.3 Opportunity in a crisis
•

As with prior economic downturns, upgrades and maintenance of existing stock and new supply of social
housing has been utilised to stimulate economic recovery and create jobs.

•

It is notable that at this point in the pandemic there has been no new direct allocation of funding for social
housing by the Australian Government, while the response from some states has been moderate.

•

Social and affordable housing featured prominently in prior downturns, including the Global Financial crisis
of 2008–09.

•

Social and affordable housing was central to the Australian Government’s response to this crisis—the Nation
Building Economic Stimulus Plan—with $5.2b ($6.5b in 2020 dollars) allocated to the Social Housing Initiative
that generated 19,700 new housing over three years (Pawson, Milligan et al. 2020: 95).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

46

5. Social housing 

•

Modelling by SGS Economics and Planning (2020) of the Community Housing Industry Association’s
proposed Social Housing Acceleration and Renovation Program (SHARP) shows that increased Australian
Government expenditure could lead to significant job creation and offset the decline in demand driven by
reductions in migration and poor market sentiment.

•

The SHARP proposal includes construction of 30,000 new dwellings over a four-year period and the
acceleration of upgrades and maintenance of existing stock to support between 15,500 and 18,000 full-time
jobs and raise output by between $15.7b and $18.2b (SGS Economics and Planning 2020: 7).

•

Proposals like SHARP would achieve the twin policy objectives of addressing the decline in volume and quality
of social housing relative to the population and thus key social goals and lead to significant macro-economic
benefits to the wider economy.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

47

6. Private rental
•

This chapter discusses the range of measures targeting the Private
Rental Sector (PRS) of the housing system.

•

Approximately $1.2 billion has been earmarked for PRS housing
outcomes during the early stages of the crisis.

•

Due to the distribution of responsibilities under the federation much
activity was driven by the states/territories with regulatory oversight
of residential tenancy legislation and control over core revenue
policies such as land tax and stamp duty.

•

A plurality of states also provided transfers/payments in the form of
rent relief for those experiencing hardship due to the suppression of
economic activity associated with social distancing measures and
adverse labour market conditions associated with the economic
downturn.

•

The PRS was nonetheless a key focus of the National Cabinet early
in the pandemic and there was multi-level coordination as evidenced
by harmonisation of laws to protect tenants through eviction
moratoria and suspension of rental increases.

•

Each level of government and jurisdiction was actively involved in
policy interventions or emergency activities except for the Northern
Territory.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

48

6. Private rental 

6.1 Private rental policy context
6.1.1 The private rental sector
The private rental sector (PRS) in Australia has experienced major and prolonged growth and encountered
significant challenges during the pandemic. The PRS refers to ‘dwellings leased through a real estate agent
or through a private arrangement with a landlord’ (Rowley and James 2018: viii), and approximately 2.1 million
households are classed as private rental (Productivity Commission 2019). This arrangement also covers specific
rental contexts, such as student accommodation and subsidised rental contexts. The long-term dynamics of the
PRS have shown an increasing demographic spread of private renters, as well as growing proportions of renters
relying on the system long-term (10+ years) for stable accommodation (Hulse, Reynolds et al. 2019). Thus, whereas
private rental was deemed to be a temporary transition toward home ownership for Australians, it has now
supplanted home ownership as the primary (and achievable) goal for residence. This has been driven by several
factors, not least: exponential growth in dwelling values, increasing pressures on household incomes, flat wage
growth, increasing pressure on workforce participation among older Australians and rising employment precarity
facing different generations involved in the workforce (Productivity Commission 2019).
Thus, in terms of policy context framing for the PRS, there are several existing pressures on the sector that affect
the broad spectrum of tenant categories as well as landlords/dwelling owners and managers. Essentially, the
goal of any policy changes in the PRS space is to decrease the likelihood of individuals and households falling
into homelessness or marginal housing. This is becoming increasingly difficult, especially with the rising number
of people living in crowded households, partly because of employment precarity and lack of availability of social
housing options for many who need them (Productivity Commission 2019). Policy instruments, in particular, the
Commonwealth Rent Assistance (CRA) and the National Rental Affordability Scheme (NRAS) are critical to the
context of private rental experiences, both pre- and post-pandemic. As providers of subsidies for private renters,
both CRA and NRAS offer supports to help vulnerable households meet the increasing costs of covering rent.
However, the decreasing capacity of households to meet housing and related costs, even with subsidies, left
major vulnerabilities across the PRS before the early impacts of the pandemic were felt. For example, while CRA is
an effective support for low-income households, it is indexed against the consumer price index, meaning it cannot
keep pace with the greater increases in relative rent costs.

6.2 Levels and degree of coordination
The existing pressures on the PRS before the crisis, like other housing outcome areas, precipitated rapid action
among policy actors and levels of government. The increasingly precarious rental conditions for many, especially
but not limited to metropolitan areas, was clearly seen by policy actors as a potential area for economic and
social disaster. As such, the interventions were coordinated between the Australian Government and the states
at National Cabinet level, using initiatives and instruments to address rent relief and harmonised regulation for
eviction moratoria to protect tenants. This approach focused largely on subject (rather than object) subsidies,
aiming to affect increases in household income as well as targeted measures to support landlords, including
rate freezes and land tax relief (in some instances where landlords agreed to rent reductions). Within the wider
framework of action provided by the Australian Government, the states and territories’ governments used
instruments necessary to minimise the disruption to households adversely affected by the economic downturn
and also ensure that tenants were not evicted and forced to move during a period in which social distancing
was mandated.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

49

6. Private rental 

6.2.1 Initiatives
The PRS was the focus for 21 policy initiatives to support both private renters and landlords, worth approximately
$1.21b. Except for the NT, where no initiatives were announced during the early stages of the pandemic, the
number of initiatives were relatively evenly spread across the Australian and state governments. This is illustrated
in Figure 12. Due to the distribution of responsibilities, much policy action was driven by the states/territories,
with regulatory oversight of residential tenancy legislation and the ability to deliver rental relief through the social
security system. The PRS was nonetheless a key focus of the National Cabinet early in the pandemic and there
was multi-level coordination as evidenced by harmonisation of laws to protect tenants.
Figure 12: Amount allocated
by jurisdiction ($ millions)—Private rental
Figure 12: Amount allocated by jurisdiction ($ millions)—Private rental

Source: Authors.

Table 7: Private rental initiatives by jurisdiction and instrument type
Jurisdiction
Initiative
Principal instruments

Funding
Eviction moratoria
Regulation/legislation

Rent relief
Transfer/payment

Tax relief

Australian Government
NSW

$220m

Victoria

$500m

Queensland

$400m

Western Australia

$30m

South Australia

$60m

Tasmania
Northern Territory
ACT
Source: Authors

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

50

6. Private rental 

Australian Government
Following a National Cabinet meeting on 20 March, the Prime Minister announced that the states and territories
would introduce rent relief measures for tenants ‘to ensure that in hardship conditions there will be relief…and
ensuring the tenancy legislation is protecting those tenants over the next six months at least’ (Department of
the Prime Minister and Cabinet 2020a). Further to this, after the National Cabinet meeting on 29 March, the
Prime Minister announced that there would be an eviction moratorium for a six-month period for ‘residential
tenancies in financial distress who are unable to meet their commitments due to the impact of coronavirus’,
to be implemented by the states and territories (Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet 2020b).
New South Wales
The New South Wales government announced funding and emergency measures to protect tenancies totalling
$220 million (Department of Customer Service 2020). Measures were for six months and included an eviction
moratorium and rent relief in the form of requirements for landlords and tenants to negotiate rent reductions
if required. As an incentive, landlords were eligible for land tax relief or a rebate of up to 25 per cent. Tenants
experiencing financial distress would also not be blacklisted for the accrual of rental arrears during the six-month
period. In addition to these measures, $2.5 million was earmarked for tenancy services.
Victoria
In Victoria, a range of measures were introduced to support residential tenants during COVID-19 (Department
of Premier and Cabinet 2020e). This included legislation supporting the eviction moratorium, pausing rental
increases for six months, and providing land tax relief for landlords and rent relief for tenants experiencing
financial hardship through its Rental Relief Grant program—$420 million was earmarked for land tax relief and
$80 million for rental assistance payments for renters facing hardship due to COVID-19. This amounted to a
commitment of $75.18 per head of population in the state. In August, the Victorian Government announced an
extension of the moratorium on rental increases and evictions until December 31 (Department of Premier and
Cabinet 2020c).
Queensland
Queensland introduced a COVID-19 rental framework (Department of Housing and Public Works 2020a;
Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020m). This included an eviction moratorium and rent relief such
as new criteria for rental grants and the ability to negotiate a temporary and fair rent reduction. This was
encouraged through $400 million in land tax relief for property owners and compulsory conciliation for disputes,
a commitment equivalent to $77.97 per capita. On 24 April, the moratorium on evictions was enacted through
legislation and a Practice Guide formalising the temporary requirements and protections for tenancies was
published (Department of Housing and Public Works 2020b).
Western Australia
The Government of Western Australian announced that legislation to minimise the financial impacts of COVID-19
on tenants and landlords would be introduced into parliament (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020k).
Measures included a six-month eviction moratorium, a prohibition on rent increases, the option for fixed term
tenancy agreements that were due to expire to continue as periodic agreements, relieving lessors of the obligation
to conduct repairs and enabling a tenant to end a tenancy early. These measures became law on 21 April
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020h). On 23 April, Premier McGowan announced rent relief, providing
payments of up to $2,000 to residential tenants. $30 million was earmarked for this initiative (Department of the
Premier and Cabinet 2020j).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

51

6. Private rental 

Vignette 4: Maintaining residential tenancies in Western Australia during the COVID-19 pandemic
Shelter WA, the peak body in Western Australia that advocates for social and affordable housing and
ending homelessness, indicates that there are over 700,000 people living in rental accommodation in
Western Australia (Shelter WA 2020). At the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, government interventions
targeted at keeping tenants in their rental properties were announced. To begin with, Western Australia’s
McGowan Government announced a number of initiatives to address the burden of utilities bills on
households (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020a; 2020g). Then, following the decision of the
National Cabinet to provide relief for tenants, the Western Australian Government introduced new laws
and relief payments targeted at residential tenants (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020h;2020k).
On 16 March 2020, the Western Australian Government announced $402 million to freeze household fees
and charges, including electricity and water, alongside $91 million to double the existing Energy Assistance
Payment to $600 (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020g). Premier Mark McGowan said the
measures would provide ‘relief and certainty to each and every Western Australian’ (Department of the
Premier and Cabinet 2020g). Further to this, eligibility for the Energy Assistance Payment was expanded
on 31 March 2020, a move anticipated to cost the state government $24.4 million (Department of the
Premier and Cabinet 2020a). Also on 31 March 2020, it was announced that no households would have
their power or water disconnected and that no interest would be charged on deferred bill payments for
those experiencing COVID-19-related financial hardship (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020a).
When, on 20 March 2020, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced that the states had agreed to identify
how relief could be provided to residential tenants and how tenancy legislation could protect tenants,
he indicated that Western Australia would be leading the way (Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet 2020a).
On 14 April 2020, the Western Australian Government announced that urgent legislation to preserve
tenancies would be introduced into state parliament (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020k). By
21 April 2020, there were a number of new laws (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020h). These
included a six-month moratorium on residential evictions; a ban on rent increases; fixed-term tenancies
automatically converting to periodic tenancies upon expiry; a removal of the requirement for landlords
to carry out non-urgent repairs; and no break lease fees where a tenancy was ended early due to COVID19-related financial hardship. The new laws implemented the decision of the National Cabinet to provide
relief for tenants, including through an eviction moratorium (Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
2020a). Shelter WA said, ‘This is good news for tenants who are experiencing hardship, as it will help to
prevent a second wave of homelessness, as housing and having a place to self-isolate is the best defence
against this virus’ (Shelter WA 2020). The state government was quick to point out, however, that the new
laws did not include a moratorium on rent. Premier Mark McGowan said that, ‘If a tenant can't pay their
rent, they will still have to pay it later’ (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020k). Thus, landlords and
tenants were encouraged to negotiate in good faith.
Further to these laws, on 23 April 2020, the Western Australian Government announced relief payments
for residential tenants experiencing hardship (Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020j). The initiative
was anticipated to cost the government $30 million. Under the Residential Rent Relief Grant Scheme,
grants equivalent to four-weeks’ rent up to a maximum of $2,000 would be paid directly to the tenant’s
landlord, to contribute to the tenant’s rental payments. Such an approach contrasted with those taken in
other states where the focus was on residential land tax reductions. According to Premier Mark McGowan,
‘the one-off grant of up to $2,000 will provide greater assistance’ than the approach taken by other states
(Department of the Premier and Cabinet 2020j). Shelter WA CEO Michelle Mackenzie said that the
initiative, coupled with the moratorium on evictions, would ensure that many Western Australian renters
had housing security during the COVID-19 pandemic (Shelter WA 2020). By 16 June 2020, it was reported
that more than 900 applications for grants had been lodged since the program began on 1 May 2020. At
the same date, 17 payments totalling $25,000 had been approved (Quigley 2020).

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

52

6. Private rental 

South Australia
The Government of South Australia introduced a range of measures to support the PRS (Department of Treasury
and Finance 2020a; 2020b). These included rent relief for residential tenants suffering significantly due to
COVID-19 modelled on that introduced in Victoria and NSW. Rent reductions were encouraged through land tax
relief for landlords for which $50 million in funds was earmarked (Department of Treasury and Finance 2020b).
Other measures consistent with the decisions made in National Cabinet in March were a six-month eviction
moratorium achieved through regulation/legislation and a temporary freeze on rent increases for the private
market. On 5 June, the SA Treasurer announced a rent relief fund for which $10 million was earmarked to be
achieved through a transfer to landlords (Department of Treasury and Finance 2020a).
Tasmania
In Tasmania, new legislation was announced to protect residential tenants (Department of State Growth 2020b).
These included a 120-day eviction moratorium for tenants unable to pay their rent and rent relief by way of
agreement between tenant and landlord on a reduction in rent. On 22 April, Minister for Building and Construction,
Elise Archer, further announced that the Tasmanian Government had issued additional legislation to prevent
residential rent increases (Department of State Growth 2020c). A third announcement was made by Minister
Archer on 19 May regarding the establishment of a Rent Relief Fund providing payment up to $2,000 for tenants
suffering from extreme hardship (Department of State Growth 2020a).
Australian Capital Territory
The ACT introduced rent relief for tenants in the form of a rebate for landlords providing a rent reduction and
regulations supporting a temporary freeze on rental increases, an eviction moratorium and blacklist preventions
(Chief Minister Treasury and Economic Development Directorate 2020). It was also noted that landlords and
tenants could reach an agreement to delay rental payments if tenants were not earning an income.

6.3 Opportunity in a crisis
•

The pandemic presented particular challenges for a PRS already under strain.

•

Social distancing measures and the subsequent suppression of economic activity have exacerbated the
rental crisis (Martin 2020), with those made redundant or on reduced working hours having even less for
essentials after rental payments (Pawson and Mares 2020).

•

The Australian, state and territory governments adopted a range of measures and initiatives in an attempt
to mitigate the twin health and economic impacts of the crisis.

•

Through the National Cabinet, the states and territories harmonised regulations to enable eviction moratoria
and provide rent relief.

•

COVID-19 has shown that the federation can rapidly respond with ‘stop-gaps’ to mitigate the short-term
impacts on tenants, the challenges of housing insecurity and homelessness present for public health, and
hinder the effects of pandemic-induced individual and household stress.

•

The medium and long-term impacts are harder to assess, and a sustained downturn will place pressure on
the PRS.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

53

7. Policy development options
In this chapter we summarise the major policy opportunities to improve the housing system based on the unique
policy context and the multi-level governance response to COVID-19. The policy options are framed by two broad
categories: initiatives and housing outcomes. While both interweave in practice, the major findings in this scoping
study reinforced an ongoing set of policy issues facing the housing system: How and why has the housing system
responded to unforeseen exogenous shocks in ways to mitigate negative outcomes?
As such, the study explored three linked research questions to scope the range of governmental responses in the
early stages of the pandemic.
•

RQ1: What initiatives, interventions, policy and regulatory reforms have been developed and implemented by
governments at all levels to directly and indirectly address housing outcomes due to COVID-19?

•

RQ2: How do these existing and emergent policies and activities intend to address negative housing
outcomes caused and exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic?

•

RQ3: Is there coordination between levels of government and across sectors (including with not-for-profit
service providers)?

To discuss the policy implications arising from the scoping study, the following sections focus on three thematic
areas: how interventions addressed negative housing outcomes, the level of coordination, and future research
opportunities.

7.1 How did interventions address negative housing outcomes?
The scale and scope of government responses to the pandemic was extensive, and housing and related areas
have figured particularly prominently in the response of Australian governments to COVID-19. As we have detailed
throughout this report, each housing outcome was targeted by measures and instruments to minimise the risk of
increasing negative housing outcomes or exacerbating existing problems in the housing system.
During the early phases of the pandemic, the economic and social costs were largely unknown. The major policy
development opportunities arising focus on different layers of the housing system:
•

•

Homelessness
•

The coordinated response to tackle rough sleeping and other forms of homelessness in the early stages
of the pandemic is widely seen as a successful public health emergency operation.

•

Australia was well-positioned due to the multi-level governance of housing and homelessness, particularly
the expertise of sub-national governments and SHS. The states/territories could coordinate with frontline
SHS and use their existing networks to rapidly transition people into hotel accommodation. The Australian
Government then provided fiscal support through existing funding mechanisms such as the bilateral
NAHAs as well as its volume-based funding partnerships with SHS and other charities.

•

Direct interventions and an approach that was characterised by close-coordination between the states/
territories and frontline SHS assisted in getting rough sleepers and people at risk of homelessness into
safe, if temporary, accommodation and potentially averted a major public health crisis.

Crisis accommodation
•

Direct interventions, especially increased Australian Government and state/territory government funding
support for DFV programs and increased support for referral services and mental health support provided
an expanded capacity to help DFV survivors and facilitate prevention through referrals for perpetrators.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

54

7. Policy development options 

•

•

Social housing
•

As with prior economic downturns, upgrades and maintenance of existing stock and new supply of social
housing has been used to stimulate economic recovery and create jobs.

•

It is notable that at this point in the pandemic there has been no new direct allocation of funding for social
housing by the Australian Government, while the response from some states has been moderate.

•

Direct supports came in the form of improving social housing stock, through upgrades and maintenance
programs. Investments in new supply of social housing stock were announced but were comparatively
small in value, targeted in areas where future demand was likely to be and to provide long-term housing
to those in temporary accommodation.

Private rental
•

COVID-19 has shown that the federation can rapidly respond with ‘stop-gaps’ to mitigate the short-term
impacts on tenants, the challenges that housing insecurity and homelessness present for public health,
and hinder the effects of pandemic-induced recession on individual and household rental stress.

7.2 Was there coordination between levels of government and across
sectors?
Alongside the scale and scope of interventions, was the importance of coordination to deliver emergency frontline
services and implement programs and initiatives. Coordination between different layers of government in the
housing system is complex, and a test of the system’s responsiveness was whether it could coordinate effectively,
with information asymmetries, in uncertain and high-risk operational conditions.
In the early stages of the pandemic, governments acted swiftly, having identified the impending catastrophe
across the housing continuum if actions were not targeted—and implemented with speed. These responses
were supported by cooperation with frontline service delivery agencies, indicating that coordination was also
in evidence across sectors. While the response to homelessness and rough sleepers is a stand-out example of
coordination between the states/territories and SHS, other areas exhibited different modes of coordination. This
reflects the institutional structures and processes that are unique to different parts of the housing system (such
as social housing and private rental as two examples of this).
Also, the immediate and existing pressure on policy actors in the housing system also contained a risk that
weaknesses in the system would be exposed and make rapid deployment a flawed aspiration. Fortunately, this did
not transpire although, as we argue in the following points, existing weaknesses in the system—a combination of
policy settings that have adverse effects (e.g. inflated housing costs) and underinvestment (e.g. investment social
housing supply) were circumvented due to necessity, rather than addressed or ‘fixed’ in the long-term.
•

Homelessness
•

At a broader national and systemic-level COVID-19 has provided a window of opportunity to better
understand homeless populations and develop an enhanced understanding of individual homeless
persons across jurisdictions. Support workers no longer needed to locate clients to provide access to
services and additional data and information on homeless people was added to existing homelessness
registry data. This can build on the existing knowledge captured within the system, where case managers
play a critical role in navigating individuals through different aspects of the system.

•

This has provided an opportunity to use models such as Housing First and rapid housing to break the cycle
of homelessness by providing secure housing (Johnson, Parkinson et al. 2012). Some jurisdictions have
capitalised on this opportunity by expediting or extending funding for social housing to accommodate
those temporarily housed.

•

Overall, this represents a successful approach to coordinated direct interventions to protect some of the
most disadvantaged in Australian society during a crisis. To capitalise on this temporary response, future
work should evaluate the longer-term impacts and outcomes on homeless persons that encapsulates how
interventions were facilitated using existing structures and key support roles.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

55

7. Policy development options 

•

Crisis accommodation
•

•

•

There was some coordination between the Australian Government and state/territory jurisdictions
to ensure programmatic supports were in place once the impacts of physical distancing and work from
home requirements became a reality for many.

Social housing
•

At this point in the response to the pandemic and the associated economic downturn coordination
between the Australian Government and the states/territories has been limited with respect to new
build and social housing supply.

•

Modelling (SGS Economics and Planning 2020) and prior experience shows that increased Australian
Government expenditure could lead to significant job creation and offset the decline in demand driven
by reductions in migration and poor market sentiment.

•

This may result in an expanded role for the National Housing Finance and Investment Corporation (NHFIC)
and increased private investor interest in the development of social and affordable housing to offset
projected declines in other forms of development adversely affected by shifting investor preferences and
decreased population growth.

•

Overall, the crisis provides more evidence that Australia’s underinvestment in the social housing system
meant it was underprepared for other challenges (such as the hard lockdown of Melbourne’s public
housing towers). The lack of suitable supply to meet the demands of all the vulnerable populations outlined
in this report was exacerbated by the increases in demand from populations not previously experiencing
housing stress (e.g. DFV, marginal housing, employment precarity, etc.).

Private rental
•

Through the National Cabinet the states and territories harmonised regulations to enable eviction
moratoria and provide rent relief and adopted a range of measures and initiatives in an attempt to mitigate
the twin health and economic impacts of the crisis.

7.3 Coda: from crisis footing to (re)building back better
While this research has outlined how policy makers and other actors effectively coordinated the emergency
response, there remain several risks as we move from a crisis footing to a rebuilding phase.
These risks as noted could occur across the continuum. For example, if hotel and temporary accommodation for
homeless people is discontinued without the provision of either transitional or preferably secure housing (coupled
with adequate support services) to break the cycle of homelessness then the gains made during the response will
be lost.
Similarly, the expiration of eviction moratoria combined with the winding back of other state-based supports such
as grants to renters or land tax reductions and other incentives to landlords present real risks to the private rental
system. As the increase in income transfers to individuals and households, such as JobSeeker and JobKeeper,
are wound back from September 2020 and January 2021 (and terminated in the case of JobKeeper in March 2021)
additional pressures will fall on renters. It will also place stress on households, including owner-occupiers, who
can no longer service loans on the reduced rates if they are unable to find secure employment.
Other changes, such as the end of mortgage repayment holidays from banks to investors and owner-occupiers to
the resumption of utilities price increases and other state-based supports, will start to place significant pressure
on households—and the housing system—just as Australia exits the acute phase of the pandemic.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

56

7. Policy development options 

7.4 Opportunities for future research
There are several possible future research options that would greatly assist policy makers and participants in
the wider system. First, a key gap in the coordinated government response was, largely due to the need for rapid
responses, a lack of coordinated measurement of outcomes on both the system and housing outcomes levels.
Future research should focus on this exact area, driven by critical questions:
•

What measurements were quickly formed (or already in place) to monitor and measure impacts?

•

What new approaches or analysis can help to capture this data?

•

How and why do existing evaluation frameworks provide accurate data and system feedback?

•

How did prevailing administrative structures and processes adapt during the rapid implementation process,
and how and why have these adaptions been sustained?

•

What lessons can be learned about rapid and collaborative policy making and implementation processes?

•

What are the downstream impacts of the pandemic on households in the private rental and owner-occupied
sectors?

This would help policy actors to uncover critical learnings about the functioning of the housing system, while
building valuable knowledge and capacity building opportunities for the delivery of housing services. As such,
research must capture the experiences from multiple layers of the system, including the voices of policy
actors, service agencies, and individuals and households in receipt of housing supports. To assist in this
regard, this scoping study has culminated in a comprehensive online resource, a housing system policy making
clearinghouse, available via the Analysis and Policy Observatory via the following link:
https://apo.org.au/collection/306399/housing-policy-during-covid-19
Second, there is a further opportunity to study housing system arrangements and institutional structures, including:
•

a modelling and evaluation of the hypothetical scenario of non-intervention in the housing system during
the first stages of the pandemic—this would help to understand the scale of impacts arising from the
interventions with more precision and be of great use to policy makers

•

assessments of how the emergency interventions interacted with the existing policy landscape, and did the
housing system perform better or worse than expected during and after the crisis, and

•

how and why new arrangements could help to strengthen the housing system, supporting its inherent
institutional frameworks and national agreements to be better prepared for future exogenous shocks?

The coming years will provide researchers with ample opportunity and data to respond more effectively to the
questions of the extent of interventions and the achievement of policy goals that were made possible in the
present study. As part of this research, policy actors should be asked to reflect on the qualities of the system
and how they were enabled to work within it to facilitate rapid and effective action. Especially, the uniqueness of
the pandemic context provides an opportunity to understand the housing system in all its complexity, from its
macro-level design and institutional frameworks, to the micro-level working of service delivery arrangements and
housing support beneficiaries.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

57

7. Policy development options 

7.5 Concluding remarks
This scoping study has laid the first steps in understanding the phenomenon of system responses to the
pandemic more closely, uncovering important knowledge for policy actors about the scope and scale of
interventions. Through our mapping, we have detailed how policy interventions unfolded over time, and at
which levels of government. Further, we have built on this through a closer look at the types of interventions and
instruments used by governments, resulting in typologies for each housing outcome. Finally, we have explored the
levels of coordination between the Australian Government and the state and territory governments, illustrating
where close coordination worked well, and where existing structural flaws in the system were laid bare. Detailed
illustrative vignettes have been developed to show some of the finer-grained workings of this coordinated action.
There remains a considerable task for policy actors to continue to support Australians through the ongoing crisis.
The anticipated ending of indirect supports on the housing system, such as JobKeeper, will have further corollary
impacts on housing stress, compounding precarious economic realities for many households alongside the
existing stressors that many people experience daily. There has never been a more relevant context to advocate
for a strong and cohesive housing system that supports all Australians and that protects the most vulnerable
and those now falling into housing stress. Rather than seeing a rolling-back of fiscal investments into the system,
this mapping suggests that multiple benefits can accrue from a measured and consistent approach to policy
interventions in the future.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

58

References
AHURI (2017) Understanding the housing continuum [Online], Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute,
Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/research/ahuri-briefs/understanding-the-housing-continuum, accessed
26 August 2020.
AIHW (2019) Homelessness and homelessness services [Online], https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/australias-welfare/
homelessness-and-homelessness-services, accessed 20 August 2020.
Alberici, E. (2020) Coronavirus stimulus measures like JobKeeper are keeping zombie businesses alive, warn insolvency
practitioners [Online], Australian Broadcasting Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-07-24/thecoronavirus-crisis-may-be-keeping-zombie-businesses-alive/12485528, accessed 24 September 2020.
Bamford, M. (2020) ‘Tsunami’ warning for domestic violence networks as victims try to escape coronavirus lockdown
[Online], Australian Broadcasting Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-06-06/nsw-government-meetswith-domestic-violence-groups-amid-warning/12296018?nw=0, accessed 26 August 2020.
Boseley, M. (2020) ‘Homelessness: Can the Covid-19 crisis help end rough sleeping in Australia for good?’ [Online], The
Guardian Australia, https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/jun/10/no-better-time-push-for-covid-19-responseto-help-end-rough-sleeping-in-australia, accessed 20 August 2020.
Burke, T. (2012) ‘The Australian Residential Housing Market: Institutions and Actors’, in R. Tomlinson (ed.), Australia’s
Unintended Cities, CSIRO, Collingwood, Victoria: 35–50.
Burke, T., Nygaard, C. and Ralston, L. (2020) Australian home ownership: past reflections, future directions, Australian
Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne.
Burke, T., Stone, W. and Ralston, L. (2014) Generational change in home purchase opportunity in Australia [Online],
Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0012/2208/AHURI_Final_Report_No232_Generational-change-in-home-purchase-opportunity-in-Australia.pdf,
accessed 26 August 2020.
Chief Minister Treasury and Economic Development Directorate (2020) More information to support tenants and landlords
[Online], ACT Government, ACT, https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/act_government_media_
releases/barr/2020/more-information-to-support-tenants-and-landlords, accessed 26 August 2020.
Community Services Directorate (2020) COVID-19 support for Canberrans facing homelessness or domestic and
family violence [Online], ACT Government, ACT, https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/open_government/inform/
act_government_media_releases/suzanne-orr-mla-media-releases/2020/covid-19-support-for-canberrans-facinghomelessness-or-domestic-and-family-violence, accessed 26 August 2020.
Council on Federal Financial Relations (2020a) National Housing and Homelessness Agreement [Online], Australian
Government, Australia, https://www.federalfinancialrelations.gov.au/content/housing_homelessness_agreement.
aspx, accessed 20 August 2020.
Council on Federal Financial Relations (2020b) Victoria: National Housing and Homelessness Agreement [Online],
Australian Government, Australia, https://www.federalfinancialrelations.gov.au/content/npa/other/other/NHHA_
VIC_BILAT.pdf, accessed 20 August 2020.
Department of Communities (2020a) $3 million strengthens pandemic response to violence in the home [Online],
WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/05/3-million-dollarsstrengthens-pandemic-response-to-violence-in-the-home.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Communities (2020b) Bayswater and Maylands housing projects boost METRONET vision [Online], WA
Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/05/Bayswater-and-Maylandshousing-projects-boost-METRONET-vision.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

59

References

Department of Communities (2020c) COVID-19 response payments not included in eligibility assessments for social
housing [Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/03/
COVID-19-response-payments-not-included-in-eligibility-assessments-for-social-housing.aspx, accessed 26
August 2020.
Department of Communities (2020d) Fast-tracked Housing First project to ease Bunbury homelessness [Online], WA
Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/06/Fast-tracked-Housing-Firstproject-to-ease-Bunbury-homelessness.aspx, accessed 5 June 2020.
Department of Communities (2020e) Housing and Homelessness Support Package [Online], Tasmanian Government,,
Tasmania, https://coronavirus.tas.gov.au/media-releases/housing-and-homelessness-support-package, accessed
26 August 2020.
Department of Communities (2020f) McGowan Government brings forward housing funds to support jobs in building
industry [Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/05/
McGowan%20Government%20brings%20forward%20housing%20funds%20to%20support%20jobs%20in%20
building%20industry.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Communities (2020g) New $444 million housing stimulus for Western Australia [Online], WA Government,
WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/06/New-444-million-dollar-housing-stimulusfor-Western-Australia.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020a) Breaking the cycle of homelessness [Online], NSW Government,
NSW, https://www.dcj.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/780045/breaking-the-cycle-of-homelessness.pdf,
accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020b) Domestic violence support during COVID-19 crisis [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.dcj.nsw.gov.au/news-and-media/media-releases/domestic-violence-supportduring-covid-19-crisis, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020c) Economic stimulus to boost jobs and social housing [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.nsw.gov.au/news/economic-stimulus-to-boost-jobs-and-social-housing, accessed
6 August 2020.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020d) More housing for the homeless in NSW, NSW Government, NSW.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020e) Pilot program to fast-track new social housing [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://melindapavey.com.au/pilot-program-to-fast-track-new-social-housing/, accessed 6
August 2020.
Department of Communities and Justice (2020f) Together Home Program: housing and support for people street
sleeping during COVID-19 [Online], NSW Government, NSW, https://www.coronavirus.dcj.nsw.gov.au/__data/
assets/pdf_file/0010/785377/Together-Home-Program-Program-Guidelines.pdf, accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Customer Service (2020) Funding boost and new emergency measures to protect tenancies [Online],
NSW Government, NSW, https://www.nsw.gov.au/nsw-government/ministers/minister-for-better-regulation-andinnovation/media-releases/funding-boost, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Finance (2020) Jobs boost through fast-tracked planning system [Online], NSW Government, NSW,
https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Media-Releases/2020/April/Ministerial-media-release-Jobsboost-through-fast-tracked-planning-system-2020-04-03.pdf, accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Health and Human Services (2020a) Almost $500 million social housing boost to strengthen our
economy and provide stability for Victorians [Online], Victorian Government, Victoria, https://www.dhhs.vic.gov.au/
news/social-housing-boost-to-strengthen-our-economy, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Health and Human Services (2020b) Delivering new homes for Victorians who need support [Online],
Victorian Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/delivering-new-homes-for-victorians-who-needsupport/, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Health and Human Services (2020c) More homelessness and public housing support In COVID-19 fight
[Online], Victorian Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/more-homelessness-and-public-housingsupport-in-covid-19-fight/, accessed 1 June 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

60

References

Department of Health and Human Services (2020d) Respite and recovery facilities fact sheet [Online], Victorian
Government, Victoria, https://fac.dhhs.vic.gov.au/respite-and-recovery-facilities-fact-sheet, accessed 2 July 2020.
Department of Health and Human Services (2020e) Safe places for the homeless to recover and isolate [Online],
Victorian Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/safe-places-for-the-homeless-to-recover-andisolate/, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Housing and Public Works (2020a) Government continues to listen on temporary COVID-19 tenancy
measures [Online], Queensland Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/4/16/
government-continues-to-listen-on-temporary-covid19-tenancy-measures, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Housing and Public Works (2020b) Practice Guide to navigate tenancies through COVID-19 [Online],
Queensland Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/4/24/practice-guide-tonavigate-tenancies-through-covid19, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Human Services (2020) No social housing rent increases due to coronavirus stimulus [Online],
SA Government, SA, https://www.housing.sa.gov.au/latest-news/no-social-housing-rent-increases-due-tocoronavirus-stimulus, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Local Government Community Development and Housing (2020) Safe stay plan for remote community
visitors [Online], NT Government, NT, http://newsroom.nt.gov.au/mediaRelease/33330, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Planning Industry and Environment (2020a) Fast-tracked assessments: TrancheoOne [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Other/fast-tracked-assessmentstranche-one-2020-04.pdf?la=en, accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Planning Industry and Environment (2020b) Fast-tracked assessments: Tranche three [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Other/fast-tracked-assessmentstranche-three-2020-06.pdf?la=en, accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Planning Industry and Environment (2020c) Fast-tracked assessments: Tranche two [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/-/media/Files/DPE/Other/fast-tracked-assessmentstranche-two-2020-05.pdf?la=en, accessed 6 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020a) $2.3 billion health boost and economic stimulus [Online], NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.nsw.gov.au/media-releases/23-billion-health-boost-and-economic-stimulus,
accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020b) Homes for homeless Victorians during pandemic and Beyond [Online],
Victorian Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-07/200728-Homes-ForHomeless-Victorians-During-Pandemic-And-Beyond.pdf, accessed 16 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020c) Pause on evictions extended and extra renter protections [Online], Victorian
Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/pause-evictions-extended-and-extra-renter-protections,
accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020d) A safe place to escape family violence during coronavirus [Online], Victorian
Government, Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/safe-place-escape-family-violence-during-coronavirus,
accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020e) Supporting tenants and landlords through coronavirus [Online], Victorian
Government Victoria, https://www.premier.vic.gov.au/supporting-tenants-and-landlords-through-coronavirus/,
accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020f) Two year blitz to generate $3.1 billion in construction value [Online],
Tasmanian Government, Tasmania, http://www.premier.tas.gov.au/releases/two_year_blitz_to_generate_$3.1_billion_
in_construction_value, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Premier and Cabinet (2020g) Unprecedented new social and economic support package released
[Online], Tasmanian Government, Tasmania, http://www.premier.tas.gov.au/releases/unprecedented_new_social_
and_economic_support_package_released, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Social Services (2019) Homelessness [Online], Australian Government, Australia, https://www.dss.gov.au/
housing-support/programmes-services/homelessness, accessed 25 August 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

61

References

Department of Social Services (2020a) National Housing and Homelessness Agreement [Online], Australian
Government, Australia, https://www.dss.gov.au/housing-support-programs-services-homelessness/nationalhousing-and-homelessness-agreement, accessed 20 August 2020.
Department of Social Services (2020b) Urgent support for frontline domestic violence services [Online], Australian
Government, Australia, https://ministers.dss.gov.au/media-releases/5706, accessed 7 August 2020.
Department of State Growth (2020a) Assisting Tasmanian renters during COVID-19 [Online], Tasmanian Government,
Tasmania, http://www.premier.tas.gov.au/releases/assisting_tasmanian_renters_during_covid-19, accessed
26 August 2020.
Department of State Growth (2020b) Measures to assist renters during COVID-19 pandemic [Online], Tasmanian
Government, Tasmania, https://www.coronavirus.tas.gov.au/media-releases/measures-to-assist-renters-duringcovid-19-pandemic, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of State Growth (2020c) Rent increase freeze in place for residential tenants during COVID-19 crisis
[Online], Tasmanian Government, Tasmania, http://www.premier.tas.gov.au/releases/rent_increase_freeze_in_place_
for_residential_tenants_during_covid-19_crisis, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020a) $1 billion COVID-19 economic and health relief package unveiled
[Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/03/$1-billionCOVID-19-economic-and-health-relief-package-unveiled-.aspx, accessed 28 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020b) $5.5m to boost domestic violence services during COVID-19 pandemic
[Online], Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/4/8/55m-to-boost-domestic-violenceservices-during-covid19-pandemic, accessed 7 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020c) $24.7 million coronavirus housing and homelessness response
[Online], Queensland Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/3/25/247-millioncoronavirus-housing-and-homelessness-response, accessed 7 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020d) $159 million COVID-19 relief fund to provide crisis support [Online], WA
Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/03/159-million-dollar-COVID19-Relief-Fund-to-provide-crisis-support.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020e) $267M building boost to benefit tradies, regions and more [Online],
Queensland Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/6/16/267m-building-boostto-benefit-tradies-regions-and-more, accessed 17 June 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020f) Commonwealth funding boost to address domestic and family
violence during COVID-19 [Online], Queensland Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/
Statement/2020/5/28/commonwealth-funding-boost-to-address-domestic-and-family-violence-during-covid19,
accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020g) COVID-19 economic response: relief for businesses and households
[Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/03/COVID-19economic-response-Relief-for-businesses-and-households.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020h) Moratorium on residential tenancy evictions becomes law in WA
[Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/04/Moratoriumon-residential-tenancy-evictions-becomes-law-in-WA.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020i) New $6m tender to help reduce homelessness in SA [Online], SA
Government, SA, https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/news/media-releases/news/new-$6m-tender-to-help-reducehomelessness-in-sa, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020j) New $154.5 million relief package to support tenants, landlords
and construction industry [Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/
McGowan/2020/04/New-154-point-5-million-dollar-relief-package-to-support-tenants-landlords-and-constructionindustry.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020k) New laws to provide support for commercial and residential tenants and
landlords [Online], WA Government, WA, https://www.mediastatements.wa.gov.au/Pages/McGowan/2020/04/Newlaws-to-provide-support-for-commercial-and-residential-tenants-and-landlords.aspx, accessed 26 August 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

62

References

Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020l) Public housing maintenance stimulus to boost jobs, economy [Online],
SA Government, SA, https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/news/media-releases/news/public-housing-maintenancestimulus-to-boost-jobs,-economy, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020m) Queensland COVID-19 – Thursday, April 9 [Online], Queensland
Government, Queensland, http://statements.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/4/9/queensland-covid19--thursdayapril-9, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of the Premier and Cabinet (2020n) Virtual summit explores domestic and family violence victims’ safety
during COVID-19 [Online], Queensland, http://statements.cabinet.qld.gov.au/Statement/2020/5/6/virtual-summitexplores-domestic-and-family-violence-victims-safety-during-covid19, accessed 7 August 2020.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (2020a) Media Release: 20 Mar 2020 [Online], Australian Government,
Australia, https://www.pm.gov.au/media/press-conference-australian-parliament-house-act-20march, accessed
1 June 2020.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (2020b) Media Statement: 29 Mar 2020 [Online], Australian Government,
Australia, https://www.pm.gov.au/media/national-cabinet-statement, accessed 1 June 2020.
Department of Treasury (2020) Billions in tax relief for business, $1 billion fund for jobs, and help for the vulnerable. NSW
Government, NSW, https://www.nsw.gov.au/media-releases/billions-tax-relief-for-business-1-billion-fund-for-jobsand-help-for-vulnerable.
Department of Treasury and Finance (2020a) $1000 rent relief grants to further support residential tenants [Online],
SA Government, SA, https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/news/media-releases/news/$1000-rent-relief-grants-tofurther-support-residential-tenants, accessed 26 August 2020.
Department of Treasury and Finance (2020b) Landlords and tenants benefit from extra $50m in land tax relief [Online],
SA Government, SA, https://www.premier.sa.gov.au/news/media-releases/news/landlords-and-tenants-benefitfrom-extra-$50m-in-land-tax-relief, accessed 26 August 2020.
Dodson, J., de Silva, A., Dalton, T. and Sinclair, S. (2017) Housing, multi-level governance and economic productivity:
Inquiry into housing policies, labour force participation and economic growth, Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute, Melbourne, https://apo.org.au/sites/default/files/resource-files/2017-06/apo-nid95591.pdf.
Environment Planning and Sustainable Development Directorate (2020) Public and community housing upgraded
with solar and sustainability improvements [Online], ACT Government, ACT, https://www.cmtedd.act.gov.au/
open_government/inform/act_government_media_releases/yvette-berry-mla-media-releases/2020/public-andcommunity-housing-upgraded-with-solar-and-sustainability-improvements, accessed 26 August 2020.
Equity Economics (2020) Supporting economic recovery in NSW: Investment in social and affordable housing is
critical to supporting jobs today and families into the future [Online], https://www.homelessnessnsw.org.au/sites/
homelessnessnsw/files/2020-05/LR%20-%20FINAL%20-%20Equity%20Economics%20-%20Supporting%20
Economic%20Recovery%20in%20NSW_05092020.pdf, accessed 6 August 2020.
Fazel, S., Geddes, J. R. and Kushel, M. (2014) ‘The health of homeless people in high-income countries: descriptive
epidemiology, health consequences, and clinical and policy recommendations’, The Lancet, vol. 384, no. 9953:
1529–1540.
Flanagan, K., Blunden, H., Valentine, K. and Henriette, J. (2019) Housing outcomes after domestic and family violence,
Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0026/37619/AHURI-Final-Report-311-Housing-outcomes-after-domestic-and-family-violence.pdf.
Flanagan, K., Martin, C., Jacobs, K. and Lawson, J. (2019) A conceptual analysis of social housing as infrastructure, AHURI
Final Report No. 309, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute Limited, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.
au/research/final-reports/309, doi:10.18408/ahuri-4114101.
Flatau, P., Wood, L., MacKenzie, D. and Spinney, A. (2015) The Inquiry into the funding of homelessness services in
Australia, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_
file/0022/5863/AHURI_Discussion_Paper_The-Inquiry-into-the-funding-of-homelessness-services-in-Australia.pdf.
Forethought (2020) Public perceptions of homelessness [Online], https://cms.launchhousing.org.au/app/
uploads/2020/08/Launch-Housing-Perceptions-of-Homelessness-Final.pdf, accessed 2 July 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

63

References

Gleeson, H. (2020) Hannah Clarke did ‘everything’ she could to protect herself and her children. Experts explain why it
wasn’t enough [Online], Australian Broadcasting Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-03-10/hannahclarke-domestic-violence-law-cant-keep-women-safe/12041184?nw=0, accessed 7 August 2020.
Grattan, M. (2020) Treasury revises JobKeeper’s cost down by massive $60 billion, sparking calls to widen eligibility
[Online], The Conversation, https://theconversation.com/treasury-revises-jobkeepers-cost-down-by-massive-60billion-sparking-calls-to-widen-eligibility-139231, accessed 24 September 2020.
Hamilton, S. Preston, B. and Edmond, C. (2020) JobKeeper is quick, dirty and effective: there was no time to make it
perfect [Online], The Conversation, https://theconversation.com/jobkeeper-is-quick-dirty-and-effective-there-wasno-time-to-make-it-perfect-135195, accessed 24 September 2020.
Housing Trust (2020) Housing Trust awarded role in NSW Government’s Together Home initiative [Online], NSW, https://
housingtrust.org.au/together_home/, accessed 6 August 2020.
Hulse, K., Reynolds, M., Nygaard, A., Parkinson, S. and Yates, J. (2019) The supply of affordable private rental housing in
Australian cities: short and longer term changes, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne.
Johnson, G., Parkinson, S. and Parsell, C. (2012) Policy shift or program drift? Implementing Housing First in Australia,
Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne.
Kearns, J., Major, M. and Norman, D. (2020) How risky is Australian household debt?, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney.
Killeen, O. (2020) COVID-19 doesn’t discriminate: but it’s not equal [Online], Third Sector, https://www.thirdsector.com.
au/covid-19-doesnt-discriminate-but-its-not-equal/, accessed 2 July 2020.
Knight, B. (2020) Has the coronavirus pandemic proved that homelessness is solvable? [Online], Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-06-08/housing-homeless-in-pandemic-has-worked-lets-make-itpermanent/12330442, accessed 8 June 2020.
Kohler, A. and Hobday, L. (2019) Household debt has Australians living in house of cards [Online], Australian Broadcasting
Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-11-18/household-debt-australia-world-champions/11682628,
accessed 24 September 2020.
Kolios, B. (2020), ‘Australian household debt and the macroeconomic environment’, Journal of Economic Studies, vol.
ahead-of-print, no. ahead-of-print, https://doi.org/10.1108/JES-10-2019-0460.
Land and Housing Corporation (2020) Major sites [Online], NSW, https://www.communitiesplus.com.au/major-sites,
accessed 6 August 2020.
Lawson, J., Pawson, H., Troy, L., van den Nouwelant, R. and Hamilton, C. (2018) Social housing as infrastructure: an
investment pathway, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://researchdirect.
westernsydney.edu.au/islandora/object/uws:50320/datastream/PDF/view.
Lewis Boucher, D. (2020) Construction to start on Macquarie Park’s Ivanhoe Estate [Online], https://theurbandeveloper.
com/articles/construction-to-start-on-macquarie-parks-ivanhoe-estate, accessed 6 August 2020.
Limaa, N., Souzab, R., Feitosac, P., Moreirac, J., Silvac, C. and Neto, M. (2020) ‘People experiencing homelessness: Their
potential exposure to COVID-19’, Psychiatry Research, vol. 288.
Martin, C. (2020) Rents can and should be reduced or suspended for the coronavirus pandemic [Online], The
Conversation, https://theconversation.com/rents-can-and-should-be-reduced-or-suspended-for-the-coronaviruspandemic-135929, accessed 26 August 2020.
Martin, P. (2020) Scalable without limit: how the government plans to get coronavirus support into our hands quickly
[Online], The Conversation, https://theconversation.com/scalable-without-limit-how-the-government-plans-to-getcoronavirus-support-into-our-hands-quickly-134353, accessed 24 September 2020.
Mlambo-Ngcuka, P. (2020) Violence against women and girls: the shadow pandemic [Online], https://www.unwomen.org/en/
news/stories/2020/4/statement-ed-phumzile-violence-against-women-during-pandemic, accessed 26 August 2020.
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J. and Altman, D. (2009) ‘Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and metaanalyses: the PRISMA statement’, BMJ, vol. 339.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

64

References

Muir, K., Michaux, F., Sharam, A., Flatau, P., Meltzer, A., Moran, M., Heaney, R., North, G., Findlay, S., Webb, E., Mason, C.,
Stone, W., Ward-Christie, L., Zaretzky, K. and Ramia, I. (2018) Inquiry into social impact investment for housing and
homelessness outcomes [Online], Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.
edu.au/research/final-reports/299, accessed 28 August 2020.
Muir, K., Moran, M., Michaux, F., Findlay, S., Meltzer, A., Mason, C., Ramia, I. and Heaney, R. (2017) The opportunities,
risks and possibilities of social impact investment for housing and homelessness, Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/research/final-reports/288.
Munoz, A. (2019) ‘Microgrids for disaster management: an ethical risk perspective’, IEEE Technology and Society
Magazine, vol. 38, no. 4: 70–74.
Nielsen, B. (2020) South Australia praised for supporting the homeless during coronavirus pandemic but long-term
solution needed [Online], Australian Broadcasting Corporation, https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-04-28/
advocates-call-for-long-term-solution-to-homelessness-in-sa/12194210, accessed 1 June 2020.
Parkinson, S., Batterham, D., Reynolds, M. and Wood, G. (2019) The changing geography of homelessness: a spatial
analysis from 2001 to 2016, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, https://papers.ssrn.com/
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3398044.
Pawson, H. and Mares, P. (2020) Coronavirus lays bare 5 big housing system flaws to be fixed [Online],
https://theconversation.com/coronavirus-lays-bare-5-big-housing-system-flaws-to-be-fixed-137162, accessed
20 August 2020.
Pawson, H., Milligan, V. and Yates, J. (2020) Housing Policy in Australia: A Case for System Reform, Springer Singapore,
Singapore.
Perri, M., Dosani, N. and Hwang, S. (2020) ‘COVID-19 and people experiencing homelessness: challenges and mitigation
strategies’, CMAJ, vol. 192, no. 26.
Pfitzner, N., Fitz-Gibbon, K., Meyer, S. and True, J. (2020a) Responding to Queensland’s ‘shadow pandemic’ during the
period of COVID-19 restrictions: practitioner views on the nature of and responses to violence against women,
Monash University, https://bridges.monash.edu/articles/Responding_to_Queensland_s_shadow_pandemic_during_
the_period_of_COVID-19_restrictions_practitioner_views_on_the_nature_of_and_responses_to_violence_against_
women/12581393, https://doi.org/10.26180/5ef9b6ab3f5a1.
Pfitzner, N., Fitz-Gibbon, K. and True, J. (2020b) Responding to the ‘shadow pandemic’: practitioner views on the nature
of and responses to violence against women in Victoria, Australia during the COVID-19 restrictions, Monash
University, https://bridges.monash.edu/articles/Responding_to_the_shadow_pandemic_practitioner_views_
on_the_nature_of_and_responses_to_violence_against_women_in_Victoria_Australia_during_the_COVID-19_
restrictions/12433517, https://doi.org/10.26180/5ed9d5198497c.
Powell, A., Meltzer, A., Martin, C., Stone, W., Liu, E., Flanagan, K., Muir, K. and Tually, S. (2019) The construction of social
housing pathways across Australia, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne, http://eprints.
lincoln.ac.uk/id/eprint/39898/1/2019%20Powell%20et%20al%20-AHURI%20The-construction-of-social-housingpathways-across-Australia.pdf.
Probono Australia (2020) The uncertainty continues for people experiencing homelessness [Online], https://
probonoaustralia.com.au/news/2020/08/the-uncertainty-continues-for-people-experiencing-homelessness/,
accessed 6 August 2020.
Productivity Commission (2019) Vulnerable private renters: evidence and options, Canberra, https://www.pc.gov.au/
research/completed/renters/private-renters.pdf.
Productivity Commission (2020) Report on Government Services 2020 [Online], Productivity Commission, Canberra,
https://www.pc.gov.au/research/ongoing/report-on-government-services/2020/housing-and-homelessness,
accessed 26 August 2020.
Public Accounts and Estimates Committee (PAEC) (2020) Inquiry into the Victorian Government’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic: Interim report [Online], Parliament of Victoria, Melbourne, https://parliament.vic.gov.au/
images/stories/committees/paec/COVID-19_Inquiry/Report/PAEC_59-07_Vic_Gov_response_COVID-19_Interim_
report.pdf, accessed 24 September 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

65

References

Queensland Domestic Violence Services Network (2020a) Domestic violence set to escalate with COVID-19—services
across the state on alert and families at risk [Online], https://www.dvconnect.org/wp-content/uploads/QDSVDomestic-violence-set-to-escalate-with-COVID-Media-Release.pdf, accessed 7 August 2020.
Queensland Domestic Violence Services Network (2020b) Virtual candlelight vigil held to remember the 38 Queenslanders
who lost their lives as a result of domestic violence over the past 12 months [Online], https://www.dvconnect.org/wpcontent/uploads/Media-Release-Virtual-Candle-Light-Vigil-2020-110520.pdf, accessed 7 August 2020.
Queensland Government (2020) Queensland Budget 2019–20 service delivery statements: Department of Child Safety,
Youth and Women [Online], Queensland Treasury, https://s3.treasury.qld.gov.au/files/2019-20-DCSYW-SDS.pdf,
accessed 24 September 2020.
Quigley, J. (2020) ‘Just 17 people get rent relief’ [Online], The West Australian, WA, https://www.pressreader.com/
australia/the-west-australian/20200616/281487868594821, accessed 26 August 2020.
Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) (2020) Supporting the economy and financial system in response to COVID-19 [Online],
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, https://www.rba.gov.au/covid-19/, accessed 24 September 2020.
Rowley, S. and James, A. (2018) The private rental sector in Australia: public perceptions of quality and affordability,
Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre, Perth, https://bcec.edu.au/assets/BCEC-Private-Rental-Sector-in-AustraliaReport_final_web.pdf.
Sacred Heart Mission (2020) Homelessness services banding together to get people off the streets [Online], https://
www.sacredheartmission.org/news-media/our-blog/melbourne-homelessness-services-banding-together-to-getpeople-off-the-streets, accessed 2 July 2020.
Schmidt, V. (2010) ‘Taking ideas and discourse seriously: explaining change through discursive institutionalism as the
fourth ‘new institutionalism’’, European Political Science Review, vol. 2, no. 1: 1–25.
SGS Economics and Planning (2020) Economic impacts of social housing investment [Online], SGS Economics and
Planning, Canberra, https://www.shelterwa.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/SHARP-Final-Report-03062020.
pdf, accessed 26 August 2020.
Sharam, A., Moran, M., Mason, C., Stone, W. and Findlay, S. (2018) Understanding opportunities for socialiImpact
investment in the development of affordable housing, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne,
https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/16093/AHURI_Final_Report_No294_Understanding_
opportunities_for_social_impact_investment_in_the_development_of_affordable_housing.pdf.
Shelter WA (2020) Rental eviction moratorium will help flatten the curve [Online], Shelter WA, WA, https://www.shelterwa.
org.au/media-release-rental-eviction-moratorium-will-help-flatten-the-curve/, accessed 26 August 2020.
Smith, A. (2020) ‘NSW government may buy up spare housing in $500 million stimulus plan’ [Online], The Sydney
Morning Herald, https://www.smh.com.au/politics/nsw/nsw-government-may-buy-up-spare-housing-in-500million-stimulus-plan-20200427-p54noc.html, accessed 6 August 2020.
Spinney, A. and Blandy, S. (2011) Homelessness prevention for women and children who have experienced domestic and
family violence: innovations in policy and practice, Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute, Melbourne,
https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0014/2831/AHURI_Positioning_Paper_No140_Homelessnessprevention-for-women-and-children-who-have-experienced-domestic-and-family-violence-innovations.pdf.
Stokes, G. (2014) ‘The rise and fall of economic rationalism’, in J. Uhr and R. Walter (eds), Studies in Australian Political
Rhetoric, ANU Press, Canberra, 195–220.
Swan, M. (2019) Blockchain theory of programmable risk: Black Swan Smart Contracts’, in M. Swan, J. Potts, S. Takagi, F.
Witte and P. Tasca (eds), Blockchain Economics: Implications of Distributed Ledgers, World Scientific, 171–194.
Taleb, N. (2018) (Anti)Fragility and Convex Responses in Medicine. arXiv:1808.00065,
Topsfield, J. (2020a) Extra $9.8m to extend hotel stays for homeless, help find them a home [Online], https://www.theage.
com.au/national/victoria/extra-9-8m-to-extend-hotel-stays-for-homeless-help-find-them-a-home-20200612p5524u.html, accessed 2 July 2020.
Topsfield, J. (2020b) ‘Hotel stays for 2000 homeless extended until April under $150m package’ [Online], The Age,
https://www.theage.com.au/national/victoria/hotel-stays-for-2000-homeless-extended-until-april-under-150mpackage-20200727-p55fxu.html, accessed 2 July 2020.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

66

References

Tsai, J. and Wilson, M. (2020) ‘COVID-19: a potential public health problem for homeless populations’, The Lancet Public
Health, vol. 5, no. 4: 186–187.
Warner, B. (2020) Melbourne Zero: an achievable end to homelessness [Online], Launch Housing, https://www.
launchhousing.org.au/melbourne-zero-an-achievable-end-to-homelessness, accessed 16 August 2020.
Wood, L., Flatau, P., Karetzky, K., Foster, S. and Vallesi, S. (2016) What are the health, social and economic benefits of
providing public housing and support to formerly homeless people?, Australian Housing and Urban Research
Institute, Melbourne, https://www.ahuri.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0021/8526/AHURI_Final_Report_No265_
What-are-the-health,-social-and-economic-benefits-of-providing-public-housing-and-support-to-formerlyhomeless-people.pdf.
Zaretzky, K., Flatau, P., Clear, A., Conroy, E. and Burns, L. (2013) The cost of homelessness and the net benefit of
homelessness programs: a national study. Findings from the Baseline Client Survey, Australian Housing and Urban
Research Institute, Melbourne, https://researchrepository.murdoch.edu.au/id/eprint/24596/1/homelessness_
programs.pdf.

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

67

Appendix 1: Key search terms
Below is a list of key policy, geographic and jurisdictional terms that were entered into the search engines
to capture data.
•

Homeless* + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

•

Crisis accom* + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

•

Social hous* + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

•

Private rent* + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

•

Assisted homeownership + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

•

Homeowner* + Federal/NSW/VIC/QLD/ACT/TAS/SA/NT/WA + Government + Media Release

AHURI Final Report No. 343Policy coordination and housing outcomes during COVID-19

68

Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute
Level 12, 460 Bourke Street
Melbourne VIC 3000
Australia
+61 3 9660 2300
information@ahuri.edu.au
ahuri.edu.au
twitter.com/AHURI_Research
facebook.com/AHURI.AUS
Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute

