"x"
"1" "Towards equitable evolution & ecology learning online: a perspective from a first-time instructor teaching evolution during COVID-19"
"2" "Andrea E.  Wishart a *"
"3" "a Department  of Biology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon,  Canada"
"4" "*Corresponding author: andrea.wishart@usask.ca"
"5" "Biographical notes available upon request"
"6" "Towards equitable evolution & ecology learning online: a perspective from a first-time instructor teaching evolution during COVID-19"
"7" "In light of the COVID-19 pandemic of 2020, the sudden shift to online offerings of higher education courses that would typically be taught face-to-face, has university administrators, educators, and students alike scrambling to prepare. The pedagogical movement towards active learning has always found a friend in the natural sciences, with laboratory and field components being standard to many programs. For instructors of ecology and evolution, the shift to online-only learning planned for autumn 2020 imposes limitations. As a first-time instructor teaching  a course on evolutionary processes  at the time of the COVID-19 outbreak ,  concurrent with being a student of a mentored teaching course and doctoral student in evolutionary ecology, I offer my perspective as a learner and an educator to guide decision-making by instructors. I emphasize the need to consider accessibility, equity, and compassion and the importance of building trust and a safe learning environment in the absence of face-to-face instruction. I describe some evolution-related resources and approaches to assessment I applied in the pivot-to-online context of March 2020, including COVID-19 teaching tools. Finally, I encourage scholars of evolution and ecology to bridge in contemporary scholarship on pedagogy to help teach the next generation of biologists."
"8" "Keywords:  online teaching ;  remote teaching ;  accessibility ;  COVID-19 ;  trauma-informed pedagogy ;  learning community ;  undergraduate education"
"9" "Introduction"
"10" "Teaching in the absence of face-to-face tutelage is far from an Internet-age phenomenon. The concept of online education’s analog predecessor, the correspondence course, dates back to 1728 when Caleb  Phillipps  placed an advertisement in the  Boston Gazette  for postcard-based correspondence lessons for would-be pupils to learn shorthand  (Bower and Hardy 2004) . It would be more than a century before universities took up the idea, with the first for-credit distance course being offered by the University  of London in 1858  (Thompson 1990) . The first fully-online distance course for credit (“Women and Computers in Education”) was offered by the University of Toronto in 1986 by what is now the Graduate School of Education (formerly the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education  (Harasim and Smith 1993) ). Distance and/or online courses have become staples in university course calendars in the decades since. Despite their ubiquitous presence, such courses have yet to fully displace face-to-face teaching on campus, which continues to be the dominant mode of formal teaching in university settings."
"11" "This is about to change. The academic year 2020/21 is guaranteed to make its mark in the ongoing history of distance learning, as the COVID-19 pandemic has forced the hand of many administrators to mandate all courses offered go fully online. The possibility of a return to campus teaching looks to be increasingly unlikely as we progress through summer. While vaccine trials are underway, as of early  June  2020 there is nothing available to immunize the general population."
"12" "These are uncertain times. What is certain is that we must collectively move our teaching practices from our familiar campus classrooms, laboratories, and field sites into our living rooms, kitchens, and home offices. Will this be the moment we break higher education out of the ivory tower? I will leave it to the pedagogical scholars and pundits to predict how university education may or may not be transformed permanently by this historic event. Instead, I suggest here that we pause, even briefly, before taking on the momentous task of moving to a fully online fall term."
"13" "Let us, as educators, take a moment to reflect on our goals and commitments to ourselves and our students (e.g., University of Saskatchewan’s Learning Charter  (Univeristy of Saskatchewan 2018) ). As instructors of ecology and evolution, we are well acquainted with the adaptive potential behavioural flexibility may lead to (e.g.,  (Tebbich, Sterelny, and Teschke 2010) . We understand what happens to lineages unable to adapt to shifting environments. But there is no reason that the shift in dominant learning environment should be viewed as nature, red in tooth and claw. We have the tools and services at our fingertips to create learning environments in which all students can learn and thrive. It will be the instructors who simply dump existing lecture notes online who will do the greatest disservice to today’s diverse student body, particularly one under the strain of a pandemic."
"14" "Here, I offer a perspective on teaching evolution online as a first-time instructor tasked with providing a meaningful educational experience for students of evolution, whilst being a doctoral student of evolution myself. The COVID-19 pandemic struck in the middle of my first term teaching as a university instructor. I was lecturing  a course on evolutionary processes  to just over 70 undergraduate students three times a week as part of  my institution ’ s teacher-training program for PhD candidates . The program offers the opportunity for PhD scholars to teach a university course in their discipline concurrent with taking a dedicated teaching training course. By early March, I had found my groove as the person at the front of the room, and while I certainly have room for improvement, the formative feedback I sought from students and the midterm exam results indicated that there was indeed some learning going on for all of us.  That was, of course, to change rapidly, and I soon found myself learning to teach all over again in a remote environment."
"15" "What has been, and what will come"
"16" "I recognize that I am in the relatively rare position, at least in evolutionary ecology, of being brand new to instructing while still mid-PhD .   I have also now  taught both in-person and online ,  without the years of experience even a postdoctoral fellowship might have  afforded me , and certainly not the deeply nuanced grasp of my material that I  might have developed through teaching and tweaking a course over years , yet we collectively managed to achieve our learning outcomes despite the circumstances. To this  end,  while  I do not claim mastery of the teaching suggestions I make below , I aim to offer reassurance that it can be done with a solid grounding in pedagogical theory and most importantly, with accessibility and equity at the forefront of all considerations.   As  I began  drafting  this piece, I was simultaneously a teacher and a student both in a literal sense. I am also fresh from formal training in  teaching postsecondary  education. I reflect now on these experiences through the lens of my teaching philosophy and share some specific suggestions and examples that may be adopted by instructors moving forward."
"17" "To the instructors for courses to be offered remotely later this year, you have a challenging road ahead of you, as do your learners. This is still not business as usual. What is being asked of us will not be a demonstration of online learning at its best (indeed, the distinction between online learning and emergency remote teaching has been made already  (Hodges et al. 2020) ). But with careful planning and leveraging existing supports  both within your institution and further abroad , you have an opportunity to explore and re - evaluate teaching  attitudes and  materials. Importantly, given the widespread and simultaneous response by universities to the current situation, we can look to each other. Rapid dissemination of information allows us to review and evaluate what other institutions worldwide have achieved in the context of their respective histories of online pedagogy and their individual COVID-19 situations  (Crawford et al. 2020) . We can also be emboldened by the results of studies of teaching through online asynchronous learning networks, which have found several positive outcomes reported by instructors  (Coppola, Hiltz, and Rotter 2002)  and students  (Rovai 2002) . You have the chance to craft your syllabus around open-source resources and to  effectively implement remote active and experiential learning. This will be no small amount of work, but this gift of time (how little it may be) to permit advance planning is one that the Winter 2020 instructors didn’t have and will be your greatest asset in ensuring a successful online course."
"18" "Through it all, we must remember that distance learning need not feel distant. In his 2003 reflection on distant learning, Dr Alan Tait of the Open University concluded that, even with the transition of distance learning into an online format as technology advanced “the issues of learning, teaching and student support have reappeared as the heart of the matter”  (Tait 2003) . Despite the underwhelming impact on traditional university functioning in the teaching, and a definitive lack of  the “disruption” promised by its purveyors, large online higher education initiatives such as massive open online courses (MOOCs) have nevertheless opened the door to a new avenue of pedagogical research and provided the opportunity to improve accessibility and social inclusion in higher education  (Lambert 2020) ."
"19" "Building your learning community"
"20" "Trust that students are doing their best. Give them a reason to trust that you have their best interests at heart. I was fortunate to have begun term in-class, where non-text and non-verbal communication cues can help build appropriate teacher-learner relationships and expectations. For example, as the classroom was unused in the hour prior to my lecture, I made a point to arrive early to allow time for conversations with students before a prompt start to the lecture. I had the benefit, then, of having built trust and relationships with my students in-person before pivoting online. Research and experience shows that building a supportive learning community not only is possible, but it has positive outcomes for student performance  (Tait 2003; Rovai 2002) ."
"21" "This past term, my students cared for family members, lost family members, cared for children, had children, became ill, and experienced many other hardships that come with life. By the end of term, students were scattered across Saskatchewan, to places where rural internet connectivity may be the least of their challenges, further across Canada, and home to countries in different time zones and in different states of COVID-19 infections and responses. While early reports suggest that students, on average, were able to succeed despite physical distancing and confinement  (Gonzalez et al. 2020) , not all students experienced the changes equally. Moving ahead, with the pandemic ongoing we must expect that some students will become ill themselves or may experience the illness or loss of family members. Compassion must be the foundation on which your remote learning community is built."
"22" "Accessibility and Equity"
"23" "If you have been teaching or advising students prior to the pandemic, you should be familiar with your institution’s accessibility and equity service (AES) already; if you are not, it is essential that you access their policies and recommendations immediately. Their guidelines will inform institutionally specific procedures, and importantly, provide a confidential resource for students to access and ensure appropriate accommodations are provided. While many instructors who have experience with AES are used to them in the traditional on-campus format, remember that your institution has likely been offering online courses for some time now. AES will have procedures and guidelines already in place for such delivery. Contemporary research on online pedagogy has made finding best practices in building equity and accessibility into the architecture of online learning much easier for instructors ,  e.g.  the Peralta Online Equity  Rubric  (Peralta Community College District 2019) , and this should be front of mind for all  (Van Rooij and Zirkle 2016) ."
"24" "Lesson format"
"25" "If you go the asynchronous route (and I do recommend against three hour long synchronous Zoom lectures), you might choose to capture shorter, topic-driven lessons that can be tackled in smaller chunks interspersed with other activities. Not only does this allow lessons to be managed more easily by students trying to balance their own isolation demands, in my experience it is easier to teach as well. My professional training in lesson planning has been heavily influenced by the BOPPPS model: Bridge-in, Outcomes or Objectives, Pre-assessment, Participatory learning, Post-assessment, and Summary  (Gong et al. 2017) . This model lends itself nicely to short lessons with targeted learning outcomes; indeed, the internationally-recognized Instructional Skills Workshop (ISW) employs the use of BOPPPS for 10-minute mini-lessons developed by participants  to target one or two clear and actionable learning outcomes   (Pattison and Russell 2006) . With a bit of rearranging (participatory learning activity could occur after the learning module, for instance), this model can help break down longer lectures into bite-sized chunks more easily managed by instructors and learners."
"26" "Consider making  daily learning outcomes to do some of the heavy lifting for you and your learners.  I  provide d  a  slide at the start of each of my lectures  (both in-class and pre-recorded for online material)  stating the expected learning outcomes for the day   (Kennedy, Hyland, and Ryan 2007) . These were written as in measurable and actionable statements , each  describing  a  skill or  piece of  knowledge that students should have gained by the end of the lesson. Such learning outcomes allowed students to  immediately self-assess their understanding of the material, while also providing an easy source of exam question ideas."
"27" "Texts and source material"
"28" "Students may not have access to the same text resources that they would if they were to be on campus. While I taught roughly around Evolution  (Futuyma and Kirkpatrick 2017) , students primarily accessed it on reserve at the library, which put them at a disadvantage for accessing this resource when the library closed. Fortunately, the website for this textbook has some phenomenal simulations which stood in for some lab activities, in addition to useful chapter summaries and a glossary  (Futuyma and Kirkpatrick n.d.) .  Prior to the pivot to online, I  had already made it a habit to provide links to additional online resources, such as topical explainer-style YouTube videos (e.g., the Amoeba Sisters  (The Amoeba Sisters n.d.) ) and related lessons on open educational websites (e.g., Khan Academy  (Khan Academy n.d.) ). This practice fortunately set me on a trajectory for success when it came time to pivot online. I increased the number of links from providing one every lecture or two, to providing at least two or three links per lecture (Figure 1). I also indicated whether each link was required to be reviewed or just suggested. This practice allowed me to rely a bit more heavily on existing online resources when they were exceptionally well done  and accessible  as “required” so I could allocate more time to teaching concepts that didn’t have sufficient online resources. The key objective guiding my decisions here was to limit data-hungry sites and videos and instead try to select only text-based resources as required. This again comes back to accessibility for students, both in terms of internet capability and in terms of visual and auditory limitations."
"29" "Assessment"
"30" "Given the limitations on student participation as discussed above, I wrote an entirely new final exam that was administered as an open book take-home assignment comprising multiple choice and short answer. The ten multiple choice questions I included were mostly focused on interpretation of visually represented relationships. For example, I created an image depicting a curve showing the relationship between fitness and trait value. The question then asked the students to identify which mode of selection the curve represented. For a series of questions, I created four-panel image showing four phylogenetic trees with relationships among generic species A-E (Figure 2) accompanied by a character matrix. Students were asked to identify which trees showed equivalent relationships, which species represented sister taxa, and so on.  Because the lab portion of the course was canceled after March 13, students did not get the practical experience with calculations for concepts like fixation index  (Wright 1949) . Instead, I emphasized that while students did not need to perform the calculations on the exam, they would be expected to understand the relationships among the variables in the equations. For example, I presented the fixation index equation and asked 1) Explain in words what  F st  measures. 2) How is  F st  affected by drift? 3) How is  F st  affected by migration? As you prepare for future course offerings, you may be able to find ways to engage students in practical aspects of such relationships in ecology and evolution much more effectively than my emergency switch to online. You may also reconsider what is more pertinent in your course: is success in learning to be judged by ability to apply the knowledge in calculations, or is demonstrating an understanding of the general relationships sufficient?"
"31" "While the exam was designed to be completed within the originally scheduled three-hour timeframe, students had 24 hours from the time it was posted to complete it and submit it electronically. This gave students who would typically need time-and-a-half the time they needed, as well as allowing flexibility for students in other  timezones  and with other commitments. I had a 100% completion rate. While I am not an algorithm, the short answer responses showed no evidence of academic dishonesty, and the spread of multiple - choice answers were what I expected if the exam would have been written in an exam hall. For a class of that size, I would, from experience, strongly suggest you have help grading such questions, using rubrics to guide assistants."
"32" "Trauma-informed pedagogy"
"33" "Teaching evolution offered a unique opportunity to provide students with evidence-based knowledge and critical thinking skills rooted in evolutionary theory through wh ich they could interpret the world events shaking their daily lives.  Near the beginning of term, I asked the class if they would appreciate parallel information on COVID-19 as it related to course topics on evolutionary processes, to which the majority agreed (see Additional file 1 for an annot at ed list of resources provided in this course). This addressed one of the stated learning outcomes stated on  my  syllabus:  Be able to read and critically assess information related to biology, medicine, agriculture, livestock breeding, and sociology, and offer evolutionary interpretations or describe evolutionary implications by the problems presented   [citation to syllabus redacted for anonymity in peer review]."
"34" "To this end, teaching COVID-19 examples in an evolution class may be appropriate and useful for students seeking to grasp the situation around them. While I integrated COVID-19 resources during the exponential growth phase of the pandemic, if I were to be teaching this course again in autumn 2020, I would remain alert to  environment and to student well-being at the time of teaching and let that inform my choices. Perhaps more familiar to instructors of the arts, humanities, and social sciences, trauma-informed pedagogy would be a prudent approach to take  (Teaching Tolerance Staff 2020) . Students may have lost family members to COVID-19 or have become ill themselves. Even for those not directly affected, we have all collectively faced upheavals and hardships directly associated with COVID-19. It very well could be that students and instructors alike are fatigued by new information related to the virus. Choose your teaching materials wisely. Consider whether alternative examples can be used, and if COVID-19 resources could be provided as case studies for students to explore when they are ready."
"35" "Conclusion"
"36" "Distance learning has existed for nearly 300 years, but what institutions of higher education face in 2020 is an unprecedented shift to alternative modes of course delivery as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. While it is my utmost hope that rapid and effective vaccine development renders the plans to move the 2020/2021 academic year to an online format, we must plan for the worst. The integration of contemporary pedagogical theory and research combined with the subject-specific knowledge and experience of our educators and supported by our institutions’ teaching and learning  centers  as well as services guiding accessibility and equity will be difficult, time-consuming, and frustrating at times. However, as we have come together to fight the pandemic, so too can the network of humans that have already made educational programming for ecology and evolution successful. Through the March 2020 transition to emergency remote teaching, respect and compassion for students as well as guiding principles of equity and accessibility governed much of my response and decision- making. I hope that by relating my experiences and sharing relevant aspects of my teaching practice as a new instructor that you feel empowered to move forward with your own teaching journey. Let us take care of ourselves and each other."
"37" "Declarations"
"38" "Availability of data and materials"
"39" "There is no data associated with this manuscript."
"40" "Additional Files :  Additional   f ile 1 – Evolutionary COVID-19 resources*"
"41" "* Additional  materials and examples are provided as-is to illustrate how the course described within was delivered in an emergency switch to online. They have not been altered for this publication."
"42" "Competing interests"
"43" "The author has no conflicts of interest to declare. A t the time of  writing  they  no longer hold a teaching contract with any institution."
"44" "Funding"
"45" "AEW was supported by a Teacher Scholar Doctoral Fellowship (University of Saskatchewan) during the writing of this manuscript and the experiences related within."
"46" "Author’s contributions"
"47" "AEW conceived of and drafted the manuscript."
"48" "Acknowledgements"
"49" "The University of Saskatchewan resides on Treaty 6 Territory and the homeland of the Métis. I wish to thank Jeff Lane for providing teaching mentorship and course materials throughout the TSDF program, Chris Todd for ongoing support and communication, and Scott Halpin for taking care of the laboratory section of BIOL 302. I thank the  Gwenna  Moss Centre for Teaching and Learning for supporting the entire university during this transition and for providing the GPS 982 Mentored Teaching course, specifically Ryan  Banow  & Marley Duckett for instructing the course; Heather Ross for reaching out with open textbook resources, Wenona Partridge for delivering the ISW, and Stryker  Calvez  for helping my cohort move towards inclusive Indigenization in our classrooms. Thank you to Brian Wishart for useful comments on an earlier draft of this manuscript."
"50" "References"
"51" "Bower, Beverly L., and Kimberly P. Hardy. 2004. “From Correspondence to Cyberspace: Changes and Challenges in Distance Education.”  New Directions for Community Colleges  2004 (128): 5–12. https://doi.org/10.1002/cc.169."
"52" "Coppola, Nancy Walters, Starr Roxanne Hiltz, and Naomi G. Rotter. 2002. “Becoming a Virtual Professor: Pedagogical Roles and Asynchronous Learning Networks.”  Journal of Management Information Systems  18 (4): 169–89. https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2002.11045703."
"53" "Crawford, Joseph, Kerryn Butler-Henderson, Jürgen Rudolph, Matthias Glowatz, Rob Burton, Paola Magni, and Sophia Lam. 2020. “COVID-19: 20 Countries’ Higher Education Intra-Period Digital Pedagogy Responses.”  Journal of Applied Teaching and Learning  3 (1). https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1680/geot.2008.T.003."
"54" "Futuyma, Douglas J, and Mark Kirkpatrick. n.d. “Evolution, Fourth Edition.” Accessed May 11, 2020. https://evolution4e.sinauer.com/."
"55" "———. 2017.  Evolution . 4th ed. New York, NY: Sinauer Associates."
"56" "Gong, Lijing, Cheng Ma, Jian Zhang, JinKai Lv, and Yu Wang. 2017. “Advice on  Effective Teaching Design Based on BOPPPS Model.”  Advances in Computer Science Research  73 (7th International Conference on Education, Management, Information and Computer Science (ICEMC 2017)): 296–99. https://doi.org/10.2991/icemc-17.2017.58."
"57" "Gonzalez, T., M. A. de la Rubia, K. P. Hincz, M. Comas-Lopez, L. Subirats, S. Fort, and G. M. Sacha. 2020. “Influence of COVID-19 Confinement in Students Performance in Higher Education,” 1–25. http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09545."
"58" "Harasim, L, and D. E. Smith. 1993. “Making Connections, Thinking Change Together: Women Teachers and Computer Networks.” In  Feminism and Education - A Canadian Perspective , edited by P Bourne, P Masters, N Amin, M Gonick, and L Gribowski. Toronto: CSWE/OISE Press."
"59" "Hodges, Charles, Stephanie Moore, Barb Lockee, Torrey Trust, and Aaron Bond. 2020. “The Difference Between Emergency Remote Teaching and Online Learning.”  Educause Review , 2020."
"60" "Kennedy, Declan, A Hyland, and N Ryan. 2007. “Writing and Using Learning Outcomes.”  A Practical Guide , 1–103. http://lo-hei.net/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/A-Learning-Outcomes-Book-D-Kennedy.pdf."
"61" "Khan Academy. n.d. “Khan Academy.” Accessed May 11, 2020. www.khanacademy.org."
"62" "Lambert, Sarah R. 2020. “Do MOOCs Contribute to Student Equity and Social Inclusion? A Systematic Review 2014–18.”  Computers and Education  145 (September 2019): 103693. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103693."
"63" "Lane, Jeffrey E, and Andrea E. Wishart. 2020. “Course Syllabus for BIOL 302: Evolutionary Processes. University of Saskatchewan.” Saskatoon, SK. https://catalogue.usask.ca/BIOL-302#Syllabi."
"64" "Pattison, P, and D Russell. 2006. “Instructional Skills Workshop Handbook.” Vancouver, BC."
"65" "Peralta Community College District. 2019. “Peralta Online Equity Rubric.” 2019."
"66" "Rooij, Shahron Williams Van, and Kara Zirkle. 2016. “Balancing Pedagogy, Student Readiness and Accessibility: A Case Study in Collaborative Online Course Development.”  Internet and Higher Education  28: 1–7.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2015.08.001."
"67" "Rovai, Alfred P. 2002. “Sense of Community, Perceived Cognitive Learning, and Persistence in Asynchronous Learning Networks.”  Internet and Higher Education  5 (4): 319–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1096-7516(02)00130-6."
"68" "Tait, Alan. 2003. “Editorial: Reflections on Student Support in Open and Distance Learning.”  International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning  4 (1): 1–9. https://doi.org/10.4271/902000."
"69" "Teaching Tolerance Staff. 2020. “A Trauma-Informed Approach to Teaching Through Coronavirus.”  Teaching Tolerance , March 2020. https://www.tolerance.org/magazine/a-trauma-informed-approach-to-teaching-through-coronavirus."
"70" "Tebbich, Sabine, Kim Sterelny, and Irmgard Teschke. 2010. “The Tale of the Finch: Adaptive Radiation and Behavioural Flexibility.”  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences  365: 1099–1109. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0291."
"71" "The Amoeba Sisters. n.d. “YouTube Channel: The Amoeba Sisters.” Accessed May 11, 2020. https://www.youtube.com/amoebasisters."
"72" "Thompson, F.M.L., ed. 1990.  University of London and the World of Learning, 1836-1986 . London, UK: Hambledon Press."
"73" "Univeristy of Saskatchewan. 2018. “Our Learning Charter.” Saskatoon, SK. https://teaching.usask.ca/documents/vptl/LearningCharter.pdf."
"74" "Wright, Sewall. 1949. “The Genetical Structure of Populations.”  Annals of Eugenics  15 (1): 323–54."
"75" "Figure 1.  Screenshot of an example of a BIOL 302 lecture materials folder as provided to students in April 2020 on Blackboard course support software. The folder lists the downloadable lecture materials to be found (including voice-over-PowerPoint lecture recordings and accompanying PDF version of slides for students to follow along with). All files were clearly  labeled  with the lecture number and sub-identifier for students to more easily keep track. Links to additional external resources fall under two course categories: Supporting External Content for required materials, and Additional Links to External Content (not required). “F & K” refers to   Futuyma  and Kirkpatrick (reference   (Futuyma and Kirkpatrick n.d.) ) .When relevant, additional supporting resources were provided as they became available. Here, this is exemplified by the link to the Mental Health Commission of Canada’s announcement of its Resource Hub for COVID-19-related support."
"76" "Figure 2."
"77" "Image panel depicting evolutionary relationships among hypothetical species A-E as presented on the final exam for BIOL 302. This panel, accompanied by a hypothetical character matrix, provided reference material for a series of multiple-choice questions requiring interpretation of these relationships."
