Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021

Pp. 235 -243

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.18
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature: An Analysis of Margret Atwood’s Oryx
and Crake at the time of Coronavirus
Tawhida Akhter
Department of English Literature
College of Sciences and Languages Sajjir
Shaqra University, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
tawhida@su.edu.sa

Recived: 3/4/2021

Accepted: 4/3/2021

Published: 4/26/2021

Abstract
Literature has been an imitator of life for generations on this earth, this literature has voiced the
voiceless. Recent contemporary and postmodern literary theories have catered to burgeoning
notions of logic that go beyond human survival on the planet. Science fiction is a genre of fiction
that encompasses imaginative concepts like futuristic scientific-technological settings, faster than
light, past and future spatial time travel, the existence of parallel universes and extraterrestrial
life etc. An outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by a novel acute
respiratory syndrome of coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) occurred in Wuhan City, Hubei Province,
China. The outbreak was declared as a public health emergency of international concern by the
World Health Organization on 30 January 2020. During this crisis, literature also plays an
important role and apocalyptic literature has shown the disastrous consequences if humans didn’t
stop their behaviour and attitude towards the world. This research project aims to take literature
out of the realm of imagination and present the harsh realities of culture. This study revealed
how literature represents the truth of the world that science is learning every day, and how
certain inventions can have harmful effects if they are not halted in time. This research analysed
the novel Oryx and Crake in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic and pointed a convincing
glimpse of the future. Snowman (protagonist), known as Jimmy before humanity was overrun by
science, is trying to live in a world where he might be the last human Snowman tells the tale of
how Crake's scientific ambitions contributed to the abolition of human civilization. The
researcher emphasizes how the reel depicts reality and how people are to blame for the
degradation of their world.
Keywords: COVID-19 pandemic, cyberpunk, biopunk, biotechnology, science fiction,
apocalyptic
Cite as: Akhter, T. (2021). COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature: An Analysis of Margret
Atwood’s Oryx and Crake at the time of Coronavirus. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special
Issue on Covid 19 Challenges.(1) 235 -243. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.18

235

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

Introduction
COVID-19 has destroyed and had paused the whole world. This pandemic is one of the deadliest
in history, placing the advancement of research and technology in jeopardy. Despite the
development of antimicrobial antibiotics, infectious diseases and germs continue to instil fear in
the human community. An epidemic has been experimented with in literature since the early
days. These health problems, such as cholera, typhus, measles, plague, tuberculosis, among
others, have had their effects on personal as well as socio-economic relations. Today, as the
globe joins together to battle COVID 19, people can’t ignore learning about the history of
epidemics, as well as those portrayed in literature. Ancient writings, such as Giovanni
Boccaccio’s The Decameron (1353), Geoffrey Chaucer’s The Canterbury Tales (1392), set in
motion the literary trope of epidemics, portraying the Black Death that devastated Europe at that
time. Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein (1818) and Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1897) can be read as
allegories of epidemics as they feature hideous creatures, wreaking havoc everywhere they
travel.
Oryx and Crake is a book by Margaret Atwood, a Canadian author published in 2003.
The novel is speculative fiction, adventure romance and science fiction. The novel centres on
Snowman, a solitary hero, who finds himself in a grim condition with only animals named
Crakers to hold him company. The narrator hears about his history as a child named Jimmy and
about the genetic experiments and biomedical research under Jimmy's peer Glenn Crake.
McClelland and Stewart presented the novel for the very first time. It was shortlisted for both the
2003 Man Booker Fiction Prize and the 2004 Orange Fiction Prize.
Atwood's futuristic vision in her plays is just a hint at what the world could look like if
current scientific, technological, and industrial advances continue. She demonstrates a world in
which human exploitation is at its height. Along with human and technical devices, Crake's
character represents the humanist concept that runs through an impermeable wall, created by
them. Within Atwood's fiction, the notion of extinction establishes that creation and death are
ultimately connected. The simultaneous adaptation and extinction cycles form life on Earth. The
scientists in Oryx and Crake are attempting to become part of this natural phenomenon in a bid
to control nature. By expressing their self-rationalized dominance by material culture and
technology, humans are elevating themselves to the pinnacle of the food chain which, in effect,
excuses senseless use. Intervention in natural evolution that accompanies human consumption
can be seen in the human activity of selecting and breeding organisms for the desired
characteristics and enacting genetic changes over multiple generations. Atwood explores whether
genetically engineered plants and mutant animals are not as time-intensive as they used to be.
Review of Literature
In English-language literature, The Last Man (1826) by Mary Shelley was one of the first
dystopian novels to speak of a possible world destroyed by a plague where a few people tend to
be immune and escape contact with others to save them.
American poet and novelist Edgar Allan Poe published The Masque of the Red Death: A
Fantasy (1842), the tale follows Prince Prosper's attempt to escape a deadly plague, known as the
Red Death, by hiding in his castle. He, along with many other rich nobles, holds a masked ball in
seven rooms of the castle, each coloured in a different hue. Amid their merriment, a shadowy
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

236

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

figure dressed as a Red Death victim enters and walks through each room. Prospero dies after
encountering this stranger, whose attire proves to contain nothing concrete inside it; the other
guests also die. The Red Death is a fictional illness. Edgar Allan Poe explains it as inducing
stinging sensation and extreme tiredness, and then swelling which resulting in death within half
an hour.
Defoe’s A Journal of the Plague Year (1722) The bubonic plague in 17th century London
is identified in literary and historical terms. Defoe is working tirelessly in the story to create the
effect of verisimilitude, to remember actual neighbourhoods, roads, and even houses where
accidents have happened. It also contains a table of injury facts and discusses the credibility of
the writer's various stories and anecdotes.
Akhter in a paper “Gender Inequality and Literature: A Contemporary Issue” talks about
the role literature plays in society as, “ Literature asserted itself to be an intellectual imitator to
life for generations in this earth that has voiced the voiceless. The recent modern and postmodern
literary ideas have changed the whole scenario of the literature” (p. 593).
Camus’ novel The Plague (1947) the novel tells the tale of an epidemic that is sweeping
the French Algerian city of Oran from the perspective of a narrator who himself is the victim of
the plague.
Menadue & Cheer (2017) points the relationship between science and culture and how
the science fictions represent the culture, “Science fiction questions the role, relevance, costs,
and benefits of current and future technologies, and presents ideas that can influence public
opinion” (p.1)
The novel Oryx and Crake centres on a post-apocalyptic narrator called "Snowman,"
living next to a group of wild human-like beings he names Crakers. Flashbacks show Snowman
was once a child called Jimmy who grew up in a world controlled by multinationals and wealthy
residences for their workers' families. Close starvation, Snowman wants to return to the remains
of a settlement named Rejooven Esense in pursuit of food, even after deadly genetically
modified mutant animals overtake it. He provides an argument for the Crakers, who see him as a
trainer, and continues his adventure forging.
Stoker’s novel Dracula (1997), has developed several vampire fantasy traditions by
introducing the character of Count Dracula. Dracula's plan to travel from Transylvania to
England to find fresh blood and spread the zombie curse, as well as the fight between Dracula
and a small group of people headed by Professor Abraham Van Helsing, are told in this book.
Butler’s, Survivor (1978) novel is a contact between the Missionaries, a party of human
colonists fleeing a plague on Earth, and the Kohn, articulate inhabitants of the world where the
Missionaries have landed, is chronicled in Survivor. The narrative centres on Alanna, the
Missionaries' leader's adoptive daughter, as she tries to protect the Missionaries from being
destroyed or assimilated by a powerful local society.

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

237

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

Menadue and Cheer (2017) wrote about the importance of science fiction as, “Science
fiction questions the role, relevance, costs, and benefits of current and future technologies, and
presents ideas that can influence public opinion” (p. 2). Paura and Colacel (2019) talked about
science fiction as:
Two trends have long been prevalent in science fiction: the first that of totalitarian
dystopia, started with classic literature. Off and on-screen, dystopian stories reveal a
Panopticon society, where the pervasiveness of technology removes any hope of
individual life. The second trend is that of climate fiction: narratives that imagine a world
dramatically changed by the climate breakdown show that our society can always be
brought back to a pre-modern state by resource scarcity and overpopulation. (p. 7)
Objectives
The main objectives of this research work are:
• To explore the relationship between science and literature.
• To analyze the concept of mind control, telepathy and telekinesis.
• To build a foundation of realism
• To analyze the vision for the future.
• To relate reel with real.
Research Methodology
The methods selected for the current study are Comparative and Analytical Approach. The paper
incorporates different apocalyptic theories to understand the psychology of different characters.
All these methods are appropriate for the present study.
Discussion and Analysis
The settings of science fiction are all largely formed within the alternate subsistence of
utopian and apocalyptic future societies, the environments of science fiction are often
contradictory to those of concurrent fact are often contrary to those of concurrent reality, as they
are mostly developed within the alternative subsistence of utopian and dystopian future worlds.
Science fiction that highly uses magical and other supernatural prospects as its principal
ingredient of plot, theme or setting is categorized under ‘Fantasy,’ an independent subgenre of
science fiction. The diversified subgenres that come under the broad field of science fiction are
Bio-punk, Cyberpunk, Time travel, Military Science Fiction, Superhuman depictions,
Apocalyptic and Post-apocalyptic, Space opera, Paranormal Science Fiction, Social science
fiction, etc. Science fiction first appeared in the 1980s as a kind of near-future fiction portraying
a bleak patriarchal civilization in the throes of socio-cultural revolution as a result of invasive
technology's transformations. Bio-punk is concerned with the future and the anticipated
implications of the biotechnology boom and recombinant DNA breakthroughs. Built upon how
technology has already altered our lives.
Oryx and Crake's pre-apocalyptic universe was teeming with science and technology
firms specializing in transgenic studies. Constantly testing the limits of imagination, these
corporations finally pushed humanity off the brink. The expression is Genetic experimentation in
which genetic material from one animal is artificially inserted into the DNA of another is known
as transgenic science. Jimmy's father was interested in transgenic science. For example, he was
the brains behind the pigeon, a hybrid pig creature intended to produce human kidneys and skin
cells. Other hybrid creatures included in the book include rakunks, wolvogs, bobkittens, and
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

238

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

luminescent rabbits genetically engineered with jellyfish DNA. However, from Snowman's postapocalyptic viewpoint, it is apparent that the desire for technological progress directly
contributed to the abolition of humanity by granting control and wealth to unscrupulous scholars.
Oryx and Crake are engaged in a symbolic struggle between science and the arts, with
Crake representing the science side and Snowman representing the art side. In the preapocalyptic setting of the novel, science strongly overshadowed the arts. Snowman makes many
references to Crake's position as God in the book. Despite his adamant atheism, Crake created
the Paradice facility and inhabited it with a new breed of humans, casting himself as a symbolic
God. While Crake's reaction to the word ‘Paradice’ was probably sarcastic, Snowman realizes
that Crake had a God complex. He not only created a new breed of humans, but he also went out
of his way to wipe out the entire human species. Snowman, in the present, transforms Crake's
irony on himself by making him a god worshipped by the Children of Crake. Snowman refers to
himself as the ‘God of Bullshit’, and he creates bizarre origin stories that the Crakers
enthusiastically believe.
The Book ends as “Oryx and Crake” is an exciting love tale at once, and a convincing
glimpse of the future. Snowman, born as Jimmy before an epidemic ravaged humanity, is
fighting to live in a society where he might be the last human being, and grieving the death of his
best friend, Crake, and the lovely and mysterious Oryx whom they both loved. Snowman
embarks on a quest in pursuit of answers with the aid of the green-eyed Children of Crake –
through the rugged forest that was so recently a great community before large companies put
mankind for an unregulated genetic manipulation adventure.
Margaret Atwood is leading us into a distant future all too ordinary and beyond our
imagination. “Strange to think of the endless labour, the digging, the hammering, the carving, the
lifting, the drilling, day by day, year by year, century by century; and now the endless crumbling
that must be going on everywhere. Sandcastles in the wind” (Chapter 3). Snowman is
contemplating the remains of his collapsed civilization and how even the most stable objects turn
out to be frail. After the everyday afternoon rain, Snowman makes his way to a broken bridge
where he can wash in the rainfall and fill his empty bottles of beer with drinking water.
Crake produces the eco-friendly Crakers in Oryx and Crake, intending to replace humans
with them. This is not only a Frankenstein-sequel means of manipulating nature but also an
intense type of biocentrism: it produces creatures that are readily adjusted to their climate. These
new creatures are not only respectful of all life forms but also not inclined to any religion. The
negative elements of Crake's ecotopia are only the other hand of dogmatic, ecocentric radicalism
and so it is unsurprising that his egalitarian dream had disastrous consequences.
Oryx and Crake track the human path from manipulating nature (by producing new
organisms and leading the current ones to face extinction) to winding up as another survivor of
the evolutionary history narrative. Just like the creatures, they replace; the better-adapted
crackers supplant them too. It will act as a harbinger for all mankind because far from being
deemed excluded or exalted from natural powers (which offer a false sense of supremacy to
humans), our technological advancement can transform into our greatest fear because lead the
whole race to perish.
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

239

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

He knew he was faltering, trying to keep his footing. Everything in his life was
temporary, ungrounded. Language itself had lost it solidity; it had become thin,
contingent, slippery, a viscid film on which he was sliding around like an eyeball on a
plate. (Atwood, Chapter 10).
This quotation appears at the end of Chapter 10, soon after Jimmy learns of his mother's
execution. Jimmy fell into a deep depression as a result of this horrific reporting. He continued to
withdraw from his already small social life, drinking late at night to drown his sorrows. Jimmy's
sense of intent had faded, and he was losing his grip on reality.
“Immortality,” said Crake, “is a concept. If you take ‘mortality’ as being, not death, but
the foreknowledge of it and the fear of it, then ‘immortality’ is the absence of such fear.
Babies are immortal. Edit out the fear and you’ll be …..” (Atwood, Chapter 12).
This is a conversation between Crake and Jimmy which takes place in chapter 12, where Crake
first revealed to Jimmy the research he had carried out on the human genome. Crake expressed
his expectation that his new species of humans would be immune to death because they had no
sense of mortality. This will give them the illusion of longevity without ever allowing them to
live indefinitely.
Akhter in a paper “Problems and Challenges Faced by EFL Students of Saudi Arabia
during COVID-19 Pandemic”, has shown the face of coronavirus as, “The COVID-19 pandemic
had a major effect on human survival around the globe. Indeed, the Covid-19 pandemic could
trigger the global economy to compress to one quarter by 2020” (p. 2).
The natural sense states that humans are beings special because they exhibit qualities
such as voice and sensitivity that all other animals’ experience. Another such separator is the
capacity to interact but it has often been questioned. Human beings are engaged in language
distinguished by tone, movement and facial expression and are determined by it. But many
creatures also have their system to communicate including infrared vision, smell and body
language, chemical signals, or hearing that reaches beyond human sight through registers of their
organisms.
On the other, Sharon and Oryx have a slice of the novel's feminine department. They
underscore the dubious use of science and technology. Both the characters are symbols that
enjoin technology on nature. In an Asian village of parched fields, trees and wild animals that
make up the world, Oryx lives from one extreme to the other – the affluent inner paradise of the
Rejooven Esense Compound that symbolizes technological/scientific elitism in the business
culture. Sharon is taking the opposite direction by serving as a microbiologist with the Organic
Compound, only to enter the same research she helped build in the revolutionary
environmentalist demonstrations against the corporate perversions.
Scientists continued creating both strange species and utilitarian ones. Genetic
engineering enabled humans to overcome the barriers that normally limit the arbitrary crossbreeding of different species of organisms. It has almost made them feel godlike. Whereas some
inventions like the dancing rat were friendly and playful, others were dangerous, like the snake
(a rat hybrid and the rattlesnake). These hybrids once freed from human control, tended to
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

240

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

overwhelm the animal kingdom. Of all varieties, the most popular were the Crakers that
represented an anti-humanist philosophy. Survival was their primary characteristic and not
religion.
According to Glover, humans playing god prefer to objectivize reality regardless of their
desire to hybridise. The humans and the humanoid Crakers, as Chung-Hao Ku argued, depict the
fine line between humanity and monstrosity. In the artificial selection of Oryx and Crake,
Atwood explores the natural social order and human exceptionalism and investigates the
relationship between humans and animals, their roles, and non-human sentience. Atwood
discusses the ethical treatment of animals and informs her readers about what they are eating and
how it is produced. Although not consumed, the pigoons (transgenic pigs bred to grow human
replacement organs) are nevertheless killed for harvesting the organs from them.
Nutrition has been an overwhelmingly commoditised societal force, given its roots in
nature. There are other forms of meals a single group eats. The established ties between food and
human consumption have been broken here. This is further exemplified with the agricultural
commodity dubbed Chickie Nobs, an all-breast-meat chicken production line that reduces the
animal to only the muscle tissue to combat the protein scarcity created by current factory farming
related to climate change and overpopulation. Initially averse to consuming them, Jimmy
eventually gives in by remarking how the food is not as bad as it appears especially if one can
“forget everything the provenance”. This is an illustration of what Atwood considers mindless
consumption which is first characterised by abhorrence on the part of the consumer and finally
participating due to exhaustion in the face of natural dissolution.
As Atwood shows in her novel, pandemics can bring forth deeply rooted fears and
modify human behaviour greatly. The novelist used the apocalyptic genre to criticize
contemporary social structure. Even though it was published some twenty years ago, the novel
presents the same concerns we face today. The post-apocalyptic setting reflects the current time
of the novel, and every chapter of the book shifts back and forth between Snowman's present
encounters and his recollections of his pre-apocalypse childhood when he was named Jimmy. As
the novel progresses, these disparate yet intertwined plot strands weave together. This brings to
mind the current uncontrolled COVID 19 and the fear and hysteria that it engenders. The novel
also symbolises the infection since it feeds only on human blood. Literature goes beyond
statistics on global mortality and spread to show how the epidemic has affected the lives of those
who have been infected, as well as their relatives, families, and neighbours. As many cultural
critics have noted in recent weeks, fictional works concerned with plagues, epidemics, and other
manifestations of biological crisis have seen a dramatic increase in popularity.
Several of the literature on plague and contagious diseases portrays those in charge as the
sole instigator of the masses' wrath, which can be contrasted to the actual mismanagement of
regimes in several nations. The lack of access to personal narratives is a profound cultural and
ethical feature of all global epidemics. The community takes the role of the citizen as the
protagonist, and the public's welfare takes priority over the individual’s. In this way, recounting
past sufferings as told in numerous literary and historical texts can result in dense recollection
with subjective specificity. Pandemic apocalyptic practices, such as COVID-19, are profoundly
embedded in theological and cultural myths that point to the end of the world. In conclusion, we
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

241

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

should hope to become more expressive in our creative creations under COVID 19 regarding our
human survival, loneliness, insecurity, confusion, and, most importantly, the importance of
mutual introspection of inequality linked to pandemic deaths.
Conclusion
Oryx and Crake can be used as a monstrous personification of the epidemics. Oryx and Crake
open up in a tree with a guy called Snowman. There has been some sort of tragic incident, but
the reader does not yet know what the event was or what triggered the event. It seems that
Snowman may be the only survivor of the case, apart from several childlike people he relates to
it as the “Children of Crake,” who wander about nude and have a special genetic makeup.
Comparing the now-extinct animals with their bio-engineered equivalents, Atwood points out
that unless a single species becomes beneficial or valuable to human society, it may undergo
practical exploitation as opposed to extinction only. These genetically modified organisms are
merely slaves to the coming generations as they are voiceless and mere property. We are valued
as much as they can support their owners and no matter how much they add to the broader
community. We might also be exterminated and put back according to human whimsicalities.
Beneath the façade that is creation and growth, a substantial amount of naturally born species
that are of little benefit to humans go extinct. Oryx and Crake debate whether extinction is a
more troubling problem because it affects the human race, as opposed to the non-human
population, and whether the principle of fairness still extends to the latter (which has been called
the 'other' for too long). Humans have always attempted to segregate themselves from nonhumans. Via practices such as factory farming and the manufacture of processed foods, humans
have effectively made animals the "other" who are only supposed to support humans and
maintain their health. This also rendered us unaccountable to anyone who is not human. Humans
in Oryx and Crake retain isolation from natural processes that enable them to prevent any
ramification.
What should be remembered is that choices made from this vantage point, such as
collecting organs from pigeons and subsequent sacrifice, decide the ethicality of acts from the
human viewpoint. However, what should be borne in mind is that judgments made by this point
of view, as exemplified by collecting pigeon organs and their consequent destruction, decide the
ethicality of acts from the limited human viewpoint. The majority of the story includes Snowman
recalling the circumstances that led to the post-apocalyptic setting under which he now finds
himself. Each occurrence takes the reader closer to a complete comprehension of the catastrophic
event that wiped out the majority of the global population, as well as Snowman's role in it. The
humanities, especially literature, offer insightful insights into how people in the past dealt with
the tragedy of pandemics, as well as how to make sense of a world that is now, in many ways,
beyond our reach.
About the Author
Tawhida Akhter is working as Assistant Professor of English Literature in the English
Department, Faculty of Sciences and Arts Sajjir, Shaqra University, KSA since 2019. She
obtained her Ph.D from India. She has published a book with Emerlad Publishers and her another
book is submitted for publication with Cambridge Scholars UK. She has published more 20
research papers in International journals and has attended more than 30 conferences and
workshops. She is actively involved in research on Women Empowerment, Gender Studies,
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

242

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
COVID-19 Pandemic and Apocalyptic Literature

Akhter

Diasporic Fiction, Contemporary Literarure and Child Labour. She is also a reviewer of various
journals. She is also coordinator of Academic Advising Unit of English Department.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4149-4855
References
Akhter, T. (2020, December). Gender Inequality and Literature: A Contemporary Issue. In 6th
International Conference on Social and Political Sciences (ICOSAPS 2020) (pp. 593
596). Atlantis Press.
Akhter, T. (2020). Problems and Challenges Faced by EFL Students of Saudi Arabia during
COVID-19 Pandemic. Rupkatha Journal on Interdisciplinary Studies in
Humanities, 12(5), 1-7.
Atwood, M. (2010). Oryx and Crake (Vol. 1). Vintage Canada.
Butler, O. E. (1978). Survivor. New York: Doubleday.
Camus, A. (2012). The Plague. Vintage.
Defoe, D. (1904). A Journal of the Plague Year (Vol. 9). D. Estes & Company.
Glover, J. (2009). Human/Nature: Ecological Philosophy in Margaret Atwood's Oryx and
Crake. English Studies in Africa, 52(2), 50-62.
Menadue, C. B., & Cheer, K. D. (2017). Human Culture and Science Fiction: A review of the
literature, 1980-2016. SAGE Open, 7(3).
Paura, R., & Colacel, O. (2019). Reading Reality Through Science Fiction. Messages, Sages
and Ages,. 6 (1), 7-11.
Poe, E. A. (1842). The Mask of the Red Death: A Fantasy. Graham's Magazine.
Shelley, M. (1996). The Last Man. Broadview Press.
Stoker, B. (1997). Dracula. Broadview Press.

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

243

