PERCEPTIONS OF THE ACADEMICS FROM FACULTY OF SCIENCE, PALACKÝ
UNIVERSITY OLOMOUC TOWARDS SELECTED ASPECTS RELATED TO THE COURSE OF
THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC IN THE CZECH REPUBLIC AS AN EXAMPLE OF A SUCCOUR
FOR THE STRATEGY AND POLICY MAKERS
Pavel RUŠAR ✉, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, 17. listopadu 1192,
Olomouc, pavel.rusar01@upol.cz
Radim KAPAVÍK, Alma mater – Faculty of Information Technology, Brno University of
Technology, Antonínská 1548, Brno, kapavikr@gmail.com
Keywords: COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic, Faculty of Science UPOL,
perceptions of the academics towards the COVID-19 pandemic, survey as a tool in public
health

Abstract:
Background: The impact of the COVID-19 illness all around the world is enormous and as
such is a subject of study for not only medicine but also geography, economics, society,
psychology and media. Information, data and materials which are the basis for decisions made
by policy and strategy makers are acquired from a vast and chaotic mixture of sources. Those
are produced based on opinions of experts from diverse fields, results of statistical or clinical
studies, official or covert economic interests, political opinions or media pressure and many
more inputs. This study presents a concrete example of a possible instrument for correction for
the influence of the potentially misleading view in media or society.
Methods: Using a questionnaire, this study heuristically quantifies the perceptions of a
selected group of Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc employees towards the
development of the COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic. We presume that overall they
possess more experience with critical analysis and recognizing the relevance of the data than
the general population.
Results: The respondents assume that based on the data they believe to be relevant COVID19 is less than or comparably dangerous as seasonal flu (34.1 %) or several times or by an
order of magnitude more dangerous (54,1 %); implementing wearing face covering inside is in
total for the population rather beneficial (83,8 %), or disadvantageous or without any
significance (7,5 %), the daily count of infected is relevant (49,7 %), or irrelevant (42,2 %); the
exposure rate in the population is relevant (55,2 %), or irrelevant (34,0 %); the percentage of
the Czech population that has already been exposed to the virus is 5% or less (46,5 %), or 6%
or more (29,2 %). The respondents view the government measures as relevant and sufficient
or insufficient (58,9 %), or relevant but excessive (20,0 %), or irrelevant and excessive or
absurd (9,2 %). A significant amount of further data has been derived from the results
presented in this study.
Conclusion: Certain results of the perceptions quantification reflect the predominant media
discourse (such as the question of the benefit of wearing face coverings inside), other seem to
differ or contradict the discourse (such as the comparison with seasonal flu or the preference
for the exposure data over the daily infected count). As a conclusion, it can be ascertained that
when correctly implemented a verified survey of a predefined closed group of respondents can
be an applicable instrument for a potential correction for the prevailing public and media
paradigm.

INTRODUCTION
COVID-19 was first observed at the end of 2019 in Wuhan, China. It is caused by a
previously unknown type of RNA coronavirus, that is now referred to by the academia as
SARS-COV-2.1 The disease spread rapidly into various regions of China and further to
other continents. On 1 March 2020 its presence in the Czech Republic was confirmed and
on 11 March WHO described the spread of this disease as pandemic. 2 It is accepted in the
medical community that the virus spreads when people are in close contact (mainly by
droplet infection). Among the main symptoms of the disease are cough, shortness of
breath, fever, muscle aches and fatigue. The degree of seriousness differs greatly, from
almost imperceptible to severe pneumonia that can pose a threat to patients’ lives.3
Due to the massive spread of COVID-19 and the number of infected, the medical
community as well as the scientific community across the world focused on understanding
both the virus and the disease. The research is aimed at the course of the illness, the
transmission, risk factors for complications, long-term effects, comorbidities, efficacy of
protective equipment and many more.4
Political representatives and managers in the health services were and still are faced with
a lack of data when making decisions, or with the insufficient credibility, relevance, or
stringency of the data. A number of epidemiologic measures around the world were taken
without adequate data, as those were unavailable or inaccessible, or strategy and policy
makers did not utilize them for one reason or another. The pandemic is strongly affecting
businesses and the economy of the majority of countries, as well as the media. The
relations between the media and the measures taken against the spread of the disease
were the subject of numerous studies in various fields. Social scientists embarked to
examine various hypotheses on the connections between the transmission and
geographic, social, economic, demographic, and other determinants.5 Sociologists and
other scientists around the world began to study the mood and attitudes of the population. 6
This study would like to expand on these works and add a new angle of a survey of
perceptions current among the academics.
The main intent of the study is to utilize a concrete example and to outline whether or in
what way could quantification of the position of a predetermined segment of the population
be beneficial or relevant for the policy and strategy makers or for the management in
health care. This concrete example consists of a heuristic attempt to quantify the
perception of a selected sample of employees from the Faculty of Science, Palacký
University Olomouc (FoS UPOL) to certain aspects related to the evolution of the COVID1

International Committee on Taxonomy of Virus. Naming the 2019 Coronavirus (2020)
https://talk.ictvonline.org/, April 2020.
2 Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, https://koronavirus.mzcr.cz/v-ceske-republice-jsou-prvni-tripotvrzene-pripady-nakazy-koronavirem/, September 2019; Cucinotta D, Vanelli M. WHO Declares COVID-19
a Pandemic. Acta Bio Med [Internet]. 2020Mar.19 [cited 2020Sep.27];91(1):157-60. Available from:
https://www.mattioli1885journals.com/index.php/actabiomedica/article/view/9397
3 Ge, H., Wang, X., Yuan, X. et al. The epidemiology and clinical information about COVID-19. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 39, 1011–1019 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10096-020-03874-z
4 Wide variety of published results can be found for example in the PubMed database;
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, September 2020.
5 Wide variety of published results can be found for example in the PubMed database;
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, September 2020.
6 An example of such research is the National Pandemic Alarm project,
https://www.nationalpandemicalarm.eu/main-cs.html, September 2020.

19 pandemic in the Czech Republic. This is the main research aim of the study. The
motivation behind this survey among the employees of the FoS UPOL is an attempt to
ascertain opinions of a portion of the population that does not have a medical education as
such, but simultaneously due to their occupation and education in natural sciences
possesses considerably more experience with discerning the quality and relevancy of data
than the general population.
The claim that academic personnel of the FoS UPOL are better able to search for good
quality data, to better distinguish between the sources according to their reliability and to
assess the relevancy of data than the general population is not proven in this study, we
treat it as an axiom. The result of this survey is not any claim about which opinions are
more real or true, but a quantification of convictions of FoS UPOL employees as
respondents who as a part of their work process evaluate data and information. In this
study we do not compare our results with any survey of other sub-parts of the population,
although we consider obtaining such data for a comparison.
Apart from the quantification of opinions of FoS UPOL employees through their responses,
the study has also secondary research questions that are connected to it. Do the
respondents conclude that they possess a sufficient amount of reliable data related to
predetermined assertions regarding the events connected to the pandemic? Will the
respondents emphasize the importance or superiority of data published in peer-reviewed
and impacted journals? How will the results differ, when we compare answers by
employees who work in fields that are by definition closer to the medical and biological
aspect of the pandemic (herein after referred to as more related fields) with answers by
employees from fields that are not that closely related (herein after referred to as less
related fields)? Will statistically interesting data clusters emerge? And if so, what would it
suggest?
What will be the ratio between natural scientists, who rather do not agree with
implemented blanket measures and presume that the disease does not pose such a
serious health threat and that the rate of the exposure in the population is high with natural
scientists who on the other hand presume that the measures are correct, the disease
poses a very significant threat and that the exposure in the population is not very high?
From the aims and research questions of this study arises what the research does not
explore. The study does not aim to contribute to the discussion of the perilousness of
contracting the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the COVID-19 illness, the exposure rate of the Czech
population or the comparison with the seasonal flu. The research also does not reflect the
measures adopted by the Czech government, their assessment, nor the discussion about
their efficaciousness. The results of this study cannot be utilized as an argument in these
or related areas. In the conclusion it will be discussed under which conditions and using
what potential data could the result be utilized by the policy and strategy makers or the
management in the healthcare sector.

METHODS
To establish the attitudes FoS UPOL employees hold, we utilised an online survey. 7 The
survey was divided into three parts. In the introductory part the respondents were to
choose their academic degree, the field of their study and their specialization. The next
part asked questions (see the Results below) about the evolution of the COVID-19
pandemic in the Czech Republic and the respondents were to choose the statements that
best corresponded to the data they consider to be reliable or that they are not familiar with
such data. The third part of the survey asked the respondents their subjective opinion of
the epidemiologic measures in the Czech Republic.
In addition to the previously introduced aim of the survey, i.e. to quantify the position of the
employees towards selected aspects of the course of the pandemic as shown by their
responses, the survey had also secondary research questions. The survey in its second
part was to track the ratio of the “I do not know – I do not have relevant data” option to all
the other responses. The survey tracked the statistical change detection of the answers
correlated to respondents’ fields of study. It also studied the ratio of respondents who
utilized a certain discourse by implementing predefined paradigms. The study also
implemented algorithmic clustering to observe the occurrence of groups of respondents
who answered similarly. Both methods are described in respective parts of the Results
chapter.
The study also tracked any other qualitative perceptions that could be quantified in some
aspect by the use of the comment section in the questionnaire.
The group the survey was sent to is defined as the employees of the Faculty of Science,
Palacký University Olomouc. Further narrowing/extending the selection was based on
following conditions:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Technical and administrative staff were not included unless they were academic or
pedagogical personnel
Employees of the Department of Foreign Languages were not included
Email addresses were collected from the lists publicly available on webpages of the
faculty or respective institutes. If the email addresses were not published on these
or the email addresses were invalid, they were not included in this study.
Postgraduate students were not included when they were identified as such on the
webpages of their departments, institutes or other workplaces, or when they were
not mentioned at all.
Emeriti were included when their names were published on webpages of the
institute where they used to work
External personnel of the FoS UPOL were not included
Employees from the CRH and RCPTM research centres were not included unless
their names were published on the webpages of departments or institutes, i.e.
unless they work there as well

Included in the study were 497 individuals, that is to say they were sent an email informing
them about the possibility of participating in the survey. To prevent any manipulation or
7

During the research was utilized the free-of-charge software Google Forms, LibreOffice Calc was utilized
for the data analysis.

mishandling of the survey (mainly trolling), each respondent was sent a unique code that
had to be entered for the result to be valid. The source file with these codes and the list of
email addresses were permanently deleted, the participation in the study was therefore
anonymous.
Taking into account the manner in which the data were gathered, it cannot be excluded
that among the contacted were respondents who did not meet our criteria or vice versa
some potential respondents might have been omitted. It would have been only several
individuals and their potential answers would not be statistically significant for the study.
The advantages of the selected methodology, that is preventing interference from
undesirable debasement (trolling), unequivocally preponderate the above-mentioned
potential risk.
Electing to send out unique codes to the respondents was an integral part of the research
method, where examined panel of respondents is strictly defined and limited, and each
member can contribute into the complete result by exactly one vote.

RESULTS
The questionnaire was filled in by 188 respondents, 2 did not produce a valid personal
code, 1 was eliminated on the basis of one of their response that indicated that they
should not have been included in the target group. Admitted into the study were 185 valid
answers (respondents). This corresponds to approximately 37% of the total number of
recipients. The absolute majority, namely 167 (90.3%), filled in the questionnaire the day it
was sent out (24 September) or the next day (25 September). The rest provided their
answers within five days.
a) The results of the first part of the questionnaire are indicated in Pic 1.
b) The results of the first part of the questionnaire are indicated in Pic 2.
c) The results of the first part of the questionnaire are indicated in Pic 3.
d) 45 respondents (24%) used the opportunity to submit a commentary with the
questionnaire. Their contributions referred to economic, social, and psychological
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic or the government measures implemented in a
reaction to it, to the topic of vaccination, immunization, the threat of overloading the
health care system as a result of the pandemic and limiting other areas of the health
care, comparisons with influenza, face coverings and their efficacy in preventing the
spread of the virus in the population on one hand and their health risks on the other.
Frequently respondents expressed their opinions (radical opinions included) on the
current political events, the government of the Czech Republic and criticized their
decisions. Commonly critiqued were also the media, i.e. one-sided news coverage,
preference for extreme views, exaggeration of the threat, etc. Some respondents
commented on data sources, e.g. insufficient sharing of data by the Czech
government, general absence of relevant data. Some respondents included links to
data they deemed credible. Some respondents also voiced an opinion that it is
important to rely on studies published in peer-reviewed journals.
Other respondents voiced their interest in the survey and wished to know to what
end it will be used. Some were sceptical and expressed their view that the
questions are misleading, formulated with bias or that the questionnaire is vague.
Some were of the opinion that the survey is irrelevant, because it does not target
the specialists in the relevant field. Other respondents appraised the questionnaire
favourably and some were interested in the resulting data.
One comment centred on adverse consequences of excessive usage of disinfectant
on the human microbiome. Unlike the other opinions voiced in the comments, this
view is not found frequently in the media coverage.
The distribution of comments according to one of the possible features is displayed
in Tab 1.

Tab 1 – Distribution of comments based on predetermined classification
THE RESPONDENT COMMENTED
PREDOMINANTLY ON:

Number of comments
(as a per cent of the
total)

Political situation in the country, government measures 11 (5.9 %)
Questionnaire, its criticisms, expectations of it, etc

11 (5.9 %)

Health and health care

10 (5.4 %)

Other comments (irrelevant, humorous, vulgar, etc)

7 (3.8 %)

Data, their relevancy, availability, accessibility, etc

6 (3.2 %)

Pic 1 – The answers of the respondents about their highest academic degree achieved
(%)

Pic 2 – The results of the second part of the questionnaire rendered as a graph

Pic 3 - The results of the third part of the questionnaire rendered as a graph

e) The percentage of the “I do not know – I do not have relevant data” answer in the
second part of the questionnaire, where participants were selecting statements that
according to them best corresponded to credible data is presented in Tab 2.
Tab 2 – The proportion of the “I do not know – I do not have relevant data” answer
in the total of responses for each question.
The order of the answer
in the second part of
the questionnaire

Percentage

1

11.8 %

2

8.6 %

3

8.1 %

4

10.8 %

5

37.1 %

6

24.2 %

f) The differences between the more related and less related fields are presented in
Pic 4. As more related fields are classified 15% of submitted questionnaires.8 These
were answered by respondents who stated such fields and specializations that can
be regarded as thematically related to the biological and medical aspect of the
COVID-19 pandemic. These would include biochemistry, molecular biology, cellular
biology, genetics, drug design, pharmacology, molecular toxicology, infectious
metallomics, and more.9 The other 85% of respondents claimed specializations that
can be regarded as thematically further from the biological and medical aspect of
the pandemic, these are designated as less related fields. Among these would be
geology, geography, mathematics, optics, botany, ecology, informatics, and more.

8

Precisely 14,6 %.
Answers included in this category: chemistry - neurochemistry; biochemistry - molecular toxicology and
pharmacology; molecular and cellular biology – nuclear receptors, toxicology, pharmacology; physics biophysics; biology - genetics; biology - virology, genetics; biophysics; biochemistry – plant biochemistry;
molecular biology; genetics - cytogenetics; physical chemistry - theoretic chemistry and bioinformatics;
pharmacy - pharmacology, toxicology; biochemistry - genomics, biochemistry, physical chemistry - drug
design; biochemistry - enzymology; biology - toxicology, biology - biology and biotechnology; biochemistry –
plant and insect biochemistry; informatics - bioinformatics; biophysics - molecular biophysics, pharmacology,
molecular and cellular biology; analytic chemistry – infectious metallomics; chemistry - biochemistry; biology
- molecular biology. We would like to note that it was impossible to avoid a subjective attitude of the authors.
It was also impossible to verify the veracity of respondents’ stated fields and specializations.
9

Pic 4 – The ratios between more and less related fields depicted in graphs

g) The concept of a paradigm is in the study applied in a concrete and specific
manner. It is a heuristic attempt at simplifying the discourse into a set of concrete
answers through surveying predetermined questions. These are selected in such a
way as to interconnect the second and third part of the questionnaire and to amplify
the potential variance in the perception of the course of the COVID-19 pandemic in
the Czech Republic.
A representative of Paradigm A is a respondent who answered Question 1
(comparison of COVID-19 with influenza) as COVID-19 is for the Czech population
less than or comparably dangerous as the seasonal flu, answered that 6% or more
of the population have already been infected and that the government measures
implemented in the Czech Republic are either “relevant but excessive”, “irrelevant
and excessive” or “irrelevant and absurd”.10
A representative of Paradigm B is a respondent who answered Question 1
(comparison of COVID-19 with influenza) COVID-19 is for the Czech population
several times or by an order of magnitude more dangerous than influenza,
answered that less than 5% of the population were already infected and that the
government measures implemented in the Czech Republic are either “relevant but
insufficient” or “relevant and sufficient”.11
Answers that fulfil the definition of Paradigm A gave 14 respondents in total, i.e.
7.6% of participants. Answers that fulfil the definition of Paradigm B gave 44
respondents, i.e. 23.8 % of participants.

h) The answers were processed with a data clustering algorithm using the DENCLUE
method12 to identify possible clusters of similar answers, i.e. groups of respondents
who filled in the questionnaire very similarly. From the data emerged only one
significant cluster of similar answers. The cluster was comprised out of 18
respondents (i.e. 9.7% of the total number of participants). The answers of this
group were (when simplified) as follows:
COVID-19 is (Question 1) several times more dangerous than influenza (18x); face
coverings (Question 2) in total do help (18x); daily updates on the number of infected
(Question 3) are rather relevant (17x) or rather irrelevant (1x); the data showing the
exposure rate in the Czech population (Question 4) would be rather relevant (17x) or
completely irrelevant (1x); long-term negative health effects of COVID-19 (Question 5)
when compared to influenza is greater (12x) or several times greater (3x), by an order of
magnitude greater (1x) or comparable (1x) or I do not know (1x); the estimate of the rate
of exposure in the Czech population (Question 6) is 1-5% (12x) or 6-10% (5x) or more than
10% (1x); measures effective in the Czech Republic at the time of submitting the
questionnaire (Question 7) are relevant but insufficient (9x) or relevant and sufficient
(6x) or relevant but excessive (3x); blanket measures in comparison with targeted
measures bring (Question 8) approximately the same amount of negative and positive
effects (11x) or more positive effects (4x) or I do not know (2x) or more negative
effects (1x).

10

For the exact wording of questions and answers consult Pic 4.
For the exact wording of questions and answers consult Pic 4.
12 Authors utilized the implementation published at
https://www.vutbr.cz/www_base/zav_prace_soubor_verejne.php?file_id=116197; October 2020.
11

DISCUSSION
Utilizing the data from the respondents this study presents a quantification of perceptions
of a predefined group of Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc employees
towards the evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic as representative
of the segment of the population that is more experienced at distinguishing the quality and
relevancy of data than the general population.
The results indicate that the majority of respondents (54.1%) consider the disease to be
several times or even by an order of magnitude more dangerous for the Czech population
than influenza. On the other hand, there is also a significant group of respondents (34.1%)
who presume that COVID-19 is comparably or even less dangerous. Although it was not
the aim of the study to quantify the prevailing media discourse,13 it can be said that such a
strong representation of the second group is surprising. The high percentage (83.8%) of
those who consider wearing face coverings inside (a blanket measure in effect at the time
of submitting the questionnaire) to be a good policy that helps the population is in
accordance with the prevalent media discourse.
Responses to the daily updates of newly infected favoured by the media gave equivocal
results. Almost a half of respondents (49.7%) deem it rather relevant or very relevant, on
the other hand 42.2% consider it rather irrelevant or completely irrelevant. The “rather”
relevant variant is prevalent in both opinion groups.
The ratio between the “rather” and “very/ completely” options differs somewhat in Question
4 that asked about the relevancy of exposure data. The “very relevant” option was chosen
by 3 times more respondents than the same option in the newly infected question, in total
21.1%. When combined with the “rather relevant” option, these constitute 55.2% of
answers. On the contrary the “rather” and “completely irrelevant” option chose 34.0% of
respondents. From these results we conclude that the focus group is inclined to consider
the exposure rate data to be somewhat more significant than the newly infected data.
However, this data is not available and as of 10 October 2020 the authors were not aware
of any study that would research this. These findings seem substantial in relation to the
aim of our study.
The widely discussed topic of the exposure was addressed in Question 6. In this question,
respondents were to give their opinion, based on data they view as relevant, on the
percentage of the population that has already been infected. Given the unavailability (or a
very low number) of direct studies, we expected a high number of respondents choosing
the “I do not know – I do not have relevant data”; in reality 24.3% of respondents chose
this option. Nearly half of respondents (46.5%) assume that at the time of filling in the
questionnaire 5% or less of the Czech population has been already infected. Almost a third
of respondents (29.2%) believe that 6% or more has been infected.
As for the quantification of perceptions towards the potential long-term adverse health
effects of the COVID-19 disease (Question 5), the dominant answer was as expected “I do
not know - I do not have relevant data”. This was also the question where the “I do not
know – I do not have relevant data” option was selected by the highest number of
respondents (36.8%). The results do not show whether the rest of the respondents believe
that there is enough relevant data already or if they wished to share their opinion even
without relevant data.
13

Also the influenza illness was not defined in the questionnaire.

The third part of the questionnaire asked the respondents their subjective opinions on
government measures. The majority (78.9%) chose the options depicting these as relevant
for the COVID-19 pandemic. The answers “irrelevant and excessive” and “irrelevant and
absurd” chose 9.2%. These results strongly parallel the results in Question 2 asking about
face coverings.14
The comments from the comment section could be quantified only to a certain degree (as
shown in Tab 1). Our assumption that the focus group would comment in strong numbers
on the data, their quality or relevancy did not prove correct. The low number of comments
did not facilitate quantification. A comment or a link to peer-reviewed or impacted sources
shared only two participants (approximately 1%).
The ratio of the “I do not know – I do not have relevant data” answers are presented in Tab
2. In general, it can be asserted that respondents largely favoured the other options. It
cannot be inferred whether the respondents were truly convinced that they possess a
sufficient amount of relevant data for their conclusions. From the subjective comments we
conclude that participants decided to share their opinions even when these were not
grounded in relevant data, which was against the instructions.
The division into more and less related fields on the basis of the potential affinity to the
biological or medical aspects of the pandemic yielded some results. Probably the most
important is that with some exceptions we did not observe significant differences between
the responses of these two groups. The concrete variances are displayed in Results, here
we mention only selected aspects. Question 1 shows that more related fields (3.7%) opted
for the answer that COVID-19 is by an order of magnitude less dangerous than seasonal
flu significantly less than less related fields (11.4%). The respondents from the more
related fields group were also more inclined to consider the daily updates on newly
infected (Question 3) as irrelevant, especially in the “completely irrelevant” option (6.3%
less related fields, 14.8% more related fields). Mild scepticism of the more related fields
group toward the character or extent of measures taken by the Czech government could
be detected from Question 7, where the sum of answers “relevant but excessive”,
“irrelevant and excessive” and “irrelevant and absurd” amounted to 37.0% (27.8% less
related fields). When compared with the less related group, the extra votes are comprised
out of votes for the “I do not know” answer and not the other options (Pic 4).
To summarize, in relation to the less related fields the more related fields group in total
considers COVID-19 to be dangerous to a lesser degree and the daily infection updates to
be somewhat less relevant. Position of this group on blanket government measures is
somewhat more critical. These differences do not attest the closeness of these opinions to
any reality or truth, they only capture the quantified differences between the positions of
academics according to a subjective predetermined formula. The majority of these
differences did not reach statistical significance.
The number of respondents fulfilling the criteria of predefined paradigms specified in
Results proves solely that such respondents exist. To determine the statistical
significance, we compared answers with a statistically random result in case there was no
correlation between answers. 14 respondents opted for Paradigm A, while the expected
random statistical occurrence would be 5 respondents. 44 respondents opted for Paradigm
B, while the expected random statistical occurrence would be 27. We can infer that the
14

Question 8 was not assessed due to a semantic error in its original phrasing.

causations for the respondents to pick their answers to defining questions are not
independent of each other. The paradigms, therefore, to a certain degree corelate with
opinion groups in the population that manifest themselves by a distinct discourse.
Approximately 1 out of every 3 respondents fits with their answers into one of the
paradigms. The ration of the paradigms is approximately 1:3 (14 for Paradigm A to 44 for
Paradigm B).
An attempt to utilize algorithmic clustering to identify groups of respondents answering the
questionnaire offered another approach to defining opinion groups of a certain discourse.
This approach would identify opinion groups naturally from results gained from the data
and not artificially as is the case with paradigms. This attempt did not result in any
outcomes. As is stated in chapter Results, only one cluster of answers was identified and
this cluster had very differing answers to Questions 7 and 8, that is subjective question in
the third part of the questionnaire.

Conclusion
The study presents a heuristic quantification of perceptions of the respondents towards the
evolution of the COVID-19 pandemic in the Czech Republic and introduces certain devices
that can be used to analyse it. Some final data can be correlated with the media discourse
(or discourses) or public paradigms.
Certain usefulness of the survey on the topic of the health care aspect of the current
situation is indicated by the complexity of the issues related to the COVID-19 pandemic in
the Czech Republic, and also by the reality of the post-factual age when a significant
space is given to misleading, confusing, in some cases positively false news. The
complexity of the issue cannot be descried by members of the respective specializations,
no matter if these are epidemiologists, virologists or biochemists on one hand, or
economists, sociologists or psychologists on the other hand. We should not presume
either that the issue can be fully and correctly understood by groups comprised of multiple
specialists advising members of the government. Peer-reviewed data surely provide a
strong basis for a number of qualified opinions, but we see instances where different
specialists interpret the same data in a different manner and ultimately draw from them
even diametrically different conclusions. The metanarrative approach one could wish to
employ in the data processing is an illusion.
Due to the above stated, the decisions in the real socioeconomical and health care areas
cannot be anything but political. Interviewing other groups of more or less informed
academics from various fields and with various experience in reviewing and evaluating
data can be utilised as an instrument to eliminate with a degree of probability entirely
erroneous opinions, invalid procedures or propositions of solutions sponsored by groups
whose motivation might be covert and could be nonbeneficial to the population as a whole.
Survey results cannot be, for obvious reasons, an argument for any decision or measure,
but they can cocreate a rudimentary level of certainty in the process of potential correction
for seemingly predominant public opinion paradigms, which dominance can manifest itself
in the media sphere, or in the process of their confirmation. Strategy and policy makers are
under a significant and possibly contradicting pressure from different interest groups and
the general public. Surveys among academics and specialists offer a way to offset these
with a more balanced and fact-based outlook on difficult and complex issues.
This heuristically performed suggestion of a survey of perceptions of FoS UPOL
academics indicates that the potential of such surveys to correct for the prevailing public
and media paradigm is not null. It would be necessary to design the questionnaire in
cooperation with sociologists and members of the field related to the topic of the survey.
Results valuable to policy and strategy makers and health care management could be
gained if the respondents were for example physicians and researchers from faculties of
medicine, or medical practitioners from the Czech Medical Chamber. To assess the media
influence, it could be valuable to compare the opinion and position differences between the
general population and natural scientists, medical practitioners or other groups.

