RESEARCH NOTE
Public School Operating Status During the COVID-19 Pandemic and Implications for
Parental Employment

Liana Christin Landivar
Maryland Population Research Center
Leah Ruppanner
University of Melbourne
Lloyd Rouse
University of Melbourne
William Scarborough
University of North Texas
Caitlyn Collins
Washington University at St Louis

ABSTRACT
Parents rely on public schools to maintain paid work outside the home. The COVID-19
pandemic caused unprecedented closures of this critical resource in spring 2020. In the fall of
2020, school districts across the country reopened under varied instructional modes. Some school
districts returned to in-person instruction; some operated remotely. Others reopened under hybrid
models, wherein students alternated times, days, or weeks of in-person instruction. To capture
this variation, we developed the Elementary School Operating Status (ESOS) database. ESOS
provides data on elementary school districts’ primary operating status in the first grading period
of the 2020-2021 school year, covering 25 million students in over 9,000 school districts in all 50
states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. In this research note, we introduce these data
and show extensive variation in school operating status at the state and school district levels. We
show that school districts with greater representation of Black and Hispanic students were less
1

likely to offer in-person instruction. We also show that fewer in-person elementary school
instruction days was associated with reductions in maternal employment. ESOS is a critical
source of information to support plans to address long-term implications for students who
experienced less in-person learning over the past year, and reentry support for mothers who
exited employment in the absence of in-person instruction and care.
BACKGROUND
Public schools are part of the critical infrastructure of education and care for children in
the United States. During the COVID-19 pandemic, schools experienced unprecedented closures
across all states. Many moved their operations online for extended periods (McElrath 2020), and
some school districts have not reopened for in-person instruction in over a year (Thompson
2021). Without alternative childcare arrangements and increased homeschooling demands, a
staggering number of mothers left the labor force (Alon et al. 2020; Heggeness 2020; Landivar et
al. 2020; Petts et al. 2020). One in three women who left employment during the pandemic cited
childcare demands as a primary reason for their departure (Heggeness & Fields 2020). And
mothers, more than fathers, left employment in states where remote schooling was more
common (Collins et al. 2021).
During summer 2020, states required their school districts to develop continuity of
learning plans. School districts across the United States developed very different operating plans,
resulting in a patchwork of K-12 programming at the start of the 2020-2021 school year. Many

2

school districts reopened in remote status, while others reopened in person. Yet another group
of school districts reopened in hybrid status, offering limited attendance to cohorts that
alternated times, days, or weeks of in-person instruction. These approaches were a response
to a rapidly changing landscape of infection, federal guidance, state and local mandates,
teacher union negotiations, and parental surveys (CDC 2021). To understand the resulting
variation in school reopening, we collected comprehensive data on school districts’ reopening
status focusing on elementary school students because, in many districts, these plans differed
from options offered to older students. Elementary students are of key concern in analyzing
parental employment as young students are most likely to require close supervision and
assistance to complete remote education (Dorn et al. 2020).
We developed the Elementary School Operating Status (ESOS) database (Landivar et
al. 2021), which provides data on school districts’ primary operating status in the first grading
period of the 2020-2021 school year. These data are available for 9,195 elementary school
districts, representing all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Here, we
introduce this data source, show the extensive variation in school operating status at the stateand school-district level, and illustrate some of the analytical capabilities of these data. We
provide evidence that school districts with greater representation of Black and Hispanic
students were less likely to offer in-person instruction. We also show that fewer in-person
elementary school instruction days were associated with reductions in maternal labor force
participation.
EDUCATION: FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL OVERSIGHT
U.S. public schools operate within a complex government legislative structure that
leads to heterogeneity across states and local school districts (Finn Jr. & Petrilli 2011). To
access funding, the federal government mandates minimum school day lengths and

3

benchmarks school performance (Lynch 2016). However, federal funding only accounts for 8
cents of each dollar, whereas states and local communities provide 83 cents for every dollar
spent on public schools (U.S. Department of Education 2018), with a large share based on
local property taxes (Reschovsky 2017). These stakeholders create a complex public school
system that yields disparate funding and educational outcomes across school districts
(Morgan & Amerikaner 2018).
With decision-making largely residing at the state or local level, school reopening was
determined by state and local governments as one component of broader COVID-19 response
plans (Ballotpedia 2021). At the start of the 2020-2021 school year, California’s state
government mandated online learning in counties where cases of COVID-19 remained
elevated, and the Oregon governor’s directives on school operations were so strict that most
schools could not reopen (Cowan 2020; Oregon Health Authority 2020). Many states, such as
Illinois and Pennsylvania, allowed for more local discretion in schools’ reopening plans,
resulting in greater internal variation in school operations (Goldstein 2020). On the other
hand, the governors of Arkansas and Florida mandated school reopening, resulting in mostly
in-person operations at the start of the school year (Demillo 2020; Fraser et al. 2020).
THE ELEMENTARY SCHOOL OPERATING STATUS DATABASE
In the absence of federal government plans to collect detailed school district level data
on school reopening, we created the Elementary School Operating Status (ESOS) database.
ESOS is the most comprehensive database on school district operating status for elementaryaged students. While existing databases on school reopening provide data for the largest
school districts, we cover the majority of school districts: 9,195 of the approximately 13,000
school districts serving all age groups and population sizes. We collect data for districts that
serve elementary schools with a minimum of 500 students, which yields coverage for all 50

4

states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico. Data are collected from elementary and
unified school districts, focusing on plans for students in grades K-6, covering approximately
25 million students. ESOS provides: (1) operating status (in person, hybrid, remote); (2) type
of hybrid program (part-day, part-week, alternating weeks); (3) school district population
size; (4) estimated number and share of children living in poverty in the school district; (5)
number of students by grade; and (6) racial and ethnic composition of the school district.
We conducted an intensive data collection of materials available in the public domain.
School districts must make school reopening plans broadly available to the public as parents
and local communities must know schools’ operating status to adjust their plans. We located
the requisite information primarily on school district websites. For example, schools
published letters sent to parents at the start of the school year announcing reopening plans
and continued updates through news feeds, videos, and other presentations. Many schools
also maintain active social media accounts where they provide operational status updates. We
also used supplemental sources of information when the reopening plan or date was
ambiguous (e.g., local newspapers) or when state governments or education boards provided
the needed information. All sources have an associated date, which is critical to capture the
same period across school districts: operating status as of September 20-30, 2020. We
selected this date range because it is the point in the term that covers the majority of the first
grading period across most school districts nationwide.
School districts were assigned a primary operating status based on the implemented
plan for a majority of elementary school grade levels within the district. We coded schools as
operating in person if they offered at least 4 days of in-person instruction per week. Schools
were classified as remote if no days of in-person instruction were offered for a majority of the
student population. Schools operating hybrid plans offered part day (fewer than 4 hours per
day), part week (between 1-3 days a week), or rotating week schedules (cohorts attend

5

different weeks). Although schools may operate multiple programs, we classified the district
by the most generous in-person option offered to a majority of students. That is, if schools
offered in-person instruction to those that chose it but also supported hybrid or remote
options, we classified the school as offering in-person instruction. Among schools not already
operating primarily in remote status, all school districts offered a remote option, either
broadly available to all who requested it or by medical waiver. However, these school
districts were only classified as remote if the majority of the grades operated exclusively
through remote learning.
Data are collected at the school district level. For analytical purposes, we also created
a weighted aggregation (by student population size) of school district operating status at the
state level (e.g., percent of districts in a state operating in in-person, remote, or hybrid status).
The weights ensure that school districts have proportional representation. Data published thus
far and presented here are wave 1 of data collection. A second wave of data collection will
take place in spring 2021 to capture changes in elementary school districts’ operating status
over the year. Data and documentation for ESOS wave 1 are currently available at:
https://osf.io/zeqrj/.
SEPTEMBER 2020: SCHOOL OPERATING STATUS
Figure 1 presents an overview of primary operating status across states. Our data reveal that
schools in the West (e.g., California, New Mexico) and along the eastern seaboard (e.g.,
Maryland, New Jersey) were predominantly remote. By contrast, six eastern seaboard states
operated hybrid models (e.g., New York, Connecticut). Primarily in-person instruction took
place in 27 states concentrated in the South and middle of the country. Figure 2 presents this
at the school-district level. Many states were homogenous in operations (e.g., California,
Maryland, and Oregon were primarily remote throughout) whereas other states had
significant variation at the school-district level (e.g., New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia).
6

Figure 3 displays reopening status by school district racial and ethnic composition.
Following the definition of Hispanic-Serving Institution by the Department of Education, we
classified school districts as having a large Hispanic student population if at least 25% of
students were Hispanic. We classified school districts as having a large Black student
population if at least 25% of students were Black, and as having an overrepresentation of
White students if at least 75% of students were White. We show that school districts that had
greater representation of Hispanic and Black students were more likely to be operating
remotely. Half of school districts with a large share of Hispanic students were remote, as
were 38% of school districts with a large share of Black students, compared to 11% of school
districts where White students were overrepresented. Only 37% and 41% of school districts
serving larger percentages of Hispanic and Black students, respectively, were operating in
person, compared with 68% of school districts with predominately White student
populations. ESOS shows stark racial and ethnic disparities in access to in-person learning in
fall 2020.
SCHOOL OPERATING STATUS AND MATERNAL EMPLOYMENT
Mothers of school-aged children have experienced more extensive work-hour
reductions and labor force exit than fathers (Collins et al. 2020; Landivar et al. 2020). Key to
explaining this relationship may be the loss of in-person learning at schools. Using the
Current Population Survey (CPS) (Flood et al. 2020), we assess how school operating status
was associated with parental employment in fall 2020. As the CPS lacks adequate sample
size to analyze data at the school-district level, we apply state-level aggregates. We create a
weighted measure of in-person and hybrid instruction days representing the state-level
average number of days children attended in person. We use CPS data for SeptemberNovember (2019, 2020) to create an adequate sample of parents for state-to-state
comparisons. We compare pre-pandemic employment levels reflected in 2019 to employment
7

during the first grading period of the 2020-2021 school year corresponding to the timeframe
in ESOS wave 1. We restrict our sample to mothers and fathers ages 18–55 years with a
youngest child 5–12 years.
Using fixed effects linear probability models to account for unobserved state-level
characteristics, we find that mothers’ labor force participation was higher in states that had a
greater proportion of in-person school days. Figure 4 shows that in-person schooling was
associated with a reduction in the gender gap in parents’ labor force participation. This was
driven through the association of in-person schooling and mothers’ (but not fathers’)
employment. The benefits for mothers are roughly one-to-one: an increase of 1 day of inperson schooling is associated with nearly a 1 percentage point increase in mothers’ labor
force participation. States with in-person education saw little growth in the gender gap in
labor force participation between 2019 and 2020, whereas states with more remote education
had a widening of the gender gap in labor force participation by 4 percentage points. Hybrid
plans were in between remote and in-person options, with a gender gap between 1 and 3
percentage points larger than in 2019, depending on the average number of days students
attended in person. Consequently, we show in-person schooling helped reduce gender gaps in
parents’ labor force participation that grew during the pandemic.
CONCLUSION
Elementary school reopening status varied across states and districts in fall 2020.
Remote learning was the modal instructional form for schools with a large share of Hispanic
students, whereas in-person learning was most common for school districts where White
students were overrepresented. School districts with a larger share of Black students were
more evenly split between in-person and remote learning. We show remote learning is
associated with reductions in maternal employment, whereas in-person education reduced the

8

gender gap in labor force participation. For each additional day of in-person schooling, we
show nearly a 1 percentage point increase in maternal labor force participation. ESOS
provides state and federal governments, policymakers, and advocacy groups with robust
evidence to aid decision-making on school operations going forward. These data are also
critical to support discussions and plans to address long-term implications for students who
have experienced less in-person learning, as well as reentry support for mothers who have
scaled back on employment in the absence of in-person instruction and care.
NOTE
Funding for this project comes from:
1. Russell Sage Foundation Presidential Grant R-2007-26580
2. The Policy Lab at the University of Melbourne, the Faculty of Arts at the University
of Melbourne

9

REFERENCES
Alon, T., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J., & Tertilt, M. (2020). The impact of COVID-19
on gender equality. National Bureau of Economic Research.
https://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~mdo738/research/COVID19_Gender_March_2020.
pdf
Ballotpedia. (2021). School responses to the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic during the
2020-2021 academic year.
https://ballotpedia.org/School_responses_to_the_coronavirus_(COVID19)_pandemic_during_the_2020-2021_academic_year
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2021). Operational Strategy for K-12 Schools
through Phased Prevention. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019ncov/community/schools-childcare/operation-strategy.html
Collins, C., Ruppanner, L., Landivar, L. C., & Scarborough, W. J. (2021). The Gendered
Consequences of a Weak Infrastructure of Care: School Reopening Plans and Parents’
Employment During the COVID-19 Pandemic. Gender & Society.
https://doi.org/10.1177/08912432211001300
Cowan, J. (2020). Newsom Order Would Keep Most California Schools Online. New York
Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/17/us/california-schools-reopeningnewsom.html
Demillo, A. (2020). Arkansas: Schools must be open 5 days a week despite virus. The
Associated Press. https://apnews.com/article/virus-outbreak-arkansasfc9d292679c2619ff0c331703b9f76c4
Dorn, E., Panier, F., Probst, N., & Sarakatsannis, J. (2020). Back to school: A framework for
remote and hybrid learning amid COVID-19. McKinsey & Company.
https://www.mckinsey.com/industries/public-and-social-sector/our-insights/back-toschool-a-framework-for-remote-and-hybrid-learning-amid-covid-19
Finn Jr, C. E., & Petrilli, M. J. (2011). The failures of US education governance
today. Center for American Progress.
http://www.edexcellencemedia.net/publications/2011/20111201_RethinkingEducationGov
ernance/FinnPetrilli-FordhamCAP-Governance-ConferenceDraft.pdf
Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 8.0 [dataset].
Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2020. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V8.0
Fraser, J., Stucka, M., Bloch, E., Fradette, R., & Brugal, S. (2020). Florida schools reopened
en masse, but a surge in coronavirus didn’t follow, a USA TODAY analysis finds. USA
Today. https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/investigations/2020/09/28/florida-schoolsreopened-en-mass-feared-covid-surge-hasn’t-followed/3557417001/
Goldstein, A. (2020). State issues metrics-based guidance schools can consider for reopening.
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. https://www.post-gazette.com/news/education/2020/08/10/pareopen-schools-guidelines/stories/202008100089
10

Heggeness, M. (2020). Estimating the Immediate Impact of the COVID-19 Shock on Parental
Attachment to the Labor Force and the Double Bind of Mothers. Review of Economics of
the Household, 18, 1053-1078.
Heggeness, M., & Fields, J. M. (2020). Working moms bear brunt of home schooling while
working during COVID-19. United States Census Bureau.
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/08/parents-juggle-work-and-child-careduring-pandemic.html.
Landivar, L. C., Ruppanner, L., Scarborough, W. J., Collins, C., Sower, J., Rouse, L.,
Ntalianis, M., Wilson, V., Njoto, S., Ryan, L., Rueda, L. A., Squires, S., & Bariola, N.
(2021). “Elementary School Operating Status.” OSF. April 7. Osf.io/zeqrj.
Landivar, L. C., Ruppanner, L., Scarborough, W. J., & Collins, C. (2020). Early Signs
Indicate That COVID-19 Is Exacerbating Gender Inequality in the Labor Force. Socius.
https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023120947997.
Lynch, M. (2016). Understanding Federal Funding Part I: 3 Types of School Funding. The
Edvocate. https://www.theedadvocate.org/understanding-federal-funding-part-3-typesschool-funding/
McElrath, K. (2020). Nearly 93% of Households With School-Age Children Report Some
Form of Distance Learning During COVID-19. United States Census Bureau.
https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/08/schooling-during-the-covid-19pandemic.html
Morgan, I., & Amerikaner, A. (2018). Funding Gaps: An Analysis of School Funding Equity
Across the U.S. and Within Each State. Education Trust.
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED587198.pdf
Oregon Health Authority. (2020). Ready Schools, Safe Learners: Community COVID-19
Metrics.
https://www.oregon.gov/oha/PH/DISEASESCONDITIONS/DISEASESAZ/Emerging%20
Respitory%20Infections/Ready-Schools-Safe-Learners-Community-COVID-19Metrics.pdf
Petts, R., Carlson, D., & Pepin, J. (2020). A gendered pandemic: Childcare, homeschooling,
and parents’ employment during COVID-19. SocArXiv.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/gwkzx.
Reschovsky, A. (2017). The Future of US Public School Revenue from the Property Tax. The
Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.
https://www.lincolninst.edu/sites/default/files/pubfiles/future-of-public-school-revenuepolicy-brief-lla170704_0.pdf
Thompson, C. (2021). Schools plan for potential of remote learning into the fall. ABC News.
https://abcnews.go.com/Health/wireStory/schools-plan-potential-remote-learning-fall75752218
U.S. Department of Education. (2018). 10 Facts About K-12 Education Funding.
https://www.ed.gov/about/overview/fed/10facts/index.html
11

FIGURES
Figure 1. Elementary School Operating Status, September 2020, by State

Source: Elementary School Operating Status, wave 1

Figure 2. Elementary School Operating Status, September 2020, by School District

Source: Elementary School Operating Status, wave 1

12

Figure 3. Share of School Districts Operating in In-person, Hybrid, or Remote Status by
Race and Ethnicity of Student Population, September 2020
68%

50%
41%

38%

37%

21%

20%
12%

25%+ Black students

25%+ Hispanic students

Share in person

Share hybrid

11%

75%+ White students
Share remote

Note. School districts were classified as having a large share of Black or Hispanic students if Black or Hispanic
students were at least 25% of the school district student population. White students were overrepresented if they
were at least 75% of the school district student population.
Source: Elementary School Operating Status, wave 1

13

Figure 4. Gender Gap in Parents’ Probability of Labor Force Participation by Average Share of
Time in In-Person Schooling

Note. Results calculated from linear probability models with fixed effects for state and year to account for unobserved
state characteristics and overall labor force shifts between 2019 and 2020. Results derived from an interaction
between state-level percentage of in-person school days and gender. Controls include race, age, marital status,
education, and state-level average daily cases of COVID-19 per 100,000 residents. Sample restricted to parents with
youngest child aged 5-12 surveyed during fall 2019 and 2020 (September-November). n=50,864.

14

