The Welfare State and Risk Perceptions: The Novel Coronavirus Pandemic
and Public Concern in 70 Countries

Nate Breznau1, University of Bremen, breznau.nate@gmail.com
SOCIUM Research Center on Inequality and Social Policy

Abstract
The Novel Coronavirus Pandemic causes individuals to experience heightened social risks,
particularly related to health and finance. Normally, the social welfare state determines the degree
of risk faced by individuals in a given society. Stronger social policies lead to reduced risk
perceptions and higher well-being among the population. My research question is whether this is
the case in a global emergency, as with the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic. I test this using the data from
the global COVIDiSTRESS survey to compare 70 countries in April of 2020, a month where deaths
resulting from Covid-19 affected three-quarters of the world’s societies. Controlling for local
timing and severity of the pandemic, welfare state strength predicts lower risk perceptions.
However, this it is not a universal effect as I expected. The welfare state impact depends on how
quickly a government introduced strong ‘lock down’ measures, and in doing so how effectively
they contained or appear to be containing the virus. The longer it took a government to respond
the more the welfare state reduces risk perceptions. Governments that took lock down measures in
advance of the virus show no variation in risk perceptions, whereas governments that took 30 days
to respond have publics with up to 1.5 standard deviations lower marginal risk perceptions in case
of the strongest welfare states. I conclude that the welfare state matters very much when
governments fail to take effective intervention measures in a global emergency.

Funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – Project number
374666841 – SFB 1342 “The Global Dynamics of Social Policy” & BR 5423/2-1 “The Reciprocal Relationship of
Public Opinion and Social Policy”.
1

1

Introduction
Individuals perceiving a greater risk of negative life events are less likely to be happy. For
example, perceptions of a higher likelihood of dying, losing income or experiencing war
increases stress, fear and negative well-being (Tompkins, Bjälkebring, and Peters 2018). Even if
those events do not actually transpire, the perception of a higher risk alone often causes
psychological problems. The Novel Coronavirus Pandemic adds or intensifies social risks across
entire societies, in particular those related to employment and health. Therefore, the Pandemic
may disrupt overall well-being. This makes it a test of how well societies are prepared to deal
with a sudden global change to social risks. Since the Industrial Revolution, societies started
pooling risks socially as welfare states (Briggs 1961). Employing various forms of social
insurance and shifting the burden of risk, and often fault, from individuals to the societal-level,
means that individuals and families are taken care of in case of emergency or need. This has
strong implications for risk perceptions under normal conditions. The question I ask herein is if
these implications extend to an abnormal shock to risk as experienced in the Pandemic.

Risk is a fundamental aspect of human action. Theories of human behaviors spanning the social
sciences rely on risk perceptions (Taylor‐Gooby and Zinn 2006). In particular, risk perceptions
provide the basis for decision-making. Research clearly demonstrates this across diverse spheres
such as health, finance and leisure decisions (Ferrer and Klein 2015; Nosić and Weber 2010;
Sönmez and Graefe 1998). When risk perceptions are a negative psychological load on
individuals and societies, fear or frustrated-anger may result; both known to cause over-reactions
to situations either through avoidance or risk-seeking (Lerner and Keltner 2001). Thus, risk
perceptions alone are a negative source of well-being, but they may also lead to choices and
policies that cause further harm to individuals.

Given the wide global variation and timing of the highly infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus and the
life threatening Covid-19 disease it causes; a natural experiment emerges for observing its
impact on risk perceptions. As of late April, 2020, the pandemic claimed 200 thousand lives in
just 3 months of mass infection outside of China. Known Covid-19 deaths at that time ranged
from zero cases in Vietnam to over 100,000 in the United States. The rate of infection globally
was increasing rapidly in South America and Central Asia. The OECD projected a 6% decline in
2

global Gross Domestic Product in 2020, the largest in 60 years of reporting (Gurría 2020).
Unemployment soared, and a host of health problems arose for those surviving infection. Suffice
to say that as I write this in July of 2020, these have been abnormally risky times.

Early in the pandemic, a group of researchers started a global survey project called
COVIDiSTRESS (CiS), to assess the impact of the pandemic on people’s emotional well-being
(Lieberoth et al. 2020). Because of their efforts, social scientists have the opportunity to compare
risk perceptions amidst a pandemic. The Lieberoth team made their internet collected data
immediately available via the Open Science Framework. Figure 1 gives an overview of the
severity of the outbreak and the period of the survey used in this study.

3

Figure 1. Outbreak Severity of COVID-19 across 70 Countries

Given that testing varies widely by country, using confirmed cases as a measure of severity is
unreliable. Deaths indicate a cross-nationally comparable ratio of the number of infected persons
18 days ago, as this is roughly the average time-to-death from Covid-19 (Verity et al. 2020). This
requires an assumption that the death ratio is similar across all societies, which may not be true,
but hopefully it is similar enough for comparison. The 18-day-lead of the death toll is logged to
shed light on the infection curves shown in Figure 1. All data and code for this study are
available in an online Technical Appendix (https://osf.io/muhdz/).

The survey started March 26th, and is still ongoing. I chose to focus only through April because
a majority of countries were surveyed in this period. After April, the country sampling is more
4

sporadic. Longitudinal analysis is not possible as a result because only 7-10 countries have
consistent weekly data (see Technical Appendix). Moreover, there is a risk of introducing period
effects bias when using the entire time period. The time-frame under investigation should
roughly capture the transition to a global pandemic in the eyes of the public. On March 15th, 174
countries and territories still had no known deaths. By April 15th, this number dropped to 51 and
by May it was 37.
Testing the Risk-Alleviating Role of Welfare States
Risk perceptions are particular to individuals. The socio-economic status, race/ethnicity, religion,
sex, gender, sexuality, family status, psychological risk aversion and many more factors lead to
heterogeneous risk perceptions. I cannot focus on these individual-level factors in this study for
two reasons. The first is that a sizeable portion of CiS respondents did not give permission to use
their personal data. The second is that the survey only asked basic demographic questions, not
enough to adjudicate sociological processes.
The CiS data includes five questions related to, “Concern about the consequences of the
coronavirus” for ‘yourself’, ‘family’ and ‘friends’, and then for ‘your country’ and ‘other
countries’. Respondents answer along a six-point ‘thermometer’ from not at all concerned to
very concerned. In the Technical Appendix, Table 1, Panel A lists aggregated responses and their
correlations with country-level variables. Table 1, Panel B provides fit indices from confirmatory
factor analyses of the questions. Model 1 lumps all six together to construct a latent variable,
Model 2 divides the questions into separate self-concern and societal-concern factors (also
indicated by the shaded areas in Panel A), and Model 3 tests for measurement invariance across
the 47 countries for which there are at least 100 cases. As indicated by Model 2, the two-factor
solution is preferable and it exhibits basic configural invariance with an RMSEA of 0.69
suggesting somewhere around 93% confidence that the fitted model, with fixed loadings across
countries, does not lead to a significantly different implied covariance matrix than what is freely
observed in the survey data after correcting for sample size. For my purposes this is enough to
understand something about risk across societies, without delving too deep into psychometrics
and measurement modeling. As such, I create two mean scales, Personal and Societal concerns
about the virus for all countries that had at least 20 respondents in April. My main interest here is
5

Personal concerns as these should be the ones most directly linked to well-being and decisionmaking (although I also present results for Societal concerns in the Technical Appendix).

I want to identify the welfare state strength as my test variable, but measurement is a subject of
great debate. Concepts such as ideal-type regimes, spending, replacement rates, historical timing,
coverage and even normative principles are among social scientists’ measurement toolkits (Arts
and Gelissen 2001; Esping-Andersen 1989; Green-Pedersen 2004; Scruggs and Allan 2006). I do
not aim to resolve this debate. My research suggests a focus on risk for the entire population.
Replacement rates and coverage would be ideal, but these data are not available outside of the
rich democracies of the world. Therefore, I use social spending and multiply it by the percent of
the population covered by employment accident and disability protection legislation, both
provided by the International Labor Organization (ILO 2014, 2019).

Work-related accidents, disability and survivor benefits are the oldest and most basic form of
welfare policy (Flora and Alber 2009). Coverage of pensions and unemployment is equal to or,
usually, less than the coverage of accident and disability, making it a good conservative baseline
proxy of overall coverage. Thus, societies that spend much more but have low population
coverage get adjusted downward in the index and societies that spend less but cover more
adjusted upward in comparison to using just spending. The index is standardized to make it
easily interpretable and I label it Welfare State Strength. Figure 2 visualizes the relationship of
this variable and risk perceptions.

Visual results in Figure 2 reveal a strong association of the strength of the welfare state and
personal coronavirus concerns, as indicated by the correlation of -0.41. Similar but slightly
weaker association exists between societal coronavirus concerns and the welfare state (r = -0.12,
Figure 3 in Technical Appendix).

Figure 2. Welfare State and Risk Perceptions of the Novel Coronavirus Pandemic

6

Whether the level of spending and coverage of the welfare state represents an underlying set of
causal mechanisms that explain risk-perceptions is unclear in Figure 2. The number of days since
the outbreak curve reached its peak has a very strong association with individual concerns. Those
who are further past successful efforts to ‘flatten the curve’ are less concerned (r = -0.44) as
indicated by data points shaded blue. The welfare state’s impact can only be tested while
conditioning on other factors that shape risk perceptions in this Pandemic.

As shown in Table 1 (Technical Appendix), the 18-day-lead death measure is marginally
associated with risk. I assume this correlation is not higher because of timing. For example, in
Italy and China, the period leading to the apex of the curve occurs before March (beige and blue
curves, far left of Figure 1). This means that risk perceptions are far lower in these societies
because the public senses the worst is over and adjusted more to life in a pandemic, an effect
identified recently in an ongoing survey of the German population (Naumann et al 2020). Other
societies that just began to experience a severe outbreak in April, such as Brazil and Mexico, are
still in the ‘sudden and fierce’ stage, and risk perceptions are heightened. Therefore, I theorize
7

that the time passed since the infection curve inflected from an increasing to decreasing rate
week-over-week, should be a critical causal factor. I label this variable Days Since Curve
Inflection and it gets a value of zero for societies that have not experienced an inflection. In the
absence of longitudinal data, introducing timing in an independent variable helps me to
investigate longitudinal factors in a cross-sectional data set.

The United States experience helps identify another key causal factor. Although the curve
inflected in early April, the infection rate stayed very high. Therefore, whether the new cases are
increasing or decreasing in the past week should also be a cause of risk perceptions. Countries
such as Italy and Germany where week-over-week cases steadily decreased since the Inflection
have lower risk perceptions as a result, whereas in the United States and Great Britain the curve
inflected but the rate stayed relatively high leaving risk perceptions presumably higher.
Therefore, I measure New Cases on a scale from -1 to 1, where positive are increasing and
negative are decreasing week-over-week rates. Again, these data only reveal results of positive
tests, which leaves uncertainty related to testing differences; however, the benefit of this
measures is that results of tests are what the media reports and therefore should impact
individuals as much or more than the outbreak severity itself. The data for deaths and cases are
from the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center (Dong, Du, and Gardner 2020).

Other factors are that societies with more material wealth and productivity have greater resources
to alleviate risks. They have stronger infrastructure and rule of law to maintain stability and
services despite the pandemic. I use GDP at 2017 US dollar parity from the Maddison Project
(Bolt et al. 2018) to measure this. In addition, governments that took intervention measures
earlier during the spread of the virus should have reduced the perceived risks of their members.
This is not due to the interventions themselves, which likely cause as much panic and fear
associated with restricted economic and free movement activity as they provide assurance
regarding individual safety (Lieberoth, Lin, Kowal and Chrona 2020) – this is confirmed by a
tiny positive correlation in Table 1 that is further confounded by timing, as countries that just
experienced their first death in April and intervened quickly are still in the early panic phase of
the pandemic, if not economic loss. The intervention effect will reduce risk perceptions more as
time passes and these measures demonstrate better results than other societies that did not take
8

early measures. Thus, this effect is crucial to interpret as indirect and highly contingent on other
factors. I consider an interaction of this variable with New Cases and Strength of Welfare State
as ways to get at these complex pathways and recover what should be an indirect effect of
Intervention.

Findings
The multivariate models are OLS regressions predicting personal (Table 2) and societal (Table 3,
Technical Appendix) concerns. Unfortunately, GDP and welfare state strength correlate at 0.61,
therefore with 70 country-cases it is not possible to fully adjudicate unique effects. I offer M1
through M4 as baseline models for comparison. I do not believe these are accurate datagenerating models, but it is important to identify that the test variables of interest increase the rsquared substantially and to compare the fitting of GDP versus Welfare State Strength, as this is
a potential confounder of the model.
Table 2. Regressions Predicting Personal Risk-Perceptions of the Novel Coronavirus

9

The top two rows of Table 2 measuring the timing and severity of the outbreak explain about
25% (one-quarter) of country level variation in risk perceptions (M1 adjusted r2 = 0.245).
Addition of GDP or Welfare State variables independently increases this value only slightly to
26% (M2) and 27% respectively. However, the impact of GDP is not significant at p<0.10
whereas Welfare State is significant and represents a standardized effect size of -0.21. Although
this finding favors the Welfare State over GDP as a predictor variable, the difference is tiny.
However, when I consider the strength of Government Intervention, a clearer image of the role
of the welfare state emerges. This is indicated by an interaction of Welfare State and
Government Intervention in M5. A note to readers: the interaction of Intervention and New
Cases proved to be problematic most likely because the virus only just arrived in many countries
in April and Interventions taken in these countries are strong, but still positively correlate with
New Cases; whereas countries with strong interventions that took place longer ago have the
opposite correlation, thus the indirect effect of Interventions was not identified and dropped from
the models.

As interaction effects, particularly those of continuous variables, should never be interpreted in
coefficient form, I present the predicted margins of M5 from Table 2 in Figure 4.

10

Figure 4. Predicted Marginal Effects of the Welfare State on Risk Perceptions

Figure 4 demonstrates that in societies where it took a long time for government intervention,
here 30 days after the first death, Welfare State strength is associated with 1.5 standard
deviations in personal risk perceptions between the weakest and strongest welfare states. On the
other hand, governments that got out in front of the pandemic show no impact of the welfare
state.

To contextualize, consider that the Swedish government did not enforce intervention measures,
and instead urged individuals to follow best practices on their own. The resulting high infection
rates should have produced high risk perceptions; however, as seen in Figure 2, they were among
the lowest in the world revealing the Swedish Paradox. I attribute this to the super-strong
Swedish welfare state. A comparison case is the United States where the national government

11

took only weak intervention measures. The US has a ‘strong’ welfare state in comparison to the
globe, but relatively weak in comparison to Sweden. As a result, risk perceptions in the US were
also very high. Brazil and France intervened somewhat late and had high infection rates, but
concerns in Brazil were much higher in April than in France; and of course, the welfare state
differences here are dramatic. It is difficult to compare countries within South America in April
because the virus was increasing so rapidly. This is why it is important to take these claims as
‘all else equal’ using the counterfactual power of multivariate regression as opposed to
interpreting single cases and single variables.

Conclusion
Results suggest that the welfare state influenced risk perceptions among the publics of 70
countries in April, 2020. Essentially all publics were affected by the pandemic by this time,
either directly or as communicated through channels of media, social networks and governments.
Interestingly, the welfare state is not a universal pandemic risk alleviator. It comes into play
when governments fail to take appropriate intervention measures. It appears that an early
intervention by the government is enough to alleviate potentially heightened risk perceptions due
to the pandemic, net of the timing and severity of the virus in a given country; hence the Swedish
Paradox. However, when the government fails to intervene, the longer term risk perception
consequences are higher and then the welfare state becomes the next line of defense. All else
equal, comparing countries with the strongest and the weakest welfare states whose governments
failed to take strong intervention measures, suggests that publics range from barely concerned
(just above the mid-point on the 6-point concern scale) to very concerned (above 5 on the scale).
This is a massive predicted difference across welfare states.

There are limitations to the study, many identified in the peer review process concerning the
data-generating model. One potential threat is that risk perceptions are not only an outcome, but
a cause of policy interventions. Almost all governments represented in the sample had taken
some measures to intervene already in April, making it impossible to use time to sort out
causality. I can only offer logic in defense. Interventions are correlated with welfare states at 0.37, meaning that weaker interventions occurred in stronger welfare states. If interventions were
a response to public risk perceptions they should remove this correlation between risk
12

perceptions and welfare states in a multivariate model, because they would be in line with public
risk perceptions. This was not the case for roughly half the sample of countries, those
represented by the red line in Figure 4, suggesting that the welfare state, or something highly
correlated with it, likely caused risk perception outcomes. As I do not have time in the model, I
cannot claim true causal inference, so results should be taken cautiously. Another concern is the
media and potential media-bias that certainly causes public risk perceptions. Although it was
beyond the scope of the current study, I must consider if media threatens the validity of my
model. I argue it does not because it would have to be systematically correlated with welfare
states, as I assume it is with risk perceptions, to act as a confounder. The only correlation I
imagine is that authoritarian and state-centered media could reduce risk perceptions by
downplaying the virus; however, many authoritarian societies had relatively high risk
perceptions as with Hungary, Vietnam and Pakistan.

A third concern is the CiS internet sample. In a pandemic, household, in-person surveys are not
possible so there is a concern over the non-representativeness of the sample with respect to
households. This is a problem only if there is heterogeneity of risk perceptions in the un-sampled
populations by country. The typical bias is that older people are under-represented, so the
question becomes: are older persons more or less risk prone than the rest of the populations in a
systematic way across countries? I do not have the answer to this, but offer a speculation. My
expectation, and that of one reviewer, is that older persons are more risk averse, especially given
that the case-to-death ratio of Covid-19 is much higher in older persons. It is possible that in
poorer countries there are less aged persons covered due to less internet access or usage, and this
inflates the measurement of average risk perceptions. If true, this should bias my findings toward
under-estimation because weaker welfare states (mostly poorer countries) would have lower risk
perceptions. This makes it even more striking that the models revealed a significant effect.
Future research should investigate whether the correlation between risk perceptions and age
differs by country, but this would require fully representative samples which are not possible
under Pandemic restrictions.

Although I only found partial support of my hypothesis, it is possible that the welfare state still
matters in societies where the government took strong actions in response to the. Many of the
13

countries in this sample had just experienced their outbreak in late April and the government had
only just responded. Therefore, the publics did not have time to react or determine how effective
the response was. This could be a source of bias in the model. Moreover, it is likely that risk
perceptions among the public are part of the cause of government’s responses. Where risk
perceptions are lower, government response may be more nonchalant, as policymakers have
strong incentives to follow public opinion. However, in the case of a pandemic, this reaction is
costly to human lives. Earlier government intervention inevitably leads to heightened risk
perceptions which are obviously unpopular among the public. Unemployment surged and small
businesses risked bankruptcy, parents were mostly forced into homeschooling or caring for their
children, and people experienced a high degree of social isolation as a result of lock down
measures. But, if my model here is reasonably accurate, it means that governments should
intervene in pandemics no matter what. Even if the public do not want it, the long term
consequences to risk will outweigh the short term negative public response.
As discussed at the outset, risk perceptions are a negative psychological load in individual’s lives
and might lead to irrational or fear-based actions. Of course some sense of risk is necessary to
motivate health individual and public choices, but when it is too great or extends for too long the
impact on well-being is detrimental. Some research suggests that disasters have scarring effects
on individual risk perceptions, so that they are more likely to perceive risk in the future, again
presumably negative affect and potential for reduced societal well-being (see discussion in
Brown et al. 2018). This suggests early interventions are particularly important for longer term
well-being in both strong and weak welfare states, it boils down to whether prevention of the
disturbance of government imposed restrictions outweighs the scarring effect of mass unattended
human burials in the long run – I am doubtful. This suggests careful consideration of not only
short term, but also long term feedback effects of public perceptions and policymaking (Breznau
2017).

This study complements others finding non-material welfare benefits to stronger welfare states.
For example, social scientists found that fear of crime is lower among individuals living where
social security replacement rates are higher (Hummelsheim et al. 2011). One researcher
demonstrated that subjective well-being is predicted by unemployment benefit generosity,
14

suggesting that insurance provides peace of mind as much as income replacement (Sjöberg
2010). Based on psychological research I infer that individuals with higher risk perceptions
measured as concern for themselves, families and friends experience negative well-being. As
such, this study suggests that the welfare state could have large impacts on individual well-being
in case of societal-level shocks or states of emergency. Building a strong welfare state has
spillover effects by making societies better prepared for both the economic and psychological
impacts of future pandemics.

15

References
Arts, Wil, and John Gelissen. 2001. “Welfare States, Solidarity and Justice Principles: Does the
Type Really Matter?” Acta Sociologica 44(4): 283–299.
Beedle, Paul, and Peter Taylor-Gooby. 1983. “Ambivalence and Altruism: Public Opinion about
Taxation and Welfare.” Policy & Politics 11(1): 15–39.
Blum, Scott C., Roxane Cohen Silver, and Michael J. Poulin. 2014. “Perceiving Risk in a
Dangerous World: Associations between Life Experiences and Risk Perceptions.” Social
Cognition 32(3): 297–314.
Bolt, Jutta, Robert Inklaar, Herman de Jong, and Jan Luiten van Zanden. 2018. Maddison Project
Database, Version 2018. “Rebasing ‘Maddison’: New Income Comparisons and the
Shape of Long-Run Economic Development.” University of Groningen.
https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/historicaldevelopment/maddison/releases/maddison-projectdatabase-2018.
Breznau, Nate. 2017. “Positive Returns and Equilibrium: Simultaneous Feedback Between
Public Opinion and Social Policy.” Policy Studies Journal 45(4): 583–612.
Briggs, Asa. 1961. “The Welfare State in Historical Perspective.” Pp. 17–29 in The Welfare State
Reader, edited by C. Pierson and F. G. Castles. Cambridge: Polity Press (2006).
Brown, Philip, Adam J. Daigneault, Emilia Tjernström, and Wenbo Zou. 2018. “Natural
Disasters, Social Protection, and Risk Perceptions.” World Development 104: 310–25.
Dong, Ensheng, Hongru Du, and Lauren Gardner. 2020. “An Interactive Web-Based Dashboard
to Track COVID-19 in Real Time.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20(5): 533–34.
https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html
Esping-Andersen, Gosta. 1989. “The Three Political Economies of The Welfare State.”
Canadian Review of Sociology/Revue canadienne de sociologie 26(1): 10–36.
Ferrer, Rebecca A, and William MP Klein. 2015. “Risk Perceptions and Health Behavior.”
Current Opinion in Psychology 5: 85–89.
Flora, Peter, and Jens Alber. 2009. “Modernization, Democratization, and the Development of
Welfare States in Western Europe.” In The Development of Welfare States in Europe and
America [Originally Published 1976], New Brunswick and London: Transaction
Publishers, 37–80.
Green-Pedersen, Christoffer. 2004. “The Dependent Variable Problem within the Study of
Welfare State Retrenchment: Defining the Problem and Looking for Solutions.” Journal
of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and Practice 6(1): 3–14.
Gurría, Angel. 2020. Release of the June 2020 Economic Outlook: Revamping the International
Policy Architecture to Emerge from the Pandemic Stronger Together - OECD. OECD.
OECD Secretary-General Press Release. https://www.oecd.org/economy/release-of-thejune-2020-economic-outlook.htm (June 21, 2020).
Hummelsheim, Dina, Helmut Hirtenlehner, Jonathan Jackson, and Dietrich Oberwittler. 2011.
“Social Insecurities and Fear of Crime: A Cross-National Study on the Impact of Welfare
State Policies on Crime-Related Anxieties.” European Sociological Review 27(3): 327–
45.
ILO. 2014. “Global Programme Employment Injury Insurance and Protection | GEIP Data.”
https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---ed_emp/--emp_ent/documents/publication/wcms_573083.pdf.
———. 2019. Social Expenditure as a Percentage of GDP (Table 16). International Labor
16

Organization. https://www.socialprotection.org/gimi/gess/ShowWiki.action?id=594#tabs-3.
Lieberoth, Andreas et al. 2020. “COVIDiSTRESS Global Survey.” Open Science Framework
(osf.io/z39us).
Lieberoth, Andreas, Shiang-Li Lin, Marta Kowal, and Stavraula Chrona. 2020. “Stress and
Worry in the 2020 Coronavirus Pandemic: Relationships to Trust and Compliance with
Preventive Measures across 45 Countries” Registered Report accepted at the Royal
Society for Open Science, final paper currently under-review.
Naumann, Elias, Jutta Mata, Maxamiliane Reifenscheid, Katja Möhring, Alexander Wenz,
Tobias Rettig, Roni Lehrer, Ulrich Krieger, Sebastian Juhl, Sabine Friedel, Marina Fikel,
Carina Cornesse, and Annelies G. Blom. 2020. “Die Mannheimer Corona-Studie:
Schwerpunktbericht Zum Angstempfinden in Der Bevölkerung. Survey Results.”
University of Mannheim, Germany. https://www.unimannheim.de/media/Einrichtungen/gip/Corona_Studie/Schwerpunktbericht_Angstempfin
den_Mannheimer_Corona_Studie.pdf
Nosić, Alen, and Martin Weber. 2010. “How Riskily Do I Invest? The Role of Risk Attitudes,
Risk Perceptions, and Overconfidence.” Decision Analysis 7(3): 282–301.
Roser, Max, Joe Hasell, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Hannah Ritchie. 2020. “Coronavirus
Pandemic (COVID-19): Policy Responses to the Coronavirus Pandemic.” Our World in
Data. https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
Scruggs, Lyle, and James Allan. 2006. “Welfare-State Decommodification in 18 OECD
Countries: A Replication and Revision.” Journal of European Social Policy 16(1): 55–
72.
Sjöberg, Ola. 2010. “Social Insurance as a Collective Resource: Unemployment Benefits, Job
Insecurity and Subjective Well-Being in a Comparative Perspective.” Social Forces
88(3): 1281–1304.
Sönmez, Sevil F., and Alan R. Graefe. 1998. “Determining Future Travel Behavior from Past
Travel Experience and Perceptions of Risk and Safety.” Journal of Travel Research
37(2): 171–77.
Taylor‐Gooby, Peter, and Jens O. Zinn. 2006. “Current Directions in Risk Research: New
Developments in Psychology and Sociology.” Risk Analysis 26(2): 397–411.
Tompkins, Mary Kate, Pär Bjälkebring, and Ellen Peters. 2018. “Emotional Aspects of Risk
Perceptions.” In Psychological Perspectives on Risk and Risk Analysis: Theory, Models,
and Applications, eds. Martina Raue, Eva Lermer, and Bernhard Streicher. Cham:
Springer International Publishing, 109–30.
Verity, Robert et al. 2020. “Estimates of the Severity of Coronavirus Disease 2019: A ModelBased Analysis.” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 20(6): 669–77.

17

