Widening the divide: the impact of school
closures on primary science learning
Dr Cherry Canovan1, University of Central Lancashire
Naomi Fallon, University of Central Lancashire
[WORKING PAPER JUNE 2020 – ALL COMMENTS WELCOME.]

Abstract
Prolonged Covid-19-related school closures in the UK raised concerns that science teaching and
learning at primary level would be negatively impacted. This paper reports the findings of phase 1 of
a study that the authors are conducting with teachers and parents to explore this issue. We found
that a significant proportion of teachers were providing less science during lockdown than in the
normal school week. Teachers, particularly those working in more deprived areas, reported that
translating the science curriculum for home learning had been difficult, with concerns around
resources, internet access and parental ability to help. Some areas of the curriculum posed particular
difficulties, leading to a narrowing of topics being taught. Both teachers and parents felt that schools
prioritised English and maths above science. Meanwhile some parents reported that their children
had engaged in sophisticated extracurricular activities, bolstered by resources available at home and
knowledgeable adult help, but others said that their children had done no science at all. Parents
who had studied science at post-compulsory level were much more comfortable in helping their
children with science home learning. These factors combine to create conditions which may
exacerbate existing inequalities as to who can access science education and careers.

1

Corresponding author
CB106, Chandler Building, University of Central Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE
ccanovan@uclan.ac.uk
(+44) 1772 894446

Introduction
On 18th March 2020, faced with the threat of the Covid-19 pandemic, the UK government
announced that schools across the country would close to all but the children of key workers2 and
those deemed to be ‘vulnerable’3. The closures mirrored the response of countries across the world,
with UNESCO stating that “Most governments around the world have temporarily closed educational
institutions in an attempt to contain the spread of the COVID-19 pandemic... affecting over 90% of
the world’s student population.”4
The UK government had initially expected that up to 20% of children5 would continue to attend
school; however the numbers actually attending were much lower, with only around 5% of those
classed as ‘vulnerable’ attending in mid-April in England6. Numbers of key worker children were also
low, with some only attending for part of the week; government data showed that in the period 23rd
March-22nd May 2020, median attendance in England was under 2%. This low attendance was similar
in the other nations; for example, in Northern Ireland officials reported that across schools in the
region, “The most common number of pupils attending is zero and the average is two.”7 The vast
majority of the UK’s young people were, therefore, plunged into a world of online teaching
supported by parents, many of whom had themselves been catapulted into a world of home
working.
Although the closures were strongly supported by the UK population8, and there was considerable
public resistance to the gradual reopening which began on 1st June 20209, there was also disquiet
from academics, charities and NGOs about the potential impacts on children of this unusual period.
These ranged from the life-threatening – for example, UNICEF warned of malnutrition among the
global poor caused by missing school meals10 - through to serious societal harms such as increased
risk and lack of visibility of child abuse11, and more insidious long-term effects such as reduced
educational opportunity magnifying existing inequalities12. The Sutton Trust produced a study based
on research conducted in the early weeks of lockdown in the UK which showed that the impact of
the pandemic on education had the potential to negatively impact social mobility (Cullinane &
Montacute, 2020). Regular school summer closures are known to lead to learning loss, particularly
among families of low socioeconomic status (SES) (Shinwell & Defeyter, 2017; Stewart, Watson, &

2

eg medical staff, social workers, supermarket staff
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-maintaining-educational-provision
3
Those with a social worker or entitled to special needs support
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/schools-colleges-and-early-years-settings-to-close
4
https://uil.unesco.org/covid-19-response
5
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2020/04/21/impact-lockdown-education-system-far-greater-ministersanticipated/
6
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/coronavirus-covid-19-attendance-in-education-and-earlyyears-settings
7
https://www.expressandstar.com/news/uk-news/2020/04/08/most-schools-open-for-children-of-keyworkers-have-no-pupils-attending/
8
https://yougov.co.uk/topics/education/survey-results/daily/2020/03/19/74171/1
9
https://yougov.co.uk/topics/education/survey-results/daily/2020/05/13/fa60a/2
10
https://www.unicef.org.uk/press-releases/futures-of-370-million-children-in-jeopardy-as-school-closuresdeprive-them-of-school-meals-unicef-and-wfp/
11
https://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/news-and-blogs/our-blog/covid-19s-impact-on-children-at-risk-ofabuse-neglect-and-exploitation
12
https://voxeu.org/article/impact-covid-19-education

Campbell, 2018), and it seems reasonable to suggest that longer unplanned closures might magnify
such effects.
Our study investigates the potential for one specific harm that may arise from the move to online
learning – the exacerbation of inequalities in access to science, particularly among younger children.
Existing research suggests that the move to home learning could amplify the difference in
experiences and learning among those with the greatest and least ‘science capital’. We report on the
results of surveys done with parents of primary-age children and primary school teachers in the UK
during the full lockdown period and make recommendations for how the science education
community can work to mitigate these effects.

Background
The average person working in science in the UK is disproportionately likely to be white, male and
from an affluent background (Archer & DeWitt, 2017). This matters for reasons of equity – science
careers, which are often interesting, prestigious and highly-paid, should not be restricted to
privileged sections of society – but also for the more practical reason that in order to meet the
government’s stated aim of training more scientists in order to boost growth in the SciTech sector13,
we will need to enlarge the current recruiting pool for STEM degrees.
Evidence suggests that efforts to persuade young people from non-traditional backgrounds that
science is ‘for them’ need to begin at an early age. The large-scale ASPIRES project, which conducted
19,000 surveys with young people aged between 10 and 14, found that science-related aspirations
were steady across this age group – in other words, attitudes to science were already formed by the
end of primary school. The authors state that “Efforts to broaden students’ aspirations, particularly
in relation to STEM, need to begin at primary school.” (Archer et al., 2013)
The effectiveness of primary science education in the UK has long been a subject for debate14. In its
report Successful Science: An evaluation of science education in England 2007 ̶ 2010, Ofsted noted
that whilst secondary-level science education had improved over the study period, “…there are
areas that need further improvement, especially in primary schools” (Ofsted, 2011). Meanwhile the
Wellcome Trust’s 2014 report Improving primary science noted that “…very few schools have access
to high levels of science expertise… strategic leadership for the subject is weak” (Wellcome, 2014).
More recently, concerns have continued to be voiced about the importance placed on science in the
primary curriculum, particularly in contrast with the other ‘core’ subjects15, maths and English. HM
Chief Inspector of Education, Amanda Spielman, said that a focus on maths and English was
“squeezing the science curriculum out” (Spielman, 2018). Meanwhile Ofsted research found that,
after science was downgraded in the primary testing regime,
Science has clearly been downgraded in some primary schools... This is likely to have a
serious impact on the depth and breadth of science understanding and knowledge that

13

https://www.gov.uk/government/topical-events/the-uks-industrial-strategy
Education in the UK is a devolved matter, and primary curricula differ between England, Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland. In terms of science, broadly speaking, England and Wales specify science as a stand-alone
subject, while Scotland and NI teach on a cross-curricular basis.
15
In England, the three ‘core’ subjects are maths, English and science. The situation varies across the four
nations; in Scotland, the core subjects are literacy, numeracy, and health and wellbeing.
14

pupils take with them into secondary school, which may in turn stifle pupils’ later curiosity
and interest in the sciences.
Another area of concern is primary teachers’ understanding of, and confidence in, teaching science,
a topic that has been discussed for decades (eg Harlen & Holroyd, 1997; Murphy, Neil, & Beggs,
2007). A recent ‘State of the nation’ study by the Wellcome Trust (Leonardi, 2019) is reasonably
positive but suggests that there is still work to be done in this area:
Those responsible for science delivery are broadly confident in their ability to teach science
and describe science in a positive manner… However, a significant minority are concerned
that they are unable to answer pupils’ questions about science or lack confidence in
undertaking formative and summative assessments.
The authors also found that although the vast majority of schools have a science lead, “their capacity
to fulfil this role is constrained by a number of factors” including release time, CPD, and the
importance placed on science by senior leadership teams in comparison to English and maths.
The picture which emerges from the research of recent years, then, is one of science as a subject
which, although labelled ‘core’, is in fact given significantly less prominence in primary teaching than
English or maths. In addition, at the very least a significant minority of teachers lack confidence in
their science knowledge or assessment capability. This in turn raises concerns that, in the sudden
move to online teaching, science may have been neglected or the emphasis placed elsewhere.
This is a potentially serious issue because, for young people from backgrounds with little experience
of science, school may be their only route via which to ‘level up’ with their high-science-capital
peers. Science capital is a concept developed by Louise Archer and colleagues at UCL (Archer,
Dawson, DeWitt, Seakins, & Wong, 2015) to describe the web of influences and supports that some
people access in order to see pursuing science as a realistic and achievable aim for their future. They
find that high science capital has a significant relationship to science-related aspirations and postcompulsory choices. Science capital is somewhat related to social class, in that those with low
science capital are more likely to be from less advantaged families. Affluence is not, however, a
sufficient condition for high science capital; many other social and cultural factors contribute, and in
fact Archer et al only classified 5% of their cohort as being in the ‘high science capital’ group.
Analysis of the factors that comprise science capital shows that both family influences, such as
parental interest in science, and informal activities that can happen in the home, such as reading or
chatting about science, are both influential (DeWitt, Archer, & Mau, 2016). A young person from a
high science capital background, maybe one in which science activity is encouraged, the
transferability of science skills understood, and where parents or family friends role model adult
careers in science, has a significantly easier practical and psychological path to a future in science
than a child who lacks these benefits.
The importance of parents in fostering this inclination towards science is well documented. For
example, a study in Canada (Adamuti‐Trache & Andres, 2008) found that
…there is a noticeable correspondence between students with university-educated parents
and the completion of science courses in high school. Conversely, course selection made by
respondents from families where neither parent attended university corresponded with
non-science high school orientations. In addition, we found that students with universityeducated parents had well-defined, early plans to continue post-secondary education. Early

decisions provide an advantage to those who have the ability and interest in pursuing
science-related careers that require long and focused trajectories.
The potency of certain family milieux where science futures are concerned is well described by
Archer et al (Archer et al., 2012):
We found that where middle-class family habitus, capital, and a child’s identification with
science were in alignment in favor of science, the result was particularly powerful, with
families able to foster and capitalize on their child’s interest, enabling them to occupy a
strong and privileged position from which to potentially pursue these aspirations further.
Science appeared as a ‘‘natural’’ choice within such families—albeit one that is actively
nurtured and resourced.
Further discussion on the influence of parents and families on science participation can be found in
Venville et al (Venville, Rennie, Hanbury, & Longnecker, 2013), Sonnert (Sonnert, 2009) and Archer
and Tomei (Archer & Tomei, 2013). However, parents are not the only source of influence and
school can also play a part; Maltese and Tai (Maltese & Tai, 2010), who talked to graduate students
and scientists about what sparked their interest in the field, found that “nearly 40% of the responses
from the participants indicated that school-based factors played a key role in sparking their initial
interest in science”, and advise that “teachers must work to foster this interest so that it is not lost
as students mature”.
Here we again see the potential for differential impacts of the Covid-related school closures on
young people’s perceptions and learning of science. If school is reduced or removed as an
influencing factor on science aspirations, children from high-science-capital backgrounds may be
found to be able to continue on a positive science trajectory thanks to parental interest and
involvement which is denied to their peers from less science-focused families.
It is possible to envisage a worrying point of intersection between two effects identified in this
review that may arise due to school closures: schools and teachers failing to prioritise science, or
having difficulty in providing suitable work, in the rush to develop home learning materials, while
children from different backgrounds have widely different experiences in parent-generated
lockdown science activities. In order to explore the extent, if any, to which this effect occurred in
practice, we decided to instigate a study to address the following questions:
1. Has the move to home learning differentially affected schools’ provision of science? In other
words, has science provision been impacted to a different or greater extent than that for
other subjects?
2. Are some families participating in more lockdown science activities, whether schoolprovided or home-generated, and what are the characteristics of these families?

Methods
In order to investigate these issues, we instituted a study to be conducted in two phases; phase 1,
with data collected during the full school closure period, and phase 2, conducted after schools return
to normal teaching. This paper looks at the findings of phase 1. The study employs mixed methods,
collecting both quantitative and qualitative data.

Phase 1 of the study consisted of two surveys, one of UK primary teachers and one of UK parents of
primary-age children. When designing these surveys, our most immediate concern was to avoid
placing any extra pressure on participants in what was an already difficult and stressful situation. We
therefore took a conscious decision that the surveys would be short – a maximum of 10 minutes to
complete – and that we would rely solely on passive recruitment methods via social media to attract
respondents. Both of these decisions come with their own drawbacks; a short survey cannot hope to
cover the detail that a more lengthy instrument would, while the recruitment method inevitably
meant that our sample was self-selecting and that certain groups, for example those not engaged
with social media or without ready internet access, are excluded. We acknowledge these drawbacks,
but feel that our responsibility to avoid causing participants stress or distress overrides them. We
also took the decision that our phase 1 surveys should be anonymous, both to allow people to feel
able to speak freely, and to reduce feelings of stress related to participation. Again, this approach
has the drawback that it would be possible for individuals outside of our research parameters, for
example those resident outside the UK, to participate; again, we feel that under the circumstances,
this choice of approach is merited.
Our teacher survey was restricted to current teachers in UK primary schools. It gathered no
geographical information beyond which of the four nations the respondent taught in; however we
did ask teachers whether their school’s intake was in an area of high, moderate or low deprivation.
The survey asked about the balance of subjects being taught through home learning, and how this
compared to the normal school week; it also asked about the teacher’s experience of translating the
usual science curriculum for the remote learning setting.
Our parent survey was restricted to UK-based parents or guardians16 of primary-age children. This
survey looked at two aspects; firstly, what educational content families were receiving from their
child’s school and how they were engaging with it, and secondly, what extra-curricular science
activities the parents and children were pursuing. We also asked about parents’ confidence in
helping their children with learning, and with science in particular. Again, the survey was
anonymous, but we gathered postcodes and highest level of science qualification held by the
participant to act as basic measures of socioeconomic status and parental science capital.
The surveys were open for just over three weeks, from 29th April 2020 when ethical approval for the
study was granted, to 22nd May 2020. This end date was chosen because the following week was half
term for many pupils, and a phased return of some year groups to school settings began on 1st June
2020. Quantitative results were analysed using Microsoft Excel, while qualitative results were
analysed using an inductive thematic process; the material was read several times to ensure
familiarity, and then tagged with descriptive codes. These were then examined to develop
overarching themes, and the initial codes revisited with these in mind.
We intend to conduct phase 2 of the survey later on in 2020 when some level of normality has
returned to the UK education system. This will consist of a more detailed survey supported by a
series of interviews in order to look more deeply into the effects of the closures on science
education. However, there is value in a contemporaneous picture of the impacts of this sudden
change to primary education as it happens, both in capturing a unique moment and in avoiding
recall effects which are likely to be present in later studies.

16

Henceforth referred to as ‘parents’.

Results
Teacher survey
In total there were 182 responses to our survey of teachers, comprising of 91 from England, 88 from
Scotland and 3 from Wales. No Northern Ireland-based teachers completed the survey, and Scottish
teachers were particularly responsive to our survey and were over-represented compared to the
relative populations of the UK’s four nations. Of those who answered, 21% of teachers stated that
their school catchments were in areas of high deprivation, 34% in moderate deprivation and 44% in
areas of low deprivation. We received 10 responses from teachers at independent schools, with the
remainder from state schools.
We asked teachers which subjects were covered by the work being provided to pupils who were
learning at home, with options of a) mainly maths and English; b) most subjects but in different
proportions than in normal school and c) most subjects, in roughly the same proportions as in
normal school. Teachers were able to choose more than one category. In total, 36% stated that work
set was mainly maths and English, while 46% stated that most subjects were being covered but in a
different proportion to that in normal school. Perhaps unsurprisingly, these figures give us a good
indication that the balance of subjects being set by primary schools for home learning during the
closure period differed from that in the normal school week.
When asked to give more information, many teachers stated that maths and English were being
covered daily. Some noticed an increased focus on health & wellbeing, particularly in Scotland where
this is a more central element of the curriculum. Other than this, a variety of approaches were
described, for example following the normal timetable, setting maths, English and one other topic
per day, giving a weekly choice of activities, or covering subjects fortnightly instead of weekly.
We then asked teachers how often pupils were being asked to engage with science-related activities.
Here the most common answer (119/182) was once or twice a week, with eight respondents saying
that pupils were asked to do science daily. However, 30% of teachers (55/182) stated that pupils
were either asked to engage with science less than once a week, or not at all.
We then asked how that science engagement compared with a normal non-closure week. Again, a
significant proportion of teachers (35%) stated that pupils were given less science than in a normal
week, with 60% choosing ‘about the same’ and nine respondents saying that pupils were doing more
science than usual. When we consider the results broken down by how the teachers characterised
their catchment area, we begin here to see some indications that different communities may be
differentially affected by the science home learning experience. Of those who state that their school
catchment is in an area of low deprivation, 29% state that pupils are having less science engagement
than normal; the equivalent figure for teachers with high-deprivation cohorts is 44%.

Adapting the curriculum
Teachers were asked about the experience of translating the science curriculum to the home
environment. Although a minority of teachers described the experience as unproblematic, or ‘easy’,
the dominant depiction was one of difficulty. In fact of 165 responses, a total of 59 used words such
as difficult/difficulty, tricky, tough, hard and even impossible to describe this experience. Again, we
see a disparity between cohorts; 33% of teachers from areas of low deprivation used these terms
denoting difficulty, but this figure rose to 46% for teachers in high-deprivation catchments.
In order to explore this issue further, we analysed and categorised teachers’ responses on this point
as either positive, neutral, mixed or negative. Here are some typical examples of responses:

•

Positive: “It has been a fine transition as used lots of online resources to support.”

•

Neutral: “Reinforcement of areas covered. Practical activities and experiments with carers.”

•

Mixed: “Useful links available and supprt from science centre and websites. Having the
resources is the challenge at home.”

•

Negative: “Very difficult. Children will not necessarily have the resources at home to do the
same sort of practical science they would have been doing in school.”

This coding throws the differences between catchment deprivations into stark relief. Of those who
responded, 36% of low-deprivation-area teacher responses were coded as negative. This figure rises
to 57% among teachers in areas of moderate deprivation, and 64% - nearly two-thirds – among
teachers whose catchments are in high-deprivation areas.
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
Low deprivation

Moderate deprivation

High deprivation

Figure 1: % of teachers reporting negative experiences of translating the science curriculum to the
home environment, by deprivation of school catchment
Responses from teachers in the high-deprivation group include:
“It’s difficult as to conduct some experiments you need resources that parents may not have
access too. In our school many do not have access to a laptop/computer only internet via
the phone or smart tv.”
“Difficult when pupils have little prior knowledge or access to the internet. Also for some
areas it is difficult to ensure that misconceptions are not reinforced by parents. In addition
for many of our families access to simple equipment is limited and engagement is not of a
high level for a number of reasons.”
“Very difficult as I don't want to be asking parents to provide materials for experiments etc.”
Across the board, resource availability and accessibility was the primary factor in the ease or
difficulty faced by teachers. The most common difficulty discussed by teachers was in how to set
work or activities that were accessible for all families irrespective of their circumstances. Practical
resources such as the materials or equipment needed for experiments as well as access to the
internet were commonly cited as well as the important role of parents in supporting their children
with science learning.

Overall, teachers expressed a reluctance to place expectations on parents to provide a substantial
home-learning experience at a time when they may be under significant financial pressure, juggling
home working or looking after children of different ages.
Furthermore, parents’ varying level of understanding or science education and confidence to guide
their children through activities was seen as more of a limitation for science learning than in the
other core subject maths and English.
“Ensuring knowledge is available to apply during independent activities is tricky. We cannot
rely on parents having the subject knowledge themselves. Experiments are restricting for
some families due to lack of resources therefore these have to be carefully considered as
well.”
Teachers identified several further ways in which home learning was an incomplete substitute for
the school learning environment, including the use of group work and class discussions to facilitate
deeper learning and the inability to address misunderstandings or misconceptions.

Approaches to teaching
In response to the challenges identified above, teachers largely reported taking a flexible and
informal approach to science teaching, with smaller subsets reporting continuing to teach in line
with the curriculum or conversely providing no new learning/relying on revision only. Each
approached will be discussed in more detail below:
Informal ‘fun’ science-related activities
This was the most common approach reported by teachers. Given the limitations highlighted above,
teachers spoke of trying to find more broad science-related activities that that families could fit in
with their daily lives and that required few resources.
“We have had to give suggestions of activities that children would feasibly be able to do at
home, and given parents freedom to choose activities rather than following a set
progression. It has been focussed more on the exploration of a topic than set learning every
week.”
Some teachers reported that parents had embraced this approach, whilst others faced a lack of
engagement. The reduced requirement for pupils to submit work for feedback made it difficult for
teachers to evaluate the effectiveness of the approach.
Continuing with the curriculum
A subset of teachers reported being able to continue teaching to the curriculum, and for those, they
were more likely to feel positively about the experience. Enablers included the use of external
resources such as STEM Home Learning, instructions from the local authority and/or school, and the
topic currently timetabled for learning. Certain topics were seen as being more easily translatable to
the home environment, as highlighted below:
“So far fine as the units were geared towards plants and animals for the summer term so are
easy to cover at home.”
Similarly, some teachers prioritised desk-based work such as workbooks or focusing on pupils’
research skills, although this was a minority approach.
“We would have been covering electricity so some sorting activities have been set and
circuit making activities. Nothing very practical.”

Revision/no science learning
For some teachers, there was a feeling that science learning capabilities were so restricted or
variable amongst families or households that they were instead focusing activities or work around
cementing current knowledge. For others, there was work being set but an uncertainty that it was
being completed by many pupils leading to concerns that pupils will return to school with differing
levels of knowledge.
“We are reluctant to post activities as we're aware that many children won't have the
materials (e.g. sand, rice, peas) and equipment (e.g. funnel, filter paper, sieve) to carry out
their investigations. We could share links to videos but that's very passive. So we've decided
to wait to give everyone a fair chance.”

Comparison with maths and English
Teachers were asked how their experience with the science curriculum compared with that of the
other core subjects, maths and English. Their responses suggest that for many schools and teachers
there were lower expectations of science learning at home, with maths and English seen as the
priority. Science was seen as posing different challenges to maths and English, which can be largely
completed through written work and reading, whereas science is necessarily more varied, involving
practical elements and therefore more likely to be impacted by a lack of resources at home and
parental knowledge.
As a result, science teaching has largely been less frequent and less formal, and with fewer
requirements for submitted work. However, a few teachers identified positive consequences to the
approach, contending that science offered a more engaging and attractive prospect for both pupils
and their parents, as is summarised by the quote below:
“Much less structured and more open ended. But in terms of what pupils are uploading it’s
looking like the pupils are enjoy it more than literacy and maths learning.”
These responses were more prevalent among teachers with low deprivation cohorts, possibly
because these pupils had greater resources and parental support at home.

Parent survey
In total, 360 parents completed our survey – 329 from England, 13 from Scotland, 1 from Wales and
9 from Northern Ireland. We do not have information on the geographical location within the UK of
8 respondents.
We used a simple proxy for family science capital – whether or not the parent completing the survey
had participated in post-compulsory science education, ie A level or above. Of those who answered
this question (357/360), 4% had no science qualification at all, 51% had science to GCSE, 14% had
studied science at A level, 20% had a science degree and 10% had a science postgraduate degree. As
OECD figures17 show that around 5% of adults in the UK hold a STEM degree and around 3% a
postgraduate STEM degree, this is a significant over-representation of these groups. As noted in the
Methods section, this type of self-selection of respondents is an unavoidable consequence of the
chosen low-impact methodology.
We also analysed respondents’ postcodes to get a measure of deprivation via the national
governments’ indices of multiple deprivation statistics. These statistics must be treated with caution;
due to different income and employment distributions, they are not readily comparable across the
17

https://stats.oecd.org/

four nations of the UK, and are more or less granular in terms of the geographical areas which they
cover (Abel, Barclay, & Payne, 2016). In addition, 56 respondents – 16% of the total cohort – did not
give enough information for us to assign an IMD decile to them. With these caveats in place, the
distribution for England (by far the largest participant group) was significantly skewed towards less
deprived respondents, with 22% coming from IMD d1-3 areas and 41% from IMD d8-10 areas. Again,
this type of self-selection bias is an inevitable consequence of the recruitment protocol.
The vast majority of respondents had children at state primary schools, with only eight specifying
that their child attended an independent school. All primary age groups were well represented in
the responses, with 122 parents having children in more than one year. Where this was the case,
participants were asked to reply to subsequent questions with their oldest primary child in mind.
Many families surveyed were facing the challenge of co-ordinating home education while
themselves working, whether at home or in the workplace. Only 148 respondents (41%) stated that
an adult was available all day to engage in activities with children, while 151 said that an adult was
available for some of the day and 54 that all adults were working full time. Although due to the
factors noted above we are reluctant to make comparisons between demographic groups, it is
striking that families living in areas of high deprivation and with lower levels of science education
were much more likely to state that an adult was available all day to engage in activities with
children, possibly because these parents were either not working or were in jobs that could not be
done from home.

School work
We asked parents what home learning subjects they had been set by school, and whether they had
engaged with them. There was some confusion among respondents about this question, with some
stating that they had engaged with school subjects which had not been set; parent and childinitiated activities were covered in a later section. However they give a good idea of which areas of
the curriculum children engaged with during the school closure period.
By far the most commonly set subjects in school-provided work were maths and English, with
349/352 (99%) parents who answered reporting that these had been set. A much smaller proportion
reported being set work in other areas – the next most common was art/music, selected by 69%,
followed by science on 67% and history/geography on 59%. The least common subject area reported
to be set by schools was foreign languages, at only 26%.
Of the 356 parents who told us which activities their child had engaged with, again by far the most
frequently cited were maths and English. The frequencies for all subjects can be found in Table 1.
Science, as a core subject, seems to have been set more frequently than foundation subjects (the
terminology used in England for other curriculum subjects such as history and PE). However as can
be seen, there is a greater proportional disparity between the ‘set’ and ‘engaged with’ figures for
science than for most other subjects. It is also notable how few parents reported having been sent
D&T/computing or especially language work.

Subject

Subject was set by school
(n=352)

My child engaged with school
work on this subject (n=356)

Maths

99%

98%

English

99%

97%

Art/music

69%

63%

Science

67%

58%

History/geography

59%

55%

PE

53%

52%

Design & tech/computing

40%

38%

Foreign languages

26%

21%

Table 1: Proportion of parents who reported that their child had been set, and had engaged with,
school work on different curriculum subjects.

Subject confidence
We asked how comfortable parents were helping their children with their learning overall; 155 (43%)
said they were ‘very comfortable and 175 ‘fairly comfortable’, with only 27 stating they were ‘not
comfortable at all’. There were no significant differences on this measure by eldest child’s year
group or parental level of science education.
We asked parents which subjects they felt most confident helping their children with. This was an
unprompted, free text question. Of the 342 parents who answered this question, 29% (98) parents
responded that they felt comfortable with ‘all’ of the subjects – of those, 22 had some experience in
teaching professions.
Maths and English were the most commonly mentioned individual subjects with 154 and 145
mentions respectively. Science was third, but much lower at 65 (just under one in five respondents).
It is important to remember that our sample is biased towards individuals with higher than average
levels of science education and education generally.

English

154

Maths

145

All

98

Science

65

Art

48

History

41

Geography

26

PE

19

IT

10

Design Tech

9

Music

8

Languages

6

None

4

RE

3

Life skills

3
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

180

Frequency of mentions

Figure 2: Frequency of mentions of each subject by parents when asked which subjects they felt
most comfortable helping their children with
Thirty-nine parents provided extra information which contextualised their response. Most
commonly, parents mentioned that subject confidence was split between partners (“All. Though my
husband is helping with Maths, Science and English when I struggle.”) or qualifiers such as
exceptions for aspects of a subject (“English - but not phonics” ) or dependent on their child’s
age/school year (“I think all of them - they are in reception so I feel I can probably cope with the
level of knowledge I need”). Finally, some parents did not specify subjects but instead qualities that
they appreciated (“Anything that has no pressure and provides enjoyment” and “Anything that isn't
on a worksheet”).

National curriculum topics studied
We asked parents to give examples of science activities that children had participated in that had
been suggested by the school. There were 247 responses in total, of which 37 responded that they
were given no science related activities by the school (No/none/NA). Of the 211 remaining
responses, the majority included references to subject-specific activities and/or the nature of the
work given. A small subset of responses gave value judgements of the work provided.
Where relevant, the responses given were categorised according to the science curriculum topics set
out for England by the UK government18, with an acknowledgement that there may be differences in
the specific topics set out by the devolved nations. The majority of parents cited one or two
activities; a total of 269 subject mentions were coded.
Of necessity, our categorisation is somewhat inexact; for example, it might be hard to determine
whether a parent-described activity related to ‘animals’ or ‘living things and habitats’. What is
abundantly clear is that topics that fit under the broad heading of ‘the natural world’, by which we
mean plants, animals, living things and habitats, were by far the most common school topics that
children participated in, with a total of 127 making up nearly half of all responses. Examples of
18

https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/national-curriculum

activities cited include growing seeds – the single most described activity mentioned by parents
throughout all of the topics, mentioned 26 times in total – as well as habitat exploration (bug hunts,
types of trees on walks) and studying the human body.
Because these three topics are taught across multiple year groups, we would expect to see them
mentioned very frequently; even so, ‘natural world’ themes dominated the discourse, and this
finding ties in with teachers’ reports of which subjects lent themselves to home learning.
Activities relating to materials & matter were the next most frequently mentioned by respondents,
mentioned on 61 occasions; these were often discussed in relation to heating/cooling water or
cooking processes. Another fairly common topic was forces and magnets (36), with activities
including making a paper raft or boat to see if they float or sink, or making a paper plane in the
examination of gravity and air resistance.
The other topics, including light, earth & space, electricity, rocks, seasons, sounds and evolution &
inheritance were each cited by less than 10% of respondents. The wide differentials between topics
add further substance to teachers’ comments that some lend themselves more favourably to homelearning activities.

Extracurricular science
As well as asking about school science work, we also asked parents about science activity that had
been initiated independently or from within the family. A total of 184 individuals said that their child
had engaged with science-related resources or activities other than those suggested or provided by
school, including BBC Bitesize lessons, other science websites and books/magazines. We also asked
about joint activity, with the question “Have you and your child engaged together with sciencerelated learning outside of the curriculum, such as discussing science ideas, conducting experiments
or attending online events?” to which 180 answered yes. There was significant overlap between
these groups, with 144 respondents answering ‘yes’ to both questions.
It is notable that families whose children had engaged in school science were much more likely to
also engage in extra-curricular science. Where a child had not done school science, just under half
had engaged in other resources and/or activity with parents. This proportion rose to 70% where the
child had taken part in school science activity. Of 356 individuals who answered both these
questions, 128 (35%) stated that they had not participated in any extracurricular science. In total
20% of parents reported that their child had engaged with no science, either school or extracurricular, which is concerning given that our sample was expected to be more science-oriented than
average.
Common forms of extracurricular science activity included doing simple experiments, talking about
science during other activities such as gardening or baking, or using online content such as YouTube
videos. Of the 193 who described extracurricular activities that they had participated in, 50
respondents volunteered information that clearly involved a specific financial commitment, such as
providing science kits, magazine subscriptions, books or paid-for online activity. Practical activity was
popular; 53 families reported doing ‘experiments’.
As well as BBC Bitesize (used by 76 respondents) a wide variety of online resources were cited, with
47 parents stating that they had used online resources. TV presenter Maddie Moate’s YouTube
channel was a popular choice, but parents had used a wide variety of resources from Glasgow
Science Centre via whale charity ORCA to the Linnaean Society.

Interestingly, 37 respondents gave responses to these questions suggesting that they have very high
science capital; these include availability of adult scientists for discussion, evidence of large amount
of scientific activity or skill, and use of technical terminology. As Archer et al (Archer et al., 2015)
suggest that around 5% of students they surveyed were in the high science capital group, this gives
weight to the suggestion that our sample is skewed towards this group. Examples of these responses
include:
“Grandma and Grandpa have been delivering science demonstrations via Zoom! We have
briefly looked at chromatography, making an electrical current through potatoes and we
made a volcano using vinegar and bicarbonate.”
“We extracted DNA from an onion (wanted to show the children what DNA was).”
Although we saw some suggestion that children in families where the parent had post-compulsory
science qualifications were more likely to engage in extra-curricular science activities, these effects
were small and will be investigated in more detail in phase 2 of the research. However what is
undisputable is that these parents were, as might be expected, more confident in helping their
children with science work. Asked how comfortable they were helping their children with science
learning, 131/355 respondents (37%) said they were ‘very comfortable’ – fewer than the 43% who
stated they were very comfortable helping with learning in general. However, when we split the
group into those with post-compulsory science education and those without, the difference is stark.
Half of the post-compulsory group were ‘very comfortable’ helping with science learning, but only
26% of the compulsory only group placed themselves in this category. This difference did not appear
for learning in general.
Extracurricular topics
Much of the learning covered in extracurricular activity was similar to that being set by teachers – a
strong focus on nature, for example minibeasts, habitats, life cycles and the human body.
Sometimes this was enhanced by the equipment available in the home, for example “We have cut
up a flower and looked closely at it under microscope.” The focus on materials and matter seen in
school work, as represented by discussions of boiling/freezing water or changes during the baking
process, was also represented.
Outside of the natural/domestic world, a few ‘standard’ activities appeared numerous times –
‘volcano’ making (eg “Mentos and Coke”), lava lamp making and growing crystals, possibly because
instructions and/or kits for these are widely available. Whether or not the science behind these
activities was being accurately communicated remains an open question.
Some families went beyond these ‘standard’ science activities to explore different areas. A common
focus was on space, a topic often popular with primary-age children. One parent commented:
“We've watched the Disney Plus documentaries about space and following the space
centre's Facebook live feeds. We've also watched some of the kids’ storybook readings from
the International Space Station. He likes space...”
Astronaut webinars, the NASA website and “looking at the stars” were also featured. Some practical
activities were also mentioned, for example looking at the planets through a telescope or making a
model Solar System.
Other, less commonly mentioned activities concerned pH and indicators, electronics and circuits,
and light, including reflection, refraction and rainbows. Despite wide variation, most if not all
curriculum topics were being covered by at least some parents at home.

Parents’ views on science home learning
We asked parents to comment generally on science learning during the school closure period, and
85 did so. Of these, 38 comments were about science that had been provided by the school, and the
vast majority of these were more or less critical. Although a few parents were understanding about
schools’ situations – “I think schools are doing the best with what they have” – many more were
disappointed with the amount and/or quality of schools’ science offerings. Comments included:
“School are struggling to send adequate science learning materials.“
“Science seems to be the lowest priority from his school (and the one he's most
disappointed about as it's his favourite!)”
Some respondents, while disappointed, felt that they understood the pressures that led to a decision
to deprioritise science:
“Science experiments are often resource-led which can be difficult. Teachers won't know
what type of equipment families have available to them.”
“Science seems to have been given far less focus than English or maths which is
understandable as primary schools are measured and judged on their English and Maths
results.”
As well as schools prioritising maths and English, a few parents had taken the decision to do this
themselves, particularly where time pressure was an issue, for example “Time is very limited as I also
have a preschooler to care for. I focus all my attention on maths and English as these seem to be the
most important skills.” Other parents commented more generally on difficulties with trying to
balance children’s learning with other responsibilities; as one respondent eloquently put it, “I’m
working from home and mum works 3 days per week — it’s like spinning plates and trying to juggle
whilst riding a bike…” Sometimes this caused guilt vis-à-vis a perceived lack of science engagement:
“Availability of experiments is depending on resources and time available - as the only
parent in the house (husband full time on site at work) and having a full time job
experiments aren’t top of our list due to the time they take. Sad and embarrassing, but
true.”
Another group of parents (23 responses) voiced concerns that were specifically related to their own
ability to co-ordinate science learning. Sometimes this was due to a lack of resources:
“Practical experiments better at engaging kids but time consuming and not all resources
were readily available in lockdown.”
For other parents, however, the limiting factor was their own knowledge and/or confidence.
“I think my child would enjoy doing something science related bit I just don't know where to
start.”
Finally, a handful of parents commented that they were prioritising science because it was more fun
or interesting for their children than other subjects:
“We are doing more science related work than anything else but that is because my two
boys are keen on science over anything else so easy to engage them in these activities.”

Analysis and discussion
Has the move to home learning differentially affected schools’ provision of science?
It is clear that the answer to the above question is yes. More than a third of teachers (36%) stated
that the work they were sending home for pupils was mainly maths and English, and almost that
number (30%) said that science was set less than once a week or not at all. A significant minority
(35%) said that science was set less often than in the normal school timetable.
Science was not only restricted in terms of time, but also in the range of what was taught. When we
coded parents’ descriptions of the work their children had participated in, nearly half of all
responses referred to areas of the curriculum broadly characterised as ‘the natural world’. Materials
& matter and forces & magnets were also mentioned frequently, but a long way behind. All other
curriculum topics – light, Earth & space, electricity, rocks, seasons, sounds and evolution – were
mentioned by less than 10% of parents. This chimed with teachers’ comments that some topics were
easier to adapt for home learning.
Many parents had clearly noticed a dearth of science in the work provided by school, and although
some understood the pressures on schools, some were unhappy about it. Our teacher survey
provided perspective on why this might have been, as teachers reported the difficulty faced in
translating the science curriculum for use in the home. Concerns about lack of resources in the
home, lack of internet access, and whether parents had the knowledge to support the activity and
correct misconceptions were all present. Some teachers explicitly saw this as an equity issue, and
were unwilling to set activities that only part of the class would be able to engage in. By contrast,
most found maths and English more straightforward to set, as they involved mainly bookwork, and
many suggested that these were also a greater priority for their school. Parents were also more
comfortable in supporting these subjects.
One interesting point to note was that teachers were rarely mentioned by parents in their discussion
of work set by school, raising questions about the level of dialogue between parents and schools.
This might suggest a case for schools to engage with parents once this situation is resolved so that
there can be a plan in place should there be any future events of this nature.
Particularly worrying were potential inequities arising from the difficulties faced by teachers in
setting science. Teachers working in areas of low deprivation were much more likely to be positive
about translating the science curriculum to home learning than their counterparts in areas of higher
deprivation. By contrast, nearly two-thirds of teachers working in areas of high deprivation had
found the experience negative; they were also more likely to state that less science than normal was
being taught than their counterparts in higher-SES areas. From our results, this disparity seems to be
the result of worries about resources, internet access and family’s ability to help. We have not seen
evidence that this perception of difficulty is due to lack of science confidence on the part of
teachers, although we will return to this question in phase 2 of the study.
These findings suggest a potential widening of differences in science learning amongst primary aged
pupils with those from more deprived backgrounds, already at a disadvantage in normal educational
conditions, put at an even greater disadvantage during this period of educational interruption.

Are some families participating in more lockdown science activities, and what are the
characteristics of these families?
Again, it is clearly the case that some families are participating more in science learning during the
school closure period. While nearly all parents/guardians reported that their children had engaged in

school maths and English, this figure fell to 58% where science was concerned – although it is worth
noting that this is higher than for most of the ‘foundation’ subjects, with design &
technology/computing and foreign languages particularly disregarded; although not the focus of our
research, this is an area deserving of further study. It is notable that there was a greater disparity
between the amount of work set for science and the amount actually engaged with than for most
other subjects.
Many parents noted that their child had accessed science resources other than those provided by
school, and/or that they had participated in science activities with their child. However 135 families
– around 38% of the cohort – had done neither. These families were much more likely not to have
participated in school science; under half of families who had not done school science did
extracurricular activities, while the figure was 70% for those who had engaged in school work.
Although much extracurricular activity was focused in the same areas as the school work being set,
particularly in relation to the natural world and the relationship of science to domestic activity,
parents overall reported a broad range of subjects of study; space was particularly popular, but our
parental reports covered the whole curriculum. Many parents were able to supplement such
learning with extra resources or technology, either previously owned or bought especially for the
period; these included telescopes, microscopes, science kits, books and magazines. Others reported
being able to call on science-skilled friends or family for conversations, activity ideas or even
personalised online lessons. For both parents and teachers there was a minor theme around the
purpose of science lessons during school closures as an opportunity for a fun activity, something that
can be done as a family.
In these findings, we begin to see the emergence of distinct groups of science ‘haves and have-nots’
– some families engage in both school-provided and extracurricular science learning, in some cases
supported by a wealth of resources and/or input from other adults knowledgeable about science.
Other families do none of these things; in fact 20% of the sample had done no science whatsoever.
However what the characteristics of such families are is to some extent an open question. Theory
would suggest that families from areas of higher-SES and where parents hold post-compulsory
science qualifications would engage disproportionately in science learning; however this effect,
while seen, is somewhat weak. We postulate that this may be due to two effects: family situations
during the lockdown period, and the nature of our sample. There was more adult availability in
lower-SES households and those without post-compulsory science education; this may be a
mitigating factor against this potential source of inequality. We must also note that our sample was
self-selecting; the decision to complete a survey about primary learning may indicate an interest in
the subject that works against other effects. We hope to tease out these effects in the next phase of
the study.
It is worth noting that parental science confidence was one area which was indubitably affected by
post-compulsory learning; those with science A levels and above were twice as likely to describe
themselves as ‘very comfortable’ helping their children with science than those with compulsory
science only. As one area of concern for teachers was how well parents could support science
learning and whether they could accurately correct misconceptions, this is an area where those with
high science capital are likely to have an edge.

Conclusions
Summary of findings
We would summarise our findings thus:
1. In a significant minority of schools, less science was taught during the school closure period
than would be taught in a normal week. The curriculum taught during the period was
narrower than would normally be the case, focused on the natural world and
materials/matter, with a number of subject areas (eg light, rocks, evolution) reported by less
than 10% of parents. Many teachers and parents felt that their school prioritised the
teaching of maths and English above science.
2. Teachers described a great deal of difficulty in translating the science curriculum to home
learning. Concerns about moving the curriculum to the home setting included a lack of
resources in the home, difficulties in accessing the internet, and concerns about parents’
ability to support science learning.
3. These difficulties and concerns were reported more frequently by teachers working in areas
of higher deprivation, suggesting that families in these areas are likely to be
disproportionately impacted by changes in school science provision.
4. Parents reported that their children engaged in school-provided science learning to a far
lesser degree than for maths and English, although the situation was worse for some
foundation topics. Around half of families had engaged in extracurricular science learning or
activity, and this was much more prevalent among those who had also taken part in school
science. One-fifth had done no science at all, school or extracurricular.
5. Although many families had engaged with similar nature-based topics to the school work, a
wide range was present including a particular focus on space. Some families supported
science learning through resources such as kits and other equipment and by conversation
with knowledgeable adults. Parents with post-compulsory science education were much
more confident in helping their children with science, although not with education overall.
The above findings suggest a potentially concerning impact on both science learning overall and in
exacerbating existing disparities among different groups. The breadth and quantity of school science
has been diminished, opportunities for participation as standard have disappeared, and the
expertise of the teacher has been removed. Nevertheless, some families – the science ‘haves’ – have
continued to engage with the schoolwork provided, as well as facilitating extracurricular experiences
enhanced by use of family resources and networks. Meanwhile the science ‘have nots’ may have
seen less work set by school, due to teacher concerns about internet access, resources and parental
support. These families may have struggled to find extracurricular activities to participate in, to
understand the science that lay behind them, or to provide the necessary materials. Children in a
significant minority of these families will have done no science at all during the closure period.
We know that science attitudes and motivations are set at a young age, and so the gap that looks
likely to have been widened by the effect of the closures must be addressed swiftly in order to
reverse negative impacts on efforts to widen participation in science. A good place to start would be
a temporary relaxation of National Curriculum rules to allow schools to focus on science areas that
were difficult to teach at home (eg light, rocks). As schools seem to have taken quite widely varying
approaches to teaching science at home, a unifying plan to catch up on science at local authority
level would also seem warranted. In addition, non-school science enrichment providers and

widening participation organisations should focus efforts on curriculum areas that were
underprovided during the period; funding bodies should consider whether emergency grants could
be made to schools in areas of high deprivation specifically to provide science enrichment activities.
The UK – and indeed the rest of the world – will be dealing with the continuing impacts of school
closures and other Covid-19-related societal changes for much time to come. However, in this one
area, we now have concrete evidence that the conditions are fertile for pre-existing gaps in access to
science education and careers to widen. Action taken now could prevent a lasting detriment to our
widening participation efforts.

Bibliography
Abel, G. A., Barclay, M. E., & Payne, R. A. (2016). Adjusted indices of multiple deprivation to enable
comparisons within and between constituent countries of the UK including an illustration using
mortality rates. BMJ Open, 6(11), e012750. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-012750
Adamuti‐Trache, M., & Andres, L. (2008). Embarking on and Persisting in Scientific Fields of Study:
Cultural capital, gender, and curriculum along the science pipeline. International Journal of Science
Education, 30(12), 1557–1584. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500690701324208
Archer, L., Dawson, E., DeWitt, J., Seakins, A., & Wong, B. (2015). “Science capital”: A conceptual,
methodological, and empirical argument for extending bourdieusian notions of capital beyond the
arts. Journal of Research in Science Teaching, 52(7), 922–948. https://doi.org/10.1002/tea.21227
Archer, L., & DeWitt, J. (2017). Understanding young people’s science aspirations: How students
form ideas about “becoming a scientist.” In Understanding Young People’s Science Aspirations: How
Students form Ideas about “Becoming a Scientist.” https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315761077
Archer, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B., & Wong, B. (2012). Science Aspirations, Capital,
and Family Habitus: How Families Shape Children’s Engagement and Identification With Science.
American Educational Research Journal, 49(5), 881–908.
https://doi.org/10.3102/0002831211433290
Archer, L., Osborne, J., DeWitt, J., Dillon, J., Wong, B., & Willis, B. (2013). Young people’s science and
career aspirations, age 10 – 14. Aspires. Retrieved from
https://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/departments/education/research/ASPIRES/ASPIRES-final-reportDecember-2013.pdf
Archer, L., & Tomei, A. (2013). What influences participation in science and mathematics?’: A
briefing paper from the Targeted Initiative on Science and Mathematics Education (TISME).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291711002558
Cullinane, C., & Montacute, R. (2020). COVID-19 and social mobility impact brief #1: School
shutdown. The Sutton Trust, (April), 1–11. Retrieved from https://www.suttontrust.com/ourresearch/covid-19-and-social-mobility-impact-brief/
DeWitt, J., Archer, L., & Mau, A. (2016). Dimensions of science capital: exploring its potential for
understanding students’ science participation. International Journal of Science Education, 38(16),
2431–2449. https://doi.org/10.1080/09500693.2016.1248520
Harlen, W., & Holroyd, C. (1997). Primary teachers’ understanding of concepts of science: impact on
confidence and teaching. International Journal of Science Education, 19(1), 93–105.
https://doi.org/10.1080/0950069970190107
Leonardi, S. (2019). “State of the Nation” report of UK primary science education. Retrieved from
www.cfe.org.uk
Maltese, A. V., & Tai, R. H. (2010). Eyeballs in the fridge: Sources of early interest in science.
International Journal of Science Education, 32(5), 669–685.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09500690902792385
Murphy, C., Neil, P., & Beggs, J. (2007). Primary science teacher confidence revisited: Ten years on.
Educational Research, 49(4), 415–430. https://doi.org/10.1080/00131880701717289

Ofsted. (2011). Successful science: An evaluation of science education in England 2007 ̶ 2010.
Retrieved from https://dera.ioe.ac.uk//2148/
Shinwell, J., & Defeyter, M. A. (2017). Investigation of Summer Learning Loss in the UK—Implications
for Holiday Club Provision. Frontiers in Public Health, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2017.00270
Sonnert, G. (2009). Parents Who Influence Their Children to Become Scientists. Social Studies of
Science, Vol. 39, pp. 927–941. https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312709335843
Spielman, A. (2018). Speech at the Association for Science Education Annual Conference 2018.
Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/amanda-spielmans-speech-at-theassociation-for-science-education-annual-conference-2018
Stewart, H., Watson, N., & Campbell, M. (2018). The cost of school holidays for children from low
income families. Childhood, 25(4), 516–529. https://doi.org/10.1177/0907568218779130
Venville, G., Rennie, L., Hanbury, C., & Longnecker, N. (2013). Scientists Reflect on Why They Chose
to Study Science. Research in Science Education, 43(6), 2207–2233. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11165013-9352-3
Wellcome. (2014). Primary Science: Is It Missing Out? Retrieved from
https://wellcome.ac.uk/sites/default/files/primary-science-is-it-missing-out-wellcome-sep14.pdf

