Poultry Prices Skid in India Due to Fake News Circulation on Coronavirus

Abstract
India had its first case of COVID- 19 on January 30th 2020. Slowly the numbers started to
increase by mid of February and so is the information on poultry products. Till January 2020
the prices of poultry products were 147.65 rupees per kg until there was a sharp drop in March
2020. The reason behind it was the rumours that coronavirus is caused by the consumption of
poultry products. This paper tries to point to out that how these rumours have badly affected
the poultry prices in India by looking at a source on which the information is passed on and
also the condition under which people tend to believe such rumours. The study emphasis on
the fact that such rumours have affected the business of rural population, in particular, making
them sell their products at a lower price.

Keywords- Fake news, poultry prices, COVID-19, pandemic, social media, panic state

Introduction
With more than 2.5 million cases worldwide till 20th April 2020, coronavirus pandemic
(COVID-19) has brought a disruption in human life. Leaders from all around the globe became
reluctant to accept the situation as a state of emergency. The situation is not new to human
species, there has been a history of pandemic diseases like 1918 H1N1, 2002 SARS. But this
time the disease was spreading across highly technologically advanced countries, where people
are virtually connected through a small device in their pocket. The ultimate requirement of
social distancing for prevention from the disease made people more inclined towards a device
called mobile phones. In order to kill boredom, people became more reliant on maintaining
connectivity through social media like Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp and Instagram. These
platforms over a while became a source for sharing information. Thus, people started sharing
information about the virus. What shows here, that social platforms have a very strong
foundation where people have effective responses towards COVID-19. It showcases not only
information but also challenges being created by the diseases. Through this, we learn about
how various people could respond to such challenges like government officials, healthcare
people, service providers and social network companies (Limaye, Sauer, Ali, Bernstein, Wahl,
Brian and Barnhill, 2020).
Nevertheless, the actors also have a vital role to play in preventing social media from being a
tool of distrust and false information; creating a threat to public health. Rumours travel faster
than any disease. Information can spread from a word of mouth or through a prank on social
media. Later it takes a form of misinformation and this information changes every time as it
passes from one mode to another. The concept of legitimacy has a different hold on the social
media platform. Users have trusted people in their network who support their content and
exchange or forward information as a valued source of information. The more it is
1|P a ge

disseminated, the more it is perceived as legitimate information. However, this form of sharing
contrasts with the normal mode of exchange of information which is specialised and have
verified knowledge about it. Thus, people have disseminated information on COVID-19 from
precautions to how it spreads. This has led to the formulation of information that people want
to believe.
In India, the information made people believe that the inception of COVID -19 is linked with
the consumption of poultry products. The outbreak of the virus started in December 2019, but
the sale of poultry products started to decrease by mid-February. Despite being a vegetarian
country India is projected as one of the largest consuming countries of chicken, meat and
mutton. According to, Sample Registration System (SRS) survey released by the registrar
general of India in 2014, showed that around 71% of people in India are non-vegetarian
(Rowland, 2017). With a sudden pandemic crises, people have shifted their focus from nonvegetarian to vegetarian food; but long after it came into being. This drastic shift has made this
paper to argue that what made people focus only on food consumption when medication and
sanitation should be the first priority? Why the effect on poultry prices showed a slop in
February when the virus started spreading from December? On what grounds people believe
such information? Which platform has a major role in disseminating such information? This
essay tries to answer all these questions in the context of India while comparing it with the
countries which have been badly hit by the virus.

Objective
The paper will look at a crash of poultry prices from 2019 till 2020. Its impact on food
distribution and change in food consumption pattern among people in India after lockdown.
Lastly, the role and impact of social media platforms of the poultry market.

Overview on Poultry business in India
In 2016 Indian poultry business was valued around Rs 80,000 crore and organized commercial
business sector account for 80% of total market share while the rest account for unorganised
sector according to National Action Plan for Egg and Poultry 2022. It was estimated that
poultry population of 729 million small and medium farmers are engaged in contract farmers
while the 30 million are indulged in backyard farming. The reason for discussing the value of
poultry business is because the population of poultry consumption is increasing exponentially
even in the country like India. The proportion vegetarian countries are very low except India
(29%), Israel (13%), Australia (2-11.2%), Sweden (10%) and Italy (7- 10%) (Choudhary et al,
2017, p.251). Through this, one can estimate that the major population is consuming nonvegetarian food. In India, globalisation had a major impact on food consumption pattern. As
mentioned before 71% of people consume poultry products in India and the number is still
increasing.
According to, National Council of Applied Economic Research, New Delhi the rice
consumption in the rural household has declined from 83kg to 73kg in 2010; and in the urban
2|P a ge

household, it has declined from 64kg to 55kg in 2010. Whereas the egg production in the
country has increased from 83 billion in 2016 to 88 billion in 2017. “According to data from
the central government’s sample registration system baseline survey (SRSBS) (2014),
Telangana tops the list of 21 big states in the country in non-vegetarianism (98.8% men and
98.6% women) followed by West Bengal (98.7% men and 98.4% women) and Andhra Pradesh
(98.4% men and 98.1% women). These two states (Andhra Pradesh and Telangana) are also
the largest producers of egg and meat” (Choudhary et al, 2017, p.252).

Poultry and pandemic
With witnessing an increasing trend in the poultry business in India, the market also faces
certain challenges like feed costs, transportation, infrastructure, inadequate cold storage
warehouses and most importantly its vulnerability to diseases, affecting the prices and the
production in the business. Every year country reports erratic instances of bird flu, and the
authorities spread the word while taking fast action in controlling the infection. Thus, such
outbreaks are limited and are easily controlled by the poultry market. According to Indian
Council of Food and Agriculture, poultry production continues to “focus on improving
production through better Feed Conversion Ratio (FCR) by testing with feed mixes, lower
mortality rates through superior farm management, and constant efforts to improve other
parameters like hatchability, average daily weight gain and reducing selection gap” (Indian
Council of Food and Agriculture, p.3).
The above discussion emphasis on the fact that government are well aware of any disease and
take best of possible action to control it. In addition, they spread awareness regarding the source
of the disease. The similar step was taken by the government of India with an outbreak
pandemic disease known as coronavirus. With the immediate lockdown on 24/03/2020, the
government mentioned of how the disease is spread and to prevent it. COVID-19 as per WHO
guidelines can spread through saliva or a droplet discharged from the nose while sneezing or
coughing as it is a respiratory disease. Since then the virus outbreak in many countries at a very
fast pace. There are three levels at which this virus is spread: at first level, the virus is spread
through the infected person who has travel history, at the second level the virus spread through
local transmission and at third level, there is a community spread. In most of the countries, the
COVID-19 spread through a person who has travel history and, in some cases, these people are
also proved to be a super spreader.
Furthermore, coronavirus is termed as a group of viruses that have many types. In recent times,
two outbreaks have emerged from coronavirus: Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS)
and Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS) in 2003 and 2012 respectively. Thus, the
pandemic itself is not a new concept. However, this time in India the pandemic gets to
associated with a food consumption especially poultry products due to rumours surrounding
poultry business.

Impact on Poultry Prices with the outbreak of COVID-19
3|P a ge

Poultry products headed for its crisis after the outbreak of COVID-19 in India. India’s weekly
sale has plummeted to 47% while the drop in prices has slumped around 60% according to B.S
Yadav, managing director of Godrej Agrovet Ltd, one of the leading companies in the poultry
industry. Farmers having a loss of Rs 100- 130 on every bird (Bloomberg, 2020). Farmgate
prices have fallen to Rs 15-35kg against the production cost of Rs 80-85 per kg. thus, poultry
producers started cutting down on production to cope with losses (The Hindu, 2020). This loss
was incurred due to the spread of misinformation that COVID-19 is caused by the consumption
of poultry products.
Table 1 Poultry Monthly Prices in India Rupees by Per Kilogram and Change in Production
Cost
MONTH

PRICE

CHANGE

November 2019

132.14

0.53%

December 2019

140.95

6.67%

January 2020

147.65

4.75%

February 2020

134.32

-9.02%

March 2020

133.77

-0.41 %

The above-mentioned table shows how after January poultry business witnessed a sharp drop
in prices. This time was a period when the number of coronavirus cases surging up.
Egg producers alone lost Rs 600 crore by the mid of February, selling it at a price of Rs 2.50
against the production cost of Rs 4. As mentioned earlier poultry business accounts for million
of farmers employing over 2.75 crore people in India. Are now looking a rescue from this
unforeseen circumstance as this has been the supplementary income for the generation to
farmers and nutrition for the poorest of the poor (Dahd, 2020, p.1).
In amidst this chaos, it is the small farmers who been the victim of such fake rumours. As stated
in the starting of this paper, southern states are poultry hub in India and hence they are largely
affected by this rumour. As cases spread in southern India, people stop eating meat because of
the rumour. In Hyderabad and Rangareddy, where most of the poultry produces in Telangana,
the active COVID-19 cases are 400 and 16 respectively by 27 April 2020 (Government of
Telangana, 2020). In Namakkal district of Tamil Nadu, the COVID-19 case is 61 by 28 April
2020, despite no relation has been found between consumption of poultry products and
COVID-19 transmission, people begin to fears to consume poultry products even when the
cases of COVID-19 is not as high in poultry hub of India, this has a huge impact on people
related to the poultry industry (Government of Tamil Nadu, 2020). “In Namakkal, India’s
principal poultry hub, about 200 million chicken eggs lie unneeded. As a result, the livelihoods
of the nearly 20 million people dependent on the national poultry industry have been severely
and adversely hit” (The Wire, 2020). In addition, to this India produces third-highest amount
of egg and the seventh-highest amount of chicken and meat among the world. The recent
4|P a ge

disruption in supply and demand chain because of the rumours have badly affected the lives of
many.
It is of extreme importance to look at a condition under which such rumours started circulating
but firstly, it is crucial for this essay to understand that under what mindset people are to
formulate and to believe such information.

Coronavirus set on Panic State
Panic Disorder is a basic human anxiety syndrome. It is an emotion found not only among
humans but also among all animals. Panic experiences stress, fear or terror. It occurs due to
physiological and psychological condition set on an organism. Anxiety can vary from small,
flashy event to constant all-day fear. In other words, it’s a mental and behavioural response to
any threat or danger. It is stated by all the researcher that anxiety is related to fight/ flight
response as the sole motive of anxiety to fight and flee the danger. It is estimated that the
condition of anxiety or panic disorder has a 2-month prevalence of 1–2% and a lifetime
prevalence of 4% or greater (Goddard, 2017, p.1). it is linked with extreme suicidality
condition. On a physical system, it has Nervous and Chemical effects, Cardiovascular effects,
Respiratory effects and Sweat Gland effects.
Respiratory Effects in particular as we are looking at it from the point of view COVID- 19. The
fight/ flight response is associated with an increase in the speed of breathing as the defence
organism (parasympathetic nervous system) requires more oxygen to prepare itself for the
action towards driving away from the anxiety; therefore, tissues need more oxygen for it.
However, such deep breathing results in breathlessness, choking and sometimes tightness in
the chest. And if no action occurs then such breathing can decrease the blood supply to the
head. All of this occurs in small proportion therefore it is not dangerous but can cause blurred
vision, dizziness and confusion.
In addition to this, Supreme court on 31st march 2020 asked Centre to counsel migrants and
help them to understand the situation on the country’s lockdown who are on the roads to return
to their villages. They are in the panic state due to sudden news of coronavirus lockdown.
Indian express stated that (Indian Express, 2020):
The SC bench, also comprising Justice L Nageswara Rao, is hearing two separate PILs
filed by Advocates Alakh Alok Srivastava and Rashmi Bansal on the exodus of
migrants. On Monday, the SC observed that the migration of labourers out of panic and
fear was becoming a bigger problem than the coronavirus.
In 2009, Director-General of WHO, Margaret Chan said the very term pandemic trigger global
panic. It is not a matter of how a disease is spread but how it is perceived. Pandemic and
epidemic term is unfettered to deadly disease but also have a psychological and emotional
impact. But panic disseminates at a much higher pace than real information. Some diseases
cause moral panics like HIV/ AIDS or the outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) in 2003. In inception when it occurred in Southern China it was called severe acute
nervousness syndrome because it was accompanied by fear making it a moral panic. However,
5|P a ge

the illness and the sense of its risk and our response to that risk shape the experience with that
illness (Gilman, 2010). Furthermore, the source of information also reflects and generate panic
for example, “Arunachal Pradesh officer commits suicide’ COVID-19 related stress could be
trigger” (Hindustan Times, 5/04/2020). People with flu starts researching coronavirus and start
assuming that they soon going to die which is reasonable looking at an above-stated example.
However, people do not look at information from its source, the panic mode makes them
believe whatever they hear or see related to pandemic disease. This where the formulation of
fake news begins.

The role of fake news in a time of the pandemic
UNESCO work on strengthening of education on journalism as they focus on International
Programme Development of Communication (IPDC). It is to teach and share of journalism
from a global perspective that deals with the emerging problem of disinformation that confronts
society in general and journalism in particular. UNESCO consider ‘news’ is information which
is verified in the public interest and therefore, fake news undermines the credibility of
information and does not fulfil the gap of verification. It can be in a form of text messages,
social media, videos or visual memes. The problem with the spread of fake news that it is well
organised, resourced and reinforced by automated technology. Fake news also consists of
certain information which is not phoney, thus, making it difficult to make a distinction between
real news and fake news. Fake news can affect policies, public officials, even democracy itself.
In addition to this, “In November 2018, representatives from eight countries joined the United
Kingdom’s Digital, Culture, Media and Sport Committee for a meeting known as an
“International Grand Committee” (IGC), to discuss the spread of disinformation, the threat of
fake news, questions of privacy and protecting individuals’ data” (CIGI, 2019). Its first meeting
was regarding Cambridge Analytica Scandal, of how personal data is being shared via
Facebook apps. It also included Google, Twitter and WhatsApp like social media platforms
which are dominating the whole world. Dealing with online information which disseminates
false news can obstruct people politically all around the world. Thus, the committee
recommended filtering the information which is politically targeted containing false
information. Particularly, in India, fake news is drivers for violence. The main source of
disinformation is WhatsApp, the Facebook-owned encrypted messaging platform. Killing over
crime is sometimes shown as mob lynching which largely blames the WhatsApp raising the
question on people’s security and privacy. India’s struggle with WhatsApp further becomes
complicated when there is a shift in the nation’s approach to Foreign Technology companies.
Government is seeking restrictions technological giants like amazon, google, twitter for
safeguarding the information. Government has also asked IT ministry to store certain data
physically in India. According to the data provided by Wired, it points out that (The Wire,
2020):
The small, bright green WhatsApp icon is ubiquitous on India’s hundreds of millions
of smartphones. The platform has transformed daily life here for its users, which the
company says exceed 200 million—its largest market…. But in markets like India, as
6|P a ge

well as Brazil and Mexico, WhatsApp was already a dominant player in messaging.
The app’s simple, clutter-free design made it easy to use, even for people picking up a
phone for the first time. In parts of rural India, where connectivity is limited and where
websites struggle to load, the app can often function without issue.
It is more than sending a message to person to person. It is used by political parties to harvest
information, used by shopkeepers to sell goods and by magazines to spread the news. Cheap
smartphones and reasonable internet packages handed the app to the people coming online for
the first time. These people are vulnerable to fake news and disinformation. This further
influence person into group thinking of information which further moves people into the act of
violence. Sometimes the information is not fake however, the place where information is
relevant to differ. Like the information children being kidnapped by a group of goons resulted
in a massacre in the village of Rainpada in Maharashtra. The belief started from the WhatsApp
image where children were lying dead on the ground half covered in sheets. The image was of
children who were killed in Syria during a chemical attack. This information was passed on
from an open network that is, a community was convinced by the visual news that a gang
kidnap the child and harvest their organs.

Journalism could be another source of fake news
Another formulation of fake news could be through journalism. This could be because of weak
journalism that is, a knowledge comprises of poor research or carelessness in verification. As
a common source of information is social media, journalism plays a vital role in it. In
journalism, it is not about grasping false information but they tend to disbelief all the
information whether the information is real or not. This is could be understood by looking at
the existing crisis: coronavirus with which whole is affected.

The Start of a Rumour
Social media plays a very important role in spreading the news about COVID-19. Normally,
fake news does not surround near health system in India but it has surged up in the last few
months after battling with the pandemic disease known as COVID- 19. Here are some examples
like one message said that there is advisory audio by UNICEF asking people to avoid icecreams and cold beverages and wash your clothes regularly because the virus can stay for 9
hours on a fabric. Another message recommended intake of heavy Vitamin C. Another there
was a rumoured video which showed that men being shot in China and lying on streets; showing
the fear of coronavirus.
As these videos become viral, it shows that Indian with coronavirus fear is also looking for
answers and searching on YouTube and other social media accounts. One such popular video
comes from the area 270km far from New Delhi. ‘In Bareilly with a population of nearly one
million, a team of people is circulating viral videos on the spread of the virus, with healthy
doses of unverified information and conspiracy theories.’ Prajapati news, a YouTube channel
with around 6.21 million of subscribers put on videos and information with eye-catching
7|P a ge

headlines. One such video claimed that coronavirus is spreading because of non-vegetarian
food. Prime Minister Narendra Modi has requested people on not rely on fake rumours
regarding coronavirus. Government has also asked giant social media platforms to control the
spread of misinformation. But again, the problem is that the companies are working on
removing fake news rather than promoting authentic content.
In India, WhatsApp is one of the strongest social media platforms. India is the largest market
of Facebook-owned application WhatsApp. It is used by more than 400 million users. The
reach of WhatsApp in India is growing at a very rapid pace in recent years as shown by the
below figure it increases by 10 times from 20 million in August 2013 to 200 million in February
2017. Among all social networks in India, after YouTube and Facebook, WhatsApp is the third
most active social networks used by internet users and in terms of the messenger, WhatsApp
ranks topmost used app.

What makes people spread fake news?
Sociologist and social psychologist have put a light on rumours as circulation of
misinformation can be considered as conspiracy theories. This focus particularly on the
individual. This raises a question of why individual tend to believe on such unlikely news?
What makes them dispose of such gullibility? Who is affected most by it? Firstly, this could be
understood as a part of the social system of interacting persons. It gives a theory that news is
communicated or shared among the people who are in any sort of relationship and later, it starts
growing from group to group. In other words, from the close end network, it becomes part of
an open-end network system (Difonzo, 2018). People who believe rumours are often rational,
in a sense that their belief is partially sensible in the realm of existing knowledge. Therefore, it
is important to understand that a rumour would not spread until it is partly true.
Its other side can be explained in a way that rumours also spread through overlapping processes
that is, social cascades and group polarization. Social cascades occur because individual rely
on information what other tends to believe. If the majority believes a rumour then we as an
individual started inclining towards that rumour. Thus, our partial knowledge makes us rely on
rumour. In addition, rumours trigger strong emotion in us, like fear, threat or anxiety, which
further helps in spreading of rumour and create a panic state among people. Secondly, group
polarization occurs when like-minded people get together and start thinking an extreme version
of what they used to think before. After talking to each other and sharing their extreme version
of knowledge; from being tentative they become certain about that rumour and believe that
rumour as true information. Thus, their knowledge is being distorted due to their subjective
views (Sunstein, 2009).

Unveiling the Truth behind Rumors
It is important to make clear the basic understanding of COVID-19 that it is a respiratory
infection which spreads through droplets transmitted in the air. No study or news has stated or
has been proved that virus can stay or is a source of this pandemic disease. People tend to
8|P a ge

believe such false rumour because their understanding starts from the information that the virus
originated from the poultry market in Wuhan, China; which is true. Secondly, this virus is also
found among animals and birds like bats; which is also true but there is no certain evidence
that proves that it has spread from birds to humans.
However, but the virus did not originate from poultry products. Dr Laxman Jessani, Consultant,
Infectious Diseases, Apollo Hospitals, Navi Mumbai stated that no food is entirely unsafe for
consumption. He further added (Times of India, 2020):
“The SARS- CoV-2 virus is usually transmitted through direct contact with an infected
person’s body fluids like from coughing or sneezing or indirectly through contact with
surfaces. Coronaviruses need a host and cannot grow in food. "As far as food is
concerned, there is currently no evidence that food can be a route of transmission of the
virus or a determinant of any form of infection. So, eating non-vegetarian food is
perfectly safe”.
In addition to this, no evidence or statement is supported by WHO which says that virus is
transmitted through poultry products. Maintaining hygiene and cross-checking sanitation
practices can cut down the risk of being getting infected. If people are careful about touching
items and maintaining hygiene as instructed by the government like washing hands regularly
then the virus can be avoided. Same goes for any food whether vegetarian or non-vegetarian
food. If a virus to survive on edible products then it could be any food and therefore it is
important to ensure that any food goes through a cleaning process before it is cooked.
The above stated partial information makes people believe that coronavirus is more likely to
spread via poultry products. Now imagine in the world where the information is one click away.
Sources like Wikipedia and WhatsApp act as a primary source of information for people who
are looking for coronavirus under a panic condition. Rumours are expected to spread at a much
higher rate through these social media because of the real-time nature of these media.
However, in India, the bird flu also caused fear of consuming the chicken. In January 2020, the
highly contagious H5N1 bird flu outbreak in Chhattisgarh also become the reason for fear
among people. Along with the rumours, this bird flu also creates panic among poultry buyers
and make the poultry industry losses. The outbreak of bird flu in some part of Kerala and
Karnataka also make it difficult for poultry farmers in Tamil Nadu. More than 10 crore eggs
are lying at various poultry as there is no one to buy them, as per National EGG Coordination
Committee chairman. They claimed that INR 10 crore is being lost every day as eggs remain
unsold. According to them, there are guidelines to prevent the bird flu outbreak but with
coronavirus, such rumours lead to losses for manufacturers. The President of Tamil Nadu
Poultry Farmers’ Association estimated that the poultry industry has lost nearly INR 800 crore
since January (Deccan Herald).

Action Taken for Building Trust
Our knowledge about COVID-19 is continuously evolving. Therefore, the government have
collaborated with social media companies asking them to stop such rumours. Though they have
9|P a ge

been successful in removing such false rumours but are unable to stop from formulating. In
addition, the Telangana Government ate chicken at a public event in order to refute the rumours
around poultry products and have appealed the public to do the same (Livemint, 2020). Also,
The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) chief executive officer G S G
Ayyangar at Assocham event said that “Lot of misconception is there that coronavirus will
spread through chicken and mutton, there is nothing like that. It is scientifically not proven, I
am a scientist, I will not buy that argument,” (FSSAI, 2020). This show that the government is
taking initiative on its behalf. As per the announcement of lockdown Food Corporation of India
sent enough stock to all the states in order to implement PM Garib Kalyan Ann Yojana
(PMGKAY). They have delivered an average of 1.44 Lakh MT food grain per day. This is to
provide 5kg of cereal per person for a month. However, the public distribution system was
supposed to cover 75% of the rural population and 50% of urban population and this number
varies from state to state. On average, 922 million people were eligible for PDS in 2020. But
Center used the data of 2011 and the population has increased since then. Therefore, the
quantity of food has also increased. But this problem is burdened with the people who have
shown a drastic shift from non-vegetarian food. Scholars Meghana Mungikar, Jean Drèze and
Reetika Khera pointed out that due to population shift from non-vegetarian food to vegetarian
food the distribution was only able to cover 60% of the population eligible for public
distribution system (The wire, 2020). This has put into another state of emergency. Therefore,
it is extremely important to verify the information and double-check before sharing it in our
peer network.

Conclusion
In conclusion, one can say that at this point it is difficult to draw a deduction that coronavirus
is spreading through poultry products as there is no evidence to prove henceforth. If one argues
that it has spread through bats, still it does not rationalize the fact that poultry products have
any role to play in it. We can look into the countries who are completely based on nonvegetarian food like Japan, South Korea, European countries and so on. Furthermore,
coronavirus does not denote single virus it stands for a group of related viruses, such as SARSCoV-2, the MERS CoV, bovine coronaviruses, avian coronaviruses and others; which
transmits from an infected human to another who is coughing or sneezing. The circulation of
fake news comprises of partial true information which ultimately makes a person believe
information under the existing crisis. One should also not forget that rumours trigger panic
symptom like fear which makes person over sympathized with the situation and encourage
them to pass on the information to people in their close relation without further checking its
source. However, in the end, the initiation of this virus is still unknown despite various tests.
This shows that likeminded people imagine a situation to a different extent making them jump
to a conclusion. With this global crisis, India is a country where poultry business has been
badly costing at a life of many people, and turning towards other options in foods. Making
people believe that virus is contained on poultry products. However, infected people have not
been classified under vegetarian or non- vegetarians in India yet. So, there is no proof that the
virus infects those people who consume poultry products.
10 | P a g e

References
Anon,
2020,
Accessed
from:
https://www.indexmundi.com/commodities/?commodity=chicken&months=120&currency=i
nr
Anon, 2020/03/31. Panic will Destroy More Lives than Virus: SC tells Center to counsel
migrants,
Indian
Express,
Retrieved
from
https://indianexpress.com/article/coronavirus/supreme-court-coronavirus-migrants-6340178/
Choudhary et al and Kumar, N. 2017, Environmental Impact of Non- Vegetarian Diet: An
Overview, International Journal of Engineering Sciences and Research Technology, 6(8),
pp.251-257.
Difonzo, Nickolas. 2018, Conspiracy Rumor Psychology, Rochester Institute of Technology,
pp. 257- 268.
Democracy, Emerging Technology, Internet Governance. 2019, Centre for International
Governance Innovation. Timeline: The International Grand Committee on Disinformation and
"Fake News". Accessed from: https://www.cigionline.org/igc
FSSAI. (05/03/2020), No Scientific Data to Prove Non-Veg, Including Poultry, Seafood
Responsible
for
Coronavirus,
Times
of
India
accessed
from:
https://fssai.gov.in/upload/media/FSSAI_News_Data_TOI_06_03_2020.pdf
Gilman, Sander L. 2010, Moral Panic and Pandemics, The Lancet, Vol 375(9729), Retrieved
from: https://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(10)60862-8/fulltext
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, Indian Council of Food and Agriculture, Indian Poultry Market
Overview,
pp1-5
Accessed
from:
https://www.icfa.org.in/assets/doc/reports/Indian_Poultry_Market_Overview.pdf
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries
Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare, National Action Plan for Egg & Poultry-2022 For
Doubling
Farmers’
Income
by
2022,
pp.1-37
Accessed
from
http://www.dahd.nic.in/sites/default/filess/Seeking%20Comments%20on%20National%20Ac
tion%20Plan-%20Poultry-%202022%20by%2012-12-2017.pdf
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU, 2020, Health & Family Welfare Department, Accessed
from:
https://nhmtn.maps.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/095ad0a1c0254b058fa36b32d1ab
1977

GOVERNMENT OF TELANGANA, 2020, Indian Institute of Health & Family Welfare,
Accessed from: https://covid19.telangana.gov.in/district-wise-cases/
Ireton, Cherilyn and Posetti, Julie. 2018, Journalism, ‘Fake News’ & Disinformation,
UNESCO
Series
on
Journalism
Education,
Accessed
from:

11 | P a g e

https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/journalism_fake_news_disinformation_print_friendly
_0.pdf
Jayant Limaye, Rupali; Sauer, Molly; Ali, Joseph; Bernstein, Justin; Wahl, Brian and Barnhill,
Anne. 21/04/2020, Building trust while influencing online COVID-19 content in the social
media
world,
The
Lancet,
Accessed
from
https://www.thelancet.com/journals/landig/article/PIIS2589-7500(20)30084-4/fulltext
Kulkarni, Vishwanath; Kurmanath, KV and Kumar, Sanjeev. 10/03/2020. Now, Poultry
Industry
'Catches'
Covid-19,
The
Hindu
Accessed
from:
https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/economy/agri-business/poultry-industry-seeksbailout-as-prices-crash-amid-covid-19-fears/article31021906.ece#
Khandekar, Omkar. (21/03/2020), How WhatsApp forwards on coronavirus broke the ₹1 Tn
Indian poultry industry, Livemint Accessed from https://www.livemint.com/mintlounge/features/how-whatsapp-forwards-on-coronavirus-broke-the-1-7-bn-indian-poultry-industry11584715653782.html

McLaughlin, Timothy. 2018, How WhatsApp Fuels Fake News and Violence in India,
Retrieved from: https://www.wired.com/story/how-whatsapp-fuels-fake-news-and-violencein-india/
Parashar, Utpal. (05/042020). Arunachal Pradesh Officer Commits Suicide; COVID-19
Related
Stress
could
be
Trigger:
Police,
Retrieved
from:
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/arunachal-pradesh-officer-commits-suicidecovid-19-related-stress-could-be-trigger-police/
Pellman Rowland, Michael. 17/12/2017, Demand for Meat Is Growing Rapidly in India. This
Could
Impact
All
of
Us,
Forbes,
Accessed
From:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/michaelpellmanrowland/2017/12/17/india-meatincrease/#137dd8bb33b1
Parija, Pratik, (28/02/2020). Indian Poultry Sales Drop on Virus Rumors Spread by Social
Media, Bloomberg, Accessed from: https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-0227/rumors-of-avian-links-to-coronavirus-hit-poultry-sales-in-india
Sunstein, Cass. R. 2009, On Rumors: How Falsehoods Spread, Why We Believe Them, What
Can Be Done, The Washington Post, Retrieved from: https://www.washingtonpost.com/wpsrv/style/longterm/books/chap1/onrumors.htm
Sivapriyan, ETB. (2020, 03, 18), Poultry industry in Tamil Nadu worst-hit due to coronavirus
and avian flu, Deccan Herald, Accessed from:
https://www.deccanherald.com/national/south/poultry-industry-in-tamil-nadu-worst-hit-dueto-coronavirus-and-avian-flu-814975.html
Times of India, (20/03/2020), Coronavirus: Is it safe to eat meat and poultry? Accessed from:
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/life-style/health-fitness/diet/coronavirus-is-it-safe-to-eatmeat-and-poultry
12 | P a g e

The Wire, (21/03/2020). Chicken and the New Coronavirus – No, They Are Not Related,
Retrieved
from:
https://science.thewire.in/the-sciences/coronavirus-covid-19-chickenbetacoronavirus-ibv/
The Wire. (16/04/2020), Coronavirus Lockdown: As Hunger Grows, the Fear of Starvation Is
Real, Accessed from: https://thewire.in/rights/covid-19-100-million-hunger-pds-universal
W. Goddard, Andrew, 2017, The Neurobiology of Panic: A Chronic Stress Disorder, Sage
Publication, Vol 1, pp. 1-14.

13 | P a g e

