Policing the Pandemic: Tracking the Policing of Covid-19 across Canada
Alex Luscombe1 and Alexander McClelland2

Police have been centrally positioned in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Across Canada, there has been an
extraordinary scaling-up in police powers and presence in
response to the virus’ spread. States of emergency have
been declared in every province and territory, shutting down
non-essential businesses, mandating self-isolation for recent
travellers, and imposing physical distancing rules. These
and other virus containment rules are being enforced via
provincial public health law, emergency legislation, the
criminal code, and municipal by-laws, resulting in hefty
fines, and a risk of potential jail time for re-offences. In
certain locations, check-points have been set up, while in
other areas, people are being required to identify themselves
when questioned by police. In some jurisdictions, police
and municipal by-law officers have been given the power
to enforce public health and emergency orders. Furthermore,
a myriad of “snitch lines” have been launched across Canada
in an effort to bolster police intelligence via crowdsourcing.
These snitch lines are encouraging people to report on those
in their community breaking rules under the new pandemic
normal.
The Policing the Pandemic Mapping Project was launched
on 4 April, 2020 to track and visualize these massive and
extraordinary expansions of police power and the unequal
patterns of enforcement they are likely to produce. In doing
so, we hope that we can bring to light patterns of police
intervention, to help understand who is being targeted, what
justifications are being used by police, and how marginalized
people are being impacted. More broadly, we hope the
project will inform a larger conversation about the role of
policing in society, to scrutinize public health and police
collaboration, and to focus attention toward the harms of
criminalization. Having an understanding of these patterns in
coming weeks will help inform approaches to actively resist
the logic and practices of policing crisis and disease, rather
than allow them to become widespread and normalized.
Through the acts of identifying, reporting, and visualizing
events related to the policing of COVID-19, the project
offers a living repository of publicly accessible data that can
be used by activists, academics, journalists, and community
members to analyze, discuss, and challenge the policing of
disease. We encourage all people to use the data available
through this project in any way they wish.
The Policing the Pandemic Mapping Project is an exercise
in counter-mapping. Following Nancy Lee Peluso[1], who
1 Alex Luscombe is a PhD student at the University of Toronto. Email:
alex.luscombe[at]mail.utoronto.ca
2 Alexander McClelland is a postdoctoral fellow at the University of
Ottawa. Email: mcclelland.alex[at]gmail.com

Fig. 1: Screenshot of the Policing the Pandemic Map, taken April
9, 2020, available at https://www.policingthepandemic.ca/

coined the term counter-mapping in 1995, we conceive
of mapping as an “intrinsically political act” with the
potential to disrupt taken-for-granted power structures and
ways of governing. With Kidd[2], we further conceive of
counter-mapping as a form of data activism, involving the
use of data “to create knowledge about the world, denounce
dominant representations, shed light on discrimination
and injustice, and establish alternative social categories.”
Since Peluso first introduced the concept, the number
of counter-mapping projects worldwide has exploded.
Examples include the Anti-Eviction Mapping Project in
San Francisco, the Mapping Police Violence project, the
Counter-Cartographies Collective, the Detroit Geographic
Expedition and Institute, and the countless uses of
counter-mapping by Indigenous activists across Canada[3].
At the time of writing, there are reports of 510 people
in Canada being ticketed, charged and/or arrested for
COVID-19 related violations across 10 provinces. These
actions are accounted for by 22 police forces and involve
enforcement of numerous laws, including the federal
Criminal Code, and provincial legislation, such as the
Ontario Emergency Management Act or the Nova Scotia
Health Protection Act, and in two Ontario jurisdictions,
new municipal by-laws were passed specifically targeting
COVID-19 related events. The vast majority of these police
actions have taken place in the provinces of Quebec (N=323),
Ontario (N=93), and Nova Scotia (N=73).
While social distancing and certain other state-imposed
orders aimed at the containment of COVID-19 may be
effective, punishment for breaking these rules by police
and other law enforcement agents is not. Policing only
exacerbates and escalates crises, deterring people from
seeking healthcare, while eroding the rights of dignity of
targeted people[4, 5]. Moreover, it is important to recognize
that COVID-19 is not an equal opportunity virus, and that

Fig.
2:
Screenshot of the Policing the Pandemic
Searchable Database, taken April 9, 2020, available at
https://www.policingthepandemic.ca/

policing is not an equal opportunity institution. Initially, the
idea circulated that COVID-19 was impacting all people
equally. However, this idea has been quickly dispelled
as the race and class dynamics of the pandemic become
increasingly apparent. These same dynamics shape the
application of laws and policing practices designed to contain
illness. Based on decades of research in criminology, we
know that police interventions related to COVID-19 will not
impact all people equally. In Canada, our policing institution
is historically rooted in the project of settler-colonisation, a
project that continues today in the form of disproportionate
surveillance, regulation, and incapacitation of Indigenous
people[6, 7]. Black and other racialized groups in Canada
have long been subject to disproportionate harm from law
enforcement in Canada, beginning with the numerous drug
wars of the early 20th century[8, 9]. The long history of
over-policing in poor and working-class communities in
Canada (whom are often also racialized) is similarly well
documented[10, 11]. The fact that this legacy of racialized
and class-based targeting by police in Canada is still with
us[12, 13] is precisely why we should be concerned about
the extraordinary boosts to police power and enforcement
we are seeing around the spread of COVID-19.
We have said it before and will continue to say it until
this message is clearly heard: We cannot police our way out
of this pandemic.
R EFERENCES
[1] N. L. Peluso, “Whose woods are these? counter-mapping forest
territories in kalimantan, indonesia,” Antipode, vol. 27, no. 4,
pp. 383–406, 1995.
[2] D. Kidd, “Extra-activism: counter-mapping and data justice,”
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 22, no. 7, pp. 954–970,
2019.
[3] G. L. Eades, Maps and memes: Redrawing culture, place, and identity
in Indigenous communities, vol. 76. McGill-Queen’s Press-MQUP,
2015.

[4] N. Bulled and E. C. Green, “Making voluntary medical male
circumcision a viable hiv prevention strategy in high-prevalence
countries by engaging the traditional sector,” Critical public health,
vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 258–268, 2016.
[5] B. D. Adam, R. Elliott, P. Corriveau, and K. English, “Impacts
of criminalization on the everyday lives of people living with hiv
in canada,” Sexuality Research and Social Policy, vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 39–49, 2014.
[6] C. Proulx, “Colonizing surveillance: Canada constructs an indigenous
terror threat,” Anthropologica, pp. 83–100, 2014.
[7] J. Monaghan, “Mounties in the frontier: Circulations, anxieties, and
myths of settler colonial policing in canada,” Journal of Canadian
Studies, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 122–148, 2013.
[8] A. Khenti, “The canadian war on drugs: Structural violence and
unequal treatment of black canadians,” International Journal of Drug
Policy, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 190–195, 2014.
[9] A. Owusu-Bempah, “Race and policing in historical context:
Dehumanization and the policing of black people in the 21st century,”
Theoretical Criminology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 23–34, 2017.
[10] M.-È. Sylvestre, “Policing the homeless in montreal: is this really what
the population wants?,” Policing & Society, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 432–458,
2010.
[11] T. Gordon, “The return of vagrancy law and the politics of poverty in
canada,” Canadian Review of Social Policy, no. 54, p. 34, 2004.
[12] M. Tulloch, “Report of the independent street checks review,” 2018.
[13] R. Maynard, Policing Black lives: State violence in Canada from
slavery to the present. Fernwood Publishing, 2017.

