"x"
"1" "How Right-Leaning Media Coverage of COVID-19 Facilitated the Spread of Misinformation in the Early Stages of the Pandemic"
"2" "Matt Motta*"
"3" "Assistant Professor"
"4" "Department of Political Science"
"5" "Oklahoma State University"
"6" "210 Murray Hall"
"7" "Stillwater, OK. 74078"
"8" "matthew[dot]motta[at]okstate[dot]edu"
"9" "Dominik Stecula"
"10" "Postdoctoral Fellow"
"11" "Annenberg Public Policy Center"
"12" "University of Pennsylvania"
"13" "Christina Farhart"
"14" "Assistant Professor"
"15" "Department of Political Science"
"16" "Carleton College"
"17" "In recent weeks, several academic and journalistic outlets have documented widespread misinformation about the origins and potential treatment for COVID-19.  This misinformation  could have important public health  consequences if  misinformed people are less likely to heed the advice of public health expert s . While some have anecdotally tied the prevalence of misinformation to misleading or inaccurate media coverage of the pandemic in its early stages, few have rigorously tested this claim empirically. In this paper, we report the results of an automated content analysis showing that right-leaning news  outlets  (e.g., Fox News, Breitbart)  were  more than 2.5 times more likely than mainstream outlets to discuss COVID-19 misinformation during the early stages of the U.S. pandemic response. In a nationally representative survey (N = 8,914) conducted from 3/10-3/16, we then show that people who  consumed  more right-leaning news during this timeframe were more than twice as likely to endorse COVID-related misinformation. Alarmingly, survey data further suggest that misinformation endorsement has  negative  public health consequences, as misinformed people are more likely to believe that the CDC is exaggerating COVID-related health risks."
"18" "COVID-19 Misinformation; Media Effects; Partisan Media; Conspiracy Theories; Public Health"
"19" "1. Introduction"
"20" "We have yet to know the ultimate impact around the globe of the novel coronavirus pandemic. However, we do know that delays, denials, and misinformation regarding COVID-19 have exacerbated the spread and slowed the response to the pandemic, particularly in the U.S. Experts have noted that the Trump Administration was informed of the outbreak in China on January 3, 2020. However, it was 70 days later when the Administration finally acknowledged the novel coronavirus, “not as a distant threat or harmless flu strain well under control, but as a lethal force that had outflanked America’s defenses and was poised to kill tens of thousands of citizens” (Abutaleb, Dawsey, Nakashima, and Miller 2020)."
"21" "While the role that  misinformation  played in slowing the  fed eral government’s response to  COVID-19  is well-understood ,  less is known about  why  Americans  might endorse  misinformation  about  the virus , and how misinformation might impact  trust in  information from  public health  experts ."
"22" "Recent  public opinion polling suggests that many Americans are misinformed about COVID-19.  In early March  of 2020 , a poll conducted by YouGov and The Economist found that 13% of Americans believed the coronavirus was a hoax, 49% believed the coronavirus is man-made, and 44% believed the threat of the coronavirus is being exaggerated for political reasons."
"23" "However, while  COVID-19  misinformation is prevalent, it is not necessarily bi-partisan. A  March 1  Civiqs poll  found  68% of Democrats were moderately or extremely concerned about COVID-19, but only 21% of self-identified Republicans expressed moderate or extreme concern about the outbreak (Badger & Quealy 2020).  Another Quinnipiac University poll released early in March found that roughly six in 10 Republican voters nationwide were not especially concerned that the coronavirus would disrupt their lives (Russonello 2020a)."
"24" "We  expect  that  variation in media outlet coverage of  the pandemic in its early stages  may  help explain these partisan differences.  While federal and state governments could have been making tough decisions and preparing for the potential onslaught of cases  in early 2020 , media outlets across the country covered the spread of the virus, many of which denied or downplayed its severity. The divergence in opinion resulted in the coverage of the virus becoming highly politicized."
"25" "Some  media outlets, particularly  popular  right-leaning outlets and pundits spouted talk of hoaxes and conspiracy theories behind the pandemic. Sean Hannity said the virus was a fraud by the  “ deep state ”  trying to spread panic, manipulate the economy, and suppress dissent; Rush Limbaugh suggested the virus was a plot hatched by the Chinese to harm the U.S. economy; Fox Business anchor Trish Regan told viewers on Monday that the worry over coronavirus “is yet another attempt to impeach the president” (Peters and Grynbaum 2020) .   As  denial and disinformation exploded on  right-leaning  media outlets,  many   conservative  elites correspondingly downplayed concern about the virus   (Abutaleb et al. 2020; Badger & Quealy 2020; Gowen 2020; Peters, &  Grynbaum  2020;  Polskin  2020;  Russonello  2020;  Warzel  2020)."
"26" "Consistent with this view, polling data from Mid-March revealed that only 38% of Fox News viewers are worried about coronavirus (compared to 72% of national newspaper readers or 71% of CNN viewers) .  Further, considerable partisan gaps existed on how people were behaviorally responding, like washing their hands, working from home, or changing their travel plans  (Stecula 2020) ."
"27" "Previous academic research has  demonstrated that people  selectively accept information – even that which is factually incorrect – as true if it originates from trusted sources, or affirms their political and social world-views  (Kahan  2017 , 201 3 ; Taber & Lodge 2006) . C onsiderable evidence has  also  mounted  suggesting  that individual political identity leads people to engage in motivated conspiracy endorsement impugning their political rivals (Miller et al. 2016 ; Flynn et al., 2017 ).   These motivations  may be  amplified in an environment in which the pandemic is highly politicized, and trusted opinion leaders, such as well-known Republican politicians, also endorse dubious COVID claims ( Stecula  2020, Zaller 1992).  As a result, we believe that  even seemingly innocuous denials or false claims from relied-upon media sources may lead individuals either into a false sense of security, or lead others to ignore government recommendations."
"28" "The spread of misinformation  about COVID-19 could be particularly problematic if misinformed people are subsequently less likely to trust advice from medical professionals. Previous research has found that misinformation about vaccine safety is associated with decreased support for mandatory vaccination policies, and increased skepticism about the role medical professionals play in the policymaking process (Motta et al. 2018). Medical conspiracy theory beliefs have also deeply impacted whether or not the public complies with expert-backed health behaviors (e.g., wearing sunscreen, not vaccinating children) (see Oliver & Wood 2014)."
"29" "Of course, whether or not right-leaning news consumption increased misinformation endorsement in the pandemics’ early stage hinges on documenting systematic differences in how media outlets talked about COVID-19.   To do this,  we trace the news coverage of the pandemic from early February through mid-March; taking our lead from scholars who have analyzed the evolution of politicization in news coverage of public health controversies, and the impact of media politicization on support for public health experts and expert-backed policies ( e.g.,  Fowler & Gollust 2015)."
"30" "While recent polling suggests that Americans’ trust in scientists, experts, and the CDC remains relatively high (Stecuła 2020), public health experts and scientists do not have easy or direct access to the mass public. When people pay attention to the news, they usually turn to trusted sources, which, for Republicans, have been outlets like Fox News, given their widespread distrust of mainstream news (Stecuła 2020). Media attention is therefore particularly important during times of crisis and uncertainty."
"31" "Thus ,  we  suspect  that the  highly partisan nature  of  early media coverage of the  coronavirus pandemic  had important public health consequences.   The  relative prominence of COVID misinformation shared by right- leaning  media  contributed to the spread  misinformation about COVID, and  subsequently   undermined  support for  information from  public health experts ."
"32" "In this paper, we show that right-leaning media outlets (e.g., Fox News, Breitbart) did in fact regularly discuss misinformation about COVID-19, during the early stages of the pandemic. Nationally representative survey data suggest that people who  consumed  right-leaning media during that time were more likely to beli eve misinformation about COVID. Alarmingly, we find  that misinformed people were more likely to believe that the CDC exaggerated COVID’s health risks ; suggesting that media coverage of the virus in the early stages of the pandemic did in fact have important public health consequences ."
"33" "2. Material & Methods"
"34" "2.1 Automated Content  Data & Protocol  (2/1-3/23)"
"35" "To examine the content of the news media environment surrounding COVID-19 misinformation, we have turned to the  MediaCloud  Explorer, a tool designed to track news media outlets designed by  the  MIT Center for Civic Media  and the  Berkman Klein Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University ."
"36" "For our purposes in this paper, our goal is not to provide a detailed content analysis of the news media coverage of the novel coronavirus. Instead, our goal is to compare the volume of coverage of common misinformation about COVID-19 in two types of sources: right wing media and traditional, non-ideological news outlets. As a result, we compare two news outlet collections on MediaCloud. First, we look at the  U.S. Top Sources 2018  (collection #186572516), which includes the most prominent outlets in the U.S., based on a Pew Research Center report published in 2019. It includes sources such as the New York Times, Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, USA Today, or Politico. Based on the Pew Research Center reports, these are the sources that most Americans trust and consume. Second, we examine the  Right Wing Sources  (collection #9360524), which includes Fox News, Fox Business, Fox Nation, Breitbart, Rush Limbaugh, and other  right-leaning   outlets that tend to be trusted by those on the political right in the U.S. MediaCloud classified the sources as right wing based on relative number of tweets of election story urls by Clinton vs. Trump retweeters during the 2016 presidential election cycle."
"37" "Our search protocol was the following:  (\"coronavirus\" or \"covid\")  AND   (\"made in a lab\" OR \"Big Pharma\" OR \"George Soros\" OR \"hoax\" OR \"conspiracy\" OR \"bioweapon\" OR \"not real\" OR \"existing vaccine\") . It  was designed to capture common misinformation about COVID-19, such as that it is a hoax and does not exist, that it is a Chinese bioweapon, that the vaccine already exists but pharmaceutical companies  won’t release it, and that it is a plot by the financier George Soros to destroy capitalism in the West. Our approach, of course, might miss other forms of misinformation about COVID, but our goal was to capture the most common misinformation. Furthermore, out approach does not analyze content in detail, and might miss “debunking” stories , which is the form that a lot of the mainstream coverage of misinformation took . However, given that research demonstrates the harm of repeating misinformation, even in the case of debunking, we are not worried about that caveat here."
"38" "We search the media for the terms outlined above for the time period of February 1, 2020 to March 23, 2020. That encompasses several weeks prior to the Pew survey data used in our analysis and a week after the survey."
"39" "2.2 Survey  Data (3/10-3/16)"
"40" "Survey data for this study come from Wave 63.5 of Pew’s American Trends Panel (ATP). Panelists were invited to participate in ATP’s large and nationally representative online panel from several probability-based surveys; including three dual-frame phone surveys (recruited via cell phone and landline random digit dial; combined N = 19,922), and two address-based samples (combined N = 15,596), administered from Winter 2014 to Fall 2019."
"41" "Wave 63.5 was fielded between March 10 - March 16, 2020. Ipsos (on behalf of Pew) invited all 11,028 remaining panelists to participate, 8,914 of whom ultimately completed the survey (RR1 = 81%; cumulative response rate = 4.5%). All interviews were conducted online. Respondents lacking proper hardware or software were provided with an internet-accessible tablet."
"42" "To account for potential deviations between the final sample and the target population, data were weighted on the basis of age, gender, educational attainment, race, region, party identification, and several other factors (and combinations of factors). All data used in this study is publicly available. Additional technical information about ATP can be found at Pew’s website (see: Melia & Picco 2020)."
"43" "2.3 Survey Measures"
"44" "Misinformation Endorsement.  The primary outcome variables in our survey analyses – and the key independent variable in the second stage of our survey analyses – are four binary indicators of whether or not respondents endorse COVID-19 misinformation. These indicators are derived from responses to two questions. First, respondents were asked if they think “it is most likely that the current strain of the coronavirus” was either “developed intentionally in a lab,” “made accidentally in a lab,” “came about naturally,” or “does not exist.” From this, we created three dichotomous variables taking on values of 1 if respondents believe that COVID-19 was lab created (accidentally, on purpose) or if they believe that the virus does not exist."
"45" "Respondents were also asked whether or not a COVID-19 vaccine is available “now,” “in the next few months,” “in a year or more,” or that “it is not possible to create a vaccine.” From this, we created a  fourth dichotomous indicator; with those indicating that the vaccine is available now, or will be available in the next few months scored as being misinformed."
"46" "Figure 2  in the main text summarizes the (weighted) distribution of misinformation endorsement on these four indicators. As the figure suggests, misinformation about COVID-19 is pervasive. More than a fifth of Americans believe that the disease was intentionally created in a lab, and nearly a quarter believe that a vaccine will exist in the near future. Note that, because less than 1% (N = 56) respondents endorsed the view that COVID-19 does not exist, we opted to exclude that indicator in our analyses."
"47" "Distrust in Public Health Officials.  The key outcome variable in the second half of our survey analyses is an indicator of whether or not Americans trust information from public health officials about the severity of COVID-19. Respondents were asked whether or not “public health officials at the CDC” either “greatly exaggerated [COVID-19’s] risks,” “slightly exaggerated the risks,” “gotten the risks about right,” “not taken the risks quite seriously enough,” or “not taken the risks seriously at all.” We fashioned the resulting scores into a binary indicator of whether or not respondents perceived either great or slight exaggeration."
"48" "Partisan News Consumption.  Consistent with Pew’s conventional practice, we measure respondents partisan news consumption habits by combining information -- assessed in Wave 57 of the ATP -- about respondents’ partisanship (i.e., whether they are self-identified Democrats or Republicans) and self-reported media exposure to left-leaning (e.g., MSNBC, New York Times, NPR), right-leaning (e.g., Rush Limbaugh, Fox News, Breitbart), and “mixed” audience outlets (e.g., Wall St. Journal). See Pew (2020) for additional information about how the organization determined each outlet’s partisan lean. We combine this information into four dichotomous indicators of whether or not respondents are Republicans (Democrats) who consume either mostly right-leaning (left-leaning) news, or a mix of different sources."
"49" "Controls.  Our models account for a variety of different factors that could alternatively explain why people might endorse misinformation about COVID-19, and/or explain distrust in the CDC’s expressed levels of concern about the virus."
"50" "First, we control for respondents’  political ideology ; a standard five-point measure (ranging from “Very Liberal” to “Very Conservative”), denoting respondents’ self-placement on a left-right ideological continuum. For consistency, we  rescaled this variable (and all other variables) to range from 0-1. We include this as a control in our model, as previous research suggests that self-identified ideological conservatives may be more likely to endorse misinformation about public health, and distrust public health experts (e.g., Jost 2003; Gauchat 2012; Blank & Shaw 2015; Nisbet et al., 2015 Joslyn & Sylvester 2017; Motta 2018; Jost et al., 2018)."
"51" "Next, we control for respondents’  distrust in journalists and scientific authorities;  both of which have been shown to increase Americans’ receptivity to conspiratorial and factually inaccurate claims about public health (e.g., Kata 2010; Motta, Callaghan, & Sylvester 2018; MacFarlane et al., 2020; Stecula, Kuru, & Jamieson 2020)."
"52" "In ATP Wave 40, respondents were asked to rate the extent to which they are confident that various individuals and institutions tend to “act in the best interests of the public.” Respondents could respond that they hold “a great deal,” “a fair amount,” “not too much,” or “no confidence at all” in “scientists” and either “the news media” (on two out of four randomly-assigned survey ballots), or “journalists” (on the remaining two ballots)."
"53" "We scored respondents as expressing distrust in either group if they indicated “not too much” or “no confidence at all” in either group; noting that we combined the latter two targets (i.e., those focused on the media) into a single measure of distrust in journalists."
"54" "Note that, although ATP Wave 63.5 did   ask respondents questions about their levels of trust in scientific and media authorities, we might be concerned about potential endogeneity issues. That is, because the questions were administered at the same time, we cannot be certain whether distrust in media/scientists facilitates misinformation endorsement, or  vice versa ."
"55" "Because the items we use were administered in ATP Wave 40 (Fall 2018), we circumvent this potential issue (i.e., because attitudes were assessed more than a year before the public was introduced to scientific and journalistic rhetoric concerning COVID-19). However, one downside of this approach is that we lose N = 1,914 cases as a result of panel attrition. Consequently, models studying the effects of partisan news media on misinformation endorsement contain N = 6,266 valid responses."
"56" "Of course, this approach cannot circumvent a different endogeneity concern; i.e., the possibility that our outcome variable in the models assessing the relationship of misinformation on trust in scientific authorities is conceptually not distinct from the distrust in scientific authorities variable. To alleviate this concern, and to perform these analyses on as many W63.5 respondents as possible, we removed both W40 indicators of distrust in scientific and journalistic authorities from the model  (i.e., Figure 4) ."
"57" "Next, we control for respondents’ levels of  political knowledge  based on their performance on a short, nine-item civics knowledge quiz embedded in Wave 57 of the ATP. Note that, because all participants in Wave 63.5 also participated in Wave 57, we do not report any missing data on this variable; even though it is a lagged indicator of political knowledge. Consistent with Pew’s conventional practice, we trichotimized knowledge scores to reflect low (0-5 questions correct), medium (6-7 questions correct), and high (8-9 questions correct) knowledge. We control for political knowledge given the possibility that people who are better  informed  about politics and current events may be more likely to be  mis-informed  about related issues (e.g., Kuklinski et al., 2000; Pennycook & Rand 2019; although see: Miller Saunders & Farhart 2016; Kahan 2017)."
"58" "Finally, our models control for respondents’ educational attainment (a binary indicator of whether or not respondents completed college), race (a binary indicator of whether or not respondents are Non-Hispanic and White), and metropolitan status (a binary indicator of whether or not respondents  do not  live in a major metropolitan area). We found it particularly useful, conceptually, to control for “non- metro” status, as individuals living in more sparsely populated areas may be less concerned about community transmission of COVID-19."
"59" "3. Results  & Discussion"
"60" "3.1  Right- Leaning  Media were More Likely to Discuss COVID-related Misinformation in Early March."
"61" "Figure 1  plots news media stories in  right leaning and mainstream news outlets, in the time period beginning on February 1 until March 23, several days after our survey data was collected. The patterns are clear:  right-leaning  outlets, such as Fox News, dedicated  3 , 839 stories that reference misinformation about COVID-19 in that time period, while mainstream outlets  highlighted misinformation considerably less frequently ( 1 , 541 stories ). Over time patter n s also highlight that misinformation spiked in the early March, and the gulf in misinformation continued to widen as the novel coronavirus continued to spread through the United States in March."
"62" "Figure 1. Prevalence of COVID-19 Misinformation on Right-Leaning vs. Mainstream Media (2/1-3/23, 2020).  Story counts are derived from quires of the MediaCloud Explorer database. Search terms included  (\"coronavirus\" or \"covid\") and (\"made in a lab\" OR \"Big Pharma\" OR \"George Soros\" OR \"hoax\" OR \"conspiracy\" OR \"bioweapon\" OR \"not real\" OR \"existing vaccine\"). Please refer to the online methods for additional information about MediaCloud and our search protocol."
"63" "3.2  More than 1 in 3 Americans Endorse COVID-related Misinformation."
"64" "Figure  2  displays  the percentage of survey respondents in Pew’s nationally representative American Trends Panel who endorsed COVID-related misinformation, between 3/10-3/16. The results suggest that more than 1 in 5 (22%) believe that COVID-19 was purposefully created in a lab, and nearly 1 in 4 (24%) believe that a coronavirus vaccine exists now, or will exist within the next few months. Fewer believe that COVID-19 was lab made by accident (7%), or that the virus does not exist at all (<1%). Together, we find that more than one third (38%) of Americans endorse misinformation about COVID-19 (i.e., they endorse at least one of the misinformed statements listed above)."
"65" "Fig ure 2 . COVID-19 Misinformation Endorsement (3/10-3/16, 2020).  Bars correspond to the weighted percentage of survey respondents in Pew’s nationally representative ATP Wave 63.5 Survey (N = 8,914).    Misinformation indicators are derived from responses to two questions. First, respondents were asked if they think “it is most likely that the current strain of the coronavirus” was either “developed intentionally in a lab,” “made accidentally in a lab,” “came about naturally,” or “does not exist.” From this, we created three dichotomous variables taking on values of 1 if respondents believe that COVID-19 was lab created (1) accidentally, (2) on purpose, (3) or if they believe that the virus does not exist. Respondents were also asked whether or not a COVID-19 vaccine is available “now,” “in the next few months,” “in a year or more,” or that “it is not possible to create a vaccine.” From this, we created a fourth dichotomous indicator; with those indicating that the vaccine is available now, or will be available in the next few months scored as being misinformed."
"66" "3.3  Right- Leaning  Media Viewers Are More than Twice as Likely to Endorse COVID-related Misinformation."
"67" "Figure  3  plots the effect of survey respondents’ partisan news consumption habits on misinformation endorsement; accounting for the influence that several political factors (e.g., political ideology), social  (e.g., distrust in scientists and the media), and demographic (e.g., age) factors that might alternatively influence misinformation endorsement."
"68" "Circles falling to the  right  of the dashed red line indicate a positive effect of each variable (rows) on endorsing a particular piece of misinformation (see the color-coded legend). Circles falling to the  left  indicate a negative effect. When the lines extending out from each circle  do not  intersect with the dashed red line, that effect is statistically significant. For more technical information about the results of the logistic regression models used to produce this figure, please consult the online Methods appendix."
"69" "We find that both people who solely (row 2) or sometimes (row 3) consume righ t-leaning  media were significantly more likely to believe that COVID was purposefully made in a lab, and that a COVID vaccine exists now (or will exist soon). However, we find no evidence that right- leaning  news consumption was significantly associated with believing that COVID was accidentally lab-made."
"70" "According to our models, while just 17% of people who primarily consume left-leaning media believed that COVID was purposefully lab-made,  nearly double  (34%) of exclusive right- leaning  news consumers believed the same. Similarly, while 17% of left-leaning news consumers believed that a COVID-19 vaccine already (or will soon)  exist,  more than double  (35%) of right- leaning  news consumers believed the same."
"71" "Figure 3 . Correlates of Misinformation Endorsement (3/10-3/16).  Logistic regression parameter estimates presented (shaded circles), with 95% confidence intervals extending out from each one (N = 6,266). Note that, in order to avoid endogeneity concerns, anti-scientist and anti-journalist attitudes were measured prior to Wave 63.5 (ATP Wave 40, Fall 2019). Due to panel attrition, we lose N = 1,914. Note also that we do not include the “COVID-19 does not exist” misinformation indicator in these analyses, as fewer than 1% of the sample endorsed this view (N = 56). Additional information about the ATP sample, how each control variable in the model was measured, and how we address potential endogeneity concerns can be found in the Online Methods. All data are weighted."
"72" "3.4  Misinformed Americans Think that the CDC Exaggerated COVID’s Health Risks."
"73" "Finally, Figure  4  plots  (as green bars) the likelihood that people who endorse either one of the two pieces of COVID-related misinformation that we found to be influenced by right- leaning  media viewership  also  report that the CDC is exaggerating COVID’s public health harms risks."
"74" "When the 95% confidence intervals (black lines) extending out from each bar do not intersect with one another, the difference between misinformed and non-misinformed people is statistically significant.  Again, for more technical information on how we model and calculate these quantities, please review the Online Methods appendix."
"75" "Alarmingly, we find that people who believe that COVID was purposefully lab-created (26%) are significantly more likely to believe that the CDC is exaggerating the virus’ health risks than those who do not (19%). Likewise, people who believe that a vaccine already exists (24%), compared to those who do not (20%), are significantly more likely to distrust claims from the CDC."
"76" "Figure 4 . The Effect of Misinformation Endorsement on Anti-CDC Attitudes (3/10-3/16).  N = 8,568. Predicted probabilities presented  (bars), with 95% confidence intervals (lines). The outcome variable in this analysis is an indicator of whether or not respondents think that the CDC “greatly” or “slightly” exaggerated COVID-19’s health risks. Probabilities were calculated based on the results of a logistic regression model, holding all covariates at their sample means. The model controls for all factors displayed in Figure 2, with the exception that we remove anti-scientist and anti-journalist views from these models (due to concerns of a lack of conceptual distinctness between these variables and the  outcome variable).  As a result, the valid N for this model is larger than the model results presented in Figure 2. Note also that we again exclude the “COVID-19 does not exist” variable from these analyses (see the note accompanying Figure 2). Additional information about how we measured the outcome variable in this analysis, as well as all independent variables, can be found in the Online Methods. All data are weighted."
"77" "3.5 Discussion"
"78" "We caution that the results presented here offer a look at a single snapshot in time; assessing the relationship between media coverage and public opinion in the early stages of the pandemic. Whether or not people misinformed in the early stages of the pandemic continue to hold misinformed views and/or express skepticism toward public health advice is an open question.  A s media coverage about the pandemic changes, so too might the proportion of Americans who exhibit misinformed views. We  look forward to   future  research in all of these areas."
"79" "4.   Conclusion"
"80" "Our analyses suggest that the way right-leaning media outlets talked about COVID-19 in the early stages of the pandemic had important public health consequences.  Right-leaning outlets were more likely to feature inaccurate claims about the origins and treatment of COVID-19, and people who self-reported consuming more right-leaning news were subsequently more likely to express misinformed views. In turn, misinformed individuals were more likely to think that public health experts over-estimated the severity of the pandemic."
"81" "The Authors declare no conflicting interests and have no funding to report for this submission."
"82" "References"
"83" "Abutaleb, Y., Dawsey, J., Nakashima, E.,  & Miller, G. (2020). The U.S. was beset by denial and dysfunction as the coronavirus raged.  The Washington Post,  April 4. https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2020/04/04/coronavirus-government-dysfunction/?arc404=true"
"84" "Badger, E., & Quealy, K. (2020). Red vs. Blue on Coronavirus Concern: The Gap Is Still Big but Closing.  The New York Times . March 21. https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/03/21/upshot/coronavirus-public-opinion.html?searchResultPosition=1"
"85" "Blank, J. M., & Shaw, D. (2015). Does partisanship shape attitudes toward science and public policy? The case for ideology and religion.  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  658 (1), 18-35."
"86" "Flynn, D. J., Nyhan, B., & Reifler, J. (2017). The nature and origins of misperceptions: Understanding false and unsupported beliefs about politics.  Political Psychology ,  38 , 127-150."
"87" "Fowler, E. F. & Gollust, S. E. (2015). “The Content and Effect of Politicized Health Controversies.”  The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science , 658:155-171."
"88" "Garrett, R. K.,  Gvirsman , S. D., Johnson, B. K.,  Tsfati , Y., Neo, R., and Dal, A. (2014). Implications of pro-and counter-attitudinal information exposure for affective polarization.  Human Communication Research , 40(3):309–332."
"89" "Guess, A., Lockett, D., Lyons, B., Montgomery, J. M., Nyhan, B., & Reifler, J. (2020). ‘Fake News’ may have limited effects beyond increasing beliefs in false claims.  Harvard Misinformation Review , January 20. https://misinforeview.hks.harvard.edu/article/fake-news-limited-effects-on-political-participation/"
"90" "Gowen, A. (2020). Coronavirus deniers and hoaxers persist despite dire warnings, claiming ‘it’s mass hysteria’  The Washington Post . March 19. https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/coronavirus-deniers-outbreak-hoax/2020/03/19/46bc5e46-6872-11ea-b313-df458622c2cc_story.html"
"91" "Iyengar, S.,  Sood , G., and  Lelkes , Y. (2012). Affect, not ideology: A social identity perspective on polarization.  Public Opinion Quarterly , 76(3):405–431."
"92" "Joslyn, M. R., & Sylvester, S. M. (2019). The determinants and consequences of accurate beliefs about childhood vaccinations.  American Politics Research ,  47 (3), 628-649."
"93" "Jost, J. T., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A. W., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003). Political conservatism as motivated social cognition.  Psychological bulletin ,  129 (3), 339."
"94" "Jost, J. T., van der Linden, S., Panagopoulos, C., & Hardin, C. D. (2018). Ideological asymmetries in conformity, desire for shared reality, and the spread of misinformation.  Current opinion in psychology ,  23 , 77-83."
"95" "Kata, A. (2010). A postmodern Pandora's box: anti-vaccination misinformation on the Internet.  Vaccine ,  28 (7), 1709-1716."
"96" "Kahan, D. (2013). Ideology, Motivated Reasoning, and Cognitive Reflection.  Judgment and Decision Making , 8: 407-424."
"97" "Kahan, D. M. (2017). Misconceptions, misinformation, and the logic of identity-protective cognition."
"98" "Kuklinski, J. H., Quirk, P. J., Jerit, J., Schwieder, D., & Rich, R. F. (2000). Misinformation and the currency of democratic citizenship.  Journal of Politics ,  62 (3), 790-816."
"99" "Merkley, Eric. \"Anti-Intellectualism, Populism, and Motivated Resistance to Expert Consensus.\" (2020).  Forthcoming at Public Opinion Quarterly"
"100" "Miller, J. M., Saunders, K. L., & Farhart, C. E. (2016). “Conspiracy Endorsement as Motivated Reasoning: The Moderating Roles of Political Knowledge and Trust.”  American Journal of Political Science  60(4): 824-844."
"101" "Motta, M. (2018). The dynamics and political implications of anti-intellectualism in the United States.  American Politics Research ,  46 (3), 465-498."
"102" "Motta, M., Callaghan, T., & Sylvester, S. (2018). Knowing less but presuming more: Dunning-Kruger effects and the endorsement of anti-vaccine policy attitudes.  Social Science & Medicine ,  211 , 274-281."
"103" "Nisbet, E. C., Cooper, K. E., & Garrett, R. K. (2015). The partisan brain: How dissonant science messages lead conservatives and liberals to (dis) trust science.  The ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  658 (1), 36-66."
"104" "Oliver, J. E. & Wood, T. J. (2014). Medical conspiracy theories and health behaviors in the United States.  JAMA internal medicine ,  174 (5), 817-818."
"105" "Pennycook, G., & Rand, D. G. (2019). Lazy, not biased: Susceptibility to partisan fake news is better explained by lack of reasoning than by motivated reasoning.  Cognition ,  188 , 39-50."
"106" "Peters, J. W., & Grynbaum, M. (2020). How Right-Wing Pundits Are Covering Coronavirus.  The New York Times . March 11. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/11/us/politics/coronavirus-conservative-media.html"
"107" "Polskin , H. (2020).  How right-wing media is covering the COVID-19 epidemic .  Columbia Journalism Review , April 13.  https://www.cjr.org/analysis/right-wing-coronavirus-federalist-redstate-american-thinker.php"
"108" "Russonello, G. (2020a). Afraid of Coronavirus? That Might Say Something About Your Politics. March 13. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/13/us/politics/coronavirus-trump-polling.html"
"109" "Russonello, G. (2020b). What Unites the Right and Left? Coronavirus Anxiety.  The New York Times , April 3. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/03/us/politics/coronavirus-polls.html?action=click&module=News&pgtype=Homepage"
"110" "Stecuła, D. (2020). What do we know about misinformation during the coronavirus outbreak?  The Mischiefs of Faction . April 6: https://www.mischiefsoffaction.com/post/what-do-we-know-about-misinformation-during-the-coronavirus-outbreak"
"111" "Stevis-Gridneff , M. (2020). The Rising Heroes of the Coronavirus Era? Nations’ Top Scientists.  The New York Times , April 5: https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/05/world/europe/scientists-coronavirus- heroes.html?algo=identity&fellback=false&imp_id=171151241&action=click&module=moreIn&pgtype=Article&region=Footer"
"112" "Suhay , E., Bello-Pardo, E., and Maurer, B. (2018). The polarizing effects of online partisan criticism: Evidence from two experiments.  International Journal of Press/Politics , 23(1):95–115."
"113" "Taber, C. S., & Lodge, M. (2006). Motivated Skepticism in the Evaluation of Political Beliefs.  American Journal of Political Science , 50(3): 755-769."
"114" "Warzel, C. (2020). What We Pretend to Know About the Coronavirus Could Kill Us.  The New York Times , April 3. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/03/opinion/sunday/coronavirus-fake-news.html"
"115" "Zaller, J. R. (1992). The nature and origins of mass opinion.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press."
