The academic precariat post-COVID-19
Aidan Cornelius-Bell and Piper A. Bell, Flinders University
The nature of academic work has again shifted, this time as a result of the COVID-19
global health crisis disproportionately affecting the academic precariat. The continually
accelerating conditions of global capitalism have created increasing precarisation in academic
workers of the knowledge economy. Alongside issues of mental health, instability, and a denial of
the possibility of a stable future, the precariat are also those who are “expected to have a level of
education that is greater than the labour they are expected to perform or expect to obtain”
(Standing 2014:10). The conditions for work have changed dramatically as a result of the pandemic
with wide ranging social and economic impacts. Global capitalism continues its destructive
appetite for adaptation and subsumption of human energy and labor, pausing only briefly for
localized lockdowns which, we argue, has created increasingly dangerous and tenuous working
conditions for the academic precariat. From an initial lack of support for the precarious workforce
to work from home through to a current emphasizing of “if you won’t do it, we will find someone
who will”, the precarious worker in academia is under greater pressure than ever before1. The
continued neoliberalising of and capitalist creep into global higher education has created
conditions of extreme surplus labor; labor which is highly educated, capable and anxious to work
(Standing 2014). Alongside this slide into almost pre-Fordist employment (Betti 2016) conditions
comes a polarization towards ideological extremism, a twisted commitment to managerialism, and
a hyper-focus on “job ready graduates” has crept into the structures and core nature of higher
education (Brett 2021; Giroux 2014; Norton 2020). An obsession of politicians-come-Vice
Chancellors through the entire senior leadership of universities in a vain march towards “profit”

Front-line workers, health care professionals and service industry workers are also under enormous pressures of a
similar nature, in a competition to survive, and enable survival, through work.
1

through the production of flash buildings and fast paced organizational change into a
zombification of higher education. Amongst this corporate-political class, as Brabazon (2020:131)
has characterized, “There is always another Key Performance Indicator, change management
initiative, and restructure”, a moving feast for academics, professionals and students who work in
the higher education sector, and a constant re-evaluation of conditions for employment. Gone is
the period of academia as a secure source of employment, at least for wealthy white men, with its
tenured positions to public appearance offering a cushy and relaxed life lent over a book or
occasionally leading discussions with small groups of students. It is replaced now by “dualization”
of academic work where “insiders [are] in secure, stable employment and outsiders [are] in fixedterm, precarious employment” (Afonso 2013). The promise of a rapid increase in doctoral
“students” for an educated populous, strong democracy and knowledgeable pool for potential
academic employment has instead resulted in a collapse of academic work into a cat fight for the
highest outputs, contributions to journals and books, teaching evaluation results and a continuous
competition for more work (Rao, Hosein, and Raaper 2021).
COVID-19 added yet more vectors of insecurity, angst and anger for the already precarious
academics of the twenty-first century university. In addition to changing working conditions, it
highlighted the tragic fact that it is not just “management” academics who leverage the precariat,
rather the entirety of academia, including beloved academic mentors who face increasing incentives
to abuse their stable power. Rather than fight back, the secure working bloc turn on the precariat,
not just out of fear for themselves, but because they have accepted new capitalist terms and are
increasingly succumbing to university management hegemony (here taken in terms of Gramsci
1996). Below, we briefly explore the changes to the university system during the pandemic, explore
our experiences of moving online and the changing pressures of working from home in insecure
work, evaluate the disproportionate impact of insecure pandemic affected work on academic

women, and propose a re-centering of doctoral education and traineeship as a productive road to
intervene in the desperate future of academia.

The global economy, a pandemic, and technological changes to academic
work
During the COVID-19 global health crisis the fundamental nature of work changed as
countries around the world entered lockdown. These changes were disproportionate for service
industry, front line and scientific workers whose work, in general terms, continued to operate in a
pre-pandemic mode (Myers et al. 2020). Another subset of people lost their means of employment
altogether, and already vulnerable people were at a particular disadvantage, including the working
class and those in insecure work, as disproportionately affected (Williams 2020). Indeed, the effects
of epidemics and pandemics on work has had a notable impact over time which, according to
economists, cannot be fully measured (Keogh-Brown et al. 2010). With the recent pandemic, a
rapid decentralization of knowledge work occurred and in countries where the effects of COVID19 lockdowns and behavioral modifications have continued, there has been a sustained exit of
knowledge workers from cities and urban centers involving, in particular, the wealthy middle class.
Notably, epidemiologists have highlighted the role of cities in the spread and sustain of COVID19, in particular in the networked ways in which larger cities operate, with many shared services,
spaces and health systems (Lai et al. 2020). In this regard, those wealthy workers able to exit cities
and work remotely are literally safer, both in terms of health conditions as well as their established
economic positions, across the health crisis. During this rapid shift to “work from home”, or
perhaps realistically transition to not working for a great number of people, engagement with digital
technology increased dramatically. Online meetings have proliferated and replaced much humanto-human contact across 2020 as a “safe” mode of communication (Hodder 2020). An emergence
of new language has accompanied this shift of work online, in itself a quasi-marketing tactic, the

rise of “Zoom Fatigue” (Wolf 2020) as a compliment to hyper-capitalism’s burnout is a sad reality
for many still able to engage with their workplace from home (Walker 1986).
The move to Zoom for work has also been mirrored in higher education globally with
higher education workers – academic, professional and students alike – moving rapidly to online
conferencing tools to replace face-to-face interactions (Serhan 2020). The move online, termed by
many universities as “emergency remote teaching”, or for international students “emergency
remote offshore teaching,” saw dramatic shifts to the pedagogy and mode of work for huge
cohorts of students and staff. Quick to distinguishing between “emergency” and business as usual,
universities justified their rapid curriculum adaptation, and in some instances dilapidation, as a
necessary continuation of “essential” work (Hodges et al. 2020; Rahiem 2020). For many academic
staff this transition heralded a newfound collaborative spirit around the teaching and learning
process in the pressure-cooker of lockdown, and an engagement with technology – something
which may have been previously less than prominent – became a necessity. Suddenly, those with
skills in distance and online education became informal, networked leaders in the education space
(Fernandez and Shaw 2020). Amongst the scientific community actively researching COVID-19 a
rapid opening of research knowledge occurred through fast paced publication and the use of open
access knowledge dissemination networks (Lee and Haupt 2020). Broadly, this global health crisis
has created significantly challenging conditions for those in precarious and insecure work. Even
amongst knowledge workers with the capacity to move online, there are disproportionate economic
effects on those with and without stable employment from people of color, women and poorer
communities (Clark et al. 2020; Dang, Huynh, and Nguyen 2020; Fortuna et al. 2020). For students
of these backgrounds across the sector, the move to online learning and teaching had
disproportionate impacts as students without access to relatively modern technology, high speed
internet access, or a stable home environment from which to work suffered a lack of socioeconomic ability to engage. Respectively, precarious academic workers found themselves with

immediate need to adapt to working from home, teaching from home, and with increasing demand
from their institutions, to support students of diverse backgrounds. Significantly, this included
international students who were dramatically impacted by travel restrictions and health conditions
at home (Nguyen and Balakrishnan 2020; Paudel 2020; Supiani et al. 2020).
International students make up the economic lifeblood of many of Australia’s eastern coast
universities, with high numbers of Chinese students supporting the universities dangerously
ambitious research agendas. Amidst a struggling university sector, the crisis of the pandemic has
plunged many of Australia’s universities into deep uncertainty (Doidge and Doyle 2020). Indeed,
recent political conversations have emerged which would see conservative and liberal governments
merging and combining universities in a misguided attempt to save, enhance or shuffle the
institutions up the international rankings (Siebert 2020). With COVID-19, many international
students were suddenly plunged into difficult financial conditions themselves and no longer in a
position to pay their exorbitant tuition fees with no support from government: “we were told by
the Prime Minister to pack our bags and leave if we were not able to support ourselves financially”
(Sivarajah 2020:35). A spattering of student support from foreign governments and local
universities eventually emerged which ensured select international students were able to either stay
in Australia or return to their own country, though government support never came. At our
university, international and disadvantaged students were supported through a tailored financial
package which went some way towards providing aid for students in difficult economic conditions
as a result of the initial lockdown (Our P&VC announced this package here: Stirling 2020). While
student support locally emerged, the Liberal/National Coalition federal government in Australia
refused to reasonably support the international students who pay their way to an education in the
country (Nguyen and Balakrishnan 2020).
Universities in Australia, already in a difficult position and struggling for relevance, funding
and acting in increasingly cutthroat corporate forms of governance in a race to the bottom, took

further hits with many institutions shedding “insider” permanent staff in “necessary”
organizational downsizing (Universities Australia 2021). Claims that government failed to bail out
the university sector were ill received by the public, whose conservative cultural conditioning has
worked to position them against any form of “bailout” and a disposition of apathy towards the
problems of the university sector. Complicated further by a general perception of universities as
ivory towers where privileged professors reside, and an ongoing Liberal Party rhetoric of the
university as a societal disservice meant only for the privileged minority destined to Liberal Party
politics, has created a broad culture of anti-intellectualism.

Moving online and precarious work
During South Australia’s first lockdown we were both teaching across multiple topics in a
handful of disciplines as casual employees with heavy teaching loads. Both of us had fallen trap to
the necessity of absorbing as much work as possible as the glimmer of hope for a permanent
academic position flashed before our eyes. Just as the depiction of a Chinese epidemic was
beginning to make its first appearances in Australian media, we were both in a struggle to take on
work across bridging programs, the humanities, and education, balancing what we needed to pay
our rent against how much we could manage to teach, mark and support in addition to working
on our doctoral studies: the very image of precarious workers in higher education under piles of
student papers and swimming through content for multi-disciplinary teaching (O’Connor 2020).
While we are both experienced “casual academics,” neither of us had ever been offered a contract,
let alone a permanent position in the academy. Our contributions across a year equaled in the order
of educating 300 students, marking some 1,800 assignments, and making substantial contributions
as casual research assistants to a range of projects, including those funded by the prestigious
Australian Research Council. The “glory” of working on these projects was an internal victory in
ourselves, a kind of “I can do this” attitude to our own detriment.

Neither of us experienced “burnout”, as there were certainly substantive crunch points
across our working periods. Balanced with the dearth of work across the summer and winter
breaks, we could rationalize the exceptional load between us as both a way to pay the bills, the
privilege of teaching, and the glimmer of possibility of academic roles at the end of the tunnel. It
was not long into our Semester 1, 2020 teaching that the sudden necessity to move online surfaced
in the country. With almost no notice, and a flurry of activity by insider academics and professional
support staff on campus, we were teaching online. As casuals with no paid access to professional
learning, and limited access to resources, support and, honestly, time, there were no bona fide
supports for casual tutors moving to online learning and teaching. Both being “young”, relatively
tech savvy academics, we were able to stumble our way through using our university’s online
conferencing environment, Collaborate, and with the influx of our students streaming in to
collaborate with us, it felt like the sharp learning curve was happening together. Fortunately, our
inexperienced students went easy on us, but amongst our casual colleagues there were many
without adequate equipment, skills and support to engage with online teaching. In some instances,
these peers lost their teaching contracts, easily rescinded by the University and delegated to other
eager casuals who had rapidly developed a knack for talking at students for an hour tutorial online.
Balancing Collaborate, Microsoft Teams for our professional communication about the
research work we were both managing, and a deluge of emails from students, this was one of the
busiest times either of us have ever experienced. The immense stress of juggling this work with
next to no human support and no financial support, with a requirement that we redevelop tutorial
content and workshop activities on the fly, while the permanent “insider” academics languished with
their two or three classes online, created an easily depressive environment in our homes. As with
many of those working from home, particularly as a novel experience, having been recently evicted
from a shared office in our then College, the boundaries between work and home life blurred.
Both of us had experiences of working well into the early hours of the morning writing emails to

students, contributing to publications, drafting reports, and revising teaching plans. The slide into
“work as life” was, for us, nearly complete. Admittedly, we were taking on a lot of work – work
we were capable of doing with a track record of “success”, though we could not have predicted
the timing of the pandemic and its wide-ranging impacts on our work. We both managed to
successfully complete two semesters in 2020 of teaching, though with a substantially reduced load
in Semester 2, with positive student evaluations of our teaching and high praise received for our
commitment to our student’s success, wellbeing and engagement during the pandemic’s
lockdowns, though none of this coming from the University’s insider academics. The move online,
however, was not the only dramatic change during the pandemic. Casual employment conditions
shifted and the responsibilities of caring for students shifted disproportionately, with student
expectations increasing around “care,” particularly from female academics (Kınıkoğlu and Can
2021; Nash and Churchill 2020). Across 2020 we both lost substantial amounts of work, partly due
to natural attrition of research and teaching work in a pandemic, and in no small part due to
changing workplace conditions in the academy and a marked increase in exploitation of precarious
workers.

Insecurity, pandemic and academic women
The pandemic created employment insecurity across a range of categories, the effects of
which were exacerbated for women, particularly those in insecure work (Churchill 2020; Wenham
et al. 2020). Educational participation in Australia results in a high number of women “prepared”
for skilled work, however gender segregation leads to women being “more likely to be on the
frontline as essential workers putting them even more at risk of being exposed to coronavirus”
(Churchill 2020:3). With demands on women increasing for care obligations, be they responsible
for their own family and children, or for labor which entails care for others, and labor in the “home
workplace,” women have been disproportionately disadvantaged in terms of additional unpaid
work during the pandemic. Indeed, even amongst those essential researchers in academia, with a

disproportionate gender balance towards women in the health professions, correspondence in The
Lancet highlights that “at 30%, 28%, and 22%, women’s shares of overall, first, and last authorship
in COVID-19 papers decreased [in 2020] by 16%, 23%, and 16%, respectively” (Gabster et al.
2020:1969).
The exploitation of women’s labor to support men’s publishing, work, and academic
careers marks a repeat of the patterns of the historical academy. While this phenomenon is far from
new, as White (2001) highlighted, corporatization and managerialism have only accelerated the gap
between men and women in in the academy, and, importantly, even in the 1990s there had been
ongoing issues of managerialism and “a negative impact on the work patterns and pay rates of
Australian women academics” (White 2001:67). The damaging impacts of capitalist acceleration
and a cultural replacement in university management towards managerialism have only amplified
the challenges for women in academia. While under the guise of progress, or perhaps while they
are ostensibly “in charge” there is a constructed “glass cliff” where academic women can be
deliberately placed in positions where their progress is limited by design and their tenure is denied
and ultimately reduced to administrative work as opposed to scholarly prestige (Peterson 2015).
Moreover, these positions are the vast majority of high-level academic ranks for women (ranks D
& E in Australia) and management are, themselves, an image of precarity, working on borrowed
time and power (Stringer et al. 2018). In this space, as academic women begin to “move up”
through a constructed academic hierarchy – to which hegemonic men are not beholden – they
inherit a credulous acceptance of, and even a dependence on, the extant institutional patriarchal
systems which exploit women and their labor (Bone 2018). Here, women with “opportunity” to
compete in the false labor market are converted to intense dependency, an esprit de corps with the
patriarchs – the hegemonic ideal which in reality endlessly pits women against women, including
senior academic women against junior academic women, in an exploitative relation which positions

women from the beginning of their careers as the hard worker under the academic man and, in
many instances, unable to lift other women, even to the point of deliberate sabotage.
In conjunction with the pandemic, the augmentation of the problems with “pipelines” for
women through higher education, with recent proliferation of doctoral students and reductions in
total numbers of “insider” stable academic positions, they have always affected women beyond
measure. While, in broad terms, educational participation by women in Australia is comparatively
high, the pipeline, or pathway, through to stable “insider” work in the academy is still, as White
(2001) asserted, leaky. Doctoral programs no longer automatically include high quality academic
mentorship or internships in to teaching and learning or research processes of the crumbling
academy; both of us experienced a complete lack of support from our then supervisors during our
shift to emergency remote teaching, both in supervisory capacity in our doctoral education and
from our immediate supervisors in the teaching programs we worked in. Indeed, it was almost as
though we had disappeared to the entire department. Later we learned about weekly check-ins
between “insider” academics, an emanation of support from leadership, including the organization
of forums to discuss strategies for online teaching, and several above-and-beyond support
measures for those academics to whom a computer is still a scary technological object rather than
a tool for educational ends. Our experiences of our then supervisors could certainly be
characterized as “exploiter” (Brabazon 2016:15), and, in particular, shone a light back on the sexist
relationship between male academic and their female students that is still rampant in academia.
Rather than the mentor-mentee relationship of promise, the female, indeed often feminist,
precariat can still unknowingly be trapped in a sexist relationship in which she falls prey to the ageold woman behind the academic man, indeed, a white man of privilege posing himself as a feministsympathizer gaining favor and even flanked by his female colleagues for his apparent work for
women. The female doctoral student will work hard to contribute substantially to her male
academic’s research, only for it to be claimed in his name. This accelerated through COVID-19, to

the point where a female student could become literally invisible to the institution whilst working
from home, enabling the exploitative relationship to expand, and, like an eclipse, allowing a
subsumption of “her” work into “his”. The female junior researcher can easily become a literal
housewife to academia if the academy does not protect her or recognize her status as a contributing
citizen of the academy (O’Keefe and Courtois 2019). The invisibility of female work in the
pandemic meant that women may be unable to take any credit, or be acknowledged in any way, for
the work they meaningfully contributed, perhaps due to a toxic male of academic “prowess” that
feeds on the labor and flanking of female junior academics, which, critically, must remain junior by
necessity for his success. Any glimmer of hope for the future of an academic career that the female
precariat might have had was seriously threatened during COVID-19 lockdown, when sexist, white,
male academics could not be called out in a see something say something on campus that, at very least,
enabled the calling out of exploitation – even if it never resulted in action. Keeping the woman at
home made it such that the academy needed to do nothing about the oppression which had been
occurring since before the pandemic. The female junior researchers’ presence, standing behind the
white, able bodied, heterosexual, academic man rendered them literally invisible to the machinery
of the University. Maximizing on the ability to exploit, and scrambling to highlight significance in
the academy, now mobilized through the invisibility of the female junior, enabled a vainglorious
exploitative male academic to profit, through inaction, from the work of a female precarious
“outsider”.

Doctoral education and traineeship against the storm
In late-capitalism, university qualifications are aggressively repositioned towards market
objectives, from political rhetoric through to university advertising campaigns (Brett 2021; Connell
2013; Gottschall and Saltmarsh 2017). Including an obsessive and accelerating focus on the use of
emergent technologies including virtual reality, blockchain and big data, made to fit with teaching
and learning in undergraduate, science, technology, engineering, math, humanities, arts, social

sciences, education, law, government, medicine and nursing qualifications – regardless of authentic
benefit or even relevance (for example: Eijnatten, Pieters, and Verheul 2013; Kaplan 2015; Kitchin
2014; Rooksby and Dimitrov 2019; Skiba 2017). A subsequent adaptation of teaching and learning
towards convenience, a “McDonaldization” of degrees (Nadolny and Ryan 2015), and the decaying
value of a qualification for learning or as a fundamental pillar of engaged, critical democracy erodes
the very purpose and nature of the scholarly promise in universities. Australian universities find
themselves trapped in a self-harm cycle, managerial university executive driving itself towards rapid
technological and educational change, driving the cost of the “campus” up, chasing enhanced
research outcomes that ignore any actual cultural, social, health or political benefit, and a federal
political system which continues to catastrophically cut, reimagine and redistribute funding and
models of higher education. An endless cut, shift, restructure, recreate, move and divide between
the soft sciences and hard sciences, the pitting of academics against one another2, an increasing
scarcity of jobs, and an endlessly unstable and increasingly mentally draining and damaging
university landscape has emerged. This is a scary world for future academics. While it is important
to acknowledge that not all students will not necessarily continue beyond an undergraduate or
masters qualification, those that do are increasingly taking what is of value from the research process
and exporting it into private enterprise to produce more private profit, as the only space with the
possibility of stability for the factory production line of quantitative skill PhD holders (Brabazon
2016). The promise of higher education as an institution of learning, sharing knowledge, and
democratization briefly realized in the 1970s and 1980s after the dramatic social upheaval and
student power movements of the 1960s are but a flash in the historical pan as universities give up
on democracy and possibility in favor of corporatization, market competition, deregulation,

This is constructed within a false labor market where hegemonic necessity breeds competition. As the hegemonic
university leader drives towards ever increasing ranking gains the establishment of hierarchical and extremely
competitive spaces are established. Here competition is established as a basic principle of participation in the Civil
society of the university (Gramsci 1996).
2

mergers and fee hikes. The university suffers in an era of students seen singularly as consumers,
valued for their market use-value (Brown 2015). The cultural shift in the contemporary capitalist
university, itself a bifurcation of academy-as-institution and academy-as-tradition, has seen a
departure from academic community towards use-value profit. Here, an exploitative academic
model has been allowed to thrive enabling a collective value extraction from the precarious worker,
often incredibly skilled intellectual laborers, under the banner of attracting research funding and
appealing to management hegemony. The secure academic pivots from a scholar to a sales front
as their presidents and vice chancellors had only a few years before. Here, the scant few who fight
back for equitable working conditions and a return to the ‘golden era’ of universities voices are
drowned out, and while the 1960s image of a university was far from an egalitarian class, race and
gender utopia it stands starkly as an image against the modern academic malaise or exploitative
marketing-man.
A reconceptualization, then, is necessary in order to reposition education and universities
in contemporary culture. A move towards a new way which acknowledges the problems,
exploitations, and failures of the university institution of the past, which allows for a radical, yet
necessary, new university. This need not be implemented in the hallowed halls of Loxbridge, nor
the Ivy American university; those that wish to build a new way can. Starting with relatively
weakened, yet employment-stable position of academics of rebellious interest, and through
creation of communities around practice and knowledge sharing the academy qua tradition can
find its way back to its purpose as a public good. While leading from the bottom, itself a
monumental task, provides its own challenges, the resultant ‘metric’ uplift, which meshes with
fresh modes of being in higher education, is possible together. By casting down the marketing-man
in an allegiance of PhD, precariat, and tenured activist-scholar, new spaces and ways of working
become clearer, though require serious commitment for action. This initiative, possible only
through a unification of those inside and out of the academy, creates conditions for a shared

consciousness of Gramscian tradition. Therefore, in this section, we pose four recommendations
to re-center doctoral education as a pathway to change universities for the better.
1. Research support for PhD students and mentored pathways to research active positions
Universities have the opportunity to provide support for students who have an identified
interest in pursuing a research trajectory. By tailoring mentoring and support programs, universities
can re-value doctoral students’ contributions, with pay, which would enable thorough research
engagement across disciplines. By tailoring a stream in doctoral programs to research-focused
students, through a combination of intensified funding for research support and training and
through new mentorship pathways and incentives for students in discipline, the possibility that
PhD students will “succeed”, by metric success, increases dramatically. Valuing contributions and
facilitating meaningful learning through research traineeships which, based on evidence and track
record, eventuate in contract-pathway to permanent research focused roles for successful
participants uniquely solves the problems of immediate tenure and the precariousness of working
in academia: the losing of talented researchers under a mountain of marking. Accompanying this
must be an incentive structure which encourages research dissemination through community and
open access channels. Alongside such a mentorship pathway would come an equal opportunity
policy, and a gender quota – a still strong mode of encouraging equal gender engagement.
2. Rebuild teaching internships for PhD students
Academia has a track record of providing strong mentorship for teaching-focused future
academics. While this support has largely evaporated in the massification of doctoral education,
there is real potential to reintroduce teaching internships amongst PhD candidates. By providing
equal support for research-interested and teaching-interested students, and an inherent ability for
students to choose a “stream” or a mandate to complete one year of each, offers support for
teaching trajectory students in doctoral programs while equipping them with the research skills

that come with quality supervision and support. Through new mentoring and training designed
specifically for doctoral students, and funding avenues for doctoral students to enter into a peersupervised “teaching academy” which incentivize teaching focused staff to support doctoral
students’ development of good pedagogic strategies in their discipline, the cycle of research
support and teaching support can be complete. Such an approach, though not entirely novel, gives
PhD students support networks, enables collegiality, and creates opportunities for them to
experiment in their teaching and research process at a meta level. Pragmatically, universities would
likely use these programs as a filtering system to determine who is able to enter into teaching or
research work. While not the purpose of these proposed support schemes, with appropriate and
peer-reviewed mechanisms there is no reason mentoring and pathways to teaching and research
could not act as a constructive education toward permanent employment. Indeed, ensuring that
students in these pathways were either teaching or researching, being given appropriate financial
compensation and scholarly recognition for their work, and having a program designed to support
students to develop and deliver their own research as they work would create arguably better
working conditions than “insider” academics already have. Importantly, by enabling and facilitating
higher degree student’s contributions, and counting them in meaningful ways, presents an
incentive for both the institution and the rebuilt academic community. In this sense, the universities
can count more output, the tenured academic has more access to diversity, and the student
embarks on their career visibly sooner without substantive fear of loss of income, reputation or
revenue.
3. Incentivize PhD supervisors to co-publish with students
Research is valued based on its impact, rank or the funding it secured. In this regard,
funding bodies and universities alike should prioritize and incentivize those grants and publications
which are co-authored or supported by doctoral students. Ensuring a partnership plan for working
with doctoral students is in place to prevent possible exploitation and rewarding publication and

other research output that works with students is a meaningful way towards ensuring students are
part of the culture of the university. This would require the configuration balanced and research
focussed roles such that academics are in a position to be rewarded for co-publishing with their
PhD students. Moreover, this supports and protects the fundamental “freedom” provided through
academic integrity, one amongst the most significant of the academic tradition’s values.
4. Students in Governance
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, give students a seat at the table in governance
dialogue. Valuing students’ contributions in their research and teaching work by providing secure
pathways to permanent work goes a long way towards building sustainable culture. However, to
ensure everyone has a voice in governance requires a radical rethink of the way that university
governance is currently operated in Australia. There is a deep need to identify students’ views on
areas for innovation, improvement and change. In this vein, universities have, distressingly,
progressed towards increasingly consumer-focused market research tactics in a marketing and
market research head spin (Batabyal 2006; Gottschall and Saltmarsh 2017). In order to
meaningfully direct higher education for the future the students must be included in meaningful
ways in the strategic decision-making of the university. Vice Chancellors, Deans, teaching program
directors, and teaching staff should use every opportunity to listen to student views, but also to
involve students before strategic decisions are made in decisions that affect them – nothing about
them without them (Cornelius-Bell and Bell 2020). Rather than focusing on reporting on the “good
job” the university has been doing politically and in its research agenda, it should create a culture
of ownership amongst undergraduate, graduate and post-doctoral students and workers. If
everyone can feel responsible, secure and valuable to the institution, the culture of the institution
will rocket forward. Students, and precarious workers, are equally stakeholders in academic
institutions. Not only do we contribute to a web of knowledge in most of the anglosphere, students
pay for the opportunity. If education is to run as a business, a fundamental acceptance which seems

to have held to the core of many anglophone countries, then students must be considered as critical
stakeholders, and their robust engagement must be encouraged. Importantly, however, this cannot
be taken aproblematically; conscious, analytical and meaningful grassroots education is required to
ensure that the dream of a new academy – no longer separated as institution and community – can
be achieved together for the benefit of humanity and our planet.
Concluding thoughts
Higher education globally is in a grim state. Successive attacks of corporate governance
structures, neoliberal managerialism, economic rationalism and metric chasing has left the
university sector in ruins. The COVID-19 global pandemic accelerated the exploitation and
damage of the university sector to students and workers alike, and as long as it continues to affect
the nature of work the damage will continue. Students still speak to the mental damage of social
distance, the global insecurity of health, the inability to access healthcare, the insecure workplaces,
worries about the climate and planet, and the world they are inheriting. Alongside students,
academics, particularly early career and female academics, struggle with insecurity and anxiety over
their work, taking on too much, never knowing if they might lose their job, or be exploited by a
supervisor or colleague. To make a meaningful difference in late-capitalism, serious intervention
into the governance, priorities, and pathways in universities are needed. Across the political
economy the degradation of the nature of work, the boundaries between work and leisure, the
security of employment, the access to adequate mental and physical resources, failure of rapid
technological advancement to solve societal problems, wealth concentration and climate change
pose significant and wide-ranging problems for students and scholars. There are hopeful ways
towards the future, but they require a serious and sustained rethink of what higher education is
and does, how culture and representation work, and the nature and future of work in a global era
of insecurity, anxiety and disruption.

We hope to have started another conversation about the nature and value of doctoral
education and insecure work in the, hopefully soon, post-COVID age. Our optimistic suggestions
here are designed to be improved, interrogated and adapted. We hope only for attention to be
given to the state of higher education globally before it falls into obscurity, collapses into the void
of for-profit micro-credentialling, or is altogether shut down by the collapse of the global climate.

References
Afonso, Alexandre. 2013. “How Academia Resembles a Drug Gang.” Impact of Social Sciences.
Retrieved March 20, 2021
(https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/impactofsocialsciences/2013/12/11/how-academia-resemblesa-drug-gang/).
Batabyal, Amitrajeet A. 2006. “Shakespeare, Einstein, and the Bottom Line: The Marketing of
Higher Education.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 88(3):767–68. doi: 10/fdc48c.
Betti, Eloisa. 2016. “Gender and Precarious Labor in a Historical Perspective: Italian Women
and Precarious Work between Fordism and Post-Fordism.” International Labor and
Working Class History 89:64–83. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0147547915000356.
Bone, Kate Daisy. 2019. “‘I Don’t Want to Be a Vagrant for the Rest of My Life’: Young
Peoples’ Experiences of Precarious Work as a ‘Continuous Present.’” Journal of Youth
Studies 22(9):1218–37. doi: 10.1080/13676261.2019.1570097.
Brabazon, Tara. 2016. “Winter Is Coming: Doctoral Supervision in the Neoliberal University.”
International Journal of Social Sciences 3(1):14–34.
Brabazon, Tara. 2020. “From Bad Apples to Zombies? Walking Dead Leadership in the
Contemporary University.” Fast Capitalism 17(2). doi: 10.32855/fcapital.202002.009.
Brett, Judith. 2021. “The bin fire of the humanities.” The Monthly, March 1.
Brown, Wendy. 2015. Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution. First Edition. New York:
Zone Books.
Churchill, Brendan. 2020. “COVID-19 and the Immediate Impact on Young People and
Employment in Australia: A Gendered Analysis.” Gender, Work & Organization 1–12. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12563.
Clark, Eva, Karla Fredricks, Laila Woc-Colburn, Maria Elena Bottazzi, and Jill Weatherhead.
2020. “Disproportionate Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Immigrant
Communities in the United States.” PLOS Neglected Tropical Diseases 14(7):e0008484. doi:
10.1371/journal.pntd.0008484.
Connell, Raewyn. 2013. “The Neoliberal Cascade and Education: An Essay on the Market
Agenda and Its Consequences.” Critical Studies in Education 54(2):99–112. doi:
10.1080/17508487.2013.776990.
Cornelius-Bell, Aidan, and Piper Bell. 2020. “Partnership as Student Power: Democracy and
Governance in a Neoliberal University.” Radical Teacher 118(1). doi:
https://doi.org/10.5195/rt.2020.738
Dang, Hai-Anh, Toan Luu Duc Huynh, and Manh-Hung Nguyen. 2020. Does the Covid-19
Pandemic Disproportionately Affect the Poor? Evidence from a Six-Country Survey. SSRN Scholarly
Paper. ID 3627054. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research Network.

Doidge, Scott, and John Doyle. 2020. “Australian Universities in the Age of Covid.” Educational
Philosophy and Theory 0(0):1–7. doi: 10.1080/00131857.2020.1804343.
Eijnatten, Joris van, Toine Pieters, and Jaap Verheul. 2013. “Big Data for Global History: The
Transformative Promise of Digital Humanities.” BMGN - Low Countries Historical Review
128(4):55–77.
Fernandez, Antonio Arturo, and Graham Paul Shaw. 2020. “Academic Leadership in a Time of
Crisis: The Coronavirus and COVID-19.” Journal of Leadership Studies 14(1):39–45. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1002/jls.21684.
Fortuna, Lisa R., Marina Tolou-Shams, Barbara Robles-Ramamurthy, and Michelle V. Porche.
2020. “Inequity and the Disproportionate Impact of COVID-19 on Communities of
Color in the United States: The Need for a Trauma-Informed Social Justice Response.”
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy 12(5):443. doi: 10.1037/tra0000889.
Gabster, Brooke Peterson, Kim van Daalen, Roopa Dhatt, and Michele Barry. 2020. “Challenges
for the Female Academic during the COVID-19 Pandemic.” The Lancet
395(10242):1968–70. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)31412-4.
Giroux, Henry A. 2014. Neoliberalism’s War on Higher Education. Chicago, IL: Haymarket Books.
Gottschall, Kristina, and Sue Saltmarsh. 2017. “‘You’re Not Just Learning It, You’re Living It!’
Constructing the ‘Good Life’ in Australian University Online Promotional Videos.”
Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education 38(5):768–81. doi:
10.1080/01596306.2016.1158155.
Gramsci, Antonio. 1996. Selections from the Prison Notebooks. London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Hodder, Andy. 2020. “New Technology, Work and Employment in the Era of COVID-19:
Reflecting on Legacies of Research.” New Technology, Work and Employment 35(3):262–75.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1111/ntwe.12173.
Hodges, Charles, Stephanie Moore, Barb Lockee, Torrey Trust, and Aaron Bond. 2020. “The
Difference Between Emergency Remote Teaching and Online Learning.” Educause Review
6(1):15.
Kaplan, Frédéric. 2015. “A Map for Big Data Research in Digital Humanities.” Frontiers in Digital
Humanities 2. doi: 10.3389/fdigh.2015.00001.
Keogh-Brown, Marcus R., Simon Wren-Lewis, W. John Edmunds, Philippe Beutels, and Richard
D. Smith. 2010. “The Possible Macroeconomic Impact on the UK of an Influenza
Pandemic.” Health Economics 19(11):1345–60. doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/hec.1554.
Kitchin, Rob. 2014. “Big Data, New Epistemologies and Paradigm Shifts.” Big Data & Society
1(1):2053951714528481. doi: 10.1177/2053951714528481.
Kınıkoğlu, Canan Neşe, and Aysegul Can. 2021. “Negotiating the Different Degrees of Precarity
in the UK Academia during the Covid-19 Pandemic.” European Societies 23(sup1):S817–
30. doi: 10.1080/14616696.2020.1839670.

Lai, Ka Yan, Chris Webster, Sarika Kumari, and Chinmoy Sarkar. 2020. “The Nature of Cities
and the Covid-19 Pandemic.” Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 46:27–31. doi:
10.1016/j.cosust.2020.08.008.
Lee, Jenny J., and John P. Haupt. 2020. “Scientific Globalism during a Global Crisis: Research
Collaboration and Open Access Publications on COVID-19.” Higher Education. doi:
10.1007/s10734-020-00589-0.
Myers, Kyle R., Wei Yang Tham, Yian Yin, Nina Cohodes, Jerry G. Thursby, Marie C. Thursby,
Peter Schiffer, Joseph T. Walsh, Karim R. Lakhani, and Dashun Wang. 2020. “Unequal
Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on Scientists.” Nature Human Behaviour 4(9):880–83.
doi: 10.1038/s41562-020-0921-y.
Nadolny, Andrew, and Suzanne Ryan. 2015. “McUniversities Revisited: A Comparison of
University and McDonald’s Casual Employee Experiences in Australia.” Studies in Higher
Education 40(1):142–57. doi: 10.1080/03075079.2013.818642.
Nash, Meredith, and Brendan Churchill. 2020. “Caring during COVID-19: A Gendered Analysis
of Australian University Responses to Managing Remote Working and Caring
Responsibilities.” Gender, Work & Organization 27(5):833–46. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12484.
Nguyen, Oanh (Olena) Thi Kim, and Varsha Devi Balakrishnan. 2020. “International Students in
Australia – during and after COVID-19.” Higher Education Research & Development
39(7):1372–76. doi: 10.1080/07294360.2020.1825346.
Norton, Andrew. 2020. “3 Flaws in Job-Ready Graduates Package Will Add to the Turmoil in
Australian Higher Education.” The Conversation. Retrieved October 20, 2020
(http://theconversation.com/3-flaws-in-job-ready-graduates-package-will-add-to-theturmoil-in-australian-higher-education-147740).
O’Connor, Sarah. 2020. “The Academic Precariat Deserves Better.” Financial Times, December 1.
O’Keefe, Theresa, and Aline Courtois. 2019. “‘Not One of the Family’: Gender and Precarious
Work in the Neoliberal University.” Gender, Work & Organization 26(4):463–79. doi:
https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12346.
Paudel, Pitambar. 2020. “Online Education: Benefits, Challenges and Strategies During and
After COVID-19 in Higher Education.” International Journal on Studies in Education
3(2):70–85. doi: 10.46328/ijonse.32.
Peterson, Helen. 2016. “Is Managing Academics ‘Women’s Work’? Exploring the Glass Cliff in
Higher Education Management.” Educational Management Administration & Leadership
44(1):112–27. doi: 10.1177/1741143214563897.
Rahiem, Maila. 2020. “The Emergency Remote Learning Experience of University Students in
Indonesia amidst the COVID-19 Crisis.” International Journal of Learning, Teaching and
Educational Research 19:1–26. doi: 10.26803/ijlter.19.6.1.
Rao, Namrata, Anesa Hosein, and Rille Raaper. 2021. “Doctoral Students Navigating the
Borderlands of Academic Teaching in an Era of Precarity.” Teaching in Higher Education 1–
17. doi: 10.1080/13562517.2021.1892058.

Rooksby, John, and Kristiyan Dimitrov. 2019. “Trustless Education? A Blockchain System for
University Grades1.” Ubiquity: The Journal of Pervasive Media 6(1):83–88. doi:
10.1386/ubiq_00010_1.
Serhan, Derar. 2020. “Transitioning from Face-to-Face to Remote Learning: Students’ Attitudes
and Perceptions of Using Zoom during COVID-19 Pandemic.” International Journal of
Technology in Education and Science 4(4):335–42.
Siebert, Bension. 2020. “Labor Promises Commission on Merging South Australia’s Three Top
Universities.” October 31.
Sivarajah, Divvya. 2020. “The Cost of Studying in Australia.” Advocate: Journal of the National
Tertiary Education Union.
Skiba, Editor. 2017. “The Potential of Blockchain in Education and Health Care.” Nursing
Education Perspectives 38(4):220–21. doi: 10.1097/01.NEP.0000000000000190.
Standing, Guy. 2014. “The Precariat.” Contexts 13(4):10–12. doi: 10.1177/1536504214558209.
Stirling, C. 2020. “Flinders COVID-19 Student Support Package: 2 April - Flinders University
Students.” Flinders University. Retrieved March 15, 2021
(https://students.flinders.edu.au/coronavirus-information/update-vc-covid19-studentsupport-package).
Stringer, Rebecca, Dianne Smith, Rachel Spronken-Smith, and Cheryl Wilson. 2018. “‘My Entire
Career Has Been Fixed Term’: Gender and Precarious Academic Employment at a New
Zealand University.” New Zealand Sociology 33:169–201.
Supiani, Dina Rafidiyah, Yansyah, and Hafizhatu Nadia. 2020. “The Emotional Experiences of
Indonesian PhD Students Studying in Australia during the COVID-19 Pandemic.”
Journal of International Students 10(S3):108–25. doi: 10.32674/jis.v10iS3.3202.
Universities Australia. 2021. “17,000 Uni Jobs Lost to COVID-19.” Universities Australia.
Retrieved March 20, 2021 (https://www.universitiesaustralia.edu.au/media-item/17000uni-jobs-lost-to-covid-19/).
Walker, Gillian A. 1986. “Burnout: From Metaphor to Ideology.” The Canadian Journal of Sociology
/ Cahiers Canadiens de Sociologie 11(1):35–55. doi: 10.2307/3340447.
Wenham, Clare, Julia Smith, Sara E. Davies, Huiyun Feng, Karen A. Grépin, Sophie Harman,
Asha Herten-Crabb, and Rosemary Morgan. 2020. “Women Are Most Affected by
Pandemics — Lessons from Past Outbreaks.” Nature 583(7815):194–98. doi:
10.1038/d41586-020-02006-z.
White, Kate. 2001. “Women in the Professoriate in Australia.” International Journal of Organisational
Behaviour 3:64–76.
Williams, Mark. 2020. “Coronavirus Class Divide – the Jobs Most at Risk of Contracting and
Dying from COVID-19.” The Conversation. Retrieved March 20, 2021
(http://theconversation.com/coronavirus-class-divide-the-jobs-most-at-risk-ofcontracting-and-dying-from-covid-19-138857).

Wolf, Carolyn Reinach. 2020. “Virtual Platforms Are Helpful Tools but Can Add to Our Stress.”
Psychology Today. Retrieved March 20, 2021
(https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/the-desk-the-mental-healthlawyer/202005/virtual-platforms-are-helpful-tools-can-add-our-stress).

