Getting Closer by Moving Apart?
Strategic Interdependence and Preferences for Debt Mutualization in the Eurozone

Lucio Baccaro*

Björn Bremer†

Erik Neimanns‡

March 2021

Abstract
Existing research suggests that a “democratic constraint” blocks progress towards debt
mutualization in the eurozone: voters in creditor countries fiercely oppose debt sharing,
while voters in debtor countries strongly support remaining in the euro, which limits their
governments’ bargaining power. However, this literature neglects that preferences depend
on expectations about what other countries will do. We document this strategic
interdependence with a novel survey experiment in Germany and Italy, conducted at a crucial
moment during the COVID-19 pandemic. Italian voters vastly discount the costs of a
disorderly exit, while they strongly reduce their support for the euro if austerity is a condition
for continued euro membership. Faced with the possibility of Italexit, German voters weigh
the costs of a possible breakup of the euro more heavily than the costs of debt mutualization.
A majority thus accepts debt mutualization. These results suggest that voters take strategic
interdependence into account when formulating their preferences and that public opinion is
not (or no longer) a binding constrain for increasing fiscal risk-sharing in the eurozone.
Moreover, we reconstruct the debate about the pandemic recovery fund in Germany and
Italy and show that the German change of position was aimed at defusing a threat to the
integrity of the eurozone.

Keywords: eurozone; debt mutualization; COVID-19; public opinion; survey experiments

* Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies, Cologne. E-mail: baccaro@mpifg.de
† Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies, Cologne. E-mail: bremer@mpifg.de
‡ Max Planck Institute for the Study of Societies, Cologne. E-mail: neimanns@mpifg.de

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has created both new risks and new opportunities for the
eurozone. On the one hand, burgeoning public debt levels in countries like Italy and Spain
threaten to trigger another fiscal crisis in Europe. On the other hand, the fallout from the
pandemic has reopened the debate on fiscal risk-sharing across member states, which seemed
to have been buried in the mid-2010s, and has led to a first concrete step towards debt
mutualization: the launching of a pandemic recovery fund (NexGenEU) in early 2021.
These developments invite a reevaluation of the scholarly consensus about the (in)feasibility
of debt mutualization in Europe. The European treaties explicitly prohibit fiscal risk-sharing
across countries.1 During the euro crisis, the “no-bailout clause” of the treaty was bent to
allow for financial assistance to member states in case of systemic risk, but the determination
to prevent moral hazard remained: any financing was made contingent on strict
conditionality, including austerity and structural reforms to be implemented by the recipient
country. Alternative solutions, especially proposals for “Eurobonds”, were heatedly debated
during the crisis, but did not lead to any meaningful action.
Political scientists have explained the lack of progress towards fiscal integration by pointing
to a “democratic constraint”2 or “constraining dissensus”.3 Public opinion in northern
countries, so the argument goes, is strongly opposed to risk-sharing and cross-border
redistribution and this limits the northern politicians’ room for maneuver.4 At the same time,
voters in southern countries remain strongly attached to the euro and are unwilling to leave
the monetary union despite the high costs of austerity policies,5 which undermines the
1. In this paper, we use the terms “debt mutualization” and “fiscal risk-sharing” interchangeably.
2. Beramendi and Stegmueller 2020.
3. Hooghe and Marks 2009; Hooghe and Marks 2018.
4. Beramendi and Stegmueller 2020; Degner and Leuffen 2020; Howarth and Schild 2021; Schneider and
Slantchev 2018; Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020.
5. Clements, Nanou, and Verney 2014; Fernández-Albertos and Kuo 2016; Jurado et al. 2020; Walter et al.
2018.
1

leverage of southern politicians in the negotiations. During the euro crisis, this combination
created a strategic imbalance that allowed creditor countries to shift the burden of adjustment
on debtor countries,6 making any moves towards debt sharing unlikely.
Although this “democratic constraint” explains Europe’s response to the eurozone crisis
well, recent developments during the COVID-19 pandemic are difficult to reconcile with it.
Albeit temporary and limited in scope, the launching of NextGenEU, which is financed by
joint European debt, and Germany’s change in position – from staunch opposition against
any form of common debt to driving force behind the pandemic recovery fund – require us
to reassess the conditions under which voters in northern countries may agree to some form
of fiscal risk-sharing benefiting southern members. Is it still correct to conclude that a
binding democratic constraint ties politicians’ hands and prevents any significant move
towards fiscal integration? Are southern voters really committed to remaining in the euro at
all costs? Do northern voters not take into consideration the risks associated with a breakup
of the eurozone?
This paper addresses these questions with two linked survey experiments conducted in
Germany and Italy in April 2020. We ran our experiments at a crucial moment in the debate
on “coronabonds” (which later evolved into the NextGenEU plan), when the raging
COVID-19 pandemic produced an exogenous, negative shock to attitudes towards euro
membership in a systemically important country like Italy, making the threat of a breakup of
the euro more credible. Our research design thus exposed voters in Germany to a
hypothetical scenario in which Italy faced a financial crisis that could lead to its exit from the
common currency. They were asked to evaluate the costs of Italy exiting for the German
economy, i.e. a possible breakup of the euro, against the costs of allowing debt mutualization
in order to keep the euro intact. Voters in Italy were presented with the same scenario of
6. Copelovitch, Frieden, and Walter 2016; Frieden and Walter 2017.
2

their country facing a financial crisis and were asked to weigh the costs of a disorderly exit
from the euro against the costs of implementing austerity and structural reforms as a
condition for a European bailout.
Our results suggest that voters internalize the strategic interdependence between northern
and southern countries when formulating their preferences. For German voters, the costs of
a euro breakup weigh more heavily than the costs of debt mutualization. Importantly, when
they evaluate both types of costs simultaneously, a majority of Germans support debt
mutualization. For Italian voters, instead, the costs of remaining in the euro by implementing
austerity reforms weigh much more heavily than the costs of a disorderly exit. In fact, the
latter costs do not have a statistically significant impact on preferences. This suggests a
fundamental disparity between German and Italian voters in line with prospect theory:7 on
average, Italian voters seem to evaluate the prospect of remaining in the eurozone from the
“domain of losses” and are, therefore, more willing to embrace a risky option like euro exit;
German voters appear instead to evaluate euro membership more from the “domain of
gains” and are, therefore, more risk-averse.
Overall, our survey experiment suggests that public opinion is not, or perhaps no longer, a
binding constraint for progress towards fiscal risk-sharing in the Eurozone. Differently from
Greek voters in 2015,8 Italian voters are seemingly unwilling to pay the extra costs of austerity
in order to remain in the euro. When faced with a credible threat of losing the euro, German
voters seem amenable to agreeing to debt mutualization, and this finding dovetails with
similar evidence about the preferences of German interest groups.9 In line with the
experimental findings, we also present evidence that the German change of position about
coronabonds and the NextGenEU was aimed at strengthening positive sentiments towards

7. Quattrone and Tversky 1988; Tversky and Kahneman 1992.
8. Walter et al. 2018; Jurado et al. 2020.
9. Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020.
3

the European Union (EU) and the euro in Italy and other countries, and thus at defusing the
threat of euro-breakup. Ironically, it seems that the citizens of Europe need to first move
further apart, with a systemic country being willing to exit, before they can move closer to
one another.
In the remainder, we begin by reviewing the literature on the democratic constraints for fiscal
integration in the eurozone. Then we set out our theoretical framework and hypotheses.
Third, we introduce the experimental design and methods before presenting our results. We
then provide a brief reconstruction of the debate on coronabonds in Germany and Italy.
Finally, we test to what extent the rise in pandemic-related solidarity, as opposed to interestbased considerations, affects German support for helping Italy remain in the euro. We
conclude by discussing the contributions and limitations of our key findings, including
relevant scope conditions.

Conflicts about fiscal integration in Europe: A brief overview
The development of European integration reflects the intense political controversies
regarding fiscal risk-sharing across member states. At the end of the 20th century, when the
euro was created, intergovernmental conflicts prevented tools for risk-sharing and debt
mutualization from being introduced.10 Northern European countries feared that they would
have to pay for the profligacy of southern European member states. Therefore, they
intentionally limited fiscal risk-sharing in the Maastricht Treaty in three ways: 1) by
prohibiting monetary financing of government debt by the ECB (Article 123 of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU)); 2) by including a no-bailout clause
(Article 125); and 3) by introducing the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), which was

10. Dyson and Featherstone 1999; Eichengreen and Frieden 2001; McNamara 1998.
4

supposed to prevent member states from excessive deficit spending and unsustainable fiscal
policies.
At the time, it was assumed that an institutional architecture that constrained monetary policy
to solely target inflation, and constrained fiscal deficits and public debt (to 3 and 60 percent
of GDP, respectively), would bring economic benefits for everybody. Moreover, the
Maastricht Treaty did not foresee any measures to limit the accumulation of private debt
because it was assumed that governments’ excesses posed the greatest threat to the stability
of the common currency, while private financial markets could be relied upon to price risk
correctly.11
The euro crisis, however, revealed the problems of the eurozone architecture. Financial
markets first ignored country-level risks, allowing interest rates to converge, but then started
to impose unsustainable risk premia onto southern European countries in 2010.12 When
Greece lost access to financial markets, and several other member states followed suit, the
European partners decided to bail them out, first through ad-hoc measures and then through
a more institutionalized solution: the introduction of the European Stability Mechanism
(ESM). The no-bailout clause was amended by modifying article 136 of the TFEU. However,
the economic philosophy underlying the Maastricht Treaty was not changed. Countries
receiving financial assistance were required to sign a Memorandum of Understanding,
committing to structural reforms and austerity policies. The mechanisms of fiscal
surveillance were further strengthened through the introduction of the Fiscal Compact.
While debtor countries were helped to service their debts, the burden of adjustment fell
solely onto them.13

11. Stiglitz 2016, chap. 2.
12. Chang and Leblond 2015.
13. Frieden and Walter 2017; Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020.
5

Ideas for an alternative resolution of the eurozone crisis existed, but northern member states
were reluctant to implement them. This resistance has been described as resting on a strong
moral foundation,14 but the most common explanation focuses on public opinion. In
Europe, policymakers have increasingly been confronted with Eurosceptic publics in the last
few decades. As European integration became politicized in elections and referendums, a
“permissive consensus” gave way to a “constraining dissensus”, which prohibits further
integration despite functional pressures. Political leaders increasingly had to “worry about
the electoral consequences of their European policies.”15
The fear of a populist backlash strongly influenced the EU’s response to the eurozone crisis.
Numerous studies show that voters in northern European countries were strongly opposed
to fiscal integration, and argue on this basis that public opinion constrains the politicians’
room for maneuver. Bechtel et al. fielded a survey in January 2012, which suggests that 61
percent of Germans were opposed to the European bailouts.16 Moreover, data from the
Eurobarometer shows that support for Eurobonds was much lower in countries that would
likely have been net contributors. It was particularly low in Germany where only one third
favored the introduction of Eurobonds.17 Beramendi and Stegmueller argue that this
opposition towards fiscal integration is rooted in domestic economic interests that diverge
across the eurozone.18 They argue that heterogeneity in citizens’ preferences makes riskpooling among member states difficult as “leaders weigh heavily the preferences of their
national electorates when negotiating policy.”19 Citizens’ preferences were thus “the central
elements of the democratic constraint on EU leaders” in northern Europe.20

14. Carstensen and Schmidt 2018; Hien 2019; Matthijs 2016; Matthijs and McNamara 2015.
15. Hooghe and Marks 2009, 21; also see Hooghe and Marks 2018.
16. Bechtel et al. 2014.
17. Kanthak and Spies 2018; Nicoli 2019.
18. Beramendi and Stegmueller 2020.
19. Ibid., 640.
20. Ibid.
6

Other research confirms that public opinion in northern countries was an important
constraint for policymakers. For example, Schneider and Slantchev show that concerns
about the unpopularity of a Greek bailout shaped the German government’s negotiation
position in 2010.21 Polls showed that only 20 to 25 percent of Germans supported helping
Greece and “Merkel’s tough talk on Greece brought her political gains domestically”.22
Similarly, based on interviews with policymakers in Austria, Netherlands, and the
Netherlands, Walter et al. show that elites were aware of the popular opposition towards
fiscal transfers and described it as the main obstacle for further fiscal integration.23 They thus
argue that “popular resistance against interstate financing constrained governments’ appetite
for more generous financing approaches.”24 Especially, Germany’s strategy was “firmly
rooted in domestic politics” during the euro crisis.25 The government’s opposition towards
fiscal integration “aligned fully with an extremely hostile public opinion towards
Eurobonds”26, and the government’s position was motivated by electoral considerations and
political calculations.27
Simultaneously, southern governments faced their own version of the “democratic
constraint”. The prolonged eurozone crisis substantially increased dissatisfaction with the
EU.28 Remarkably, however, support for the euro remained high.29 Even in the crisis-ridden
south, voters still fundamentally supported the euro despite austerity and a prolonged
recession. There was a broad consensus in debtor countries that exit from the euro should
be avoided at all costs, not just in Greece but also in other countries.30 Many voters thus had

21. Schneider and Slantchev 2018.
22. Ibid., 18.
23. Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020, 225–9.
24. Ibid., 42.
25. Schneider and Slantchev 2018, 3.
26. Howarth and Schild 2021, 219.
27. Bernhard and Leblang 2016; Börzel and Risse 2018.
28. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales 2016; Hobolt and de Vries 2016; de Vries 2018.
29. Hobolt and Leblond 2013; Hobolt and Wratil 2015; Roth, Jonung, and Nowak-Lehmann Danziger 2016;
Walter et al. 2018.
30. Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020, chap. 4.
7

conflicting preferences because they strongly supported the euro but opposed austerity
policies.31 As citizens compare the status quo against possible alternatives,32 the prospect of
leaving the euro was even less attractive than austerity for voters in the south.
In the negotiations with creditors, this high support for the euro influenced the southern
governments, which is clearly illustrated by events around the third Greek bailout in 2015.
Jurado et al. have shown that while the far-left government led by Syriza was trying to
renegotiate the terms of the agreement with the creditors (the “Troika”), support for the
euro remained very high in Greece (around 75 percent),33 despite the negative consequences
of austerity for the Greek population.34 In summer 2015, when a majority of voters rejected
the third bailout package in a popular referendum, more than three-quarters of respondents
wanted to keep the euro, and only 13 percent preferred exit.35 Arguably, popular support for
the euro deprived the Greek government of a credible exit option and reduced its bargaining
power.36
Public opinion, therefore, favored the negotiation position of creditor countries: while
southern countries had no credible alternative, northern countries had no incentive to
fundamentally alter the institutional architecture of the euro. This is why Beramendi and
Stegmueller argue that “Europe’s perpetual stasis has clear and traceable democratic
origins”,37 while Schneider and Slantchev argue that “strong domestic opinions can lead to
suboptimal foreign policies.” 38 The strategic imbalance led to constant muddling through,39
as EU leaders took “the path of least political resistance, keeping the euro afloat with

31. Clements, Nanou, and Verney 2014; Fernández-Albertos and Kuo 2016; Franchino and Segatti 2019.
32. de Vries 2018.
33. Jurado et al. 2020.
34. Xezonakis and Hartmann 2020.
35. Walter et al. 2018, 982.
36. Varoufakis 2017, 478.
37. Beramendi and Stegmueller 2020, 642.
38. Schneider and Slantchev 2018, 28.
39. Jones, Kelemen, and Meunier 2016.
8

regulatory measures while avoiding populist pressures that would arise in major treaty
reform”.40 Meanwhile, the fundamental problems of the eurozone remained unsolved.41
In 2020, however, the debate about fiscal risk-sharing returned with a vengeance. The
COVID-19 pandemic affected all European countries but with different economic
consequences. Due to large differences in government debt, the capacity of eurozone
countries to respond to the economic shock with deficit spending diverged sharply. This
made a resurgence of tensions in sovereign bond markets a distinct possibility. The most
forceful response to these renewed tensions came from the ECB, which in March 2020,
launched the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Program (PEPP), promising to counter any
rise in interest rates spreads with potentially unlimited purchases of government bonds. This
measure was effective at keeping spreads under control. However, it remains crisisdependent and time-bound, in addition to resting on uncertain legal ground.42 Over time, it
may prove difficult for the ECB to maintain its role as the buyer of last resort due to the
strictures of the existing treaties, which prohibit monetary financing of fiscal expenditures.
Consequently, the issue of debt mutualization returned center stage in spring 2020. In March,
nine heads of states from the eurozone signed a letter to European Council President Charles
Michel, explicitly demanding the issuance of common European bonds to finance the crisis
response. Following the script from the euro crisis, these demands were initially opposed by
northern governments, including Germany and the so-called “Frugal Four” (Austria,
Denmark, Netherlands, Sweden). However, in a surprising turn of events, the German
government shifted its position in May when Angela Merkel and French President
Emmanuel Macron proposed a pandemic recovery fund, including grants to member states

40. Hooghe and Marks 2018, 117.
41. Copelovitch, Frieden, and Walter 2016; Jones, Kelemen, and Meunier 2016; Matthijs and Blyth 2015.
42. This was made clear in May 2020 when the German Constitutional Court issued a skeptical ruling about
the ECB’s Public Sector Purchase Program (PSPP).
9

financed through joint European debt. This initiative paved the way for a decision in July
2020, when the European Council agreed on a 750 bn instrument called “Next Generation
EU” to respond to the pandemic. The centerpiece of this pandemic recovery fund is the
Recovery and Resilience Facility which will distribute funds to member states that will be
raised through joint borrowing. Although this does not mutualize legacy debt and transfers
to the south remain limited when compared with the deficits incurred due to the pandemic,
this shift in the German and European position seems prima facie difficult to reconcile with
the existence of a binding “democratic constraint” on fiscal risk-sharing. How do we explain
that European leaders were able to overcome this constraint in spring 2020?

Strategic interdependence and the formation of preferences
The argument about a democratic constraint neglects that choices in “debtor” and “creditor”
countries are strategically interdependent. When a eurozone member experiences financial
difficulties, creditor countries need to evaluate the costs of stabilizing a country against the
costs of allowing this country to exit from the eurozone, especially if it is economically
important and politically important to them.43 Debtor countries, in turn, need to evaluate the
costs of staying in the eurozone against the costs of a possible exit. The former are strongly
dependent on whether creditor countries agree to debt mutualization or substantial fiscal
transfers and the conditionality associated with these transfers. In short, support for debt
sharing in creditor countries depends on whether debtor countries seriously contemplate the
possibility of exit, while support for exit in debtor countries depends on whether creditor
countries are willing to agree to debt mutualization or not.

43. Schneider and Tobin 2020.
10

As argued above, a credible threat of rupture of the eurozone was absent from the euro crisis,
due to strong popular attachment to the euro in the southern countries directly affected by
the crisis. And as implied by the literature on the “democratic constraint”, in these
circumstances the unconditional preferences of the northern electorates constrain northern
policymakers to oppose any move towards fiscal risk-sharing and debt mutualization.
However, we argue that the COVID-19 pandemic introduced an important change in
background conditions.
The epicenter of a possible new financial crisis moved to Italy, a systemically important
country, which would be more difficult to “ring-fence” than a crisis in Greece or the other
southern countries. Furthermore, Italy already had high levels of Euroscepticism as a result
of 25 years of economic stagnation, and the health emergency brought it closer to a tipping
point where the costs of continued membership in the eurozone become too high. Against
this background, analyses that focus on unconditional preferences (e.g., “are you for or
against debt mutualization?”, “are you for or against remaining in the euro?”) are likely to
suffer from omitted variable bias. Rather, we need to study the strategic preferences of voters,
which depend on perceptions of what other countries might do when faced with a potentially
highly disruptive crisis.44
If voters had complete information and full capacity to process it, they would objectively
estimate both the costs and the probability of different outcomes under alternative scenarios,
and form their preferences accordingly.45 However, this is not realistic. In reality, preferences
depend on the type of information voters process and on the way they form “causal beliefs”,

44. In Appendix B, we formalize the argument about the strategic interdependence of preferences with a simple
game theory model that considers one debtor (Italy) and one creditor (Germany) country. This model shows
that debt mutualization is an equilibrium outcome if a) Italy prefers exiting from the euro to remaining in it in
the absence of debt mutualization, and b) Germany prefers debt mutualization to Italexit. If these two
conditions do not hold jointly, the equilibrium is either the status quo (if Italy prefers remaining in the euro
independently of what Germany does) or Italexit (if Germany prefers a breakup of the euro if Italy prefers
Italexit to remaining without debt mutualization).
45. Gabel 1998.
11

i.e. how they assess the causal impact of different scenarios.46 There are different ways in
which the eurozone could respond to a possible fiscal crisis resulting from the COVID-19
pandemic. Debt mutualization, breakup, or a continuation of the status quo are all possible
outcomes, but the impact of each of these outcomes for voters in northern and southern
countries is difficult to determine in advance as it depends on the way other actors respond
as well as on other variables (such as trends in the global economy).
In this paper, we manipulate the information processed by voters in forming their
preferences by using frames. Specifically, we focus on frames that provide information about
the costs associated with a country exiting or remaining in the eurozone for both debtor and
creditor countries. A large literature on issue framing has shown that highlighting the positive
or negative consequences of a policy choice in survey experiments substantially affects
individual-level preferences.47 Here we do not use frames to selectively emphasize different
features of the same policy choice, but to convey information about the costs of different
options, which voters may not consider if it was not made available to them.48
For debtor countries, remaining in the euro in the midst of a possible financial crisis likely
implies the implementation of a series of structural reforms and austerity measures in
exchange for financial support. As argued above, Europe’s crisis resolution strategy adopted
during the eurozone crisis prescribes that countries having trouble financing themselves on
the market receive financial support from the ESM in exchange for strict conditionality. The
unpopular measures countries are expected to implement if they receive an ESM loan have
contributed to a decline in support for the euro.49 In Greece, they were decisive in moving

46. Rho and Tomz 2017.
47. Amsalem and Zoizner 2020; Chong and Druckman 2007b; Chong and Druckman 2007a; Lupia 1994;
Slothuus and de Vreese 2010.
48. Rho and Tomz 2017; Tversky and Kahneman 1973.
49. Fernández-Albertos and Kuo 2016; Franchino and Segatti 2019.
12

voters to a “no” vote in the 2015 referendum.50 We thus expect voters in debtor countries
to be more likely to support euro exit if they receive information that links continued
membership in the euro to the implementation of austerity measures. Conversely, we expect
voters in creditor countries to be less supportive of the continued membership of debtor
countries in the euro if they receive information linking continued membership with the need
for debt mutualization or guarantees, which are unpopular in creditor countries.
Hypothesis 1: Support for a debtor country remaining in the euro (exiting) is lower
(higher) when voters receive information highlighting the costs of the debtor country
remaining in the euro (the implementation of austerity policies for the debtor
country; debt mutualization for the creditor country).
By the same token, voters receiving information about the costs of a debtor country exiting
the euro should become more favorable to keeping the eurozone intact. Exit would carry
substantial costs for both debtors and creditors due to externalities and knock-on effects.
These costs are difficult to specify a priori because there is no precedent of a country exiting
the eurozone that could offer guidance. Whether exit would be unilateral or negotiated would
probably make a big difference. Nonetheless, we can speculate about the costs of exit of a
systemically important country based on existing economic literature.51 In the country that
exits, at a minimum, there would be the costs and uncertainty associated with a currency
changeover. In all likelihood, the exchange rate would depreciate, too, and inflation would
increase, which would erode the purchasing power of non-indexed income. A severe
recession and the bankruptcy of many businesses are also possible, especially if their assets
are redenominated while their liabilities remain in euro. Furthermore, domestic banks often
hold a large quantity of local sovereign bonds, which would likely depreciate in case of exit,

50. Jurado et al. 2020; Xezonakis and Hartmann 2020.
51 E.g., Manasse 2019; Eichengreen 2010.
13

leading to capital losses and, potentially, bankruptcies. At the same time, exit would also
impose severe adjustment costs on other member states, and even threaten the euro in its
current form. For creditor countries, it would likely result in appreciation and competitive
losses for their export industry and endanger the stability of the financial system.
Hypothesis 2: Support for a debtor country remaining in the eurozone (exiting) is
higher (lower) when voters receive information highlighting the costs of the debtor
country exiting from the euro (disorderly exit for the debtor country; threat to
export-led growth and financial stability for the creditor country).
We rely on prospect theory to formulate hypotheses about which kind of costs, of exit or
remain, have the greatest impact on voters’ preference formation.52 Prospect theory
maintains that individual choices depend on whether the evaluation of prospects is
conducted from the “domain of gains” or the “domain of losses”. In the domain of gains,
decision-makers display risk-aversion, which means that faced with the choice between a
certain outcome and a risky outcome, they choose the certain outcome, even though the
expected value is the same. In the domain of losses, however, decision-makers become riskseeking and prefer the uncertain outcome to the sure loss associated with the status quo.53
Prospect theory suggests that the choice between keeping the eurozone intact vs. breaking it
up will be different depending on whether the eurozone is considered fundamentally a good
thing (and hence evaluated from the “domain of gains”) or a bad thing (“domain of losses”).
In the former case, there will be a tendency to preserve the status quo. In the latter case, the
opposite will happen. To the extent that voters in debtor countries perceive the euro

52. Quattrone and Tversky 1988; Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Tversky and Kahneman 1992.
53. Based on prospect theory, Carreras (2019) argues that British voters in districts facing long-term
economic decline were more likely to evaluate the economic consequences of Brexit positively and more
likely to vote for Brexit (the risky option). He shows that the arguments of the “project fear” campaign,
which associated Brexit with economic disaster, had less of an impact on these voters.
14

negatively, they are more likely to be risk-seeking. Vice versa, to the extent that voters in
creditor countries perceive the euro positively, they are more likely to be risk-averse. This
implies that voters in debtor countries will give more weight to information emphasizing the
costs of the status quo (remaining in the euro), while voters in creditor countries will give
more weight to information emphasizing the costs of fundamental change (a possible breakup of the euro).
Hypothesis 3a: For voters in a debtor country, information emphasizing the costs
of a euro breakup has a smaller impact on preferences than information emphasizing
the costs of remaining in the euro.
Hypothesis 3b: For voters in a creditor country, information emphasizing the costs
of a euro breakup has a larger impact on preferences than information emphasizing
the costs of maintaining the eurozone intact.

Data and methods
We study public preferences for reform of the eurozone at a crucial time during the COVID19 pandemic, and we focus on one key debtor country, Italy, and one key creditor country,
Germany. Italy’s pre-existing high level of public debt (135 percent of GDP in 2019), the
high increase in public deficit caused by COVID-19 (estimated at 10 percent of GDP in
2020), and 25 years of economic stagnation in which Italy’s growth rate has usually been
lower than its interest rate, make Italy especially vulnerable to a fiscal crisis. At the same time,
the pandemic also has the potential to alter the assessment of the cost of remaining in the
euro for Italian voters. Public support for the euro has been lower in Italy than in most other

15

European countries.54 Survey evidence, discussed later in the paper, suggests that COVID19 caused an exogenous drop in attitudes towards the EU at the time we launched our study.
The possibility of Italexit implies a threat to the euro in its current form. As the third biggest
economy of the eurozone, Italy’s exit would have severe consequences for other member
states. This is especially the case for Germany, which headed the creditor front during the
sovereign debt crisis and strongly influenced Europe’s crisis resolution strategy. Germany
has been one of the primary beneficiaries of the eurozone because its export-led growth
model has been found to benefit from the single market and an undervalued real exchange
rate.55 Domestic political considerations, more specifically German public opinion being
opposed to debt mutualization, were important determinants of the German government’s
position during the eurozone crisis, as detailed above. Yet, German public opinion has been
highly supportive of keeping the euro as the common European currency.56 We thus need
to know whether German voters would be willing to support debt mutualization if this was
necessary to avoid Italexit and a breakup of the eurozone.
We use a linked survey experiment in both countries to study how preferences shift when
voters are confronted with the strategic interdependence of the two countries. Fieldwork in
both countries began on March 31 – immediately after European heads of state asked the
Eurogroup (made up of eurozone finance ministers) to present a proposal for Europe’s joint
fiscal response to the pandemic – and ended before the Eurogroup meeting on April 7 where
this proposal was first discussed. To allow for the completion of the surveys in a short period
with a representative sample, the survey was simultaneously conducted by SWG in Italy and
respondi in Germany. Both surveys were based on a common questionnaire, and we closely
coordinated and monitored their implementation. In Italy and Germany, 2,118 and 2,246

54. European Commission 2019.
55. Cesaratto and Stirati 2010; Höpner 2019.
56. European Commission 2019.
16

respondents, respectively, were sampled from a large pool of individuals, who were recruited
online and by telephone to ensure a balanced composition of the population.57 Sample quotas
were used to ensure a representative sample based on age, gender, and education. We use
survey weights to correct for deviations in our sample from the true population. The weights
account for the inclusion probability with respect to region, age, gender, education, and past
vote choice. However, results do not depend on the type of weights (or no weights).
In both Italy and Germany, the survey included a factorial survey experiment. 58 We had
conducted a first wave of our survey about preferences towards the euro in Italy in October
2019. This allows us to compare baseline attitudes towards remaining or exiting from the
euro before and at the beginning of the pandemic. We made the second wave as comparable
as possible to the first wave. In Italy, we asked all respondents to imagine a basic scenario in
which Italy is faced with a financial crisis:
Italy faces a crisis of confidence in financial markets. Capital flies out of the country; customers try
to withdraw their deposits from banks; and the interest rate spread with Germany increases. As a
result, the Italian government is unable to meet its financial obligations. Other European countries
offer Italy a bailout package.
Before deciding whether to accept or not the bailout package, the government calls a referendum. The
referendum asks citizens whether they want to stay in the euro and thus accept the bailout package,
or whether they want to reject the bailout package and therefore exit the euro.
We adapted this Italian scenario to the German case by asking respondents to imagine the
following basic scenario:

57. For further information on our survey, see Appendix A.
58. The experiment was pre-registered and received Institutional Review Board (IRB) approval.
17

Italy faces a crisis of confidence in financial markets. Capital flies out of the country; customers try
to withdraw their deposits from banks; and the interest rate that the Italian government has to pay
to issue government debt increases. As a result, the Italian government is unable to meet its financial
obligations. The Italian government is unwilling to sign a bailout plan similar to the Greek one after
the financial crisis, which would condition the disbursement of funds on the implementation of
austerity measures, and is contemplating exit from the euro.
Due to its weight in the negotiations with other eurozone countries, the German government can
prevent Italy from exiting the euro or facilitate Italy’s exit.
In both countries, the basic scenario emphasized the strategic interdependence of countries.
In Italy, the choice to exit or remain in the euro was set against the background of a European
bailout plan. Even more explicitly, in Germany, the basic scenario centered on Italy not being
willing to agree to a Greek-style adjustment plan. The final sentence about the German
government being able to prevent or facilitate Italy’s exit acknowledged the key role played
by it in shaping the policy response to the euro crisis.
After the basic scenario, we asked Italian respondents how they would vote in a hypothetical
referendum about euro membership. This was a heuristic device aimed at eliciting
preferences about a real decision-making situation as opposed to simply expressing an
opinion.59 In reality, it seems unlikely (but not impossible) that a decision about Italexit would
be preceded by a popular referendum. Nonetheless, the possibility of such a referendum has
been repeatedly discussed by key political actors in Italy before and after the Greek
referendum of 2015 and is highly salient in the Italian public sphere.60

59. Landa and Meirowitz 2009, 494.
60. The referendum would have to take the form of a consultative referendum (referendum di indirizzo) in the
Italian legal systems and its organization would have to be authorized by a constitutional law approved by
two-thirds of both chambers. A consultative referendum was held on June 18, 1989, when Italians
overwhelmingly approved giving the European Parliament a mandate to draw up a draft European
constitution. In June 2020, a popular legislative initiative was launched for the organization of a similar
18

In designing the basic scenario, we drew inspiration from the Greek crisis of June 2015,
which saw the freezing of liquidity by the European Central Bank (ECB), capital flight and
depositors’ run on banks, a rapid increase of risk premia on government bonds, and financing
problems for the treasury due to mounting interest rates. This kind of scenario is considered
realistic by Italian economists who have studied the issue of a possible exit of Italy from the
eurozone.61 However, our basic scenario diverts from the Greek course of events in 2015 in
one crucial respect. In Greece, the consequence of a no vote was ambiguous because it was
not clear whether it implied renegotiation of the bailout package or euro exit.62 We eliminated
the ambiguity and created a stark choice between accepting the bailout package and
remaining in the euro, or rejecting it and exiting the euro. In the German scenario, the
reference to Italy being unwilling to follow the established crisis-resolution script was aimed
at making clear that a solution similar to those during the eurozone crisis is excluded.
We then randomly combined the basic scenario with two frames on the costs of “Italremain”
or “Italexit” for Germany and Italy, respectively.63 All frames were pure issue frames,
providing no information about endorsements by parties or other actors. For Italy, the costs
of Italremain scenario highlighted that the European bailout plan was contingent on the
implementation of austerity policies and structural reforms. These were the policies that crisis
countries had had to implement in return for European financial support during the euro
crisis. In contrast, the costs of Italexit scenario highlighted the costs of a disorderly exit from
the euro for Italy, i.e., inflation, reduced purchasing power, bank insolvencies, and possible
retaliation by other countries. For Germany, the costs of Italremain scenario emphasized the

referendum, see https://www.gazzettaufficiale.it/eli/id/2020/06/13/20A03215/sg (accessed on December
7, 2020).
61. E.g., Manasse 2019.
62. Walter et al. 2018.
63. For Italy, both the basic scenario and the costs of Italremain frame were essentially the same as in the
October 2019 survey; the costs of Italexit frame was new. For the exact wording of these frames, see Appendix
A.
19

need for Germany to agree to some form of debt mutualization to keep Italy in the eurozone.
The costs of Italexit scenario concentrated on the negative implications of a collapse of the
euro for the competitiveness of the German export industry.
In both countries, the combination of frames resulted in a 2 x 2 factorial design with four
different scenarios, as summarized in Table 1.64 Respondents were shown one out of four
different scenarios (three treatment groups and a control group). Afterward, they were asked
whether or not they supported Italy exiting or remaining in the eurozone. In Italy, we asked,
“How would you vote in this referendum?”. In Germany, we asked, “In your view, what
should the German government do in response to this crisis?”. We use answers to these
questions as our key dependent variables.65
Table 1. List of all experimental groups in Italy and Germany
1
2
3
4

Frame I
No costs of
Italremain
Costs of
Italremain

Frame II
No costs of Italexit
Costs of Italexit
No costs of Italexit
Costs of Italexit

Experimental group
Control group
Treatment 1
Treatment 2
Treatment 3

Support for fiscal integration vs. breakup in the shadow of the COVID-crisis
We present results in three steps. First, we examine how baseline support changed in Italy
after the outbreak of the coronavirus. This allows us to validate our hunch, expressed above,
that COVID-19 brought about an exogenous shock to the attitudes of Italian voters,

64. To be as realistic as possible, our frames combine various elements. While we are able to identify any overall
treatment effect of the frames thanks to randomization (which ensures exogeneity by design), we are unable to
specify the role that different elements of our frames play. For example, for the austerity frame in Italy we
cannot determine to what extent any shift in preferences is due to easier rules for layoffs, expenditure cuts,
privatization, etc. This is acceptable, in our view, because these elements have historically been bundled together
in bailout packages.
65. The Italian dependent variable has four categories: accept the bailout and remain in the euro, reject the
bailout and exit the euro, would not vote, and don’t know. We merge respondents from the last two answer
categories to simplify the analysis below. The German dependent variable has three categories: prevent Italexit;
facilitate Italexit; don’t know.
20

increasing support for exit. Second, we analyze the results of the framing experiment. We
estimate multinomial probit models and calculate average treatment effects (ATE) and
predicted probabilities to test whether the frames have the expected effects. 66 In the final
step, we discuss some robustness checks.
Support for the euro in Italy and Germany
Figure 1 illustrates that support for euro membership in Italy was considerably lower in April
2020 than in October 2019. Support for Italremain decreased from 51 percent to 34 percent,
while support for Italexit increased from 30 percent to 37 percent. This means that a small
absolute majority for remaining in the euro turned into a relative majority for Italexit in the
wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. Yet, uncertainty also increased: in October 2019, 18
percent indicated that they did not know how they would vote in a hypothetical referendum,
increasing to 28 percent six months later. Regression results show that the changes in
preferences in Italy between 2019 and 2020 are statistically significant (Table C.1 in the
appendix). In Germany, there was also a close horse-race: a relative majority of 42 percent
of respondents wanted Italy to remain in the euro in April 2020, whereas 38 percent of
respondents favored Italexit. Nearly one-fifth of respondents were uncertain.
Our surveys also show that assessment of the benefits of the euro is considerably higher in
Germany than in Italy, and that in Italy, it declined between 2019 and 2020. In Italy, the
average value on a scale from 0 to 10 (where higher values indicate higher perceptions of
having benefited from the euro) was 3.78 in 2019 (see Appendix C.2). It further decreased
to 3.47 in 2020. In Germany, individuals were more likely to think that they benefited from

66. We do not include control variables in the main analysis. A robustness tests which includes control variables
(age, age squared, gender, education, subjective income, national identity, economic knowledge, and region)
does not change the results (Tables C.3 and C.4). The results also remain the same if we use linear probability
models instead of multinomial probit models (see Appendix D.3). For these models, we generated three binary
dependent variables, each with one of the outcomes of the dependent variable coded as 1 and the other
outcomes coded as 0.
21

the euro in 2020: the average value was 5.17.67 Furthermore, the share of respondents who
reported not having benefited at all from the euro increased in Italy from 25.43 percent to
31.16 percent, while in Germany, only 12.62 percent of respondents fall in this category.
Overall, these descriptive findings suggest that the COVID pandemic was, indeed, an
exogenous shock for attitudes on the euro in Italy and that Italians are more likely to evaluate
euro membership from the domain of losses, whereas Germans are more likely to evaluate
it from the domain of gains.

Figure 1. Preferences for Italexit and Italremain in Germany (April 2020) and Italy
(October 2019 and April 2020)
Note: Only observations from the control group included; survey weights applied.

Evidence from the Italian survey experiment
In the next step, we examine the effects of the framing experiment in Italy. Figure 3 shows
the average treatment effects of the two frames and their combination. The costs of Italremain
frame has a strong effect on preferences, which is in line with our Hypothesis 1: informing
67. Regression results indicate that the difference in the assessment of the euro in Italy between 2019 and 2020
is again statistically significant (Appendix C).
22

voters that Italy’s continued membership in the eurozone is contingent on the
implementation of austerity measures increases support for Italexit by 15.57 percentage
points and reduces support for remain by 13.35 percentage points.
Contrary to Hypothesis 2, we do not find a statistically significant effect of the costs of Italexit
frame, though. Despite the severity of the scenario, preferences hardly shift. Although
surprising, this result resonates with prospect theory and is in line with research on Brexit,
which finds that British voters also discounted the costs of exit in the 2016 referendum. 68
The results from the combined treatment including information on both the costs of remain
and exit are also in line with prospect theory, as expressed in Hypothesis 3a: when both
frames are presented together, the costs of exit frame clearly prevails. It increases support for
Italexit by 14.83 percent, which is only marginally smaller than the effect of the costs of Italexit
frame alone.
To test whether the frames can alter the democratic majorities for or against Italexit, we also
calculate the predicted probabilities for voting in the hypothetical referendum by treatment
(Figure 4). In nearly all scenarios, we find a relative majority in favor of Italexit. Only under
the costs of exit frame (scenario 2), we find a relative majority in favor of Italremain, but the
difference between exit and remain is statistically insignificant. In contrast, mentioning
austerity as a requirement for Italy’s continued membership in the euro has a strong effect,
leading to an absolute majority in favor of Italexit (52.92 percent, scenario 3). When both
frames are combined (scenario 4), there is still a majority (52.09 percent) for Italexit, which
indicates that the prospect of austerity and conditionality clearly dominates over the possible
costs of exit. Overall, these results suggest that Italian voters seriously consider exiting the
euro if austerity is the only adjustment mechanism envisaged in case of a fiscal crisis.

68. Carreras 2019; Grynberg, Walter, and Wasserfallen 2020.
23

Figure 3. Average treatment effects of frames on preferences towards Italexit in Italy
Note: Average treatment effects and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial probit models.
Survey weights included.

Figure 4. Predicted probabilities of preferences towards Italexit in Italy
Note: The figure shows the predicted probabilities and 95 percent confidence intervals based on the same
regression models used to calculate the ATEs shown in Figure 3.

24

Evidence from the German survey experiment
Results from the German survey are mostly in line with our expectations (Figure 5). The
frame highlighting the costs of Italremain for Germany increases support for exit by 9.02
percentage points, while it decreases support for remain by 10.37 percentage points
(Hypothesis 1). Thus, German voters react negatively to debt mutualization. However,
mentioning the costs of Italexit for the German economy has a larger effect: it increases
support for remain by 14.85 percentage points and decreases support for exit by 12.96
percentage points (Hypothesis 2).
Importantly, when the costs of Italremain and Italexit are mentioned simultaneously, the
costs of Italexit prevail and the treatment effects are very similar to the scenario where only
the costs of Italexit are mentioned. This confirms Hypothesis 3b. Support for Italy remaining
in the eurozone increases by 8.61 percentage points, while support for Italy exiting from the
eurozone decreases by 9.67 percentage points. In line with prospect theory, as in the Italian
case, one frame prevails since German voters are strongly worried about the costs of Italexit
for the German economy.
Figure 6 again shows the predicted probabilities associated with the different frames. As
shown above, in the control group, a relative majority of Germans favors Italremain if Italy
is faced with a financial crisis and is unwilling to follow the “Greek route” of implementing
austerity in exchange for financial assistance. The difference between the shares of voters
preferring remain and exit is statistically insignificant, though. The costs of Italexit frame
substantially bolsters the electoral majority for Italremain, leading to an absolute majority
(57.27 percent) in favor of remain. The frame emphasizing the costs of Italy remaining in
the euro for Germany leads to a relative majority in favor of Italexit (47.34 percent). When
the costs of remain and exit are presented together, however, a slim absolute majority of
51.04 percent is in favor of Italremain.
25

Figure 5. Average treatment effects of frames on preferences towards Italexit in Germany
Note: Average treatment effects and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial probit models.
Survey weights included.

Figure 6. Predicted probabilities of preferences towards Italexit in Germany
Note: The figure shows the predicted probabilities and 95 percent confidence intervals based on the same
regression models used to calculate the ATEs shown in Figure 5.

26

Robustness checks
To probe our results, we first explore heterogeneous framing effects. The discussion about
euro membership and debt mutualization, and our vignettes, are cognitively demanding.
Education may condition how individuals react to the frames.69 Yet, heterogeneous effects
are absent for most frames (Figures D.3 and D.4). For the Italian case, we find that under
the combined treatment of costs of exit and remain, individuals with low educational
attainment are more likely to become undecided. Nevertheless, the positive effect of this
combined treatment on the likelihood to vote exit is evident across education levels (Figure
D.3). For Germany, we find that individuals with low education are particularly sensitive to
the potential costs of an Italexit and reduce their support for exit. In contrast, individuals
with high educational attainment weigh the costs of Italremain more heavily and increase
their support for exit. However, we do not observe any heterogeneous treatment effects by
educational background for the likelihood to support remain. The results for the combined
frames similarly demonstrate that the cost of Italexit frame is more decisive for respondents
across all educational levels. Overall, individuals reacted to the treatments in roughly similar
ways.
Second, as a further test that voter preferences respond to the strategic interdependence of
countries, we also analyzed a different dependent variable from our survey. In Italy, we asked
respondents whether they prefer to remain or exit from the euro if Germany and other
European governments do not agree to debt mutualization. In Germany, we asked
respondents whether they prefer a scenario in which Germany and other European
governments do not agree to share debts and Italy exits the euro or one in which Germany
and other European governments agree to share debts and Italy remains in the eurozone. 70

69. Chong and Druckman 2007a.
70. These questions were asked immediately after the question which we used in the analysis above.
27

The results with this variable are similar to the main analysis (see Appendix E). Italian voters
are willing to exit the euro in the absence of debt mutualization, creating a credible threat of
exit. In turn, German voters are willing to accept debt mutualization if the alternative is a
breakup of the eurozone. This confirms that preferences depend crucially on the expected
choices of the counterpart.

The debate on coronabonds in Italy and Germany
In this section, we document that the experimental findings reported above resonate with
the debate on coronabonds in Italy and Germany in 2020, and hence help to explain why the
EU was able to overcome the democratic constraint. Based on a review of national
newspapers, we show that Italian policymakers launched a veiled threat of “going alone”
early on in the pandemic, while German policymakers started to respond to the pandemic
by following the script of the euro crisis. However, the latter quickly began to worry about
the integrity of the eurozone, especially with regard to a possible Italexit, which led them to
embrace a partial mutualization of COVID-related sovereign debt.
Italy was hit by the pandemic earlier and more violently than other European countries. After
other European countries blocked the exports or the transit of anti-COVID masks and other
protective gear, requisitioning them for domestic use,71 there were outpourings of
indignation in the Italian daily press,72 and the emergence of a widespread perception that
Italy had been abandoned by its European partners and left alone to face the pandemic.73 A
survey fielded at the end of April 2020 found that 79 percent of Italians believed that EU
71. E.g., “L’Europa e il sovranismo delle mascherine“, Corriere della Sera. 7 March 2020; “Caos mascherine”,
La Repubblica. 16 March 2020.
72. “Viva la Ue: Parigi e Berlino si tengono le mascherine”, Il Fatto Quotidiano, 6 March 2020; “E Alibaba
invia un milione di mascherine alla Croce Rossa”, La Repubblica, 18 March 2020.
73. “Se l’alleato diventa Xi”, La Stampa, 17 March 2020; “Il mondo non sarà mai più come prima: vincitori e
vinti della guerra al coronavirus”, La Stampa, 11 April 2020.
28

support for Italy had been too little or not at all adequate during the crisis, while 73 percent
of respondents believed that the pandemic had demonstrated the complete failure of the
EU.74 Another survey suggested that 67 percent of respondents believed being part of the
union was a disadvantage for Italy, up from 47 percent in November 2018.75
In this period, the Italian government – a coalition between the M5S and the PD which had
succeeded a more Eurosceptic coalition between the M5S and the Lega – tried to convince
its European partners to introduce “corona recovery bonds”. The government never
explicitly threatened exit from the euro. However, faced with a stalemate in the negotiations
for coronabonds in early April, prime minister Conte declared repeatedly that if Europe
failed to live up to expectations, Italy would “go alone” (“farà da sola”).76 Although this was
an ambiguous declaration, it could be read as a veiled threat that Italy was prepared to leave
the euro if circumstances forced it to do so. For example, it was interpreted as such by
Alesina and Giavazzi, two Italian top economists, who commented as follows in Italy’s most
circulated newspaper:
That the Premier should address European meetings with phrases such as ‘Ready to
go alone’ is not only counterproductive but absolutely lacking in credibility. How can
Italy threaten to leave Europe and the euro? What would happen if we were on our
own?77
Similarly, in April 2020, the FT worried about the risk of Europe “losing Italy”, writing that
“there is a rising feeling among even its pro-European elite that the country is being
abandoned by its neighbors … Many in Rome now feel that unless bold action is taken by

74. See https://www.iai.it/sites/default/files/laps-iai_2020_covid.pdf (accessed 21 March 2021).
75. “Coronavirus: Is Europe losing Italy?”, Financial Times, 6 April 2020.
76. “Il promemoria per Bruxelles”, Corriere della Sera, 14 April 2020.
77. “Per noi sarebbe un errore voler fare da soli”, Corriere della Sera, 21 April 2020.
29

northern European countries, they risk Italy turning its back on the European project
forever.”78
In Germany, politicians initially rejected calls to introduce Eurobonds. For example, Markus
Söder, the leader of the Bavarian CSU, gave a “clear no to Eurobonds”.79 This echoed
Merkel’s statement from the eurozone crisis, when she had said that there would be “no
Eurobonds, as long as I live”.80 Instead, the German government argued that countries like
Italy and Spain should avail themselves of the existing institutional channels, i.e. apply for an
ESM loan.81
Rapidly, however, concerns about the integrity of the eurozone emerged. Stories about the
increasing unpopularity of the EU in Italy were prominently featured in German media. They
reported that the ESM was not an option for the Italian government because it would face
severe opposition from within the M5S.82 German newspapers also cited results from Italian
opinion polls, mentioned above, showing a clear drop in approval for the EU83 and a massive
fall in Germany’s reputation among Italians.84 Several news outlets argued that this rise in
Euroscepticism could endanger the euro and speculated about the consequences for the
German economy.85 For example, the Handelsblatt wrote that “Italy and Spain could soon
lose the confidence of the financial markets and become the target of speculative attacks –

78. “Coronavirus: Is Europe losing Italy?”, Financial Times, 6 April 2020.
79. “Corona-Krise; Riesenstreit um‘s EU-Geld”, Bild, 9 April 2020.
80. “Merkel zur Schuldenpolitik: ‘Keine Euro-Bonds, solange ich lebe’”, Der Spiegel, 26 June 2012).
81. “Droht die Euro-Krise?”, Handelsblatt, 27 March 2020; “Merkel lehnt Corona-Bonds ab”, Spiegel
Online, 27 March 2020; “Berlin ringt um Corona-Bonds”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 1 April 2020.
82. “Deutsch-italienisches Verhältnis; Gestörte Beziehung”, Handelsblatt, 21 April 2020.
83. E.g., “So viel Empathie war noch nie“, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 3 April 2020; “Die Wut der Italiener”, Die
Welt, 17 April 2020; “Deutsch-italienisches Verhältnis; Gestörte Beziehung“, Handelsblatt, 21 April 2020.
84. “Die Deutschen halten sich noch immer für eine überlegene Rasse”, Die Welt, 1 April 2020; “Die
Hoffnung ist, dass Deutschland die EU verlässt”, Die Welt, 18 May 2020.
85. E.g., “Alle mit einem”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, 2 April 2020; “Angst um Europa”, Handelsblatt 2, April
2020; “Ein neuer Ansatz für Europa”, Handelsblatt, 7 April 2020.
30

and this would also put the euro itself at risk … A return to the deutschmark would be a
disaster for the German export industry”.86
Consequently, beginning in April, German policymakers became increasingly worried about
the EU coming apart. CDU executive board member Elmar Brok declared that European
corona bonds were unavoidable. He argued that if Germany refuses, “then the Le Pens and
Salvinis will scream for joy”, emphasizing that there would be no post-crisis recovery in
Germany either if major EU countries fall to radicals.87 Other policymakers began to argue
that “solidarity” with other European countries was in the economic self-interest of
Germany. For example, foreign minister Maas said that “as an export-oriented economy,
solidarity is also in our own interest: if large parts of the EU are deep in crisis – who will buy
our products?”.88 Similarly, finance minister Scholz emphasized Germany’s position as an
Exportnation89 and the close integration of Europe’s economies,90 while Merkel argued that
“we will only do well in the long run if Europe does well”.91 They were influenced by German
businesses, which worried about the lack of demands for exports and their supply chains,
which had been disrupted during the first lockdown.92
The shift in Germany’s position gained further traction after the German Constitutional
Court declared parts of the ECB’s bond-buying programs unconstitutional in early May.
Shortly after, concerns arose that the agreed volume of the ECB’s PEPP could prove
insufficient and that an expansion of the program would be politically contentious given the
court’s recent decision.93

87. “Gemeinsame Haftung für Staatsschulden: Brauchen wir Euro-Bonds?”, Handelsblatt, 24 March 2020.
87. “Streit über Schulden”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, 5 April 2020.
88. “Angst vor dem Hinterhalt”, Die Welt 23, April 2020.
89. “Hektische Arbeit an einer Alternative”, Die Welt, 21 April 2020.
90. Deutscher Bundestag, Plenarprotokoll 19/164. 29 May 2020.
91. Wiederaufbau: EU-Kommission will Autoindustrie stützen, Handelsblatt, 28 April 2020.
92. “German conservatives’ eurobond awakening”, Politico, 20 May 2020.
93. “Die EZB gerät unter Zugzwang”, Handelsblatt, 15 May 2020; “The chain of events that led to
Germany’s change over Europe’s recovery fund”, Financial Times, 22 May 2020.
31

Therefore, only two weeks after the German Constitutional Court’s ruling, Germany
abandoned its opposition to debt mutualization. Together with Macron, Merkel proposed a
pandemic recovery fund that would be financed by joint European debt and include transfers
to EU member states that were hit particularly hard by the pandemic. With this initiative, the
German government aimed to repair broken trust, particularly among the Italian public. 94
One senior advisor quoted in the Financial Times said that “the big concern is that the
economic crisis will destroy the European single market and even threaten the future of the
EU”.95 In parliament, Merkel defended the fund by saying:
This fund is an urgent requirement of the hour to make a sustainable economic
recovery possible for all affected regions and areas in Europe. This is the only way
we can secure convergence, competitiveness, and cohesion in Europe in the long
term. We must not allow the pandemic to lead to a drifting apart of the economic
prospects of the EU member states and thus weaken the Single Market, a core
element of Europe.96
Reactions to the Merkel-Macron Plan in German media and politics were relatively
favorable.97 They generally regarded the plan as necessary to avoid the political and economic
collapse of the euro and the EU. Eckhardt Rehberg, a leading CDU parliamentarian, argued
in parliament: “Doing nothing would be disastrous not only for us as the Federal Republic
of Germany – 60 percent of our exports go to the EU – but it would also be disastrous for

94. “German conservatives’ eurobond awakening”, Politico, 20 May 2020; “Merkels letzter Ausweg”, Die
Welt, 20 May 2020.
95. “The chain of events that led to Germany’s change over Europe’s recovery fund”, Financial Times, 22 May
2020.
96. Deutscher Bundestag. Plenarprotokoll 19/166. 18 June 2020.
97. “Ende der Schaukelpolitik”, Die Welt, 23 May 2020; “Es war mutig von der Kanzlerin”, Die Welt, 30
May 2020; “Zwei für einen Tango”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 20 May 2020; “Merkel konnte, Macron
musste”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung, 24 May 2020.
32

Europe”.98 Even Friedrich Merz, a conservative politician from the right-wing of the CDU,
argued that “help to our partners is also in our own interest”.99
The decision to introduce the recovery fund was also directly linked to public opinion in
Italy. Söder, who had initially refused debt mutualization, argued in May that “a disintegration
of Europe and thus of the single market would be the far greater risk in financial terms alone
... If we hesitate now or underestimate the psychological impact [of the pandemic], we risk a
second Brexit in Italy”.100 Similarly, Armin Laschet, who was later elected as CDU leader,
said that “Eurosceptic sentiments have increased among many people in Italy. We have many
centrifugal forces … We must prevent the north and south from drifting apart.”101 From a
critical perspective, another leading CDU politician was quoted in the Bild as saying that
“one gets the impression that the aim here is to counteract Germany’s waning popularity [in
other European countries] with money.”102
After intense European negotiation, the plan resulted in the decision of the European
Council in July 2020 to set up NextGenEU. Scholz called this Europe’s “Hamiltonian
moment”.103 He explicitly interpreted it as an entry into a fiscal union and stated that “we
will continue along this path”.104 Although this may be an overstatement, German
policymakers successfully reframed the debate by focusing on the risks of a possible euro
breakup, which allowed them to avoid a popular backlash against the first concrete step
towards debt mutualization.

98. Deutscher Bundestag. Plenarprotokoll 19/166. 18 June 2020.
99. “Merz (CDU) zur EU-Wiederaufbauhilfe”, Deutschlandfunk. 28 May 2020.
100. “Wir haben nur diesen einen Versuch”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 28 May 2020.
101. “Wir brauchen keine Staatsgründung”, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, 10 June 2020.
102. “Merkels 500-Milliarden-Plan; Darum soll Deutschland nicht noch stärker werden”, Bild, 25 May 2020.
103. “Jemand muss vorangehen”, Die Zeit, 19 May 2020.
104. “Finanzminister Scholz warnt vor Sparkurs in Europa nach der Coronakrise”, Handelsblatt, 2 February
2021.
33

The role of COVID-related solidarity
The above reconstruction shows that arguments about the risk of a euro breakup featured
prominently in the German debate. However, at the time our survey was fielded, there was
also a surge of COVID-related support for Italy in the German public discourse. This raises
the possibility that altruistic, rather than cost-benefit considerations, explain Germany’s
change of position.105 Pandemics, like natural disasters, have exogenous causes. In contrast
to the euro crisis, when a dominant narrative was established that the fiscal profligacy of the
southern countries had led to the crisis,106 this could make it easier for German voters to be
empathetic with Italy. While COVID-related solidarity does not necessarily affect the
treatment effect of our informational frames, it may inflate the size of the majority in favor
of debt mutualization.
We are unable to rule out this threat to external validity. However, we can quantify the effect
of the appeal to COVID-related solidarity and compare it to the effect of highlighting the
costs of Italexit for Germany. In our survey experiment, we included an additional frame
that focused attention on the COVID-19 pandemic as the trigger of the Italian crisis and
absolved the Italian government from responsibility for fiscal deterioration, attributing it to
the health crisis. Specifically, the frame preceded the vignette describing the basic scenario
and went as follow:
The corona crisis has forced the Italian government to significantly increase public expenditures, both
to reinforce health care infrastructure and to contain the consequences of the recession. This has led
to a large increase in the Italian public deficit as a share of Gross Domestic Product and a downgrade
of Italian government bonds by rating agencies. As a consequence, now [the basic scenario follows].

105. Bechtel, Hainmueller, and Margalit 2014; Kuhn and Kamm 2019; Kuhn, Solaz, and van Elsas 2018.
106. Matthijs and McNamara 2015.
34

We randomly combined this frame with the basic scenario and the two other frames
highlighting the costs of Italremain and Italexit. This resulted in four additional experimental
groups as shown in Table 3 for which we recruited an additional 2,265 German
respondents.107
Table 3: List of additional experimental groups including the COVID-19 frame
Frame I
5
6
7
8

Frame II
No costs of
Italremain

COVID-19
Costs
of
Italremain

Frame III

Experimental group

No costs of Italexit

Treatment 4

Costs of Italexit

Treatment 5

No costs of Italexit

Treatment 6

Costs of Italexit

Treatment 7

Figure 7 plots the average treatment effects. The results show that highlighting the COVID19 pandemic as the cause of the crisis reduces support for Italexit by 7.15 percentage points
relative to the control group. However, the COVID frame does not have a statistically
significant effect on the support for Italy’s continued membership in the euro and the
negative effect of the COVID frame on support for Italexit is smaller than the cost of Italexit
frame shown in Figure 5. When both appeals are combined, the effect is only marginally
larger than appealing to Germany’s self-interest alone (-15.27 compared to -12.96 percentage
points). In combination with other frames, the COVID frame hardly matters, except when
it is coupled with the frame that highlights the costs of Italy remaining in the eurozone. In
this case, the two frames cancel each other out: the marginal effect on support for Italexit
decreases from 9.02 to 1.12 and becomes statistically insignificant. When the COVID frame
is added to the combined costs of Italexit and costs of Italremain frame, it does not change

107. We included a similar frame in Italy. The results for this analysis are shown and discussed in Appendix F.
35

the results. This indicates that German public opinion is more affected by the costs of Italexit
than by sympathy with the plight of COVID-stricken Italy.
This conclusion is also confirmed by Figure 8, which shows the predicted probabilities of
supporting Italy’s euro membership in Germany for the four scenarios that involve the
COVID frame in comparison to the scenarios from the main analysis above. It indicates that
the COVID frame alone only generates a relative but no absolute majority for debt
mutualization in Germany. When both frames are combined, close to 60 percent of Germans
want Italy to remain in the euro, but the cost of Italexit frame alone is already sufficient to
generate support among 57.2 percent of Germans.

Figure 7: Average treatment effects of the COVID-19 frame in Germany
Note: The figure shows the average treatment effects and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial
probit models. All treatment effects are calculated with reference to the control group which only received the
basic scenario and survey weights are applied. The full regression table with the results for the COVID-frame
is shown in Appendix F.

36

Figure 8. Predicted probabilities for scenarios with the COVID-19 frame in Germany
Note: The figure shows predicted probabilities and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial probit
models based on the same regression models used to calculate the ATEs in Figure 7.

Concluding discussion
The COVID-19 pandemic has brought about a large increase in public debt. In low growth
Italy, the fiscal outlook is especially worrisome since financial markets may perceive the
country’s staggering public debt (close to 160 percent of GDP in 2020) to be unsustainable.
Other high-debt countries, such as Spain, may also be affected. It is thus not surprising that
renewed requests for debt mutualization emerged in spring 2020.
In explaining why European politicians rejected any type of cross-country sharing of fiscal
risks during the euro crisis, the literature has introduced the notion of a “democratic
constraint” which limits the room for maneuver of national politicians: voters in northern
countries are strongly opposed to debt sharing or fiscal transfers, while voters in southern

37

countries are unwilling to leave the eurozone, which reduces the bargaining power of
southern politicians. The implication is that (national) democratic accountability blocks
progress towards fiscal integration in the eurozone.
However, this literature has not paid sufficient attention to the role that strategic
interdependence plays in shaping preferences about fiscal integration. As suggested by our
survey experiment, for German voters, the costs of a possible breakup of the euro loom
larger than the costs of debt mutualization. When they are given an opportunity to consider
both costs simultaneously, a majority in favor of fiscal risk-sharing emerges. In turn, the
preferences of Italian voters are much more strongly affected by the prospect of having to
implement austerity and structural reform in order to remain in the common currency than
by any consideration of the negative consequences of a disorderly exit from the euro.
To be clear, we are not arguing that the previous literature was wrong to emphasize the
democratic constraint. On the contrary, we think that it captures the strategic situation of
the early 2010s rather well. In the absence of a credible threat of exit, northern politicians
responded to the unconditional preferences of their electorate not to extend financial
assistance to southern countries beyond what was strictly necessary to save the euro. 108
However, with the epicenter of the crisis moving to Italy – a more Eurosceptic country than
Greece and a larger systemic threat – the strategic situation changes radically, and this affects
public opinion in northern countries as well. The results of our survey experiment suggest
that when a credible threat to the stability of the euro emerges, public opinion in a key
northern country like Germany ceases to be a constraint for further fiscal integration. In fact,
it internalizes the threat in the formulation of preferences. This finding dovetails with similar

108. Copelovitch, Frieden, and Walter 2016; Degner and Leuffen 2020; Jones, Kelemen, and Meunier 2016.
38

findings about the preferences of interest groups in Germany, which, too, are more willing
to allow for some risk-sharing than to let the euro collapse.109
Increased awareness of the systemic risks for the integrity of the eurozone helps to explain
Germany’s surprising shift in the negotiations over coronabonds. The attitude of the
German elites in wake of the pandemic was very different from a few years before, when
they had staunchly rejected all proposals for debt mutualization. After suggesting that Italy
and Spain follow the established crisis resolution path and apply for loans from the EMS,
the German government quickly turned around and became a strong supporter of the
decision to introduce the European pandemic recovery fund, which includes elements of
joint fiscal liability that resemble Eurobonds quite closely. Newspaper evidence suggests that
German politicians responded to the threat of a breakup of the euro, and took the reaction
of public opinion in southern countries, especially Italy, into account when conceiving their
response. Although there was a surge in pandemic-related solidarity towards Italy and other
southern countries, we have shown that consideration of the negative consequences of a
euro breakup is sufficient to generate a majority in Germany for risk-sharing.
A few remarks about the scope conditions of our argument are in order, though. For
preferences in northern countries to shift strategically towards greater support for fiscal risksharing, the majority has to consider membership in the euro from the “domain of gains”,
and take a risk-averse attitude towards it. Furthermore, for our mechanism to apply, it is
necessary that the threat of euro exit is issued by a systemically important country. In other
words, a sudden negative shift in public opinion in smaller countries, which could be more
easily “ring-fenced” than Italy, is unlikely to have the same effect.

109. Walter, Ray, and Redeker 2020.
39

Additionally, this paper does not try to explain how debt mutualization comes about. More
narrowly, it highlights that public opinion in creditor countries is not an obstacle to it. A shift
in public opinion in key northern countries is arguably a necessary condition for reform of
the economic architecture of the eurozone, but in all likelihood, it is not a sufficient
condition. Reform would have to overcome a large set of veto points, both in the national
public opinions of other European countries and within European institutions.
Moreover, we are not arguing that the recovery fund or even full-fledged Eurobonds would
solve all problems of fiscal sustainability in the eurozone. In fact, the recovery fund may be
too small for a meaningful economic stimulus. Besides, for an effective response to the crisis,
a regulatory shift in monetary policy is arguably more important than a common fiscal
response. What really matters for the solvency of high-debt countries is a “buyer of last
resort”, i.e., a central bank that commits to putting a floor on bond prices when financial
markets lose faith in them.110 The ECB has clearly moved in this direction during the
pandemic by launching the PEPP, which has kept interest rate spreads in check despite the
fiscal deterioration. However, this fix is unlikely to be a durable solution because the
European treaties explicitly prohibit the ECB to act as an “overdraft facility” for member
states and the legitimacy of bond-buying programs is systematically contested by the German
Constitutional Court. Furthermore, the redistribution of risks through the central bank’s
balance sheet, while effective at keeping interest rate spreads low, aggravates the democratic
deficit of the EU because it has important fiscal consequences that are not democratically
legitimated by voters. Thus, although it is probably not sufficient to stave off a possible fiscal
crisis, the building of a joint fiscal capacity is an important first step towards putting the euro
on a more solid footing.

110. De Grauwe 2013.
40

Independently of whether fiscal tensions in the eurozone will return or not, our study has
multiple implications for the way we study preferences for fiscal integration (and
disintegration) in the eurozone and beyond. First, further fiscal integration is more readily
accepted when the voters of countries that are “winners” of economic integration are primed
to take the costs of disintegration into account. Second, and conversely, voters in “loser”
countries tend to downplay the potentially very high costs of economic disintegration, or to
take a more risk-seeking attitude towards disintegration. This is an important source of
instability, as is also suggested by some literature on the determinants of Brexit.111 Third,
political elites are much less constrained than they sometimes consider themselves or pretend
to be.112 Preferences are not fixed and there is a lot of strategic uncertainty among voters,
creating room for national leaders to shape the public’s perception of the relevant facts.

111. Carreras 2019; Grynberg, Walter, and Wasserfallen 2020.
112. Gabel and Scheve 2007; de Vries, Walter, and Hobolt 2021.
41

References
Amsalem, Eran, and Alon Zoizner. 2020. Real, but Limited: A Meta-Analytic Assessment
of Framing Effects in the Political Domain. British Journal of Political Science Online
first: 1–17.
Bechtel, Michael M., Jens Hainmueller, and Yotam Margalit. 2014. Preferences for
International Redistribution: The Divide over the Eurozone Bailouts. American
Journal of Political Science 58 (4): 835–856.
Beramendi, Pablo, and Daniel Stegmueller. 2020. The Political Geography of the
Eurocrisis. World Politics 72 (4): 639–678.
Bernhard, William T., and David Leblang. 2016. Sovereign Debt, Migration Pressure, and
Government Survival. Comparative Political Studies 49 (7): 907–938.
Börzel, Tanja A., and Thomas Risse. 2018. From the euro to the Schengen crises:
European integration theories, politicization, and identity politics. Journal of
European Public Policy 25 (1): 83–108.
Carreras, Miguel. 2019. ‘What do we have to lose?’: Local economic decline, prospect
theory, and support for Brexit. Electoral Studies 62: 102094.
Carstensen, Martin B., and Vivien A. Schmidt. 2018. Power and changing modes of
governance in the euro crisis. Governance 31 (4): 609–624.
Cesaratto, Sergio, and Antonella Stirati. 2010. Germany and the European and Global
Crises. International Journal of Political Economy 39 (4): 56–86.
Chang, Michele, and Patrick Leblond. 2015. All in: Market expectations of eurozone
integrity in the sovereign debt crisis. Review of International Political Economy 22 (3):
626–655.
Chong, Dennis, and James N. Druckman. 2007a. Framing Theory. Annual Review of Political
Science 10 (1): 103–126.
Chong, Dennis, and James N. Druckman. 2007b. Framing Public Opinion in Competitive
Democracies. American Political Science Review 101 (4): 637–655.
Clements, Ben, Kyriaki Nanou, and Susannah Verney. 2014. ‘We No Longer Love You,
But We Don’t Want To Leave You’: The Eurozone Crisis and Popular
Euroscepticism in Greece. Journal of European Integration 36 (3): 247–265.
Copelovitch, Mark, Jeffry A. Frieden, and Stefanie Walter. 2016. The Political Economy of
the Euro Crisis. Comparative Political Studies 49 (7): 811–840.
De Grauwe, Paul. 2013. The Political Economy of the Euro. Annual Review of Political Science
16 (1): 153–170.
Degner, Hanno, and Dirk Leuffen. 2020. Crises and Responsiveness: Analysing German
Preference Formation During the Eurozone Crisis. Political Studies Review 18 (4):
491–506.
Dyson, Kenneth H. F., and Kevin Featherstone. 1999. The Road to Maastricht: Negotiating
Economic and Monetary Union. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffry Frieden. 2001. The Political Economy Of European Monetary
Unification. Westview Press.
Eichengreen, Barry J. 2010. The Breakup of the Euro Area. In Europe and the Euro, edited
by Alberto Alesina and Francesco Giavazzi, 11–51. National Bureau of Economic
Research conference report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
European Commission. 2019. Eurobarometer 91.5 (2019). Kantar Public, Brussels. GESIS Data
Archive, Cologne. ZA7576 Data file Version 1.0.0. Brussels. Available at
<https://doi.org/10.4232/1.13393>. Accessed 18 April 2020.

42

Fernández-Albertos, José, and Alexander Kuo. 2016. Economic Hardship and Policy
Preferences in the Eurozone Periphery: Evidence From Spain. Comparative Political
Studies 49 (7): 874–906.
Franchino, Fabio, and Paolo Segatti. 2019. Public opinion on the Eurozone fiscal union:
Evidence from survey experiments in Italy. Journal of European Public Policy 26 (1):
126–148.
Frieden, Jeffry A., and Stefanie Walter. 2017. Understanding the Political Economy of the
Eurozone Crisis. Annual Review of Political Science 20 (1): 371–390.
Gabel, Matthew. 1998. Interests and Integration: Market Liberalization, Public opinion, and
European Union. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Gabel, Matthew, and Kenneth Scheve. 2007. Estimating the Effect of Elite
Communications on Public Opinion Using Instrumental Variables. American Journal
of Political Science 51 (4): 1013.
Grynberg, Charlotte, Stefanie Walter, and Fabio Wasserfallen. 2020. Expectations, vote
choice and opinion stability since the 2016 Brexit referendum. European Union
Politics 21 (2): 255–275.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2016. Monnet’s error? Economic Policy 31
(86): 247–297.
Hien, Josef. 2019. The Religious Foundations of the European Crisis. JCMS: Journal of
Common Market Studies 57 (2): 185–204.
Hobolt, Sara B., and Patrick Leblond. 2013. Economic insecurity and public support for
the euro before and during the financial crisis. In Mass Politics in Tough Times:
Opinions, Votes and Protest in the Great Recession, edited by Nancy Bermeo and Larry
M. Bartels, 128–47. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hobolt, Sara B., and Catherine E. de Vries. 2016. Public Support for European Integration.
Annual Review of Political Science 19 (1): 413–432.
Hobolt, Sara B., and Christopher Wratil. 2015. Public opinion and the crisis: the dynamics
of support for the euro. Journal of European Public Policy 22 (2): 238–256.
Hooghe, Liesbet, and Gary Marks. 2009. A Postfunctionalist Theory of European
Integration: From Permissive Consensus to Constraining Dissensus. British Journal
of Political Science 39 (1): 1–23.
Hooghe, Liesbet, and Gary Marks. 2018. Cleavage theory meets Europe’s crises: Lipset,
Rokkan, and the transnational cleavage. Journal of European Public Policy 25 (1): 109–
135.
Höpner, Martin. 2019. The German Undervaluation Regime Under Bretton Woods: How
Germany Became the Nightmare of the World Economy. MPIfG Discussion Paper 19
(1). Available at <https://www.ssrn.com/abstract=3333760>. Accessed 3 July
2019.
Howarth, David, and Joachim Schild. 2021. Nein to ‘Transfer Union’: the German brake
on the construction of a European Union fiscal capacity. Journal of European
Integration 43 (2): 207–224.
Jones, Erik, R. Daniel Kelemen, and Sophie Meunier. 2016. Failing Forward? The Euro
Crisis and the Incomplete Nature of European Integration. Comparative Political
Studies 49 (7): 1010–1034.
Jurado, Ignacio, Stefanie Walter, Nikitas Konstantinidis, and Elias Dinas. 2020. Keeping
the euro at any cost? Explaining attitudes toward the euro-austerity trade-off in
Greece: European Union Politics 21 (3): 383–405.
Kanthak, Leon, and Dennis C Spies. 2018. Public support for European Union economic
policies. European Union Politics 19 (1): 97–118.

43

Kuhn, Theresa, and Aaron Kamm. 2019. The national boundaries of solidarity: a survey
experiment on solidarity with unemployed people in the European Union. European
Political Science Review 11 (2): 179–195.
Kuhn, Theresa, Hector Solaz, and Erika J. van Elsas. 2018. Practising what you preach:
how cosmopolitanism promotes willingness to redistribute across the European
Union. Journal of European Public Policy 25 (12): 1759–1778.
Landa, Dimitri, and Adam Meirowitz. 2009. Game Theory, Information, and Deliberative
Democracy. American Journal of Political Science 53 (2): 427–444.
Lupia, Arthur. 1994. Shortcuts Versus Encyclopedias: Information and Voting Behavior in
California Insurance Reform Elections. The American Political Science Review 88 (1):
63–76.
Manasse, Paolo. 2019. Perché I Costi Sono Altissimi E I Benefici Trascurabili. In Cosa
Succede Se Usciamo Dall’euro?, edited by Carlo Stagnaro. Turin: IBL libri.
Matthijs, Matthias. 2016. Powerful rules governing the euro: the perverse logic of German
ideas. Journal of European Public Policy 23 (3): 375–391.
Matthijs, Matthias, and Mark Blyth, eds. 2015. The Future of the Euro. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Matthijs, Matthias, and Kathleen McNamara. 2015. The Euro Crisis’ Theory Effect:
Northern Saints, Southern Sinners, and the Demise of the Eurobond. Journal of
European Integration 37 (2): 229–245.
McNamara, Kathleen R. 1998. The Currency of Ideas: Monetary Politics in the European Union.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press.
Nicoli, Francesco. 2019. Integration through crises? A quantitative assessment of the effect
of the Eurocrisis on preferences for fiscal integration. Comparative European Politics
17 (3): 397–425.
Quattrone, George A., and Amos Tversky. 1988. Contrasting Rational and Psychological
Analyses of Political Choice. The American Political Science Review 82 (3): 719–736.
Rho, Sungmin, and Michael Tomz. 2017. Why Don’t Trade Preferences Reflect Economic
Self-interest? International Organization 71 (S1): S85–S108.
Roth, Felix, Lars Jonung, and Felicitas Nowak-Lehmann Danziger. 2016. Crisis and Public
Support for the Euro, 1990–2014. JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 54 (4):
944–960.
Schneider, Christina J., and Branislav L. Slantchev. 2018. The Domestic Politics of
International Cooperation: Germany and the European Debt Crisis. International
Organization 72 (1): 1–31.
Schneider, Christina J., and Jennifer L. Tobin. 2020. The Political Economy of Bilateral
Bailouts. International Organization 74 (1): 1–29.
Slothuus, Rune, and Claes H. de Vreese. 2010. Political Parties, Motivated Reasoning, and
Issue Framing Effects. The Journal of Politics 72 (3): 630–645.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2016. The Euro: How a Common Currency Threatens the Future of Europe. W.
W. Norton & Company.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1973. Availability: A heuristic for judging
frequency and probability. Cognitive Psychology 5 (2): 207–232.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
Biases. Science 185 (4157): 1124–1131.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1992. Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative
representation of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 5 (4): 297–323.
Varoufakis, Yanis. 2017. Adults In The Room: My Battle With Europe’s Deep Establishment.
Random House.
de Vries, Catherine E. 2018. Euroscepticism and the Future of European Integration. Oxford
University Press.

44

de Vries, Catherine E., Stefanie Walter, and Sara B Hobolt. 2021. Politicizing International
Cooperation. The Mass Public, Political Entrepreneurs and Political Opportunity
Structures. International Organization Online first: 1–27.
Walter, Stefanie, Elias Dinas, Ignacio Jurado, and Nikitas Konstantinidis. 2018.
Noncooperation by Popular Vote: Expectations, Foreign Intervention, and the
Vote in the 2015 Greek Bailout Referendum. International Organization 72 (04): 969–
994.
Walter, Stefanie, Ari Ray, and Nils Redeker. 2020. The Politics of Bad Options: Why the
Eurozone’s Problems Have Been So Hard to Resolve. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Xezonakis, Georgios, and Felix Hartmann. 2020. Economic downturns and the Greek
referendum of 2015: Evidence using night-time light data. European Union Politics 21
(3): 361–382.

45

ONLINE APPENDICES/SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Getting Closer by Moving Apart?
Strategic Interdependence and Preferences for Debt Mutualization in the Eurozone

Table of Contents:
Appendix A: Further information about the survey
A.1: Short description of the survey
A.2: Italian frames and questions used as dependent variables
A.3: German frames and questions used as dependent variables
A.4: Variable coding

p. 2
p. 3
p. 4
p. 6

APPENDIX B: Strategic interaction as a game-theoretic model

p. 7

APPENDIX C: Additional tables and figures
C.1: Support for Italexit in Italy over time
C.2: Assessment of having benefited from the euro in Italy and Germany
C.3: Determinants of support for Italexit in Italy and Germany

p. 9
p. 10
p. 12

APPENDIX D: Additional tables and figures from the survey experiment
D.1. Average levels of support for Italexit by scenario
D.2. Heterogeneous treatment effects by educational attainment
D.3 Results from linear probability models

p. 18
p. 19
p. 20

APPENDIX E: Results from the survey experiment with a second dependent
variable
p. 21
APPENDIX F: Results for the COVID-19 frames in Italy

p. 23

APPENDIX A: Further information about the survey
A.1. Short description of the survey
The paper draws on two waves of an online survey about preferences towards the euro,
which were conducted among citizens over the age of 18 in Italy and Germany. The first
wave only included Italy, and it was fielded by SWG using their online panel in October 2019
(17-23 October 2019). The second wave was again conducted by SWG in Italy (31 March –
7 April 2020) as well as respondi in Germany (31 March – 7 April 2020). The second wave
was based on a common questionnaire, and we closely coordinated and monitored the
implementation of the surveys in both countries.
The use of an online survey was necessitated by the complexity of the information presented,
which requires considerable cognitive effort by the respondents. Moreover, we wanted to
minimize the effects of social desirability bias which often arises with face-to-face surveys.
We used two survey companies that maintain large online panels in the respective countries.
Since non-probability panels are less likely to be representative of the population than
probability sampling for telephone or face-to-face surveys, both survey companies employed
a quota sampling approach on age and gender (interlocked), education, and region in each
country to ensure that the samples are as representative of the population as possible.
To correct for other sources of sampling bias, the survey includes additional poststratification weights for age, gender, education, and political preferences (past vote choice).
Population targets were obtained by Eurostat and aggregated opinion polls that were
conducted during the survey fieldwork period.
The implementation of the online survey included timers which allowed the survey
companies to clean the data by removing responses that were equal to or less than 33% of
the median duration per country. To further filter out inattentive respondents, we included
a screener question as an attention check (Berinsky et al. 2013).
Respondents’ consent was obtained at the beginning of the survey. Respondents were
informed that the survey was anonymous, their participation voluntary, and that the data
would be used for scientific purposes and kept in a data repository to allow subsequent use.
Respondents had to indicate that they were citizens of the particular country, 18 years of age
or older and that they had read and agreed to the information given in the consent message.
The survey then included questions on the following aspects: demographic information,
political preferences, attitudes towards the EU, experimental manipulation and posttreatment questions, socio-economic information, and economic knowledge. We also
included an open feedback question at the end of the survey, which allowed respondents to
tell us what they thought about the survey. A limited number of respondents thought that
the survey was too long and cognitively complex, but overall the response was
overwhelmingly positive.

A.2

A.2. Italian frames and questions used as dependent variables:
Costs of remain (between the two paragraphs of the basic scenario):
Acceptance of the bailout package implies that the Italian government commits to implementing some
policy changes. The measures that the Italian government needs to implement involve making it easier
for companies to fire employees, cutting public expenditures (e.g. pension cuts, social expenditure cuts,
etc.), increasing taxes (both income taxes and value-added taxes), privatizing state assets, and
introducing a haircut on savings in troubled banks. These measures may lead to a recession and
increase unemployment.
Costs of exit (between the two paragraphs of the basic scenario):
Refusal of the bailout package implies exiting the Euro. This is likely to usher in a turbulent period
in which the new currency quickly loses value vis-à-vis the Euro, inflation rises reducing the
purchasing power of citizens, and the banks face solvency problems and cut their lending to households
and enterprises. The European partners may also react by restricting Italy’s access to their markets.
These measures may lead to a recession and increase unemployment.
Question:
How would you vote in this referendum?
1. I would accept the bailout package and remain in the Euro
2. I would reject the bailout package and leave the Euro
3. I wouldn’t vote
4. I don’t know
In Italy, the full scenario, including the basic scenarios and all frames, read as follows:
Please imagine the following scenario:
Italy faces a crisis of confidence in financial markets. Capital flies out of the country; customers try
to withdraw their deposits from banks; and the interest rate spread with Germany increases. As a
result, the Italian government is unable to meet its financial obligations. Other European countries
offer Italy a bailout package.
Acceptance of the bailout package implies that the Italian government commits to implementing some
policy changes. The measures that the Italian government needs to implement involve making it easier
for companies to fire employees, cutting public expenditures (e.g. pension cuts, social expenditure cuts,
etc.), increasing taxes (both income taxes and value-added taxes), privatizing state assets, and
introducing a haircut on savings in troubled banks. These measures may lead to a recession and
increase unemployment.
Refusal of the bailout package implies exiting the Euro. This is likely to usher in a turbulent period
in which the new currency quickly loses value vis-à-vis the Euro, inflation rises reducing the
purchasing power of citizens, and the banks face solvency problems and cut their lending to households
and enterprises. The European partners may also react by restricting Italy’s access to their markets.
These measures may lead to a recession and increase unemployment.

A.3

Before deciding whether to accept or not the bailout package, the government calls a referendum. The
referendum asks citizens whether they want to stay in the euro and thus accept the bailout package,
or whether they want to reject the bailout package and therefore exit the euro.
A.3. German frames and questions used as dependent variables:
Costs of exit (between the two paragraphs of the basic scenario):
Italy’s exit from the Euro, as the third-largest economy of the eurozone, may lead to a domino effect
and even to the end of the euro in its current form. This would imply a large appreciation of the new
German currency, which may reduce the competitiveness of the German export industry, and lead to
enterprise failures and job losses. The consequences for the German economy may be serious.
Costs of remain (between the two paragraphs of the basic scenario):
The measures that the German and other European governments would need to implement to avoid
Italy’s exit involve some form of debt mutualization such as jointly guaranteed government debt
(commonly referred to as Eurobonds); authorize the European Central Bank to buy Italian bonds
without limits; or introduce a European unemployment insurance financed by a European tax.
These measures would increase Germany’s public debt and may imply higher taxes or higher
inflation. The consequences for the German economy may be serious.
Question:
In your view, what should the German government do in response to this crisis?
1. Prevent Italy’s exit from the Euro
2. Facilitate Italy’s exit from the Euro
98. I don’t know
In Germany, the full scenario, including the basic scenarios and all frames, read as follows:
Please imagine the following scenario:
Italy faces a crisis of confidence in financial markets. Capital flies out of the country; customers try
to withdraw their deposits from banks; and the interest rate that the Italian government has to pay
to issue government debt increases. As a result, the Italian government is unable to meet its financial
obligations. The Italian government is unwilling to sign a bailout plan similar to the Greek one after
the financial crisis, which would condition the disbursement of funds on the implementation of
austerity measures, and is contemplating exit from the euro.
Italy’s exit from the Euro, as the third-largest economy of the eurozone, may lead to a domino effect
and even to the end of the euro in its current form. This would imply a large appreciation of the new
German currency, which may reduce the competitiveness of the German export industry, and lead to
enterprise failures and job losses. The consequences for the German economy may be serious.
The measures that the German and other European governments would need to implement to avoid
Italy’s exit involve some form of debt mutualization such as jointly guaranteed government debt
(commonly referred to as Eurobonds); authorize the European Central Bank to buy Italian bonds
without limits; or introduce a European unemployment insurance financed by a European tax.

A.4

These measures would increase Germany’s public debt and may imply higher taxes or higher
inflation. The consequences for the German economy may be serious.
Due to its weight in the negotiations with other eurozone countries, the German government can
prevent Italy from exiting the euro or facilitate Italy’s exit.

A.5

A.4. Variable coding
Table A.1. Coding of additional variables from the survey
Variable

Survey question

Operationalization

Region

“In which region do you live?”

Exclusive national
identity

Do you see yourself as 1 Italian only; 2
Italian and European; 3 European and
Italian; 4 European only; 5 None; 98
Refusal; 99 I don’t know
What is your gender? 1 Male 2 Female 3
Other 98 Prefer not to say

For Italy: dummy variable south; 1 for
Southern regions, including islands; 0 for
all other regions
For Germany: dummy variable east; 1 for
East Germany; 0 for West Germany,
including Berlin
Binary categorical variable; 1 coded as 1,
2 to 5 coded as 0, 98, and 99 coded as
missing

Female

Binary categorical variable 1 coded as 0, 2
coded as 1, 3, and 98 coded as missing

Age

What is your date of birth (dd/mm/yy)?

Three age groups generated (<30; >=30
& <60; >=60)

Education

What is your highest educational
qualification?

Continuous variable based on a detailed
list of Italian education levels according
to the ISCED classification

Subjective income

Thinking of your household’s total
monthly or weekly income, is your
household able to make ends meet, that
is, pay your usual expenses easily or with
difficulty?
Which party did you vote for in the last
[Italian general election on 4 March
2018/German federal election on 24
September 2017]?

Continuous variable, 0-10; 0 = With great
difficulty; 10 = Very easily

Economic knowledge

1. What does the gross domestic product
(GDP) measure? 2. What is the exchange
rate? 3. Inflation is the term used to
describe...

The variable is coded as the sum of
correct answers to three knowledge
questions. Four response options were
given for each question.

Benefitted from the
euro

Taking everything into account, would
you say that [Italy/Germany] has on
balance benefited or not from being a
member of the European common
currency, the Euro?

Continuous variable, 0-10; 0 = Not
benefited at all; 10 = Benefited a lot

Past vote

A.6

Categorical variable based on a detailed
list of Italian/German parties; smaller
parties are coded as “Other party”;
abstention, “I would prefer not to say”
and “I don’t remember” coded as “No
party”

APPENDIX B: Strategic interaction as a game-theoretic model
The clash between northern and southern countries over the issuing of Coronabonds can be
formalized as a two-person game between Germany (heading the northern front) and Italy
(heading the southern front). The game starts with the Italian government finding itself in
the condition of not being able to honor its financial commitments due to the additional
burden of the corona crisis and asking the German government to share a portion of the
additional debt. We assume that the actions of both governments conform to public opinion
in the respective countries. The German government moves first by choosing between two
possible options: allow for debt mutualization (MUTUALIZE), or not allow for it (NONMUTUALIZE). Next Italy moves by choosing whether to remain in the eurozone
(REMAIN) or to exit (EXIT). The game generates four possible states of the world: 1) one
in which Germany allows for mutualization of risk and Italy remains in the eurozone (MR);
2) one in which Germany agrees to mutualization and Italy exits (ME); 3) one in which
Germany does not allow for mutualization and Italy remains (NR); and 4) one in which
Germany does not allow for mutualization and Italy exits (NE).
We assume that Germany’s first preference is the status quo, i.e. NR (non-mutualize and
Italy remains) and that Germany's last preference is ME (debt mutualization but Italy exits
nonetheless,) because in this case, Germany would pay the costs of mutualization without
being able to deter a breakup of the eurozone. However, we also assume that German voters
are uncertain between MR (mutualization and Italy remaining in the eurozone) (MR) and NE
(non-mutualization and Italy exiting) and that they decide between the two options based on
information about the costs and benefits of these two options. With MR, Germany benefits
from keeping the eurozone intact but pays the costs of debt mutualization. With NE, the
opposite happens.
In contrast, we assume that Italy’s first preference is MR, i.e. a state in the world in which
they remain in the eurozone while benefiting from debt mutualization and that Italy’s last
preference is ME, which implies paying the costs of euro exit without benefiting from debt
mutualization. Italian voters are assumed to be uncertain between NE and NR, two states of
the world in which Germany does not agree to debt mutualization. In NR, they value to costs
of exit from the eurozone as greater than the costs of remaining. In NE, the opposite applies.
Again, we assume that the Italian voters’ preferences can be moved by providing information
about the costs and benefits of these two options. Table B.1 displays the pay-offs.
Table B.1. Pay-off matrix from the interaction between Germany and Italy (with ordinal
payoffs)

Germany

Italy
Remain (R)

Exit (E)

Mutualize (M)

MR
(3 or 2), 4

ME
1,1

Non-Mutualize
(N)

NR
4, (2 or 3)

NE
(2 or 3), (3 or 2)

Table B.1 shows that if the game is played simultaneously, an outcome involving debt
mutualization is not feasible because the strategy of mutualization is strictly dominated for
Germany (since it prefers NON-MUTUALIZE to MUTUALIZE both if Italy plays EXIT
A.7

and if it plays REMAIN). The equilibrium is Italexit or the status quo depending on the
preferences of Italian voters between exiting or remaining in the euro contingent on
Germany refusing debt mutualization. However, if the game is played sequentially (Figure
B.1), debt mutualization becomes a feasible outcome if Italy prefers NE to NR and if
Germany prefers MR to NE. In other words, for debt mutualization to emerge two
conditions have to be satisfied: 1) Italy must credibly threaten exit; 2) Germany must consider
that the costs of debt mutualization are lower than the costs of Italexit. Table B.2 presents
all four possible combinations.

Figure B.1. Decision tree for a sequential game with Germany as a first-mover

Table B.2. Four possible outcomes based on the sequential game with Germany as a firstmover
Italy

Germany

NE>NR
MR>NE

Debt sharing
(Mutualize & Remain)

NE>MR

Euro breakup
(Non-Mutualize & Exit)

A.8

NR>NE
Status quo
(Non-Mutualize &
Remain)
Status quo
(Non-Mutualize &
Remain)

APPENDIX C: Additional tables and figures
C.1. Support for Italexit in Italy over time
Table C.1. Determinants of supporting Italexit in Italy based on the pooled sample from
2019 and 2020; marginal effects of timing of the survey based on multinomial probit
regressions

Remain
Year=2020 (ref: 2019)
Exit
Year=2020 (ref: 2019)
Don’t know
Year=2020 (ref: 2019)
Control variables included?
Observations

Model 1

Model 2

-0.196***
(-5.20)

-0.163***
(-4.61)

0.0956**
(2.61)

0.0498
(1.48)

0.101**
(2.87)
No
1172

0.113**
(3.25)
Yes
1172

t values in parentheses
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001
Note: Only observations from the control group included; survey weights applied. Model 2 includes age, age
squared, gender, education, subjective income, national identity, economic knowledge, and region as control
variables.

A.9

C.2. Assessment of having benefited from the euro in Italy and Germany

Italy 2019

Italy 2020

.3

Share of respondents

.2

.1

0
Not benefited at all

Benefited a lot

Germany 2020
.3

.2

.1

0
Not benefited at all

Benefited a lot

Figure C.1. Assessment of having benefited from the euro in Germany (April 2020) and
Italy (October 2019 and April 2020)
Note: The figure shows responses to the survey question “have you and your family benefited or not benefited
from [Italy/Germany| being a member of the euro. It shows the distribution of responses on a scale from 0
to 10 and normal distributions. Survey weights applied.

A.10

Table C.2. Determinants of evaluating the Euro positively in Italy based on the pooled
sample from 2019 and 2020
(1)
(2)
Year=2020
-0.333*** 0.111
(-3.73) (1.36)
National identity=1
-2.439***
(-27.40)
Age
-0.0954***
(-6.02)
Age # Age
0.000880***
(5.65)
Female
-0.141
(-1.72)
Education
0.0987***
(5.25)
Subjective income
0.197***
(10.97)
Southern Italy=1
-0.0272
(-0.31)
Economic knowledge
-0.117**
(-2.76)
Constant
3.788*** 5.658***
(57.65) (13.00)
Observations
7896
7896
t statistics in parentheses, survey weights included
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

A.11

C.3: Determinants of support for Italexit in Italy and Germany
Table C.3. Determinants of supporting Italexit in Italy; average marginal effects based on
multinomial probit regressions with additional covariates
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.041
(1.141)
-0.022
(-0.604)
-0.019
(-0.501)

0.048
(1.431)
-0.015
(-0.422)
-0.033
(-0.888)

0.036
(1.062)
0.011
(0.306)
-0.047
(-1.300)

-0.134***
(-4.031)
0.156***
(4.055)
-0.022
(-0.601)

-0.110***
(-3.497)
0.152***
(4.218)
-0.042
(-1.199)

-0.123***
(-3.882)
0.159***
(4.418)
-0.036
(-1.059)

-0.118***
(-3.582)
0.148***
(3.856)
-0.030
(-0.807)

-0.065*
(-2.023)
0.128***
(3.527)
-0.062
(-1.754)

-0.072*
(-2.186)
0.124***
(3.506)
-0.052
(-1.533)

-0.010*
(-2.294)
-0.001
(-0.122)
0.011*
(2.243)

-0.006
(-1.252)
-0.003
(-0.548)
0.009
(1.937)

0.000*
(2.431)
-0.000
(-0.052)
-0.000*
(-2.159)

0.000
(1.436)
0.000
(0.253)
-0.000
(-1.807)

0.033
(1.421)
-0.087***
(-3.349)
0.054*
(2.106)

0.037
(1.558)
-0.077**
(-2.958)
0.040
(1.605)

0.021***
(4.358)

0.020***
(4.008)

Treatment effects
Costs of Italexit
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Costs of Italexit + costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know

Covariates
Age
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Age squared
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Female
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Education
Remain

A.12

Exit
Don’t know
Subjective income
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
National identity
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Economic knowledge
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Southern Italy
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Forza Italia (Ref: Lega)
Remain

-0.011
(-1.958)
-0.010
(-1.767)

-0.010
(-1.608)
-0.011
(-1.869)

-0.016***
(-3.521)
0.015**
(2.850)
0.001
(0.302)

-0.014**
(-2.803)
0.017***
(3.306)
-0.004
(-0.774)

-0.254***
(-11.037)
0.345***
(16.112)
-0.091***
(-3.589)

-0.169***
(-6.515)
0.267***
(10.775)
-0.098***
(-3.755)

0.004
(0.282)
0.056***
(4.311)
-0.060***
(-4.775)

-0.002
(-0.155)
0.063***
(4.762)
-0.061***
(-5.010)

-0.035
(-1.369)
0.034
(1.203)
0.001
(0.051)

-0.056*
(-2.134)
0.042
(1.511)
0.013
(0.483)
0.104
(1.818)
-0.033
(-0.514)
-0.071
(-1.500)

Exit
Don’t know
Fratelli d’Italia
Remain

0.011
(0.246)
-0.021
(-0.352)
0.011
(0.179)

Exit
Don’t know
M5S
Remain

0.094**
(2.906)
-0.099*
(-2.534)
0.005
(0.145)

Exit
Don’t know

A.13

PD
Remain

0.341***
(8.910)
-0.320***
(-7.372)
-0.021
(-0.562)

Exit
Don’t know
Other
Remain

0.251***
(5.439)
-0.269***
(-5.150)
0.018
(0.370)

Exit
Don’t know
No party
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Observations
2118
t statistics in parentheses, survey weights included
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

A.14

2047

0.100*
(2.464)
-0.248***
(-5.344)
0.148**
(3.199)
1925

Table C.4. Determinants of supporting Italexit in Germany; average marginal effects
based on multinomial probit regressions with additional covariates
(1)

(2)

(3)

0.148***
(4.537)
-0.130***
(-4.205)
-0.019
(-0.691)

0.162***
(5.274)
-0.136***
(-4.578)
-0.026
(-1.026)

0.164***
(5.393)
-0.133***
(-4.441)
-0.031
(-1.304)

-0.104***
(-3.320)
0.090**
(2.748)
0.013
(0.488)

-0.106***
(-3.513)
0.078*
(2.451)
0.027
(1.045)

-0.092**
(-3.033)
0.079*
(2.454)
0.014
(0.550)

0.086**
(2.620)
-0.097**
(-3.067)
0.011
(0.379)

0.087**
(2.781)
-0.090**
(-2.919)
0.004
(0.141)

0.084**
(2.690)
-0.084**
(-2.697)
-0.000
(-0.011)

-0.023***
(-5.524)
0.012**
(2.846)
0.011**
(2.998)

-0.020***
(-4.603)
0.012**
(2.719)
0.008*
(2.355)

0.000***
(5.108)
-0.000*
(-2.294)
-0.000**
(-3.157)

0.000***
(4.163)
-0.000*
(-2.249)
-0.000*
(-2.360)

0.004
(0.174)
-0.052*
(-2.299)
0.048*
(2.527)

-0.009
(-0.401)
-0.022
(-0.994)
0.032
(1.714)

0.002
(0.303)
0.013
(1.940)

0.000
(0.026)
0.010
(1.384)

Treatment effects
Costs of Italexit
Remain
Exit
Don’
Costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Costs of Italexit + costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know

Covariates
Age
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Age squared
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Female
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Education
Remain
Exit

A.15

Don’t know
Subjective income
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
National identity
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Economic knowledge
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
East Germany
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
SPD (Ref: CDU/CSU)
Remain

-0.015**
(-2.621)

-0.010
(-1.706)

-0.013**
(-3.227)
0.009*
(2.349)
0.004
(1.089)

-0.009*
(-2.316)
0.007
(1.660)
0.003
(0.854)

-0.249***
(-10.754)
0.236***
(10.540)
0.013
(0.663)

-0.185***
(-7.278)
0.190***
(7.817)
-0.005
(-0.260)

0.035**
(2.844)
0.017
(1.416)
-0.052***
(-5.551)

0.026*
(2.005)
0.020
(1.587)
-0.046***
(-4.916)

-0.024
(-0.812)
0.031
(1.082)
-0.007
(-0.285)

-0.006
(-0.204)
0.015
(0.539)
-0.009
(-0.398)
0.024
(0.685)
-0.020
(-0.586)
-0.004
(-0.160)

Exit
Don’t know
AfD
Remain

-0.348***
(-9.312)
0.369***
(9.088)
-0.021
(-0.765)

Exit
Don’t know
FDP
Remain

-0.088
(-1.825)
0.081
(1.669)
0.007
(0.192)

Exit
Don’t know
Die Linke
Remain

0.006

A.16

(0.145)
-0.008
(-0.181)
0.001
(0.041)

Exit
Don’t know
Bündnis90/Die Grünen
Remain

0.079*
(2.239)
-0.116***
(-3.550)
0.037
(1.388)

Exit
Don’t know
Other
Remain

-0.133*
(-2.567)
-0.005
(-0.103)
0.138**
(2.987)

Exit
Don’t know
No party
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Observations
t statistics in parentheses, survey weights included
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

2246

A.17

2178

-0.226***
(-5.481)
0.128**
(2.931)
0.098**
(2.737)
2009

APPENDIX D: Additional tables and figures from the survey experiment
D.1. Average levels of support for Italexit by scenario

Figure D.1. Average levels of support for Italexit and remain by scenario in Italy

Figure D.2. Average levels of support for Italexit and remain by scenario in Germany

A.18

D.2. Heterogeneous treatment effects by educational attainment

Figure D.3. Heterogeneous treatment effects by educational attainment in Italy

Figure D.4. Heterogeneous treatment effects by educational attainment in Germany

A.19

D.3 Results from linear probability models

Figure D.7. Average treatment effects of preferences towards Italexit in Italy based on
linear probability models

Figure D.8. Average treatment effects of preferences towards Italexit in Germany based
on linear probability models

A.20

APPENDIX E: Results from the survey experiment with a second dependent
variable
In this appendix, we show results from the analysis with the second variable, as discussed in
the robustness checks section. In Italy, respondents could indicate their preferred choice out
of the two following options: 1) “Germany and other European governments do not agree
to debt mutualization, and Italy remains in the Euro” and, 2) “Germany and other European
governments do not agree to debt mutualization, and Italy exits the Euro”. In Germany,
respondents could choose between 1) “Germany and other European governments do not
agree to debt mutualization, and Italy exits the Euro” and, 2) “Germany and other European
governments agree to debt mutualization, and Italy remains in the Euro”. These choices are
crucial for the determination of the equilibrium of the game analyzed in Appendix B.
Table E.1 depicts the relative majorities in preferences in Italy and Germany and summarizes
the expected equilibrium outcomes based on the game-theoretical account developed in
Appendix B. The table is based on Figures E.1 and E.2. which plot the predicted probabilities
for support of different outcomes in Italy and Germany, respectively. Depending on the
salience of costs of the different options, the equilibrium solutions for the eurozone fluctuate
between Italexit or debt mutualization.
First, if Germany does not agree to debt mutualization, we find that Italians are always more
likely to support exit than remain. This gives Italy a credible threat.
Second, the response of German voters is highly contingent upon the frames they receive.
If voters receive no additional information (the control group, scenario 1), or information
about the costs of mutualization for Germany without information about the costs of Italexit
(scenario 3), a majority of voters do not want debt mutualization and would accept Italy
exiting the eurozone. Yet, as soon as German respondents take into account the costs of
Italexit they consider mutualization as the preferable option (scenarios 2 and 4). Although
the difference between mutualization and exit is statistically insignificant in the combined
scenario, the pattern is clear: predicted support for mutualization is higher than support for
Italexit when Germans are alerted to the costs of Italy leaving the eurozone.
Taken together, Table E.1 demonstrates that the equilibrium outcome depends on the kind
of information processed by respondents. Note that the relative majorities for Italexit and
remain based on this second dependent variable are very similar to the results in the main
analysis (Figures 3 and 5). The results differ in two instances (scenario 2 in Italy; scenario 1
in Germany). In these two scenarios, majority support shifts from remain to exit.
Table E.1. Summary of the results of the simulated strategic interaction between Germany
and Italy
1
2
3
4

Scenario
Control
Cost of exit
Cost of remain
Cost of exit + cost of remain

Italy
NE > NR
NE > NR
NE > NR
NE > NR

Germany
NE > MR
NE << MR
NE >> MR
NE < MR

Equilibrium
Italexit
Mutualization
Italexit
Mutualization

Note: The results are based on predicted probabilities of support. “<<” or “>>” imply that differences are
statistically significant at the 95 level. The predicted probabilities are shown in Figures E.1 and E.2.

A.21

Figure E.1. Predicted probabilities of preferences towards the outcome of the strategic
interaction in Italy

Figure E.2. Predicted probabilities of preferences towards the outcome of the strategic
interaction in Germany

A.22

APPENDIX F: Results for the COVID-19 frames
Table F.1. Average treatment effects of the COVID-19 frame in Germany based on
multinomial probit regressions
(1)
Treatment effects
COVID
Remain

0.051
(1.539)
-0.071*
(-2.250)
0.021
(0.736)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + Costs of Italexit
Remain

0.170***
(5.294)
-0.153***
(-5.088)
-0.018
(-0.651)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + Costs of Italremain
Remain

-0.052
(-1.627)
0.011
(0.344)
0.041
(1.441)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + costs of Italexit + costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Observations
t statistics in parentheses, survey weights included
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

A.23

0.088**
(2.695)
-0.082**
(-2.596)
-0.006
(-0.226)
2830

We also included a COVID-19 frame in Italy. The frame read as follows:
The corona crisis has forced the Italian government to significantly increase public expenditures, both
to reinforce health care infrastructure at a time of stress and to contain the consequences of the
recession. This has led to a large increase in the public deficit as a share of GDP and a downgrade
of Italian bonds by rating agencies. As a consequence, now [basic scenario follows …]
To test the effect of the COVID-frame in Italy we recruited an additional 2092 respondents.
We had no prior expectations about the direct effect of this frame but we hypothesized that
the combination between the COVID-19 frame and the cost of remain frame would reduce
preferences for remain and increase preferences for exit. Our reasoning was as follows: to
the extent that voters understand that Italy needs to increase its public deficit in order to
cushion the consequences of the corona crisis, the imposition of austerity should decrease
their support for remain and increase their support for exit.
The results shown in Figure F.1 and Table F.2 corroborate this hypothesis. When the
COVID-19 frame is paired with the austerity frame, support for Italexit is significantly higher
(+17 percent) and support for Italremain significantly lower (-13 percent) than in the control
group. Surprisingly, when administered on its own, the COVID frame increases support for
remain by 9.68 percentage points. A possible explanation may be that when highlighting the
national health emergency due to COVID-19, respondents are less likely to blame the euro
for Italy’s economic ills.
In general, the effect of the COVID frame tends to be lower when it is combined with the
frames that emphasize material considerations. Post-estimation Wald tests show that when
the COVID frame is combined with other frames, its effects are statistically insignificant,
with one exception: in combination with the costs of Italexit and costs of Italremain frames,
the COVID frame has a significant negative effect on the likelihood to support exit (+8
percent). Even in this case, however, exit from the euro is supported by a relative majority
of Italians (43 percent), as shown in Figure F.2. Together with evidence from the previous
wave, which shows a strong effect of the austerity frame on support for Italexit, this pattern
of results makes us confident that the response of Italian voters is primarily driven by
consideration of the costs of remaining in the eurozone.

A.24

Figure F.1. Average treatment effects of the COVID-19 frame in Italy
Note: The figure shows the average treatment effects and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial
probit models. All treatment effects are calculated with reference to the control group which only received the
basic scenario and survey weights are applied. The full regression table with the results for the COVID-frame
is shown below (Table F.2).

Figure F.2. Predicted probabilities for scenarios with the COVID-19 frame in Italy
Note: The figure shows predicted probabilities and 95 percent confidence intervals based on multinomial probit
models based on the same regression models used to calculate ATEs in Figure F.1.

A.25

Table F.2. Average treatment effect of the COVID-19 frame in Italy based on
multinomial probit regressions
(1)

Treatment effects
COVID
Remain

0.097**
(2.631)
-0.046
(-1.247)
-0.051
(-1.418)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + Costs of Italexit
Remain

0.007
(0.203)
0.031
(0.828)
-0.039
(-1.035)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + Costs of Italremain
Remain

-0.128***
(-3.845)
0.174***
(4.525)
-0.047
(-1.272)

Exit
Don’t know
COVID + costs of Italexit + costs of Italremain
Remain
Exit
Don’t know
Observations
t statistics in parentheses; survey weights
included
* p<0.05 ** p<0.01 *** p<0.001

-0.079*
(-2.269)
0.061
(1.574)
0.019
(0.477)
2626

References
Berinsky, A. J., Margolis, M. F., & Sances, M. W. 2014. “Separating the shirkers from the
workers? Making sure respondents pay attention on self-administered surveys.” American
Journal of Political Science, 58(3), 739-753

A.26

