"x"
"1" "Title: Black seed (Nigella sativa), a COVID-19 medicinal intervention - a recommendation for the Americas"
"2" "Author Information:"
"3" "Corresponding author: Ponn P. Mahayosnand, MPH, Research Scholar, Ronin Institute, Montclair, NJ ponn.mahayosnand@ronininstitute.org"
"4" "We request not to publish a mailing address."
"5" "Samiha Ahmed, BS, Graduate Student, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, sahmed15@umd.edu"
"6" "ZM Sabra, Medical Student, Islamic University of Gaza, Faculty of Medicine, Gaza, Palestine,"
"7" "zsabra@students.iugaza.edu.ps"
"8" "Disclaimers: The views expressed in the submitted article are those of the authors and not an"
"9" "official position of our institutions."
"10" "Article word count: 1958 References: 18"
"11" "Funding: None."
"12" "Competing interests: None declared."
"13" "Author contributions: Concept and design: PPM, ZMS. Conducted the literature review, drafted the manuscript, and approved final revisions: PPM, SA, ZMS. Technical editing: ZMS"
"14" "Black seed (Nigella sativa), a COVID-19 medicinal intervention - a recommendation for the Americas"
"15" "Introduction"
"16" "This special report presents the medicinal use of black seed ( Nigella sativa ) for coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19). The authors analyze current COVID-19-specific black seed studies in the Middle East, South Asia, and the Far East. While black seed has benefits far beyond its antiviral and immunity-enhancing effects, the authors focus on the properties relating specifically to COVID-19. Since some of the countries discussed have fewer financial and human resources than the US, the successful ingestion or inhalation   of black seed or black seed oil deserves worthy attention. This report is split into two sections, which explore (1) the Islamic, historical, botanical, and scientific significance of black seed; and (2) the chemical composition, nutritional values, and current use of black seed as a prophylactic and COVID-19 treatment."
"17" "The authors intend to introduce black seed, a common ancient natural medicine that can be used to improve overall health and well-being, to key stakeholders in the Americas. Key stakeholders include researchers, policymakers, public health and preventive medicine clinicians and practitioners, and other persons concerned about a more equitable, economical, and accessible alternative, all-natural option for preventing and treating COVID-19. Black seed also serves as an introduction to Prophetic Medicine, a complementary practice used throughout the Muslim world alongside allopathic medicine. Implemented into one’s daily life, black seed has proven health implications surpassing the current COVID-19 pandemic."
"18" "The history and   religious significance of black seed"
"19" "Black seed is known as a natural medicine in the Christian faith, as noted in the Old Testament. (1,2)   In Islam, it is reported that the Prophet Muhammad (peace be upon him) said black seed is a  cure for everything, when used regularly, except death.  (1–4)   Following the medicinal advice of the Prophet (peace be upon him) or verses from the Qur’an is called  at-Tib  an-Nabawi  or Prophetic Medicine.  (5,6)  It is hard to gauge how widespread black seed usage is among Muslims worldwide.  However, Muslim-majority countries did have a lower total number of COVID-19 cases and deaths than non-Muslim countries as of  September 2020 .  (7)  Therefore, those in the Americas should take notice of any COVID-19 interventions used in Muslim-majority countries."
"20" "It is documented that black seed was historically used by the Egyptian pharaohs, Greek physicians, and Ibn Sina, who is often referred to as the father of modern medicine.  (1,2)   Egyptians used black seed for mummification; it was found in Tutankhamun’s tomb. They also recorded black seed as a prescription for various health conditions, such as bronchial asthma, hypertension, and back pain. Hippocrates and Galen used to treat hepatitis, fevers, nasal congestion, headaches, influenza, and even intestinal parasites with black seed.  (2,3)  In Ibn Sina’s infamous “Canon of Medicine,” black seed is noted for its ability to energize and stimulate a fatigued body and mind. Black seed is one the most widely and continuously researched medicinal plants in peer review journals,  (6)  with proven efficacy in non-communicable diseases and other ailments."
"21" "The botany of black seed"
"22" "Black seed is also known as black cumin seed, black cumin, black caraway, and black coriander in English, “little black seed” in Greek, black grains in Italian, “seeds of blessings” in Arabic, and Kalonji seeds in India. (1)     Additionally, it is referred to as “the miracle cure” and “blessed herb”. (4)"
"23" "The botanical names are:"
"24" "Kingdom: Plantae"
"25" "Division: Magnoliophyta"
"26" "Class: Magnoliopsida"
"27" "Order: Ranunculales"
"28" "Family : Ranunculaceae"
"29" "Genus: Nigella"
"30" "Species: sativa"
"31" "Originally from the Mediterranean peninsula, black seed spread throughout Northern Africa, Eastern Asia, and Southern Europe, then to Eastern Europe and North America. Although it is currently cultivated throughout the world, it thrives in the climate and soil of the Middle East, the Mediterranean region, and Southern Asia. The plant is a thin white-petaled flower with five seed pods  that distinctively stay closed until the seeds are ripe. Once the pods open, exposure to the air turns the seeds’ color to black."
"32" "The science of black seed"
"33" "Black seed is “antioxidant, antibacterial, antifungal, antiparasitic, antiviral, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, antidiabetic, hepatoprotective, [and] immunomodulatory,” with many other beneficial medicinal effects. Black seed’s therapeutic potential  “is mostly related to the presence of a number of pharmacologically active constituents such as thymoquinone, thymohydroquinone, dithymoquinone, thymol, nigellone and many other phytochemicals.”    (1,6,8)   Elnour and Abdelsalam reported black seed’s “extremely low toxicity” on humans and animals.  Black seed has a strong ability to improve immunity when taken regularly and continuously."
"34" "Nutritional benefits"
"35" "Black seed is rich in nutritional value as it contains vitamin A, calcium, iron, sodium, potassium, and more.  (3)  Notably, it has 8 of the 9 essential amino acids, which cannot be synthesized in the body and thus must be  ingested from food . In relation to immunity, when a black seed powder capsule was ingested for 4 weeks in healthy volunteers, the ratio of helper  to  suppressor T-cells increased 73%, whereas the ratio decreased by 7% in the control group receiving a placebo.   (2)  When studied on immunocompromised  AIDS  patients, they increased the ratio by 55%. Ingested black seed oil relieves allergy and bronchial asthma symptoms as it serves as a bronchodilator.  (4)"
"36" "With over 100 chemicals making black seed unique and incomparable, its antiviral properties are also impressive. For example, black seed can significantly inhibit Hepatitis C Virus ( HC V) replication.  (3)  A black seed concoction was found to dramatically decrease  the viral load, symptoms, and signs and CD4 T-cell counts  of HIV patients. Numerous studies have also proven its antimalarial properties."
"37" "In conjunction with its benefits on immunity and respiratory health, black seed’s ability to relieve fevers and influenza, along with its antiviral abilities, the possibilities of black seed having a positive effect on COVID-19 is  extremely positive.  Black seed and its oil are readily available, highly affordable, and can be self-administered at home. Known as a “miracle cure” by  the two largest religions in the world  (Christianity and Islam), black seed should be  take n seriously."
"38" "Black Seed and COVID-19"
"39" "Black seed COVID-19 related studies have taken place in  Pakistan, China , India, UAE, Korea, Malaysia, and treatment protocols are used in Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Pakistan."
"40" "Chemical structure and Biological Properties of  Black Seed"
"41" "An important aspect of black seed is that the chemical structure of its biological compounds  supports  antiviral activity. The primary bioactive compounds of interest identified in black seed  include  thymoquinone and nigellimine.  (8)   Thymoquinone studied in isolation has shown “anti-inflammatory, anti-oxidant, anti-tumor, and antimicrobial activities .”   (6,9)  A molecular docking study in India analyzed the binding between the SARS-CoV-2 receptor-binding sites and active compounds in  black seed , primarily dithymoquinone, thymohydroquinone, thymol, and thymoquinone. This study showed the potential for blocking viral activity by binding to the COVID spike protein receptor. In some cases, these  compounds bound  SARS-CoV-2 even more strongly than chloroquine, which was considered a potential immunoregulatory treatm ent at the time .   (5)   Thymoquinone was also found to be safe for children in a study done on epileptic adolescents . (9)"
"42" "Respiratory Benefits of Black Seed"
"43" "Across several respiratory disease studies, both in humans and in guinea pigs, respiratory symptom relief, such as in asthma patients, was observed after treatment with black seed.  (10)   In one study, some cases showed less reliance on their original inhaler dosage after treatment. Additionally, cytokines that lead to increased numbers of mucus-producing cells in the lungs have been inhibited by black seed. This activity would potentially decrease the overproduction of mucus, alleviating a patient’s shortness of breath.  Given the severe respiratory nature of COVID-19, black seed has great potential as a viable  treatment."
"44" "Symptom reliever"
"45" "Black seed may also serve as an effective COVID-19 symptom treatment of fever, chills, shortness of breath, low oxygen levels, muscle fatigue, and loss of taste or smell.  (11)   For patients experiencing Cytokine Storm Syndrome due to an exacerbated inflammatory response to COVID-19, the anti-inflammatory properties of black seed can provide relief .   (12)   Since black seed has shown to increase the production of r eactive oxygen species denaturing enzymes , it can also aid in the oxidative stress observed in COVID-19 patients.  (11)  While COVID-19 inhibits autophagic activity,  an important immune response that removes virus-infected cells from the human body , thymoquinone shows promise in enhancing this immune  response.   (12)"
"46" "TaibUVID - a  Black seed mixture as a COVID-19 treatment"
"47" "The Taibah University anti-COVID-19 treatment (TaibUVID) has been studied in Saudi Arabia as a novel COVID-19 treatment. The TaibUVID mixture consists of “1 small spoonful (tea spoonful) of nigella sativa oil (or 2 gram nigella sativa seeds) mixed with 1 gram of grinded anthemis hyalina mixed with 1 large spoonful of natural honey.” (13)  The mixture is recommended orally or can be inhaled as a vapor.  A retrospective study   of 20 COVID-19 patients and their healthy contacts in Egypt  used this supplement. The study cohort consisted of volunteers who were already familiar with TaibUVID as a supplement through social media. (14)  El-Sayed found that  regular consumption   among infected patients led to reduced COVID-19 symptoms, and in 70% of patients, there was a faster recovery time  of 1-4 days ."
"48" "A group of healthy contacts of the infected patients of this study, including family members, medical personnel, and others, volunteered to  use TaibUVID as a prophylaxis regularly.  Of these individuals ,   70% of  those who had  contact with COVID-19 infected patients did not result in any positive PCR tests during the 4 months of testing. This indicates TaibUVID’s significant potential for prophylaxis, which is important to consider as COVID variants emerge.  Not unpleasant to consume, participants generally had no complaints taking  TaibUVID regularly.  Composed of r eadily available, inexpensive ingredients, TaibUVID  is a highly accessible prophylaxis. TaibUVID Forte supplements were recommended alongside COVID-19 treatment on positive cases for expedited symptom relief, and TaibUVID inhalation therapy was a recommended hospital treatment for COVID-19 inpatient cases."
"49" "Honey and black seed COVID-19 treatment"
"50" "A clinical trial conducted in Pakistan showed promising results of honey and black seed mitigating severity of symptoms in COVID-19 patients. (15)  Both moderate and severe COVID-19 cases were included in the study. The experimental group was given a mix of 1 g honey and 80 mg/kg of body weight of black  seed daily . This mixture was divided into 2-3 doses per day. After roughly 3 months of symptom observation and regular PCR testing, it was found that symptoms were resolved in patients given the honey and black seed earlier than those receiving the placebo. The patients receiving the mixture also tested negative for COVID-19, on average, 4 days earlier than the group receiving the placebo."
"51" "Conclusion"
"52" "The promising results presented in the paper represent only a fraction of the black seed COVID-19 research conducted. For example, in India, a list of all COVID-19 immunity-boosting foods studied was compiled. Black seed topped the list with the highest nutrient value, above the commonly-known cumin, turmeric, cinnamon, and cardamom. (16)  Saudi Arabia studied natural  combination s of black seed, garlic, wasabi, honey, and vitamin C-rich foods.  (17)  A study in Malaysia found that black seed’s effectiveness increased when supplemented with Zinc.   (8)  Bangladesh  also  took steps to conduct research with black seed .  (18)   An important fact stressed throughout this paper is that black seed must be taken regularly and continuously for the greatest prophylaxis or treatment effect."
"53" "At the time of writing, the authors did not see any black seed COVID-19 manuscripts published from the Americas. As Muslim American public health researchers, the authors wrote this brief report to serve as one of the firsts in hopes many more will follow. The authors hope that this introductory piece intrigues the reader and encourages them to support, further explore, and possibly use black seed and/or Prophetic Medicine as a complement to Western medicine practices. Specific to the pandemic, the authors strongly recommend further and ongoing research trials of black seed and its therapeutic and prophylactic effects on COVID-19 be conducted in the Western Hemisphere ."
"54" "References"
"55" "1 .  Elnour SA, Abdelsalam EB. Some Biological and Pharmacological Effects of the Black Cumin (Nigella sativa): A Concise Review. 6:26."
"56" "2.  Gaur S, Srivastava B, Gaur S, Bhardwaj R, Khanchandani R. Medicinal and therapeutically potential of Nigella Sativa. Int J Med Biomed Stud [Internet]. 2017 Oct 30 [cited 2021 Apr 27];1(5). Available from: https://mail.ijmbs.info/index.php/ijmbs/article/view/17"
"57" "3.  Forouzanfar F, Bazzaz BSF, Hosseinzadeh H. Black cumin (Nigella sativa) and its constituent (thymoquinone): a review on antimicrobial effects. Iran J Basic Med Sci. 2014 Dec;17(12):929–38."
"58" "4.  Hoosen DM. Blackseed Natures Miracle.   2."
"59" "5.  Shaikh YI, Sameer Shaikh V, Ahmed K, Nazeruddin GM, Pathan HM. The Revelation of Various Compounds Found in Nigella sativa L. (Black Cumin) and Their Possibility to Inhibit COVID-19 Infection Based on the Molecular Docking and Physical Properties. Eng Sci. 2020 Jul 6;Volume 11(0):31–5."
"60" "6.  Ahmad A, Husain A, Mujeeb M, Khan SA, Najmi AK, Siddique NA, et al. A review on therapeutic potential of Nigella sativa: A miracle herb. Asian Pac J Trop Biomed. 2013 May;3(5):337–52."
"61" "7.  Mahayosnand P, Gheno G, Sabra ZM, Sabra DM. Fifty Muslim-majority countries have fewer COVID-19 cases and deaths than the 50 richest non-Muslim countries [Internet]. SocArXiv; 2021 [cited 2021 Apr 27]. Available from: https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/84zq5/"
"62" "8.  Rahman MT. Potential benefits of combination of Nigella sativa and Zn supplements to treat COVID-19. J Herb Med. 2020 Oct;23:100382."
"63" "9.  Ahmad A, Rehman MU, Ahmad P, Alkharfy KM. Covid‐19 and thymoquinone: Connecting the dots. Phytother Res [Internet]. 2020 Jul 10 [cited 2021 Feb 9]; Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7361316/"
"64" "10.  Kulyar MF-A, Li R, Mehmood K, Waqas M, Li K, Li J. Potential influence of Nagella sativa (Black cumin) in reinforcing immune system: A hope to decelerate the COVID-19 pandemic. Phytomedicine. 2021 May;85:153277."
"65" "11.  Maideen NMP. Prophetic Medicine-Nigella Sativa (Black cumin seeds) – Potential herb for COVID-19? J Pharmacopuncture. 2020 Jun 30;23(2):62–70."
"66" "12.  Islam MN, Hossain KS, Sarker PP, Ferdous J, Hannan MA, Rahman MM, et al. Revisiting pharmacological potentials of Nigella sativa seed: a promising option for COVID-19 prevention and cure [Internet]. OSF Preprints; 2020 [cited 2021 Apr 28]. Available from: https://osf.io/56pq9/"
"67" "13.  Sayed SME, Almaramhy HH, Aljehani YT, Okashah AM, El-Anzi ME, AlHarbi MB, et al. The Evidence-Based TaibUVID Nutritional Treatment for Minimizing COVID-19 Fatalities and Morbidity and eradicating COVID-19 pandemic: A novel Approach for Better Outcomes (A Treatment Protocol). Am J Public Health Res. 2020 Apr 6;8(2):54–60."
"68" "14.  El Sayed SM, Aboonq MS, El Rashedy AG, Aljehani YT, Abou El-Magd RM, Okashah AM, et al. Promising preventive and therapeutic effects of TaibUVID nutritional supplements for COVID-19 pandemic: towards better public prophylaxis and treatment (A retrospective study). Am J Blood Res. 2020 Oct 15;10(5):266–82."
"69" "15.  Honey and Nigella sativa against COVID-19 in Pakistan (HNS-COVID-PK): A multi-center placebo-controlled randomized clinical trial | medRxiv [Internet]. [cited 2021 Apr 28]. Available from: https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.10.30.20217364v3.full"
"70" "16.  Banerjee S, Srivastava S, Giri AK. Possible nutritional approach to cope with COVID-19 in Indian perspective. :14."
"71" "17.  Enani SM. Possible Prophylactic and Therapeutic Foods for Prevention and Management Of COVID-19- An Updated Review. Curr Res Nutr Food Sci J. 2020 Dec 28;8(3):682–9."
"72" "18.  Azam NK, Mahamud RA, Hasan A, Rahmatullah M. Some home remedies used for treatment of COVID-19 in Bangladesh. :7."
