"x"
"1" "Creatures of the state?    Metropolitan counties compensated for state inaction in initial U.S. response to  COVID -19 pandemic"
"2" "Christof Brandtner 1,  2, 4 * , Luís M. A. Bettencourt 3 ,  4 , Marc G. Berman 5 , and Andrew J. Stier 5"
"3" "1  EM Lyon Business School ,  2  Department of Sociology,  University of Chicago,   3  Department of Ecology and Evolution,  University of Chicago,   4  Mansueto Institute for Urban Innovation,  University of Chicago,  5  Department of Psychology,   University of Chicago"
"4" "Under review"
"5" "*Corresponding author ; email:  brandtner@uchicago.edu"
"6" "Abstract"
"7" "Societal responses to crises require coordination at multiple levels of organization. Exploring early efforts to contain  COVID -19 in the U.S., we argue that local governments can act to ensure systemic resilience and recovery when higher-level governments fail to do so. Event history analyses show that large, more urban areas experience  COVID -19 more intensely due to high population density and denser socioeconomic networks. But metropolitan counties were also among the first to adopt shelter-in-place orders. Analyzing the statistical predictors of when counties moved before their states, we find that the hierarchy of counties by size and economic integration matters for the timing of orders, where both factors predict earlier shelter-in-place orders. In line with sociological theories of urban governance, we also find evidence of an important governance dimension to the timing of orders. Liberal counties in conservative states were more than twice as likely to adopt a policy and implement one earlier in the pandemic, suggesting that tensions about how to resolve collective governance problems are important in the socio-temporal dynamic of responses to  COVID -19. We explain this behavior as a substitution effect in which more urban local governments, driven by risk and necessity, step up into the action vacuum left by higher levels of government and become national policy leaders and innovators."
"8" "Key words:   Spatiotemporal dynamics of  COVID -19. Government response. Policy and administration. Cities and counties. Local government. Urban governance. Urban science. USA."
"9" "Introduction"
"10" "Societal responses to novel crises require coordination of decisions and action at multiple levels of social organization, usually driven from the top-down. The lack of fast or adequate response at the highest levels, however, creates singular challenges that expose where capacity exists to ensure systemic resilience and recovery in human societies. In this paper, we  investigate   an  instance of local action that explores subsidiary spaces for the emergence of social and political capacity by regional actors, nested within higher-level organizations."
"11" "We   examine  the case of sub-national governments—including counties, cities ,  and states—taking the lead to mitigate the effects of the  COVID -19 epidemic relative to higher levels of government. Early research has mainly focused on initiatives led by national governments and by U.S. states (Gupta et al. 2020 ;  Adolph et al. 2020) ; some work even actively omits county-level policies in order to isolate the effects of state policies ( Brzenzinski  et al. 2020; Painter and  Qiu  2020) .  Analyzing the diffusion of such local-level policies, our study   reveals  important  structural  dynamic s through which  urban authorities compensate for state policy inaction and lead in the design and implementation of solutions, contradicting the common conception that cities are but “creatures of the state” (Burns and Gamm 1997;  Brandtner  and Suárez 2020)."
"12" "To  understand how features of local governments and their relationship to higher-level governments can affect  compensatory local action , we examined the process by which counties came to adopt COVID-19 containment measures prior to their states. We asked:  Why do some counties pass stand-alone policies ordering shelter-in-place in their respective jurisdictions, and why do some pass them sooner than others?  Examining this question, we conducted an event history study of all U.S. counties, estimating the timing of 163 county policies. Drawing on literature in urban and organizational sociology and urban science, we argue that counties’  structural position—their rank in the urban hierarchy and their political relationship to their state—explains spatiotemporal disparities in local shelter-in-place orders."
"13" "Using daily data on counties in the United States, we study the adoption of local, county-level shelter-in-place orders  prior  to state and national policies as an instance of local exercise of autonomy.    Event history analyses show that cities adopted shelter-in-place orders to contain the transmission of  COVID -19 the earliest, even as larger metropolitan areas may have experienced the pandemic most intensely early in the process (Stier, Berman, and Bettencourt 2020). A substantial gapon average ,  3.5 to 6.6 days, meant that counties with proactive governments were quicker to take measures to contain the spread of  COVID -19."
"14" "We find that  this  gap in issuing shelter-in-place orders was not randomly distributed in the US, but followed the geographic patterns shown in Figure 1. In particular, both social structure and inter-regional contagion influence the relationship between local jurisdictions and higher-level governments in which they are located. Liberal counties in conservative states were twice as likely to adopt a policy early on as counties whose politics aligned with the state. This finding suggests that contrasting beliefs about how to resolve governance problems between cities and their institutional and geographic context explains local exercises of discretion."
"15" "[insert figure 1 here]"
"16" "These findings are of potential significance for both urban science and public policy.  Since the efficacy of containment measures are critically dependent on timing, even small differences of adoption speed—of distancing measures as well as school closings, and other policies intended to contain the spread of a disease—can accumulate to significant differences in the number of cases and deaths ( Adolph et al. 2020;  Dave et al. 2020;  Ebell  and Bagwell-Adams 2020 ).   As the now-famous comparison between reticent St. Louis and outgoing Philadelphia  during the 1918 influenza pandemic illustrates, social and political collective decision-making and action are critical tools for controlling pandemics in the absence of widely available treatments or vaccines (Smith 2007).  In the conclusion, we discuss our study’s  implications for the understanding of the creation and diffusion of local policies and their relationship to higher levels of governance, including a discussion of the mechanisms for the origins of collective social innovation in multi-level political systems."
"17" "Urban autonomy in policy adoption"
"18" "Local jurisdictions sometimes have discretion to solve governance problems that are in the domain of higher levels of government ( Schragger  2018). For instance, cities and states in the U.S. have often taken responsibility for addressing challenges of climate change while national governments have embraced such actions more slowly and reluctantly ( Vasi  2007;  Castá n   Broto  and  Bulkeley  2013;  Brandtner  and Suárez 2020). Cities also tend to be first movers on many other challenges of social collective action, including school reform, civil rights expansion, and policies   intended  to reduce social inequality (Martin 2001;  Steil  and  Vasi   2015) as well as in the provision of novel infrastructure and services ( Brelsford, Lobo, Hand, and Bettencourt 2017).  From the perspective of urban sociology, such geographic disparities  among cities  are due to the fact that social problems are experienced dissimilarly  in cities of different sizes  and that coalitions of interested groups differ from place to place. However, organizations with relatively similar levels of exposure to problems can still differ in their likelihood to conceive and take up solutions and in their basic beliefs about what these solutions should be (Dobbin , Simmons, and Garrett  2007;  Vasi  and Strang 2014). Institutional conditions, such as ideological differences and the presence of particular organizational structures, can thus lead to spatial and temporal  heterogeneity in the invention and diffusion of practices and policies (Strang and Meyer 1983; Strang and  Tuma  1993)."
"19" "Among others, beliefs about the appropriate scope of state intervention can at times deviate from the dominant beliefs on other levels of government. These beliefs, along with general notions about the “res publica” of local governance, constitute so-called  governance configurations  that set the stage for likely local action (Brandtner et al. 2016). If these basic notions—such as whether the curtailment of individual freedoms is justified in order to protect the collective from harm, or whether the state is responsible for encouraging collective action in light of a public health crisis—are at odds, “governance gaps” (Pierre 1999) can emerge among different actors, including supra-regional governments. Local governments, often by necessity, tend to bridge these gaps in large-scale planning and policy-making in order to maintain a capacity to act ( Sørensen  and  Torfing  2009)."
"20" "We examine factors that enable local governments in the U.S. to exercise authority that may precede ,  or diverge from ,  the actions of higher-levels government.  As Peterson (1981) famously argued, cities are often limited by higher-level governments—in the U.S., many states limit local autonomy through preemption, citing that cities are but “creatures of the state.”  Scrutinizing this claim, we  suggest that spatiotemporal differences are due in part to local jurisdictions’ social and political environments.   In particular, the relationship to higher-level governments  as well as  local governance configurations are likely better predictors of local action than internal features such as secular political attitudes, budgets, or personalities ( Sørensen  and  Torfing  2009; Brandtner et al. 2016)."
"21" "Following  the research  tradition of viewing cities as embedded in a wider social  and political  structure we suggest that local governments can replace stifled and inactive higher-level  governments (Brenner 2004;  Schragger  2018). In time, they can champion, create ,  and perfect innovative policy solutions that may eventually be adopted by higher levels of government—suggesting a basic definition of urban “policy innovativeness” (Walker 1969). This argument draws on a  structural  understanding in which local governance is embedded in higher-level polities, the latter of which have been shown to differ in their degree and speed of innovativeness over time ( Boehmke  and Skinner 2012). It is also consistent with Frug and Barron’s (2008) analysis of how states can “stifle urban innovation” through regulatory and fiscal bounds, driving cities to engage with policy fields in which states show relative inaction and are thus less likely to limit the leeway of Mayors and county officials."
"22" "COVID -19 containment and urbanicity"
"23" "To investigate how the structural position of local jurisdictions affects their propensity to  act independently , we examined the conditions under which local governments adopted public policies intended to curb the transmission of  COVID -19 during the initial outbreak in the United States. Previous research has highlighted political dynamics at the state level. Adolph et al. (2020) show that the timing of state-level social distancing policies—including gathering restrictions, mandated school closures, restaurant restrictions, non-essential business closures, and stay-at-home orders—was highly variable and primarily followed partisan lines. States with a Republican governor and a high share of Trump voters show ed  an additional delay in mandating social distancing of over 2.5 days.  These findings are also consistent with geographic differences in the political preferences of individuals. An  analysis of GPS data and a survey conducted by Alcott et al. (2020) suggest that  “ individuals ’  beliefs related to  COVID -19 are strongly associated with their social distancing behaviors ”  (p. 15).  Furthermore, an analysis of  mask use in the United States is contingent on partisanship ( Milosh  et al. 2020).  We extended and qualified th e s e  analys e s by examining what explains the determinants of  county-level   COVID -19 social distancing measures that preceded state policies."
"24" "A direct application of this “political” line of inquiry from states to cities would suggest that more Democratic counties are more likely to pass legislation prior to their respective state. Voting behavior in Presidential elections has indeed been shown to be predictive of the adoption of such policies as legislation opposing fracking ( Dokshin  2016) and energy-efficient construction (Brandtner 2020). Following our theoretical framework, however, we suggest that even accounting for a county’s political orientation, a suite of additional structural features related to the autonomy of urban governance plays a role that is related to a city’s structural role in society and state politics rather than dynamics internal to a city’s administration and government."
"25" "First, large metropolitan counties are likely marked by greater political and financial autonomy and greater capacity to act than smaller, less urban counties.  M ore unique and informationally more sophisticated organizations tend to be highly concentrated in larger citie s. As a result,  such places have more extensive civic infrastructures that in turn enable a greater capacity to act on the behalf of the population ( Bettencourt, Lobo,  Strumsky , and West 2010 ;  Bettencourt 2014 ; Brandtner and Dunning 2020 ). For instance, Brandtner and Suárez (2020) show that municipalities with a greater number of nonprofits in their organizational ecosystem are more likely to adopt a host of policies and practices related to sustainability. Furthermore, research has shown steep positive associations between population size and other features of urban areas. Such size dependence means that larger cities have, for instance, greater per capita patent activity ( Bettencourt et al. 2010 ), greater per capita economic activity (Bettencourt and  West 2011;  Youn  et al. 2016), and more extensive economies of scale of local infrastructure (Brelsford  et al.  2017) that leads to greater sustainability and faster diffusion of information (Bettencourt 2013; Bettencourt 2014)."
"26" "L ittle research has applied this logic to the adoption of potentially contentious government policies. The gains in information diffusion associated with these infrastructural economies of scale brings the potential for faster creation and adoption of time-sensitive policies in larger cities. In line with such a prediction, organizational theory also suggests that larger cities tend to have more extensive and complex administrative apparatuses with heightened bureaucratic capacity. To wit, formal organizations tend to have professional positions and structures that can make them more receptive to ideas and practices and can circulate these novel ideas to their wider environment, such as HR professionals making firms attuned to anti-discrimination policies (Dobbin, Schrage, and  Kalev  2015) or more bureaucratically advanced government units being  more  receptive to new forms of formal organization (Frank,  Hironaka , and  Schofer   2000;  Drori  et al. 2006). In combination, the heightened organizational capacity and pace of coordination among dissimilar governance actors suggest that larger counties, and those that form the whole or a part of a metropolitan statistical area, are more likely to adopt a stand-alone  COVID -19 policy, all else being equal."
"27" "Second, following the above discussion of how cities may compensate for state inaction, in a crisis, urban counties in states that display little to no willingness to pass containment legislation may become most proactive. This effect mirrors the logic that particular organizational forms substitute for the failure of other spheres of influence. In the case of market failure s ,  firms’   in ternal structures  compensate for the weaknesses of the market in difficult transactions (Coase 1936; Williamson 1971). In the case of government failure, nonprofit  organizations compensate for the inability of the state to serve fringe groups among its constituents ( Weisbrod  1980). Similarly, when nation states and other higher-level governments fail to fill a local need, local jurisdictions can step up and compensate for such “governance failures” (Jessop 1999)."
"28" "How  governance  failures are addressed is likely shaped by the cultural and political alignment between local and state governing bodies. Like state and national politics, municipal politics can vary ideologically, which is consistent with differences in both the population’s and politicians’ beliefs about how governance challenges are best tackled ( Tausanovitch  and  Warshaw  2014). Given the reluctance of some states to adopt new practices and policies, the governance gap between cities and states creates a vacuum for local leaders to fill (Walker 1969;  Knoke  and  Laumann  1987; Pierre 1999). In the particular political economy of  COVID -19 in the United States, this would suggest that progressive-leaning counties that are embedded in more conservative states tended to adopt stand-alone policies sooner."
"29" "Third, like other state organizations, counties and municipalities rarely make decisions in a vacuum, but instead in relation to peer jurisdictions (Strang and Soule 1998; Dobbin et al. 2007). For instance, Martin (2001) showed that cities adapt their living wage legislation to redistributive municipal policies among peer cities and  Steil  and  Vasi   (2014) showed patterns of policy contagion among sanctuary cities. As Tolbert and Zucker (1983)  demonstrated , policies that are initially adopted for functional reasons—such as civil service reform in order to curb corruption in city administrations—can later become institutionalized and considered a desirable default that is adopted regardless of the policy’s function. This means that  horizontal  inter-organizational diffusion complements other established explanations for the uptake of urban innovation such as city size ( Knoke  1982). Finally, a series of studies on the diffusion of state  lotteries, economic development plans, and strategic planning among municipal and state organizations suggests that U.S. public administrations emulate peer organizations (Kwon, Berry, and  Feiock  2009; Berry and Berry 2018). Following this line of work, we expect that local shelter-in-place orders create local spill-overs and even establish a default policy in states with many different local policies."
"30" "Finally, these factors are argued to have a discrete influence  on local decisions even  controlling for other economic and demographic county features.  Among others,   we  expect that county leaders are more likely to adopt stand-alone policies if they are at a higher risk of  COVID -19 outbreaks and associated deaths. This is again true for larger, denser cities (Stier et al. 2020 ;  Ribeiro et al. 2020) and if the population is particularly vulnerable."
"31" "Materials and methods"
"32" "We conducted event  history analys e s of the  time  to the first adoption of a county-level shelter-in-place order in all U.S. counties since the first order was placed on March 16 using Cox models (Adolph et al. 2020; Box-Steffensmeier and Jones 2004). We combined data  based on a  publicly available New York Times investigation into shelter-in-place orders and coding by Painter and  Qiu  (2020)  and  ourselves  with county-level data from the American Community Survey (IPUMS USA 2018), David  Leip’s   (2020)  Atlas of Presidential Elections, a state policy innovativeness indicator and other state-level policy factors from the Correlates of State Policy project, and health indicators from the Robert Wood Johnson County Health Rankings ( Boehmke  and Skinner 2012; Jordan and Grossman 2020). Table 1 reports on the sources and construction of all variables in greater detail."
"33" "[insert Table 1]"
"34" "Sample"
"35" "We examined the timing of shelter-in-place orders at the county-level since the onset of the  COVID -19 pandemic in the United States on January 21. Event history models  estimate  how different county and state features affect a county’s propensity of adopting a policy on any given day. The hazard set for  these   models  is the entirety of U.S. counties between  the first record of a case of COVID-19 in the United States on January 21  and  April 5 , when no new counties issued new shelter-in-place orders.  The first  f ailure  (i.e., adoption  of a shelter-in-place order )  in our data was March 16, when seven  San Francisco Bay Area counties became the first to issue a shelter-in-place order effective March 17 .  Because we were interested in the issue of orders rather than with their effect, we  determined a failure based on  the date on which an order was issued, and not when it went into effect; typically, orders went into effect on the same or the following day."
"36" "Dependent variables"
"37" "The shelter-in-place policies of counties and states, tracked on the county-level, come from Painter and  Qiu  (2020), who coded the data from the New York Times (2020) coverage of sub-national shelter-in-place policies.  We then added to these datasets through systematic manual searches . We  describe  our search procedures  in the appendix, together with a list of all 163 counties that passed shelter-in-place orders prior to their respective state.  The primary outcome reported is whether a county had a shelter in place policy, but no state-level order, at any given day. We also estimated the  timing of  adoption  of  any   shelter-in-place  policy, regardless of whether it was issued  by the county or the state , to provide a baseline estimate of what models would look like  that disregard  local autonom y ."
"38" "In secondary analyses, we also investigate the association between the issuing of county- and state-level policies and subsequent distancing and  COVID -19 growth rates. For distancing, we drew on the  Unacast  Social Distancing Scoreboard  (2020) .  These  data included two daily measures of the reduction of: a) average distance traveled and b) visits to non-essential places. To combine these two highly correlated variables (r  = .76) , we created a factor variable of visits and travel distance . The  Cronbach’s alpha for this factor is .86,  the  Eigenvalue of the first factor is 1.76 and Eigenvalue of the second factor is .23 ;  both distancing measures loaded on the first factor with an equal weighting of .94. To calculate the  COVID -19 growth rates, we created  a  three-day moving average of daily growth in the number of cumulative cases by county. We  also  calculated the day of maximum growth based on this measure."
"39" "Independent variables"
"40" "A  large variety  of datasets  inform our model of the  covariates of local shelter-in-place policies : (a)  D emographic   variables  came from the American Community Survey  (2018 5-year averages)  and  the  2010 Census . These measures include population, which we logged because of skewness,  and population density based on the population by square mile drawn from the Census Bureau’s  2017 gazetteer  files.   (b)  County orders in state  is the share of counties within the same state that had previously adopted a shelter-in-place policy, based on summary statistics of our dependent variable, excluding the focal county. We opted for a relatively coarse measure of contagion because the short time span of the initial policy adoption makes it difficult to hypothesize and test a sequenced process of county-to-county contagion.  ( c )  Political variables  were based on 2016  Presidential election d ata  from David  Leip’s   (2020)  Election Atlas.  The difference  in election results  is  calculated  by subtracting the  population-weighted average  from the county’s  election result; a positive value means that voters in the focal county were more likely to vote for Hilary Clinton than the state as a whole.  State preemption   was  measured  as  an index of policy areas in which States preempt ed  local governments according to the National League of Cities.  State  policy innovativeness  was measured via an index from  Boehmke  and Skinner ( 2012 ), which extends work by Walker (1969).   (d)   T he  socio-economic status  of the county , including  median household income, Gini of income distribution, poverty level, education, race, and median age , was also based on data from the American Community Survey .   ( e ) Two health-related measures  came  from the Robert Wood Johnson 2018 County Health Rankings: the number of  care physicians per capita and the share of people without insurance .  ( f )   The  date of the first COVID-19 case  was recorded in the county to control for differences in the onset of the pandemic.  A series of measures indicating the intensity by which  COVID -19 was experienced in the county, including the number of positive  COVID -19 cases reported in the county, the 3-day average of the  COVID -19 case growth rate, and the number of tests per capita administered in the state account for the state’s capacity to manage the pandemic."
"41" "The classification by  urbanicity  follow ed  a simplified National Center  for Health Statistics  (NCHS)  urban-rural classification scheme   ( Ingram and Franco  2013 ) . Large central metros are counties in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) with 1 million or more population and contain the largest principal city of the MSA, have their entire population contained in the largest principal city of the MSA, or contain at least 250,000 inhabitants of any principal city of the MSA. Large fringe metros are counties in MSAs with 1 million or more population that did not qualify as large central metro counties. Medium and small counties are counties in MSAs of populations with less than 1 million  inhabitants . Micropolitan and non-core counties are not located in an MSA."
"42" "Methods"
"43" "W e used Cox models to estimate a county’s hazard of adopting a policy prior to the state.  The Cox model is suitable for modeling the timing of adoption and, as a semi-parametric model, makes no assumption about the shape of the distribution of hazard rates.  The equation  h(t) = h 0 (t)   exp ( BX) specifies the diffusion process, where h (t)   is  each county’s hazard   of issuing an order in time t, h 0 (t)  is the baseline hazard at time t, X is a set of  k  county-level covariates, and B is a vector of regression coefficients  β k   for these covariates.  All coefficients are standardized for ease  of comparing effect sizes.  The full model presented in table  2 and figure 2  is expressed by the following equation :"
"44" "The coefficient plot in panel A of figure 2 illustrates how a standard deviation change in each covariate is estimated to affect the hazard of issuing an order  at time   t . The hazard functions in panel  B  of figure  2   illustrate   h (t)  over time.  In models presented in figure  4 , we split the sample by the dominant politics of the county and estimated h(t)= h 0 (t) exp ( XB D emocratic ) separately from h(t)= h 0 (t) exp ( XB Republican ).  In additional models, we also include time-varying measures of the cumulative  COVID -19 caseload, the  COVID -19 test capacity, and how the  COVID -19 growth rate interacted with time. We interacted a vector of coefficients Z with time in order to estimate their time-variant effect ɣ:"
"45" "Since we studied the entirety of U.S. counties, we note that in our study significance levels indicative of generalizability to other countries are of secondary concern . S ignificance levels  remain  indicative of the magnitude of the effect  relative to the coefficient’s variance ."
"46" "Results"
"47" "We present our findings in four steps. First, we show descriptive statistics demonstrating that several counties adopted policies prior to their states. We then examined which county-level covariates are associated with the timing of county-level orders. We  then  discuss how these findings relate to the political geography of the United States, noting evidence in support of our hypothesis that metropolitan counties outpace their respective states if they deviate from the state politically. Finally, we show that these findings relate to different trajectories of the  first wave of the  COVID -19 pandemic."
"48" "Descriptive statistics of county-level shelter-in-place orders"
"49" "As figure 1 shows, counties with autonomous shelter-in-place policies closed businesses and ordered the population to stay at home significantly sooner than surrounding counties  that did not have  such orders. Between March 16 and  April  2 , a total of  163  counties passed local shelter-in-place orders prior to their states. Although only  5 % of all counties adopted a policy, these counties accounted for a total population of  74.8  million people. This means that about 1 in 5 U.S. Americans were ordered to shelter in place by a county rather than a state for at least one day of the study period."
"50" "How  long  is  this delay between county and state action ?  The median date of county orders was March 2 4 , with a range from March 16 to April  2 .  The median state policy date in  counties with policies already in place was April 2; the median date of all state policies was March 30.  The  resulting  time gap  between county and state policies was between one   and fourteen days (Georgia), with 50% of the orders being four to nine days ahead of their states. On average, local policies were passed  some  3.5 days ahead of the average state policy."
"51" "[insert table 1, figure 2 here]"
"52" "Multivariate analysis of county-level shelter-in-place orders"
"53" "Figure 2 shows the hazard rates of adopting a local shelter-in-place order. The panel on the right visualizes the Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard function by urbanicity. It indicates that larger and more metropolitan counties had a notably higher hazard rate throughout the critical adoption period. The event history analysis reported in the left-hand panel shows that this pattern is statistically significant ; trend lines and coefficients presented in blue indicate counties’ shelter-in-place orders .  Counties that are a single standard deviation larger are more than four times as likely to adopt a local shelter-in-place order as a less populous county at any given point in time during the study  period (hazard rate = e .84  =  2.32 , p < .001, 95% CI:  1.27  to  4.26 ).  The control model, depicted in gray, uses the same regressors as the previous model to predict when a county is affected by  any  shelter-in-place  order , including a state mandate. This model shows that larger counties  with greater population density were  more likely to see any form of policy, including state policies, which  implies  that states with  denser urban centers  also tended to adopt state-level policy orders (p < .05). The demographic  covariates   suggest  that this association may be due to the economic capacity of local states,  as  counties with higher poverty rates by one standard deviation were half as likely to adopt a local shelter-in-place policy (β = -. 85 , p < .0 01 )."
"54" "Our results further indicate that vot ing  for Hilary Clinton over Donald Trump in the 2016 presidential election was not the best political predictor for a  county  active shelter-in-place order. In fact, according to  our analysis , political preference  was not a statistically significant predictor of a local shelter-in-place policy (p > .05), although counties with Democratic voters were marginally more likely to see any policy at all—likely driven by the state-level orders of Democratic-leaning states (p < . 01 ).  These  findings  reinforce our contention that   the direct extension of political arguments  about state-level COVID-19 interventions  to the county-level  is  inappropriate  because they neglect structural dynamics of local  pandemic responses ."
"55" "Our  models show a strong association between local shelter-in-place orders and a county’s political context  in particular . Counties where the difference between local and state-wide election results was greater by a single standard deviation were  1.93  times more likely to adopt a policy at any given point in time (β = . 66 , p < .0 1 ). Figure 3 shows how the difference in election results is distributed in the United States ( shade of  color) and how local shelter-in-place orders map onto this political geography of the country (bold county borders) ."
"56" "[insert table 2, figure 3 here]"
"57" "To be sure, not all counties that passed a policy are more Democratic than their state. For example, in the State of Pennsylvania, the governor ordered shelter-in-place in some counties and in Texas, several Republican-leaning counties in proximity to Dallas passed orders earlier than the state.  Our  findings are robust to the exclusion of these states, as their inclusion attenuates the effect of the vote share difference."
"58" "Two control variables shed further light on the dynamics of local adoption. The first is the number of policies adopted by other counties in the same state — a basic measure of contagion  among counties —, which  we found to be significant (β = . 27 , p < .0 01 ). Second, we  found that counties with a greater share of uninsured individuals were almost twice as likely to see a shelter-in-place order, which suggests that policy makers may be responding to high levels of vulnerability in their population (β = . 78 , p < .001).  Naturally, counties that were hit by COVID-19 earlier tended to also see shelter-in-place policies sooner (β  = . -79, p < .001), but this association does not hold for county-level orders alone (p > .05).  The  timing of county-level orders was  thus   not  a function of denser and more  Democratic-leaning counties  simply encountering positive cases of COVID-19 before more rural,  Republican-leaning  areas."
"59" "These findings hold true despite the inclusion of a large number of controls about county demographics and economics, state policy regimes, and exposure to  COVID -19. As with state-level policies, there are statistically significant associations with the daily change in the number of total cases and the average growth rate indicative of temporal patterns . B ut  most orders were issued when the  COVID-19  case  prevalence  was still small (β = -1.88, p < .001). The negative coefficient confirms  Adoloph et al.’s (2020:12)  earlier  insight  that “while many of the early epicenters were Democratic-leaning states, it does not appear that the more aggressive action of Democratic states is simply a function of caseload. ”"
"60" "Unpacking the compensation effect"
"61" "A secondary model predicting the likelihood of local shelter-in-place orders, presented in figure 4, helps unpack the governance dynamic s  revealed by the statistically significant effect of political differences between counties and states. Separating majority-Democratic from majority-Republican states, we examined whether our finding was driven by liberal counties in conservative places being proactive, or  by  conservative counties in liberal states hanging back."
"62" "[insert figure 4 here]"
"63" "The  Cox  model of having adopted a local shelter-in-place order shows that Democratic-leaning counties are almost  three  times as likely to adopt a shelter-in-place policy than other Democratic-leaning counties if the degree to which they are more liberal than their surrounding state is one standard deviation greater (β =  1.00 , p < .001). Among Republican-leaning counties, there is no significant effect (p > .05).  It is also notable that the date of first encountering COVID-19 is a strong predictor of county-level policies among Republican counties (β = -.53, p < .001). The interpretation that the timing of  policies is a result of the trajectory of the pandemic does not hold for  their Democratic neighbors , however  (p < .05) , indicating that political considerations outweighed  a forced hand due to the  public health urgency ."
"64" "Instead, t hese secondary models  lend direct support to the argument that greater autonomy was exercised primarily among Democratic counties that faced an inactive or even restrictive governance context on the state-level. The effect of a state’s tendency to pre-empt local jurisdiction differed depending on the political leaning of the county. Whereas Republican  counties  were more likely to pass legislation in states with  lower  state preemption (β = -.36, p < .05), Democratic counties were more likely to pass legislation in states with  greater  state preemption (β = .32, p < .05). Finally, we note that the prevalence of more COVID-19 tests in the state had a muffling effect, suggesting that it was particularly counties in states that were less proactive about the pandemic that chose to pass shelter-in-place orders on their own."
"65" "These findings also illuminate the question whether liberal and conservative policies respond to the vulnerability of their population differently. The share of people without insurance in the county has a strong and significant association with local shelter-in-place orders in both Democratic-leaning (β =  .79 , p < .001) and Republican-leaning (β =  .72 , p < .001) counties."
"66" "Estimated effect of local shelter-in-place orders"
"67" "Our data do not allow us to make strong causal claims about the impact of local government policies on the containment of  COVID -19. There is, however, evidence that the early adoption of county-level policies made a significant difference for the spread of the disease in U.S. states. Dave et al. (2020)   find that in early adopting Texan counties, “ COVID -19 case growth fell by 19 to 26 percentage points two-and-a-half weeks following adoption of a shelter-in-place order.” These findings are robust for controls for the outbreak timing, testing regimes, and containment measures in neighboring  counties.  Dave et al. ( 2020:4)  claim  that “this effect is driven nearly entirely by the highly urbanized and densely populated counties” and that “the later statewide shelter-in-place mandate yielded relatively few health benefits” in addition to the quick response of what they call early-adopting  “ urban cowboys. ”"
"68" "Our  national-level  findings are consistent with this proposition, suggesting that the adoption of a local-level policy is associated with a subsequent decline in distance traveled and places visited. Overall, a county order increases distancing by about 22% (p < .001) controlling for the logged number of  COVID -19 cases  and the number of COVID-19 tests administered in the state . These associations suggest that the progression of the social response to  COVID -19 is significantly different in counties that adopted a policy than in counties that did not."
"69" "As the left-hand panel of figure 5 shows, counties with a stand-alone order in place tended to see greater levels of social distancing following the order and throughout the month of April, compared to counties with state orders and counties with no shelter-in-place policy. The time series in the right-hand panel also reveals that such counties tended to have a greater number of  COVID -19 cases reported during this period, which is likely associated with the previous insight that the  COVID -19 attack rate is highest in denser, wealthier urban areas (Stier  et al. 2020). Although these counties are hit harder at the onset, the case growth reaches the epidemic peak sooner in counties that had a policy. Because it remains possible that the relationship between public policies for social distancing and the number of cases and deaths is spurious, we leave it to future work to establish the causal effect of such associations. For the purposes of this paper, we simply note that counties with and without shelter-in-place orders have a significantly different trajectory in the early days of the pandemic than did other locales."
"70" "[insert figure 5 here]"
"71" "Discussion"
"72" "Our  analysis of how U.S. counties responded to the first wave of COVID-19  shows that local shelter-in-place orders were primarily driven by larger and presumably more autonomous counties and counties whose population does not share the political preferences of the surrounding state. This result is consistent with the idea of a compensation effect, in which cities step up if silence or refusal to act on the part of a state leadership creates a vacuum of inaction. As  our  models  confirm , multi-level governance dynamics have implications for our understanding of political behaviors in cities."
"73" "Although cities’ density has disadvantages during a pandemic, there are also political and cultural dimensions that explain , in the word s  of Jane Jacobs,  “the kind of problem a city is” (B ettencourt 2013 ).  While the   COVID -19 pandemic has exposed  natural disadvantages of cities  to the spread of an infectious disease ,  the pandemic also shows that cities  have increased capacity to act and are more responsive to urban innovation than  other forms of social organization .  The  association between governance failures   and the  autonomy of increasingly capacious cities is likely more broadly  relevant  ( Jessop 1999;  Pierre 1999;  Sørensen  and  Torfing  2009) . Future work could use such governance gaps and divergences in political preferences  between counties and states as institutional conditions of the diffusion of other policies such as municipal fiscal incentives in high-tax states, local gun regulations in highly restrictive states, or the local embrace of progressive policies to further the rights of LBGTQ people, undocumented immigrants, and other marginalized groups (Strang and Meyer 1983;  Vasi  and Strang 2009;  Steil  and  Vasi   2014;  Dokshin  2016)."
"74" "Our findings speak to the  ongoing debate about the autonomy of cities vis-à-vis their states  ( Schragger  2018;  Frug  and Barron 2013; Brandtner and Suárez 2020 ). In the Unite d  States, states differ in the degree of freedom they allow their cities, often highlighting that  states impose limits on urban autonomy (Peterson 1981) . We find that restrictive states that actively preempt local action in some domains can actually  create  the opposite effect in the  context of public health : cities innovat e  to compensate for the absence of state action and may set precedents for  their action .  Other examples  include  liberal urban climate change policies and public health initiatives in conservative or less environmentally aware states and nations. Although we are convinced of the idea of cities compensating for the limitations of states and nation states, the relationship between cities and higher-level governments is not internationally uniform. We would expect compensation effects to be  more pronounced in highly polarized countries , or where the political preferences between cities , regions ,  and nations diverge  to a greater degree . We also expect compensation to be more prevalent  in liberal market economi e s  compared to  coordinated market economies in which federal states  take responsibility for  the provision of social services ."
"75" "To be sure, the present analysis is limited to the early adoption of shelter-in-place policies, based on the assumption that immediate action had an outsized impact on the spatiotemporal trajectory of the disease progression. It is likely that these policies correlate  highly with other measures to contain the spread of  COVID -19 taken later  on. O ur data  do not  account for differences in the policy regime after April  5 , however . Future work could explicitly examine the long-term consequences of early shelter-in-place policies, for instance by creating interdependencies between municipal and state policies (such as increased collaboration between the  mayors  of large cities and state governors) and by creating path dependencies from past to future responses to  COVID -19, such as mask  mandates ,  school  reopenings , or stay-at-home policies in  later  waves   of the pandemic  (see Burns and Gamm 1997; Lawrence 2020) ."
"76" "Given the plausibility of long-term consequences of the pandemic on many different socioeconomic dimensions such as race relations, political polarization, and economic development, it is also likely that  the  autonomous actions of cities can signal, or even fuel, conflict between different  political  jurisdictions, including the federal level. These tensions may be positive in the sense of creating laboratories for future policies at the national level, but they may also force disagreements at higher levels. Future work should examine the governance dynamics of the pandemic over longer periods of time and with respect to a broader set of outcomes to test whether the structural position of the county in urban hierarchies has anticipatory long-term consequences for action with respect to  COVID -19 and beyond.  Besides government action, there may be so-called “institutional legacies” for the founding of public health cooperatives and economic recovery from pandemic-induced recessions (Rao and  Greve  2018;  Schneiberg  2020)."
"77" "Despite concerns about the potential tensions among local, regional, and national jurisdictions, this study has revealed a staggering innovative capacity of local actors in responding to  COVID -19. Every fifth person in the U.S. was ordered to stay at home by a county before a state  took action , and other local governments as well as states eventually emulated  proactive counties. The urban status and  structural  context of counties explains the spatiotemporal patterns of local  COVID -19 policies.  This conclusion  adds to mounting evidence that challenges the notion of cities as “creatures of the state” and shows that governance  configurations  matter for how social problems are resolved across multiple levels of political organization."
"78" "Acknowledgements"
"79" "We thank Molly King  and two anonymous reviewers  for helpful comments . We also thank  Patrick Bergemann, Elisabeth Clemens, John W. Hanson, Krystal Laryea, Nicole  Marwell , Scott  Ortman , Woody Powell, Amanda Sharkey,  Nick  Sherefkin ,  Satej   Soman , and Austin Wright for their advice.  We are  further  indebted to  Olivia  Paraschos  and  Ana Gonzalez  for  their   excellent   research assistance  and to Marc Painter for  generously  sharing data on local shelter-in-place orders ."
"80" "References"
"81" "Adolph C, Amano K, Bang-Jensen B,  Fullman , N, Wilkerson, J. Pandemic politics: Timing state-level social distancing responses to COVID-19.  medRxiv  2020:  https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.30.20046326v1"
"82" "Allcott   H  et al. Polarization and Public Health :  Partisan Differences in Social Distancing During the Coronavirus Pandemic.  NBER Working Paper 2020 ;  w26946 ."
"83" "Berry F, Berry W. Innovation and diffusion models in policy research. In  Weible , C. M, Sabatier, PA. (Eds.),  Theories of the policy process  (pp. 253–297). Westview Press; 2018."
"84" "Bettencourt  LM.  The Origins of Scaling in Cities. Scienc e 2018; 340(6139) :  1438–41."
"85" "Bettencourt  LM.  Impact of Changing Technology on the Evolution of Complex Informational Networks. Proceedings of the IEEE ; 2014  102(12) :  1878–91."
"86" "Bettencourt  LM,  West  GB . Bigger Cities Do More with Less.  Sci Am   2011; 305(3) :  52–53."
"87" "Bettencourt  L M ,  Lobo  J ,  Strumsky  D,  West  GB . Urban Scaling and Its Deviations :  Revealing the Structure of Wealth, Innovation and Crime Across Cities.  PLoS  ONE 2010; 5(11) :  e13541."
"88" "Boehmke  FJ, Skinner P. State Policy Innovativeness Revisited.  State  Polit Policy Q 2012;12(3): 303–29."
"89" "Box-Steffensmeier JM, Jones BS. Event History Modeling: A Guide for Social Scientists. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2004."
"90" "Brandtner   C . City Action :  Civic Capacity and the Greening of the American City.  Mansueto  Institute for Urban Innovation Research Paper ; 2020 ."
"91" "Brandtner  C.,  Dunning  C . Nonprofits as Urban Infrastructure.  In:  The Nonprofit Sector. Redwood City, CA : Stanford University Press; 2019."
"92" "Brandtner  C, Suárez D. The structure of city action: Institutional embeddedness and sustainability practices in U.S. cities. Am Rev of Public  Adm  2020; forthcoming."
"93" "Brandtner  C,  Höllerer  MA, Meyer RE,  Kornberger  M. Enacting Governance Through Strategy: A Comparative Study of Governance Configurations in Sydney and Vienna. Urban Stud 2016;54(5): 1075–91."
"94" "Brelsford C, Lobo J, Hand J, Bettencourt LM. Heterogeneity and scale of sustainable development in cities. Proc Natl  Acad  Sci USA 2017;114(34), 8963–8968."
"95" "Brenner N.  New State Spaces :  Urban Governance and the Rescaling of Statehood . Oxford University Press; 2004."
"96" "Brzezinski A ,   Kecht  V ,  Van  Dijcke  D ,  Wright  AL .   Belief in science influences physical distancing in response to  COVID -19 lockdown policies. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper   2020-56 ; 2020."
"97" "Burns N, Gamm, G. Creatures of the State: State Politics and Local Government, 1871-1921.  Urban  Aff   Rev 1997;33(1): 59–96."
"98" "Castán   Broto , V,  Bulkeley  H. A survey of urban climate change experiments in 100 cities.  Glob Environ   C hange  2013; 23(1) :  92-102."
"99" "Coase RH. The Nature of the Firm.  Economica  1936;4(16): 386–405 ."
"100" "Dave  DM,   Friedson  AI,  Matsuzawa  K ,  Sabia  JJ , Safford  S . Were Urban Cowboys Enough to Control  COVID -19? Local Shelter-in-Place Orders and Coronavirus Case Growth.  J Urban Econ 2020."
"101" "Dobbin, F, Simmons B, and Garrett G. The Global Diffusion of Public Policies: Social Construction, Coercion, Competition, or Learning?  Annu  Rev  Sociol  2007;33: 449–72."
"102" "Dobbin F, Schrage D,  Kalev  A. Rage Against the Iron Cage: The Varied Effects of Bureaucratic Personnel Reforms on Diversity. Am  Sociol   Rev 2015;80(5): 1014–44."
"103" "Dokshin  FA. Whose Backyard and What’s at Issue? Spatial and Ideological Dynamics of Local Opposition to Fracking in New York State, 2010 to 2013. Am  Sociol   Rev 2016;81(5): 921–48."
"104" "Drori , GS, Jang SY, Meyer JW. Sources of rationalized governance: Cross-national longitudinal analyses, 1985–2002.  Adm  Sci Q 2006;51(2), 205–229."
"105" "Ebell  MH,  Bagwell-Adams  G . Mandatory social distancing associated with increased doubling time :  an example using hyperlocal data.  Am J  of  Prev  Med 2020; forthcoming."
"106" "Frank  DJ,   Hironaka  A ,  Schofer  E .  ( 2000 ) . The Nation-State and the Natural Environment Over the Twentieth Century.  Am  Sociol   Rev  65(1) :  96–116."
"107" "Frug  GE, Barron DJ. City Bound: How States Stifle Urban Innovation. Ithaka, NY: Cornell University Press; 2013."
"108" "Gupta S, Nguyen TD, Rojas FL, Raman S, Lee B, Bento A, et al. Tracking Public and Private Response to the COVID-19 Epidemic: Evidence from State and Local Government Actions.  NBER  2020."
"109" "Ingram  D D ,  Franco  SJ . NCHS urban-rural classification scheme for counties. US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics  (NCHS); 2014."
"110" "IPUMS USA. Am Community Survey.  ﻿ University of Minnesota; 2018.   [Accessed August 16 2020 on w ww.ipums.org ]."
"111" "Jessop B. The Dynamics of Partnership and Governance Failure.  The new politics of local governance in Britain  1999;11–32."
"112" "Jordan MP, Grossmann M. The Correlates of State Policy Project v.2.1. East Lansing, MI: Institute for Public Policy and Social Research ( IPPSR ); 2020."
"113" "Knoke , D. The Spread of Municipal Reform :  Temporal, Spatial, and Social Dynamics.  Am J  of  Sociol  1982; 87(6) :  1314–39."
"114" "Kwon M, Berry FS,  Feiock  RC. Understanding the Adoption and Timing of Economic Development Strategies in US Cities Using Innovation and Institutional Analysis.  J Public  Adm  Res Theory  2009;19: 967–88."
"115" "Laumann  EO,   Knoke  D . The organizational state :  Social choice in national policy domains. Univ ersity  of Wisconsin Press ; 1987 ."
"116" "Lawrence  RJ.  Responding to  COVID -19 :  What’s the Problem?  J  of Urban Health  2020; forthcoming."
"117" "Leip  D .  (2020).  Dave  Leip's  Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections. http :  //uselectionatlas.org ( last accessed July 30, 2020 )."
"118" "Martin, I.  ( 2001 ) . Dawn of the Living Wage : The  Diffusion of a Redistributive Municipal Policy. Urban  Aff   Rev  36(4) :  470–96."
"119" "Milos h  M,  Painter  M,  Van  Dijcke  D,  Wright  AL .   Unmasking Partisanship :  How Polarization Influences Public Responses to Collective Risk. University of Chicago, Becker Friedman Institute for Economics Working Paper No. 2020-102 ."
"120" "New York Times. Coronavirus (COVID-19) Data in the United States. https: //github.com/ nytimes /COVID19-data. [Accessed on July 28, 2020.]"
"121" "Painter M,  Qiu  T. Political beliefs affect compliance with COVID-19 social distancing orders.  SSRN  2020."
"122" "Peterson PE.  City Limits . University of Chicago Press; 1981."
"123" "Pierre J. Models of urban governance: The institutional dimension of urban politics.  Urban  Aff   Rev 1999;34: 372–396."
"124" "Rao H ,  Greve   HR . Disasters and community resilience :  Spanish flu and the formation of retail cooperatives in Norw ay.  Acad  Manage   J  2018;  61(1), 5-25."
"125" "Ribeiro  H V ,   Sunahara , AS,  Sutton  J , Perc , M,  Hanley  QS . City size and the spreading of  COVID -19 in Brazil.  PLoS  ONE 2020;15(9): e0239699."
"126" "Schneiberg  M. Organizational Infrastructures for Economic Resilience :  Alternatives to Shareholder Value-Oriented Corporations and Unemployment Trajectories in the U.S. during the Great Recession.  Research in the Sociology of Organizations 2020 ;  f orthcoming."
"127" "Schragger  R. City Power :  Urban Governance in a Global Age. Oxford :  Oxford University Press ; 2016 ."
"128" "Smith, Richard. Social Measures May Control Pandemic Flu Better Than Drugs and Vaccines.  BMJ  2007; 334(7608): 1341–41."
"129" "Sørensen  E ,   Torfing  J . Making Governance Networks Effective and Democratic Through  Metagovernance . Public  Adm  2009; 87(2) :  234–58."
"130" "Steil  JP,  Vasi  IB. The New Immigration Contestation: Social Movements and Local Immigration Policy Making in the United States, 2000–2011. Am J   Sociol  2014;119(4): 1104–55."
"131" "Stier A, Berman M, Bettencourt L. COVID-19 attack rate increases with city size.  Mansueto  Institute for Urban Innovation Research Paper ; 2020."
"132" "Strang D,  Tuma  NB. Spatial and Temporal Heterogeneity in Diffusion. Am J   Sociol  1993;99(3): 614–39."
"133" "Strang D, Soule SA. Diffusion in Organizations and Social Movements: From Hybrid Corn to Poison Pills.  Annu  Rev  Sociol  1998;24: 265–90."
"134" "Strang  D,  Meyer  JW . Institutional conditions for diffusion. Theory  Soc  1993; 487-511."
"135" "Tausanovitch  C,  Warshaw  C . Representation in Municipal Government.  Am Polit Sci   Rev 2014; 108(3) :  605–41."
"136" "Tolbert  PS,  Zucker  LG . Institutional Sources of Change in the Formal Structure of Organizations : The  Diffusion of Civil Service Reform, 1880-1935.  Adm  Sci Q 1983; 28(1) :  22–39."
"137" "Unacast . Social distancing scoreboard .   [ Accessed  August 1 , 2020 ] .  https :  //www.unacast.com/ COVID 19/social-distancing-scoreboard#methodology"
"138" "Vasi   IB . Thinking Globally, Planning Nationally and Acting Locally :  Nested Organizational Fields and the Adoption of Environmental Practices.  Soc  Forces  2007; 86(1) :  113–36."
"139" "Vasi   IB,  Strang  D . Civil Liberty in America : The  Diffusion of Municipal Bill of Rights Resolutions After the Passage of the USA PATRIOT Act.  Am J   Sociol   2009; 114(6) :  1716–64."
"140" "Walker  JL . The Diffusion of Innovations Among the American States.  Am Polit Sci   Rev   1969; 63(3) :  880–99."
"141" "Weisbrod  BA. Toward a Theory of the Voluntary Nonprofit Sector in a Three-Sector Economy. In:  The Economics of Nonprofit Institutions . Oxford University Press; 1986."
"142" "Williamson OE. The Vertical Integration of Production: Market Failure Considerations. Am Econ Rev 1971;61(2): 112–23."
"143" "Youn   H,  et al. Scaling and Universality in Urban Economic Diversification.  J R  Soc  Interface  2016; 13(114) :  20150937."
"144" "Figures  and tables"
"145" "Figure 1.  Map of the USA, showing in darker colors the states and counties that  issued  shelter-in-place orders in response  to  the  COVID -19 outbreak  sooner . Many counties  implemented shelter-in-place orders  before   their states ,  shown  with  outlined  borders."
"146" "Figure 2.  Predictors of hazard rate of adopting a shelter-in-place order: Panel A shows the local predictors of shelter-in-place policy responses (in blue), examining the association between demographic, political, socio-economic, and health-related features of counties  X  and the hazard of passing a shelter-in-place policy  h(t)  through the equation  .  We compare the predictors of county-level shelter in place orders to the predictors of  any shelter-in-place order, including state orders, as a control model  (in gray) . Panel B displays Nelson-Aalen cumulative hazard function by urbanicity, indicating a greater hazard rate among large r ,  more  central metropolitan counties."
"147" "Figure 3.  Distribution of county shelter-in-place orders by Democratic vote share:   Map of the contiguous United States showing that  a  county vote share from the 2016 Presidential election that contrasted with its state average was predictive of county shelter-in-place orders occurring before the state’s shelter-in-place orders. Counties that passed shelter-in-place policies prior to their states have highlighted border s.    T he majority of local orders were  passed  in counties that were more Democratic than their state or spatially proximal to such a county."
"148" "Figure 4.  Regression coefficients of  split- population  Cox models  predicting presence of a county-wide policy  in predominantly Republican (N = 2,653) vs. Democratic (N = 489) counties . The regression by political orientation shows that the effect of political difference to the state is driven by Democratic counties in Republican states (rather than  Republican counties in Democratic states ).  In Republican counties, shelter-in-place orders were associated with functional factors: greater population density, experienc ing  COVID-19 sooner, and  if  state capacity to test was lower.  The coefficients of percent of uninsured population indicate s  that population vulnerability increased a county’s propensity  to issue  a policy .  Main results of political differences between county and state  are  stronger if TX and PA are excluded, because in both state leadership  was  involved in ordering shelter-in-place in select counties."
"149" "Figure 5.   COVID -19 growth rates and distancing by shelter-in-place order over time. The Figure  s hows that counties  issuing  a policy before their states passed policies sooner,  experienced greater distancing measured by reductions in the average travel distance in the county (Panel A) , and  reached the epidemic peak before other counties (Panel B) . This suggests that county-level policies are related to meaningful differences in both social behavior and  epidemic  transmission, although this effect may be correlational rather than causal .  The share and average date of shelter-in-place policies adopted by counties  and states respectively  is depicted in the bottom panels."
"150" "Table 1.  Descriptive statistics of key variables  for county-days  (all standardized in regressions)"
"151" "Variable"
"152" "Source & variable construction"
"153" "N"
"154" "Mean"
"155" "S.D."
"156" "Min"
"157" "Max"
"158" "County order (date)"
"159" "New York Times, Painter &  Qiu  (2020), author’s coding"
"160" "174,048"
"161" "0.01"
"162" "0.10"
"163" "0"
"164" "1"
"165" "Any order (date)"
"166" "New York Times, Painter &  Qiu  (2020), author’s coding"
"167" "174,048"
"168" "0.09"
"169" "0.29"
"170" "0"
"171" "1"
"172" "County order (dummy)"
"173" "New York Times, Painter &  Qiu  (2020), author’s coding"
"174" "83,722"
"175" "27 Mar"
"176" "4.90"
"177" "18 Mar"
"178" "5 Apr"
"179" "Any order (dummy)"
"180" "New York Times, Painter &  Qiu  (2020), author’s coding"
"181" "11,618"
"182" "23 Mar"
"183" "3.66"
"184" "15 Mar"
"185" "1 Apr"
"186" "Population"
"187" "Logged population as per 2010 Census"
"188" "174,048"
"189" "10.71"
"190" "1.32"
"191" "6.60"
"192" "16.13"
"193" "Population density"
"194" "Population / county surface area from Census Gazetteer files"
"195" "174,048"
"196" "4.27"
"197" "1.52"
"198" "-3.23"
"199" "11.18"
"200" "County orders in state"
"201" "State share of counties with a county order (except focal county)"
"202" "174,048"
"203" "0.01"
"204" "0.04"
"205" "0.00"
"206" "0.39"
"207" "County share Democrats in 2016 Presidential Election"
"208" "County’s voter share Clinton in 2016 presidential election ( Leip’s  Atlas)"
"209" "174,048"
"210" "0.34"
"211" "0.15"
"212" "0.07"
"213" "0.88"
"214" "County vs. state share Democrats in 2016 Presidential election"
"215" "Difference between state’s voter share Clinton and county’s vote share Clinton in 2016 presidential election ( Leip’s  Atlas)"
"216" "174,048"
"217" "-0.06"
"218" "0.14"
"219" "-0.42"
"220" "0.53"
"221" "State preemption"
"222" "Number of policies in which states preempt municipal governments from action (National League of Cities)"
"223" "174,048"
"224" "3.21"
"225" "1.38"
"226" "0"
"227" "6"
"228" "State policy innovativeness"
"229" "Indicator of early policy adopting states from  Boehmke  and Skinner (2012)"
"230" "174,048"
"231" "0.09"
"232" "0.17"
"233" "0.00"
"234" "0.86"
"235" "Median income"
"236" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"237" "174,048"
"238" "10.84"
"239" "0.26"
"240" "9.91"
"241" "11.82"
"242" "Income inequality"
"243" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"244" "174,048"
"245" "0.45"
"246" "0.04"
"247" "0.35"
"248" "0.66"
"249" "Families below poverty line"
"250" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"251" "174,048"
"252" "11.32"
"253" "5.41"
"254" "0.40"
"255" "52.10"
"256" "Percent high school graduates"
"257" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"258" "174,048"
"259" "33.84"
"260" "7.42"
"261" "8.10"
"262" "55.60"
"263" "Percent race white"
"264" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"265" "174,048"
"266" "81.72"
"267" "16.80"
"268" "9.10"
"269" "99.70"
"270" "Median age"
"271" "American Community Survey (5-year estimates)"
"272" "174,048"
"273" "40.35"
"274" "5.04"
"275" "21.50"
"276" "66.00"
"277" "Care physicians per 1,000 capita"
"278" "Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s County Health Rankings"
"279" "174,048"
"280" "0.55"
"281" "0.33"
"282" "0.00"
"283" "4.53"
"284" "Percent uninsured"
"285" "Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s County Health Rankings"
"286" "174,048"
"287" "0.12"
"288" "0.05"
"289" "0.02"
"290" "0.33"
"291" "First COVID-19 case"
"292" "First occurrence of positive test in county (NYT)"
"293" "174,048"
"294" "21 Mar"
"295" "8.22"
"296" "21 Jan"
"297" "4 Apr"
"298" "Cum. cases of COVID-19"
"299" "Logged number of cases based in county (NYT)"
"300" "174,048"
"301" "0.58"
"302" "1.47"
"303" "0.00"
"304" "13.10"
"305" "COVID-19 growth rate"
"306" "Three-day rolling average of COVID case growth"
"307" "174,048"
"308" "0.07"
"309" "0.18"
"310" "0"
"311" "4"
"312" "COVID-19 testing"
"313" "Logged per capita number of tests administered in state based on data from The Atlantic’s COVID Tracking Project"
"314" "174,048"
"315" "-7.07"
"316" "4.80"
"317" "-16.13"
"318" "6.30"
"319" "Distancing"
"320" "Principal component factor of percent change in average distance traveled and percent change in essential locations visited from  Unacast  Social Distancing Scoreboard"
"321" "76,301"
"322" "-0.03"
"323" "0.98"
"324" "-5.18"
"325" "3.52"
"326" "Table 2.  Cox model regression coefficients of variables predicting adoption of county order prior to state order to shelter-in-place during early days of  COVID -19 in the United States"
"327" "(1)"
"328" "(2)"
"329" "County order"
"330" "Any order"
"331" "Population (logged)"
"332" ".842**"
"333" ".024"
"334" "(.309)"
"335" "(.202)"
"336" "Population density"
"337" ".510*"
"338" ".218*"
"339" "(.230)"
"340" "(.087)"
"341" "County orders in state"
"342" ".267***"
"343" ".026"
"344" "(.046)"
"345" "(.034)"
"346" "County share Democrats 2016"
"347" "-.182"
"348" ".464**"
"349" "(.256)"
"350" "(.177)"
"351" "County vs. state share Democrats 2016"
"352" ".657**"
"353" "-.295+"
"354" "(.202)"
"355" "(.162)"
"356" "State preemption"
"357" ".010"
"358" ".069"
"359" "(.138)"
"360" "(.081)"
"361" "State policy innovativeness"
"362" "-.399"
"363" ".045"
"364" "(.324)"
"365" "(.130)"
"366" "Median income"
"367" ".117"
"368" ".174+"
"369" "(.183)"
"370" "(.094)"
"371" "Income inequality"
"372" ".182+"
"373" ".026"
"374" "(.100)"
"375" "(.052)"
"376" "Families below poverty level"
"377" "-.845***"
"378" ".190*"
"379" "(.180)"
"380" "(.081)"
"381" "Percent high school educated"
"382" "-.230"
"383" ".012"
"384" "(.223)"
"385" "(.065)"
"386" "Percent race white"
"387" ".144"
"388" ".140"
"389" "(.171)"
"390" "(.089)"
"391" "Median age"
"392" "-.087"
"393" ".060"
"394" "(.107)"
"395" "(.040)"
"396" "Care physicians per capita"
"397" ".091"
"398" "-.017"
"399" "(.084)"
"400" "(.028)"
"401" "Percent uninsured"
"402" ".779***"
"403" ".081"
"404" "(.160)"
"405" "(.064)"
"406" "Date of first COVID-19 case"
"407" "-.141"
"408" "-.525***"
"409" "(.110)"
"410" "(.088)"
"411" "Time variant"
"412" "Cum. cases of COVID-19"
"413" "-.906***"
"414" "-.793***"
"415" "(.116)"
"416" "(.078)"
"417" "COVID-19 growth rate"
"418" ".057"
"419" ".056**"
"420" "(.051)"
"421" "(.020)"
"422" "Cum. tests per capita in state"
"423" "-1.881***"
"424" "-1.490***"
"425" "(.497)"
"426" "(.452)"
"427" "Observations (county-days)"
"428" "174 , 048"
"429" "174 , 048"
"430" "AIC"
"431" "2689.09"
"432" "36248.30"
"433" "df"
"434" "19"
"435" "19"
"436" "All variables X-standardized by z-scoring variable; standard errors in parentheses; + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001"
"437" "Table  3 .   Ordinary Least Squares ( OLS )  coefficients of variables predicting policy effects on distancing, with county-level fixed effects holding time invariant features of counties constant.  Results  show that there is a significant post-order effect on distancin g after a county adopted a shelter-in-place order .  Distancing  was also greater in places with a higher  number of  COVID -19 cases , suggesting that counties that were more affected also saw a greater social response."
"438" "(1)"
"439" "Post -county  order"
"440" ".221***"
"441" "(.0 30 )"
"442" "Logged  COVID -19 cases"
"443" ".203 ***"
"444" "(. 015 )"
"445" "Logged  COVID -19 tests per capita in state"
"446" "-. 067 +"
"447" "(. 035)"
"448" "Constant"
"449" ".607 ***"
"450" "(. 051 )"
"451" "County fixed effects"
"452" "Yes"
"453" "Observations"
"454" "2,004"
"455" "R 2"
"456" ". 29"
"457" "df"
"458" "3"
"459" "All variables X-standardized by z-scoring variable; s tandard errors in parentheses; + p<.1, *** p<.001"
"460" "Supplemental material"
"461" "County-level shelter-in-place orders"
"462" "In order to ensure that we have included all county-level orders, we conducted additional web searches based on three criteria: we checked (a) a subset of 50 randomly selected counties, (b) a nother subset of the  300 largest counties  in the United States .  We were able to confirm all 139 shelter-in-place orders that we initially included in our survey. We were then able to include an additional 14 orders among the list of largest counties (e.g., Miami-Dade County) .   The most common reason for these omissions was that states issued orders within a couple of days after the county’s order, which is why they were overwritten by state-level orders in the New York Times’s investigation (which only registered the most recent applicable orders for each state, including individual county orders)."
"463" "Because the randomly sampled subset of counties yielded no new orders and initial results showed an overwhelming association between county size and the presence of orders, our web searches were focused on larger counties. Larger counties and cities are also more likely to be covered by national reporting. We note that our findings are entirely robust to dropping all counties that were not included in the initial database reported by the New York Times. Still, this procedure  aimed at creating a complete list of shelter-in-place orders  could potentially introduce sampling bias, because orders among smaller counties had a  lower   likelihood  of being included in the dataset."
"464" "We thus conducted additional searches of counties on two lists of orders issued by cities and states. The first list is based on searches of local media reporting on non-pharmaceutical policies passed by cities and states; the second list is a curated list of local policies related to  COVID -19.  We discarded interventions that were not shelter-in-place orders, such as non-binding advisories, school closings, and emergency declarations. We then confirmed all remaining orders for counties that were not already included in our dataset. The searches yielded another 8 orders from media mentions about counties (e.g., Mendocino County and several counties in Texas), and 2 orders from media mentions about large cities (e.g., Greenville, NC in Pitt county)."
"465" "FIPS"
"466" "County"
"467" "State"
"468" "County order"
"469" "State order"
"470" "Source"
"471" "1073"
"472" "Jefferson County"
"473" "Alabama"
"474" "23-Mar"
"475" "4-Apr"
"476" "Source"
"477" "2020"
"478" "Anchorage"
"479" "Alaska"
"480" "19-Mar"
"481" "28-Mar"
"482" "Source"
"483" "6001"
"484" "Alameda County"
"485" "California"
"486" "15-Mar"
"487" "19-Mar"
"488" "Source"
"489" "6013"
"490" "Contra Costa County"
"491" "California"
"492" "15-Mar"
"493" "19-Mar"
"494" "Source"
"495" "6041"
"496" "Marin County"
"497" "California"
"498" "15-Mar"
"499" "19-Mar"
"500" "Source"
"501" "6045"
"502" "Mendocino County"
"503" "California"
"504" "17-Mar"
"505" "19-Mar"
"506" "Source"
"507" "6053"
"508" "Monterey County"
"509" "California"
"510" "16-Mar"
"511" "19-Mar"
"512" "Source"
"513" "6055"
"514" "Napa County"
"515" "California"
"516" "17-Mar"
"517" "19-Mar"
"518" "Source"
"519" "6075"
"520" "San Francisco County"
"521" "California"
"522" "15-Mar"
"523" "19-Mar"
"524" "Source"
"525" "6079"
"526" "San Luis Obispo County"
"527" "California"
"528" "17-Mar"
"529" "19-Mar"
"530" "Source"
"531" "6081"
"532" "San Mateo County"
"533" "California"
"534" "15-Mar"
"535" "19-Mar"
"536" "Source"
"537" "6085"
"538" "Santa Clara County"
"539" "California"
"540" "15-Mar"
"541" "19-Mar"
"542" "Source"
"543" "6087"
"544" "Santa Cruz County"
"545" "California"
"546" "15-Mar"
"547" "19-Mar"
"548" "Source"
"549" "6095"
"550" "Solano County"
"551" "California"
"552" "17-Mar"
"553" "19-Mar"
"554" "Source"
"555" "6097"
"556" "Sonoma County"
"557" "California"
"558" "16-Mar"
"559" "19-Mar"
"560" "Source"
"561" "6113"
"562" "Yolo County"
"563" "California"
"564" "17-Mar"
"565" "19-Mar"
"566" "Source"
"567" "8001"
"568" "Adams County"
"569" "Colorado"
"570" "24-Mar"
"571" "26-Mar"
"572" "Source"
"573" "8007"
"574" "Archuleta County"
"575" "Colorado"
"576" "22-Mar"
"577" "26-Mar"
"578" "Source"
"579" "8013"
"580" "Boulder County"
"581" "Colorado"
"582" "24-Mar"
"583" "26-Mar"
"584" "Source"
"585" "8031"
"586" "Denver County"
"587" "Colorado"
"588" "22-Mar"
"589" "26-Mar"
"590" "Source"
"591" "8067"
"592" "La Plata County"
"593" "Colorado"
"594" "22-Mar"
"595" "26-Mar"
"596" "Source"
"597" "8097"
"598" "Pitkin County"
"599" "Colorado"
"600" "22-Mar"
"601" "26-Mar"
"602" "Source"
"603" "12001"
"604" "Alachua County"
"605" "Florida"
"606" "22-Mar"
"607" "3-Apr"
"608" "Source"
"609" "12011"
"610" "Broward County"
"611" "Florida"
"612" "25-Mar"
"613" "3-Apr"
"614" "Source"
"615" "12035"
"616" "Flagler County"
"617" "Florida"
"618" "21-Mar"
"619" "3-Apr"
"620" "Source"
"621" "12057"
"622" "Hillsborough County"
"623" "Florida"
"624" "25-Mar"
"625" "3-Apr"
"626" "source"
"627" "12073"
"628" "Leon County"
"629" "Florida"
"630" "24-Mar"
"631" "3-Apr"
"632" "Source"
"633" "12086"
"634" "Miami-Dade County"
"635" "Florida"
"636" "25-Mar"
"637" "3-Apr"
"638" "Source"
"639" "12087"
"640" "Monroe County"
"641" "Florida"
"642" "29-Mar"
"643" "3-Apr"
"644" "Source"
"645" "12095"
"646" "Orange County"
"647" "Florida"
"648" "23-Mar"
"649" "3-Apr"
"650" "Source"
"651" "12097"
"652" "Osceola County"
"653" "Florida"
"654" "25-Mar"
"655" "3-Apr"
"656" "Source"
"657" "12099"
"658" "Palm Beach County"
"659" "Florida"
"660" "28-Mar"
"661" "3-Apr"
"662" "Source"
"663" "12103"
"664" "Pinellas County"
"665" "Florida"
"666" "24-Mar"
"667" "3-Apr"
"668" "Source"
"669" "13045"
"670" "Carroll County"
"671" "Georgia"
"672" "23-Mar"
"673" "3-Apr"
"674" "Source"
"675" "13051"
"676" "Chatham County"
"677" "Georgia"
"678" "24-Mar"
"679" "3-Apr"
"680" "Source"
"681" "13059"
"682" "Clarke County"
"683" "Georgia"
"684" "19-Mar"
"685" "3-Apr"
"686" "Source"
"687" "13063"
"688" "Clayton County"
"689" "Georgia"
"690" "30-Mar"
"691" "3-Apr"
"692" "Source"
"693" "13067"
"694" "Cobb County"
"695" "Georgia"
"696" "23-Mar"
"697" "3-Apr"
"698" "Source"
"699" "13089"
"700" "DeKalb County"
"701" "Georgia"
"702" "26-Mar"
"703" "3-Apr"
"704" "Source"
"705" "13095"
"706" "Dougherty County"
"707" "Georgia"
"708" "20-Mar"
"709" "3-Apr"
"710" "Source"
"711" "13097"
"712" "Douglas County"
"713" "Georgia"
"714" "24-Mar"
"715" "3-Apr"
"716" "Source"
"717" "13099"
"718" "Early County"
"719" "Georgia"
"720" "23-Mar"
"721" "3-Apr"
"722" "Source"
"723" "13111"
"724" "Fannin County"
"725" "Georgia"
"726" "22-Mar"
"727" "3-Apr"
"728" "Source"
"729" "13121"
"730" "Fulton County"
"731" "Georgia"
"732" "30-Mar"
"733" "3-Apr"
"734" "Source"
"735" "13123"
"736" "Gilmer County"
"737" "Georgia"
"738" "22-Mar"
"739" "3-Apr"
"740" "Source"
"741" "13135"
"742" "Gwinnett County"
"743" "Georgia"
"744" "26-Mar"
"745" "3-Apr"
"746" "Source"
"747" "13139"
"748" "Hall County"
"749" "Georgia"
"750" "31-Mar"
"751" "3-Apr"
"752" "Source"
"753" "13227"
"754" "Pickens County"
"755" "Georgia"
"756" "23-Mar"
"757" "3-Apr"
"758" "Source"
"759" "13241"
"760" "Rabun County"
"761" "Georgia"
"762" "22-Mar"
"763" "3-Apr"
"764" "Source"
"765" "16013"
"766" "Blaine County"
"767" "Idaho"
"768" "19-Mar"
"769" "25-Mar"
"770" "Source"
"771" "20091"
"772" "Johnson County"
"773" "Kansas"
"774" "21-Mar"
"775" "30-Mar"
"776" "Source"
"777" "20173"
"778" "Sedgwick County"
"779" "Kansas"
"780" "22-Mar"
"781" "30-Mar"
"782" "Source"
"783" "23005"
"784" "Cumberland County"
"785" "Maine"
"786" "24-Mar"
"787" "2-Apr"
"788" "Source"
"789" "28071"
"790" "Lafayette County"
"791" "Mississippi"
"792" "21-Mar"
"793" "31-Mar"
"794" "Source"
"795" "28075"
"796" "Lauderdale County"
"797" "Mississippi"
"798" "30-Mar"
"799" "31-Mar"
"800" "Source"
"801" "28081"
"802" "Lee County"
"803" "Mississippi"
"804" "19-Mar"
"805" "31-Mar"
"806" "Source"
"807" "29019"
"808" "Boone County"
"809" "Missouri"
"810" "23-Mar"
"811" "6-Apr"
"812" "Source"
"813" "29021"
"814" "Buchanan County"
"815" "Missouri"
"816" "22-Mar"
"817" "6-Apr"
"818" "Source"
"819" "29037"
"820" "Cass County"
"821" "Missouri"
"822" "22-Mar"
"823" "6-Apr"
"824" "Source"
"825" "29047"
"826" "Clay County"
"827" "Missouri"
"828" "21-Mar"
"829" "6-Apr"
"830" "Source"
"831" "29051"
"832" "Cole County"
"833" "Missouri"
"834" "26-Mar"
"835" "6-Apr"
"836" "Source"
"837" "29077"
"838" "Greene County"
"839" "Missouri"
"840" "23-Mar"
"841" "6-Apr"
"842" "Source"
"843" "29095"
"844" "Jackson County"
"845" "Missouri"
"846" "23-Mar"
"847" "6-Apr"
"848" "Source"
"849" "29099"
"850" "Jefferson County"
"851" "Missouri"
"852" "22-Mar"
"853" "6-Apr"
"854" "Source"
"855" "29165"
"856" "Platte County"
"857" "Missouri"
"858" "21-Mar"
"859" "6-Apr"
"860" "Source"
"861" "29175"
"862" "Randolph County"
"863" "Missouri"
"864" "24-Mar"
"865" "6-Apr"
"866" "Source"
"867" "29177"
"868" "Ray County"
"869" "Missouri"
"870" "23-Mar"
"871" "6-Apr"
"872" "Source"
"873" "29183"
"874" "St. Charles County"
"875" "Missouri"
"876" "22-Mar"
"877" "6-Apr"
"878" "Source"
"879" "29189"
"880" "St. Louis County"
"881" "Missouri"
"882" "20-Mar"
"883" "6-Apr"
"884" "Source"
"885" "29510"
"886" "St. Louis city"
"887" "Missouri"
"888" "20-Mar"
"889" "6-Apr"
"890" "Source"
"891" "37021"
"892" "Buncombe County"
"893" "North Carolina"
"894" "24-Mar"
"895" "30-Mar"
"896" "Source"
"897" "37025"
"898" "Cabarrus County"
"899" "North Carolina"
"900" "25-Mar"
"901" "30-Mar"
"902" "Source"
"903" "37119"
"904" "Mecklenburg County"
"905" "North Carolina"
"906" "25-Mar"
"907" "30-Mar"
"908" "Source"
"909" "37147"
"910" "Pitt County"
"911" "North Carolina"
"912" "29-Mar"
"913" "30-Mar"
"914" "Source"
"915" "37183"
"916" "Wake County"
"917" "North Carolina"
"918" "25-Mar"
"919" "30-Mar"
"920" "Source"
"921" "40017"
"922" "Canadian County"
"923" "Oklahoma"
"924" "28-Mar"
"925" "Source"
"926" "40027"
"927" "Cleveland County"
"928" "Oklahoma"
"929" "25-Mar"
"930" "Source"
"931" "40109"
"932" "Oklahoma County"
"933" "Oklahoma"
"934" "28-Mar"
"935" "Source"
"936" "40113"
"937" "Osage County"
"938" "Oklahoma"
"939" "28-Mar"
"940" "Source"
"941" "40119"
"942" "Payne County"
"943" "Oklahoma"
"944" "29-Mar"
"945" "Source"
"946" "40125"
"947" "Pottawatomie County"
"948" "Oklahoma"
"949" "1-Apr"
"950" "Source"
"951" "40131"
"952" "Rogers County"
"953" "Oklahoma"
"954" "28-Mar"
"955" "Source"
"956" "40143"
"957" "Tulsa County"
"958" "Oklahoma"
"959" "28-Mar"
"960" "Source"
"961" "40145"
"962" "Wagoner County"
"963" "Oklahoma"
"964" "28-Mar"
"965" "Source"
"966" "42003"
"967" "Allegheny County"
"968" "Pennsylvania"
"969" "22-Mar"
"970" "1-Apr"
"971" "Source"
"972" "42007"
"973" "Beaver County"
"974" "Pennsylvania"
"975" "27-Mar"
"976" "1-Apr"
"977" "Source"
"978" "42011"
"979" "Berks County"
"980" "Pennsylvania"
"981" "26-Mar"
"982" "1-Apr"
"983" "Source"
"984" "42017"
"985" "Bucks County"
"986" "Pennsylvania"
"987" "22-Mar"
"988" "1-Apr"
"989" "Source"
"990" "42019"
"991" "Butler County"
"992" "Pennsylvania"
"993" "26-Mar"
"994" "1-Apr"
"995" "Source"
"996" "42025"
"997" "Carbon County"
"998" "Pennsylvania"
"999" "29-Mar"
"1000" "1-Apr"
"1001" "Source"
"1002" "42027"
"1003" "Centre County"
"1004" "Pennsylvania"
"1005" "27-Mar"
"1006" "1-Apr"
"1007" "Source"
"1008" "42029"
"1009" "Chester County"
"1010" "Pennsylvania"
"1011" "22-Mar"
"1012" "1-Apr"
"1013" "Source"
"1014" "42041"
"1015" "Cumberland County"
"1016" "Pennsylvania"
"1017" "29-Mar"
"1018" "1-Apr"
"1019" "Source"
"1020" "42043"
"1021" "Dauphin County"
"1022" "Pennsylvania"
"1023" "29-Mar"
"1024" "1-Apr"
"1025" "Source"
"1026" "42045"
"1027" "Delaware County"
"1028" "Pennsylvania"
"1029" "22-Mar"
"1030" "1-Apr"
"1031" "Source"
"1032" "42049"
"1033" "Erie County"
"1034" "Pennsylvania"
"1035" "23-Mar"
"1036" "1-Apr"
"1037" "Source"
"1038" "42069"
"1039" "Lackawanna County"
"1040" "Pennsylvania"
"1041" "26-Mar"
"1042" "1-Apr"
"1043" "Source"
"1044" "42071"
"1045" "Lancaster County"
"1046" "Pennsylvania"
"1047" "26-Mar"
"1048" "1-Apr"
"1049" "Source"
"1050" "42077"
"1051" "Lehigh County"
"1052" "Pennsylvania"
"1053" "24-Mar"
"1054" "1-Apr"
"1055" "Source"
"1056" "42079"
"1057" "Luzerne County"
"1058" "Pennsylvania"
"1059" "26-Mar"
"1060" "1-Apr"
"1061" "Source"
"1062" "42089"
"1063" "Monroe County"
"1064" "Pennsylvania"
"1065" "22-Mar"
"1066" "1-Apr"
"1067" "Source"
"1068" "42091"
"1069" "Montgomery County"
"1070" "Pennsylvania"
"1071" "22-Mar"
"1072" "1-Apr"
"1073" "Source"
"1074" "42095"
"1075" "Northampton County"
"1076" "Pennsylvania"
"1077" "24-Mar"
"1078" "1-Apr"
"1079" "Source"
"1080" "42101"
"1081" "Philadelphia County"
"1082" "Pennsylvania"
"1083" "22-Mar"
"1084" "1-Apr"
"1085" "Source"
"1086" "42103"
"1087" "Pike County"
"1088" "Pennsylvania"
"1089" "26-Mar"
"1090" "1-Apr"
"1091" "Source"
"1092" "42107"
"1093" "Schuylkill County"
"1094" "Pennsylvania"
"1095" "29-Mar"
"1096" "1-Apr"
"1097" "Source"
"1098" "42125"
"1099" "Washington County"
"1100" "Pennsylvania"
"1101" "27-Mar"
"1102" "1-Apr"
"1103" "Source"
"1104" "42127"
"1105" "Wayne County"
"1106" "Pennsylvania"
"1107" "26-Mar"
"1108" "1-Apr"
"1109" "Source"
"1110" "42129"
"1111" "Westmoreland County"
"1112" "Pennsylvania"
"1113" "26-Mar"
"1114" "1-Apr"
"1115" "Source"
"1116" "42133"
"1117" "York County"
"1118" "Pennsylvania"
"1119" "26-Mar"
"1120" "1-Apr"
"1121" "Source"
"1122" "45019"
"1123" "Charleston County"
"1124" "South Carolina"
"1125" "23-Mar"
"1126" "7-Apr"
"1127" "Source"
"1128" "45063"
"1129" "Lexington County"
"1130" "South Carolina"
"1131" "28-Mar"
"1132" "7-Apr"
"1133" "Source"
"1134" "45079"
"1135" "Richland County"
"1136" "South Carolina"
"1137" "28-Mar"
"1138" "7-Apr"
"1139" "Source"
"1140" "47037"
"1141" "Davidson County"
"1142" "Tennessee"
"1143" "21-Mar"
"1144" "1-Apr"
"1145" "Source"
"1146" "47093"
"1147" "Knox County"
"1148" "Tennessee"
"1149" "22-Mar"
"1150" "1-Apr"
"1151" "Source"
"1152" "47157"
"1153" "Shelby County"
"1154" "Tennessee"
"1155" "24-Mar"
"1156" "1-Apr"
"1157" "Source"
"1158" "47187"
"1159" "Williamson County"
"1160" "Tennessee"
"1161" "29-Mar"
"1162" "1-Apr"
"1163" "Source"
"1164" "48007"
"1165" "Aransas County"
"1166" "Texas"
"1167" "26-Mar"
"1168" "2-Apr"
"1169" "Source"
"1170" "48027"
"1171" "Bell County"
"1172" "Texas"
"1173" "22-Mar"
"1174" "2-Apr"
"1175" "Source"
"1176" "48029"
"1177" "Bexar County"
"1178" "Texas"
"1179" "22-Mar"
"1180" "2-Apr"
"1181" "Source"
"1182" "48039"
"1183" "Brazoria County"
"1184" "Texas"
"1185" "24-Mar"
"1186" "2-Apr"
"1187" "Source"
"1188" "48041"
"1189" "Brazos County"
"1190" "Texas"
"1191" "23-Mar"
"1192" "2-Apr"
"1193" "Source"
"1194" "48061"
"1195" "Cameron County"
"1196" "Texas"
"1197" "22-Mar"
"1198" "2-Apr"
"1199" "Source"
"1200" "48071"
"1201" "Chambers County"
"1202" "Texas"
"1203" "23-Mar"
"1204" "2-Apr"
"1205" "Source"
"1206" "48085"
"1207" "Collin County"
"1208" "Texas"
"1209" "23-Mar"
"1210" "2-Apr"
"1211" "Source"
"1212" "48113"
"1213" "Dallas County"
"1214" "Texas"
"1215" "21-Mar"
"1216" "2-Apr"
"1217" "Source"
"1218" "48121"
"1219" "Denton County"
"1220" "Texas"
"1221" "23-Mar"
"1222" "2-Apr"
"1223" "Source"
"1224" "48141"
"1225" "El Paso County"
"1226" "Texas"
"1227" "23-Mar"
"1228" "2-Apr"
"1229" "Source"
"1230" "48139"
"1231" "Ellis County"
"1232" "Texas"
"1233" "23-Mar"
"1234" "2-Apr"
"1235" "Source"
"1236" "48157"
"1237" "Fort Bend County"
"1238" "Texas"
"1239" "23-Mar"
"1240" "2-Apr"
"1241" "Source"
"1242" "48167"
"1243" "Galveston County"
"1244" "Texas"
"1245" "22-Mar"
"1246" "2-Apr"
"1247" "Source"
"1248" "48183"
"1249" "Gregg County"
"1250" "Texas"
"1251" "24-Mar"
"1252" "2-Apr"
"1253" "Source"
"1254" "48201"
"1255" "Harris County"
"1256" "Texas"
"1257" "23-Mar"
"1258" "2-Apr"
"1259" "Source"
"1260" "48209"
"1261" "Hays County"
"1262" "Texas"
"1263" "24-Mar"
"1264" "2-Apr"
"1265" "Source"
"1266" "48215"
"1267" "Hidalgo County"
"1268" "Texas"
"1269" "25-Mar"
"1270" "2-Apr"
"1271" "Source"
"1272" "48231"
"1273" "Hunt County"
"1274" "Texas"
"1275" "22-Mar"
"1276" "2-Apr"
"1277" "Source"
"1278" "48257"
"1279" "Kaufman County"
"1280" "Texas"
"1281" "23-Mar"
"1282" "2-Apr"
"1283" "Source"
"1284" "48291"
"1285" "Liberty County"
"1286" "Texas"
"1287" "23-Mar"
"1288" "2-Apr"
"1289" "Source"
"1290" "48303"
"1291" "Lubbock County"
"1292" "Texas"
"1293" "28-Mar"
"1294" "2-Apr"
"1295" "Source"
"1296" "48309"
"1297" "McLennan County"
"1298" "Texas"
"1299" "23-Mar"
"1300" "2-Apr"
"1301" "Source"
"1302" "48339"
"1303" "Montgomery County"
"1304" "Texas"
"1305" "26-Mar"
"1306" "2-Apr"
"1307" "Source"
"1308" "48347"
"1309" "Nacogdoches County"
"1310" "Texas"
"1311" "28-Mar"
"1312" "2-Apr"
"1313" "Source"
"1314" "48355"
"1315" "Nueces County"
"1316" "Texas"
"1317" "26-Mar"
"1318" "2-Apr"
"1319" "Source"
"1320" "48373"
"1321" "Polk County"
"1322" "Texas"
"1323" "24-Mar"
"1324" "2-Apr"
"1325" "Source"
"1326" "48375"
"1327" "Potter County"
"1328" "Texas"
"1329" "29-Mar"
"1330" "2-Apr"
"1331" "Source"
"1332" "48381"
"1333" "Randall County"
"1334" "Texas"
"1335" "1-Apr"
"1336" "2-Apr"
"1337" "Source"
"1338" "48395"
"1339" "Robertson County"
"1340" "Texas"
"1341" "24-Mar"
"1342" "2-Apr"
"1343" "Source"
"1344" "48397"
"1345" "Rockwall County"
"1346" "Texas"
"1347" "23-Mar"
"1348" "2-Apr"
"1349" "Source"
"1350" "48407"
"1351" "San Jacinto County"
"1352" "Texas"
"1353" "24-Mar"
"1354" "2-Apr"
"1355" "Source"
"1356" "48415"
"1357" "Scurry County"
"1358" "Texas"
"1359" "25-Mar"
"1360" "2-Apr"
"1361" "Source"
"1362" "48423"
"1363" "Smith County"
"1364" "Texas"
"1365" "26-Mar"
"1366" "2-Apr"
"1367" "Source"
"1368" "48427"
"1369" "Starr County"
"1370" "Texas"
"1371" "23-Mar"
"1372" "2-Apr"
"1373" "Source"
"1374" "48429"
"1375" "Stephens County"
"1376" "Texas"
"1377" "22-Mar"
"1378" "2-Apr"
"1379" "Source"
"1380" "48439"
"1381" "Tarrant County"
"1382" "Texas"
"1383" "23-Mar"
"1384" "2-Apr"
"1385" "Source"
"1386" "48453"
"1387" "Travis County"
"1388" "Texas"
"1389" "23-Mar"
"1390" "2-Apr"
"1391" "Source"
"1392" "48479"
"1393" "Webb County"
"1394" "Texas"
"1395" "26-Mar"
"1396" "2-Apr"
"1397" "Source"
"1398" "48485"
"1399" "Wichita County"
"1400" "Texas"
"1401" "26-Mar"
"1402" "2-Apr"
"1403" "Source"
"1404" "48489"
"1405" "Willacy County"
"1406" "Texas"
"1407" "25-Mar"
"1408" "2-Apr"
"1409" "Source"
"1410" "48491"
"1411" "Williamson County"
"1412" "Texas"
"1413" "23-Mar"
"1414" "2-Apr"
"1415" "Source"
"1416" "49011"
"1417" "Davis County"
"1418" "Utah"
"1419" "31-Mar"
"1420" "27-Mar"
"1421" "Source"
"1422" "49035"
"1423" "Salt Lake County"
"1424" "Utah"
"1425" "28-Mar"
"1426" "27-Mar"
"1427" "Source"
"1428" "49043"
"1429" "Summit County"
"1430" "Utah"
"1431" "24-Mar"
"1432" "27-Mar"
"1433" "Source"
"1434" "56039"
"1435" "Teton County"
"1436" "Wyoming"
"1437" "27-Mar"
"1438" "Source"
"1439" "Note: State orders are right-censored in the event history analysis, which focuses on adoption of county level orders."
"1440" "Robustness of results without  including  time of first adoption  (full N)"
"1441" "(1)"
"1442" "(2)"
"1443" "County order"
"1444" "Any order"
"1445" "Population (logged)"
"1446" ".642*"
"1447" ".017"
"1448" "(.286)"
"1449" "(.183)"
"1450" "Population density"
"1451" ".388+"
"1452" ".125"
"1453" "(.207)"
"1454" "(.097)"
"1455" "County orders in state"
"1456" ".287***"
"1457" ".043"
"1458" "(.046)"
"1459" "(.028)"
"1460" "County share Democrats 2016"
"1461" "-.216"
"1462" ".595**"
"1463" "(.259)"
"1464" "(.197)"
"1465" "County vs. state share Democrats 2016"
"1466" ".533**"
"1467" "-.437*"
"1468" "(.197)"
"1469" "(.184)"
"1470" "State preemption"
"1471" ".066"
"1472" ".069"
"1473" "(.135)"
"1474" "(.090)"
"1475" "State policy innovativeness"
"1476" "-.292"
"1477" ".021"
"1478" "(.272)"
"1479" "(.142)"
"1480" "Median income"
"1481" ".106"
"1482" ".105"
"1483" "(.185)"
"1484" "(.096)"
"1485" "Income inequality"
"1486" ".200+"
"1487" ".018"
"1488" "(.103)"
"1489" "(.051)"
"1490" "Families below poverty level"
"1491" "-.718***"
"1492" ".133"
"1493" "(.194)"
"1494" "(.082)"
"1495" "Percent high school educated"
"1496" "-.323"
"1497" "-.017"
"1498" "(.217)"
"1499" "(.065)"
"1500" "Percent race white"
"1501" ".236"
"1502" ".140"
"1503" "(.181)"
"1504" "(.095)"
"1505" "Median age"
"1506" "-.147"
"1507" ".024"
"1508" "(.102)"
"1509" "(.039)"
"1510" "Care physicians per capita"
"1511" ".091"
"1512" "-.024"
"1513" "(.069)"
"1514" "(.026)"
"1515" "Percent uninsured"
"1516" ".741***"
"1517" ".085"
"1518" "(.151)"
"1519" "(.073)"
"1520" "Time variant"
"1521" "Cum. cases of COVID-19"
"1522" "-.615***"
"1523" "-.414***"
"1524" "(.105)"
"1525" "(.058)"
"1526" "COVID-19 growth rate"
"1527" ".091"
"1528" ".067**"
"1529" "(.057)"
"1530" "(.022)"
"1531" "Cum. tests per capita in state"
"1532" "-2.175***"
"1533" "-1.759***"
"1534" "(.467)"
"1535" "(.425)"
"1536" "Observations (county-days)"
"1537" "222 , 074"
"1538" "222 , 074"
"1539" "AIC"
"1540" "2689.09"
"1541" "36248.30"
"1542" "df"
"1543" "19"
"1544" "19"
"1545" "All variables X-standardized by z-scoring variable; standard errors in parentheses; + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001"
"1546" "Full regression table of effects by primary political orientation of county (complementing figure 4)"
"1547" "(1)"
"1548" "(2)"
"1549" "(3)"
"1550" "All counties"
"1551" "Democratic counties"
"1552" "Republican counties"
"1553" "Population (logged)"
"1554" ".842**"
"1555" "1.029**"
"1556" ".117"
"1557" "(.309)"
"1558" "(.334)"
"1559" "(.258)"
"1560" "Population density"
"1561" ".510*"
"1562" ".128"
"1563" "1.539***"
"1564" "(.230)"
"1565" "(.285)"
"1566" "(.244)"
"1567" "County orders in state"
"1568" ".267***"
"1569" ".134**"
"1570" ".402***"
"1571" "(.046)"
"1572" "(.047)"
"1573" "(.059)"
"1574" "County share Democrats 2016"
"1575" "-.182"
"1576" "-.383"
"1577" "-.218"
"1578" "(.256)"
"1579" "(.382)"
"1580" "(.302)"
"1581" "County vs. state share Democrats 2016"
"1582" ".657**"
"1583" "1.004***"
"1584" ".429+"
"1585" "(.202)"
"1586" "(.226)"
"1587" "(.256)"
"1588" "State preemption"
"1589" ".010"
"1590" ".316*"
"1591" "-.356*"
"1592" "(.138)"
"1593" "(.157)"
"1594" "(.150)"
"1595" "State policy innovativeness"
"1596" "-.399"
"1597" "-1.140+"
"1598" "-.295"
"1599" "(.324)"
"1600" "(.598)"
"1601" "(.336)"
"1602" "Median income"
"1603" ".117"
"1604" ".801**"
"1605" "-.086"
"1606" "(.183)"
"1607" "(.273)"
"1608" "(.255)"
"1609" "Income inequality"
"1610" ".182+"
"1611" ".309+"
"1612" ".009"
"1613" "(.100)"
"1614" "(.167)"
"1615" "(.175)"
"1616" "Families below poverty level"
"1617" "-.845***"
"1618" "-.327"
"1619" "-.776*"
"1620" "(.180)"
"1621" "(.217)"
"1622" "(.317)"
"1623" "Percent high school educated"
"1624" "-.230"
"1625" ".174"
"1626" "-.363+"
"1627" "(.223)"
"1628" "(.390)"
"1629" "(.211)"
"1630" "Percent race white"
"1631" ".144"
"1632" ".305"
"1633" "-.089"
"1634" "(.171)"
"1635" "(.190)"
"1636" "(.256)"
"1637" "Median age"
"1638" "-.087"
"1639" "-.115"
"1640" "-.008"
"1641" "(.107)"
"1642" "(.168)"
"1643" "(.182)"
"1644" "Care physicians per capita"
"1645" ".091"
"1646" ".027"
"1647" ".058"
"1648" "(.084)"
"1649" "(.111)"
"1650" "(.173)"
"1651" "Percent uninsured"
"1652" ".779***"
"1653" ".797***"
"1654" ".721***"
"1655" "(.160)"
"1656" "(.216)"
"1657" "(.206)"
"1658" "Date of first COVID-19 case"
"1659" "-.141"
"1660" "-.231"
"1661" "-.586***"
"1662" "(.110)"
"1663" "(.148)"
"1664" "(.154)"
"1665" "Cum. cases of COVID-19"
"1666" "-.906***"
"1667" "-.979***"
"1668" "-1.072***"
"1669" "(.116)"
"1670" "(.119)"
"1671" "(.182)"
"1672" "COVID-19 growth rate"
"1673" ".057"
"1674" ".081"
"1675" ".011"
"1676" "(.051)"
"1677" "(.051)"
"1678" "(.083)"
"1679" "Cum. tests per capita in state"
"1680" "-1.881***"
"1681" "-1.235+"
"1682" "-2.653***"
"1683" "(.497)"
"1684" "(.645)"
"1685" "(.505)"
"1686" "Observations"
"1687" "174048"
"1688" "32856"
"1689" "141192"
"1690" "AIC"
"1691" "2689.09"
"1692" "1110.55"
"1693" "1331.51"
"1694" "df"
"1695" "19"
"1696" "19"
"1697" "19"
"1698" "All variables X-standardized by z-scoring variable; standard errors in parentheses; + p<.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01, *** p<.001"
