At what costs? A proposal for estimating migration costs in
the Bangladesh-Malaysia corridor
Shamim Ahmed Khan
School of Business, Monash University Malaysia, Bandar Sunway, Malaysia
Masnun Mahi
Faculty of Business and Accountancy, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Mohammad Zainuddin*
Putra Business School, Universiti Putra Malaysia, Serdang, Malaysia
Emadul Islam
University of Malaya, Malaysia; and BRAC, Dhaka, Bangladesh

Abstract
This article provides a comprehensive proposal to figure out the full spectrum of costs borne by
Bangladeshi workers on their journey to Malaysia. The article proposes to consider the
differences based on skill level, employment sector, immigration status, gender, traveling routes
as well as channels and funding sources in order to determine the true economic cost of
migration. The article also proposes to take social cost of migration into account. It sheds light
on the effects of migration on migrant households with a view to fully comprehend the overall
migration cost scenario. Finally, the paper suggests to take into consideration the impact of
COVID-19 pandemic on broader migration and repatriation context.
Keywords: Migration, economic cost, social cost, Bangladesh, Malaysia, COVID-19
1. Introduction
Malaysia suffered severe labor shortage in the 1990s, and consequently entered into an
agreement with Bangladesh, in 1992, for the transfer of labor on a large scale systematically.
Prior to that, in 1986, Malaysia imported 500 Bangladeshis on a trial basis to service their
plantation sector. After the agreement in 1992, the labor movement from Bangladesh to
Malaysia accelerated (Sarker, 2016). The agreement was the beginning of a long relationship
between Bangladesh and Malaysia on labor movement which was rather bumpy.
Malaysia entered into another agreement with Bangladesh in 1994 for importing 50,000 workers
annually for their construction industry. During the Asian Financial Crisis, there was a sharp
decline in the number of Bangladeshi workers in Malaysia when 100,000 of them were deported
*

Corresponding author: Mohammad Zainuddin can be contacted at mohammad.msc_hp17@grad.putrabs.edu.my

in 1997. In subsequent years, Bangladesh started exporting skilled, semi-skilled and non-skilled
laborers to Malaysia through registered recruiting agencies. In 2001, however, Malaysia
terminated the agreement on labor export from Bangladesh and announced the restriction on
labor importation formally. The latest suspension came in September 2018 following allegations
that a syndicate of 10 Bangladeshi agents – with support from Malaysia – controlled labor
recruitment in 2016-18 when recruitment cost went up to Tk. 4 lakh. However, both the countries
subsequently agree to work together to establish a new memorandum of understanding (MOU)
to reinstate the migration process. Such an effort is very significant from the viewpoint of
establishing safe and legal migration and the proposed study is undertaken against this backdrop.
2. Literature Review
While legal, safe, and affordable migration policies are conducive to maintain the flow of labor
forces between countries, improper protections and unchecked labor migration can increase the
risk of human trafficking. Thus, efficient migration policies are crucial.
Malaysia has historically been one of the largest destinations of Bangladeshi migrant population
which has great economic significance1. However, Bangladesh lost this prominent destination of
migrant workers due to suspension as mentioned above. Previously, the high fees for migration
charged by recruitment agencies forced the workers to take on crippling debts that all but
enslaved them to their recruiters or employers. The joint effort to have a new MOU is thus crucial
for establishing safe migration. It is also important for both countries; the economy of Bangladesh
relies on remittances from its migrant workers; while Malaysia also depends significantly on
migrant workers from Bangladesh to fill its factories and plantations.
A revamped MOU between the countries will not only ensure Bangladeshi workers to migrate
with zero or minimal costs to Malaysia legally, but also help curb human trafficking and protect
workers’ rights. Specially, for Bangladesh, the MOU possesses greater significance as the
country’s total remittances by migrant workers is projected to fall by 25% due to the COVID-19
pandemic, as estimated by the World Bank2. Hence, the memorandum of understanding
between Bangladesh and Malaysia with a view to re-establish the parameters of safe and legal
migration is highly significant, and the proposed study aims to address research questions
surrounding this.
In order to figure out the full spectrum of costs borne by Bangladeshi workers on their journey
from Bangladesh to Malaysia, several factors need to be considered.
First, the type of workers, viz., unskilled, semi-skilled or skilled (Mannan, 2016). According to
Maxwell (2010), 86.6 per cent of Bangladeshi workers migrated to Malaysia are unskilled, 13.2
per cent semi-skilled and 0.2 per cent skilled.
1

In 2018-19 fiscal year, Bangladesh received $1.19 billion in remittance from Malaysia. The amount is 7.25% of the
amount that migrant workers sent home that year (The Daily Star: February 17, 2020).
2
Source: COVID-19 crisis through a migration lens: migration and development brief 32 (World Bank: April 2020).

Second, the employment sector for which the workers are being recruited is another decisive
factor (Ishida & Hassan, 2000; Abdul-aziz, 2001; Wickramasekara, 2015). Semi-skilled and
unskilled workers mainly work in plantation and agricultural sectors (Robertson, 2008), whereas
a small proportion work in the construction, manufacturing, and services sectors.
Third, Bangladeshi migrants in Malaysia can be grouped in terms of their immigration status
(Hossain, Khan, & Short, 2013). Some Bangladeshis enter Malaysia legally, while others enter
illegally or become illegal at the expiry of contracts.
Fourth, the routes traveled are also important determinants of migration costs of Bangladeshi
workers. In a detailed study, Ullah (2013) discovered six routes the migrants traveled to get to
Malaysia, such as Bangladesh-Bangkok-Songkhla-through deep forest, Bangladesh-Hat YaiSungai-boat-forest-hill, Bangladesh–Bangkok–Yale-Sungai, Golok-forest-truck van, BangladeshSingapore–Malaysia, or directly from Dhaka. The majority went to Malaysia traversing Thailand
or Singapore via various routes.
Fifth, channels and funding sources have important implications on migration cost (Hossain et
al., 2013). Most government-approved agencies and financial institutions are urban-based, and
as such, most rural migrants rely on informal sources such as middlemen and moneylenders who
charge much higher fees and interest rates.
Sixth, another influencing factor is gender. Migration costs often differ considerably between
male (Sarker 2016) and female (Parvin & Rabbi, 2017) aspirants.
Finally, social cost of migration also needs to be considered, such as, chronic debt and destitution,
family breakdown, disempowerment of migrant wives, rise in hedonistic behavior and school
dropout rates (Hossain et al., 2013). The social costs are rarely reported due to complexities
involved in assessment.
In the proposed study, our primary objective is to determine the true cost of migration, taking
into account all the factors mentioned above. We will also evaluate the effect of COVID-19
pandemic on migration of workers from Bangladesh to Malaysia. In addition, our study attempts
to come up with a solution for a new migration practice that is fair, transparent and efficient.
3. Methodology
The proposed study and its methods are aligned to the philosophy of pragmatism. Consequently,
the study follows abductive logic with regard to its approach, and mixed methods of inquiry are
adopted to achieve the research objectives. As to the time horizon, the study is cross-sectional
in its design, and both survey and grounded theory will be used as research strategies. The
rationale of selecting mixed method can be explained on the basis of research objectives of the
study. The broad objective of the present study is to investigate the hidden cost associated with
migration. Cost can be categorized into two forms, viz., economic and social cost. As economic cost
is quantifiable, a quantitative study is best suited to identify the economic costs of migration. On

the other hand, social costs cannot be quantified and subjective in nature. Therefore, to find out
the social cost of migration, qualitative research design is considered appropriate.
3.1 Sampling strategy
For quantitative part of the study (i.e., to investigate the economic cost of migration), the sample
size is selected based on the total number of migrant Bangladeshi workers in Malaysia. The exact
number of migrant Bangladeshi workers in Malaysia has been reported differently in different
sources. For this study, population and demography data published by the Department of
Statistics Malaysia (DOSM) is considered as the reference point where it is reported that total
number of foreign workers in Malaysia is 3.827 million (Loh, Simler, Tan Wei, & Yi, 2019). This
figure includes both regular and irregular foreign workers. Out of 3.827 million foreign workers,
14% are Bangladeshi workers, i.e., 535,780 to be exact (Loh et al., 2019). This is considered as
our population of the study. However, it is to be noted that the unofficial estimate of foreign
workers is much higher than the reported figure.
Based on the population, using the guideline of Krejcie & Morgan (1970), sample size for the
present study will be 382. Both documented and undocumented workers will be considered
under this sample size. As there is no specific list consisting the profile of the Bangladeshi migrant
workers that can be used as a sampling frame, non-probability sampling technique will be used.
The method of sample selection will be a combination of convenient and snowball sampling. For
documented workers, convenience sampling will be used as they can be easily approached.
However, identifying undocumented workers is challenging since no one would want to reveal
that they are undocumented. Therefore, undocumented workers will be identified using snowballing or chain-referral sampling.
On the other hand, for qualitative part of the study (i.e., to identify the social costs), in-depth
interview will be conducted using theoretical sampling technique. In this technique, taking new
sample is stopped only when theoretical saturation is reached. Our goal is to gain an in-depth
understanding of the social costs of migration and develop a theoretical explanation. Hence,
grounded theory research strategy (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) will be used for the qualitative part.
3.2 Data collection
Primary data will be collected for the present study. For quantitative portion, data will be collected
via structured interview using questionnaire. For qualitative part, in-depth interviews will be
conducted. Data will be collected from Bangladeshi migrant workers residing in Selangor, Johore
and Kuala Lumpur because these three states constitute 63% of the total foreign workers of
Malaysia. To ensure that selected samples are representative of population as well as
representative of the identified factors (six factors as mentioned in section 2), some control will
be imposed in designing and carrying out the data collection. The intended data collection
strategy is outlined below.

The sample for the quantitative study will focus both documented and undocumented workers.
Although finding and approaching undocumented workers will be challenging, the goal is to
incorporate as many undocumented workers as possible within the sample size. At the very
beginning, the survey will be executed by approaching the participants based on job sector. To
ensure the representativeness, by keeping in line with the population, samples will be collected
from the five job sectors, viz., agriculture, plantation, construction, manufacturing and service as
these are the major employment sectors for foreign workers. The number of samples to be
collected from each sector are outlined in Table 1. Furthermore, to confirm the
representativeness based on gender, 306 male and 76 female Bangladeshi workers will be
surveyed. There will be no question regarding Job sector or gender in the structured interview
(survey questionnaire) because these two will be controlled by the researcher manually.
It is to be noted here that the number of samples based on job sector and gender is decided
based on the statistics of “total foreign workers” in Malaysia; not “Bangladeshi workers” in
Malaysia. We have made an assumption regarding Bangladeshi workers based on the statistics
of total foreign workers as sector-wise or gender-wise statistics of Bangladeshi workers in
Malaysia are not readily available.
It is expected that workers of every skill level (skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled) will get
automatically covered because of taking samples from five different job sectors. Specifically, due
to collection of data from agriculture and plantation sector, it is expected that unskilled and semiskilled workers will get covered as majority of the workers in these two sectors are either
unskilled or semi-skilled (Robertson, 2008). Similar to the skill level, it is also expected that sample
representation based on channel used (e.g. Govt. agencies/middleman/moneylender etc.) will
get automatically covered due to the large number and diverse nature of sample size.
Furthermore, it is evident that respondents using informal channels will be covered automatically
because, as stated earlier, majority of the Bangladeshi workers in Malaysia are from rural areas
of Bangladesh and usually tend to seek help of a middleman.
Ensuring participant representation based on “route to Malaysia” (i.e., coming to Malaysia
through Singapore/Thailand/Dhaka) is considered challenging because workers coming through
Singapore or Thailand are mainly undocumented workers. As such, due to the fear of revealing
personal information or due to social desirability bias, it is possible that majority of the
respondent will withhold the actual information regarding the route used. Therefore, initial idea
is to keep this criterion open irrespective of route used. Sampling strategy/sample size/sampling
frame will be adjusted accordingly based on initial findings. Table 1 outlines the details to ensure
that the selected samples adequately represent the population.

Table 1: Ensuring representativeness of sample
Criterion

Number

Immigration
Status

Documented &
Undocumented
Workers

382

Job Sector

Agriculture: 34
Agriculture
Plantation: 57
Plantation
Construction: 73
Construction
Manufacturing:
Manufacturing
138
Service & Others Service & Others:
80

Gender

Male
Female

Male: 306
Female: 76

Skill Level

Unskilled
Semi-Skilled
Skilled

382

Channel

Will be kept
open
(Irrespective of
govt. Agencies /
middleman)

382

Route

Will be kept
open
(Irrespective of
Dhaka,
Singapore or
Thailand)

382

Justification
- Survey will be conducted
on both types of workers.
-Sample size in accordance
with total population of
migrated workers.
-These sectors constitute
majority foreign workers.
- 9% Agriculture; 15%
Plantation; 19%
Construction; 36%
Manufacturing and 21%
Service and others.
80% Male; 20% Female
(Gender ratio of total
foreign workers in
Malaysia).
Respondents from
agriculture & plantation
will fall automatically
under either unskilled or
semi-skilled.
- As no statistical
information is available
regarding how many came
to Malaysia via direct govt.
agencies or middleman
-Although many workers
enter Malaysia via Thailand
or Singapore; they mostly
consist of undocumented
workers. (Ullah 2013)
-Therefore, due to “social
desirability bias”, it is
possible that majority of
the workers would not
reveal the actual route
information in survey

Source
Loh et al.
(2019),
DOSM

Loh et al.
(2019)

Loh et al.
(2019)

Maxwell
(2010)

-

Ullah
(2013)

For qualitative study, as data will be collected via in-depth interview to develop a theory about
social costs of migration, the focus will be to collect interview from as diverse sample as possible

which would include not only different types of workers but also the migrant households in
Bangladesh. The goal is to take interview until theoretical saturation is reached. The interview will
be recorded via audio form which will then be transcribed and analyzed.
3.3. Data analysis
Considering the sensitivity of the study topic, the collected data will be completely anonymous.
Informed consent will be obtained from the participants to take part in the survey/in-depth
interview. Participants will be ensured that their identity will be kept confidential.
To analyze the quantitative data, necessary graphical analysis and statistical analysis will be
conducted. Descriptive and inferential statistics will be used to summarize and report the
findings. Relevant bar graphs and pie charts will also be used to present the findings. To analyze
the qualitative data collected via interview, coding and constant comparison will be followed.
Based on the guideline of grounded theory strategy, concurrent data collection and analysis will
be conducted, and open coding, axial coding and selective coding will be used to make
comparison and develop conceptualization or theoretical explanation about social costs of
migration.
Moreover, a number of individuals, other than workers, who are involved in the migration process,
such as, relevant government officials, recruiting agencies, middlemen (broker, sub-broker) and
employer will be interviewed selectively to get an overall picture of migration. Notably, the
disruption caused by COVID-19 on migration will be taken into account in both data collection
and analysis. A summary of our proposed methodology is given in Table 2.
Table 2: Research design, data collection and analysis

Research design

Sampling
technique
Sample size
Data collection
Data analysis

Research philosophy
Research approach
Methodological choice
Research strategy
Time horizon
Quantitative
Qualitative
Quantitative
Qualitative
Quantitative
Qualitative
Quantitative
Qualitative

Pragmatism
Abductive
Mixed (quantitative, qualitative)
Survey, grounded theory
Cross-sectional study
Convenient, snowball sampling
Theoretical sampling
382
Theoretical saturation
Structured interview (questionnaire)
In-depth interview
Graphical (bar, pie), statistical (descriptive,
inferential). Tool: SPSS
Concurrent collection & analysis: Coding,
constant comparison. Tool: NVivo

4. Conclusion
Our study is expected to determine the full spectrum of costs borne by Bangladeshi workers on
their journey to Malaysia. The study includes a wide variety of Bangladeshi migrant workers to
understand the differences based on skill level, employment sector, immigration status, traveling
routes, gender, as well as channels and funding sources. It collects and analyzes data not only
from migrant workers but also from different agencies, sub-agents and local brokers in order to
comprehend the overall scenario of migration.
In addition, our study takes social costs into account and assesses the impact of migration on
migrant households. Besides, the impact of COVID-19 pandemic on migration and repatriation
scenario is also taken into consideration. The proposed research will also shed light on the cost
of living and ability to recuperate expenses amongst migrants. Finally, the study attempts to
provide solutions for a new recruitment process and practices that are accessible, wellmonitored, efficient and transparent.
The proposed study has some limitations. For instance, the unavailability of reliable statistics of
migrants as well as limited coverage of illegal workers pose significant limitations. In addition,
there may be limited access to some important documents on the grounds of confidentiality by
Governments and recruiting agencies. Moreover, it may be difficult to interview workers in the
present situation when movement control order or lockdown is in place.

References
Abdul-Aziz, A. R. (2001). Bangladeshi migrant workers in Malaysia's construction sector.
Asia Pacific Population Journal, 16(1), 3-22.
Department of Statistics, Malaysia (DOSM). (2018). Current Population Estimates.
Retrieved from https://newss.statistics.gov.my/newssportalx/ep/epFreeDownloadContent
Search.seam? cid=325813
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. 1967. Weidenfield &
Nicolson, London, 1-19.
Hossain, M. I., Khan, M. A., & Short, P. (2013). Migration of Bangladeshi workers to
Malaysia: emerging lessons of economic and social costs and benefits at the migrant, migrant
household and community levels. In The Asian Century, Sustainable Growth and Climate Change.
Edward Elgar Publishing.
Ishida, A., & Shahid Hassan, M. D. (2000). Why do migrant workers intend to extend their
stay in host countries? The case of Bangladeshi workers in Malaysia’s manufacturing sector.
International Migration, 38(5), 100-115.

Krejcie, R. V., & Morgan, D. W. (1970). Determining sample size for research
activities. Educational and psychological measurement, 30(3), 607-610.
Loh, W. S., Simler, K., Tan Wei, K., & Yi, S. (2019). Malaysia-Estimating the Number of
Foreign Workers: A Report from the Labor Market Data for Monetary Policy Task (No.
AUS0000681,
pp.
1-62).
The
World
Bank.
Retrieved
from
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/953091562223517841/Malaysia-Estimating- theNumber-of-Foreign-Workers-A-Report-from-the-Labor-Market-Data-for-Monetary- Policy-Task
Mannan, D. K. A. (2016). Labor migration between developing economy to developing
country: A case study of Bangladesh and Malaysia. International Journal of Migration Research
and Development (ISSN: 2411-9695), 2(1).
Maxwell Stamp Limited (2010). Study on the International Demand for Semi-skilled and
Skilled Bangladeshi Workers, TVET Reform Project, Bangladesh.
Parvin, H., & Rabbi, F. (2017) Factors Effecting Female Migration: Bangladesh
Perspectives. Malaysian Construction Research Journal (MCRJ), 126.
Robertson PS Jr. (2008) Migrant Workers in Malaysia – Issues, Concerns and Points for
Action. Washington, DC: Fair Labor Association.
Sarker, R. (2016). Migration and employment: A study of Bangladeshi male migrant
workers in Malaysia. In International Migration in Southeast Asia (pp. 125-148). Springer,
Singapore.
Ullah, A. A. (2013). Theoretical Rhetoric About Migration Networks: A Case of a Journey
of Bangladeshi Workers to Malaysia. International Migration, 51 (3), 151-168.
Wickramasekara, P. (2015). Bilateral agreements and memoranda of understanding on
migration of low skilled workers: a review. Available at SSRN 2636289.

