Trigger Warning: The following document contains racial epithets.

Introduction
The COVID-19, or Coronavirus, pandemic originated in Wuhan, China, in
late 2019. While for several months, most cases were found in China, the virus has
since moved to the United States, where at the time of this publication, there are
several million confirmed cases. (Centers for Disease Control) Many occurrences of
Anti-Asian hate crimes have been reported throughout the pandemic, especially in
the earlier part. It is generally considered that the awareness of the notion that
Coronavirus originated in China led to an increase in anti-Chinese or anti-Asian
sentiment among Americans. In this paper, I utilize Google Trends data to examine
the early impact of Coronavirus on American's attitudes towards other racial
groups. I find that in the first half of 2020, strong correlations existed between
interest in Coronavirus and bigotry towards Asian and Hispanic Americans as
operationalized by search rates for racial slurs. I additionally find some evidence
that interest in Coronavirus was inversely correlated with anti-black racial slurs.
Finally, I find substantial evidence that interest in Coronavirus was correlated with
disproportionate declines in interest in Chinese and Mexican restaurants.

Background
Coronavirus
Various anecdotes support the notion that racism and anti-Chinese
sentiment has increased directly in response to the Coronavirus pandemic. Many
incidents were publicized in the media or caught on video and featured widely on
social media. In an incident in Manhattan, an individual yelled, "Where is your
Corona mask you Asian b*tch?" at a Korean woman before punching and attacking
her, dislocating her jaw. (ABC7 News) There were various instances reported

similar to this, in which individuals of Asian descent were subjected to blatant
bigotry with perpetrators explicitly citing Coronavirus as their motive.
Further, large institutions alike have perpetrated anti-Chinese sentiment in
their messages. For example, UC-Berkeley's University Health Services published a
document that stated that "Xenophobia: fears about interacting with those who
might be from Asia and guilt about these feelings" is an acceptable response to the
Coronavirus pandemic. (Asmelah 2020) Such a bigoted statement from such a place
of high authority demonstrates the xenophobic reaction's scale and pervasiveness to
Coronavirus. Asian-Americans have also experienced explicit discrimination in the
wake of the Coronavirus pandemic. In Indiana, two Hmong-American men were
rejected from two hotels after reportedly the hotel staff thought the men might have
had Coronavirus, presumably a discriminatory assumption based on their race.
(Nottingham and Alsup 2020)
Trump's rhetoric related to Coronavirus has also been called racist and has
been accused of inciting racism against Chinese and Asian Americans, based on
Trump's tendency to refer to Coronavirus as the "Chinese virus" and on other
occasions simply the "foreign virus". This has been met with considerable
controversy. Undoubtedly, it would seem that such language would lead to
Coronavirus being more strongly associated with China and Asia than would be
otherwise, which presumably could have an impact on how Chinese and Asian
Americans are treated.
Evidence has shown that commerce at Chinese businesses has fallen
substantially since the onset of the Coronavirus pandemic. It is commonly thought
that this decline is due to the Americans' perceived association between Asian
Americans and Coronavirus, in response to Coronavirus originating from and
initially primarily spreading in China. The New York City government estimated
that sales at Chinese businesses had fallen 40% within the city. (City of New York)

Xenophobia in the United States
Integrated Threat Theory describes the circumstances and dynamics which
tend to produce prejudice, discrimination, and hostility towards identity groups.
(Stephan and Stephan 2000) Integrated Threat Theory attributes prejudice towards
out-groups to realistic threats, threats to the group's well-being, and symbolic
threats, which are distinctions in the in-group and out-group values. There are
additional factors that may influence the extent to which a threat is perceived. The
power dynamics between groups play a substantial role, as higher-power groups
may pose a greater perceived threat. Additionally, higher-power groups may have
stronger reactions to perceived threats. (Corenblum and Stephen 2001, Stephan et
al. 2009)
Recent research has supported the notion that group size is an important
contributing factor in the scale of racism and bigotry, with the effect only primarily
limited by intergroup contact that is more likely when minority groups are larger.
(Blalock 1967, Dixon 2006, King and Wheelock 2007). Another relevant factor is the
economic threat that the minority group poses. A third relevant factor can be the
cultural distinctiveness of particular minority groups, with those more culturally
distinctive minority groups posing a more extensive cultural "threat" and
subsequently being subject to more discrimination. (Lucassen and Lubbers 2012)
Recent research has found much American Xenophobia targeted towards
Hispanic Americans, a large ethnic group in the United States, with a rapidly
growing population. While there were large numbers of hate crimes against both
Hispanic Americans and Asian Americans, in 2018, there were nearly four times as
many against Hispanic Americans compared to Asian Americans. (Uniform Crime
Reports 2018) Compared to Hispanic or Black Americans, Asian Americans are
often viewed more favorably by White Americans. (Wong et al 1998) Asian
Americans are less likely to report experiencing discrimination/hostility in specific
ways. (Pew Research Center)

Black Americans are also subject to a high degree of racial discrimination;
however, this bigotry is typically distinguished from anti-Asian and anti-Hispanic
sentiment as few Black Americans are immigrants and Xenophobia plays a far
smaller role in the bigotry they experience. Xenophobia and racism are functionally
different, however, and as such, White Americans exhibit bigotry differently
towards different racial groups. Brader et al (2008), for instance found via an
experiment that a news clip on the costs of immigration had a much more
substantial impact on anti-immigration attitudes when it featured Latino
immigrants than when it featured European-American immigrants. This
demonstrates that while race and immigration can interact and be conflated, the
attitudes and opinions Xenophobia forms are functionally different from racism.
Additionally, much of the bigotry that Hispanic-Americans face that may be
conflated with pure racial discrimination may actually really result from
Xenophobia. Light et. al (2014) found that disparities between citizens and noncitizens explain much of the sentencing disparities between non-Hispanic White
and Hispanic Americans.
Coronavirus, especially in the early part of the pandemic, has triggered
national insecurity, fear of foreigners, and general Xenophobia. Various anti-Asian
hate crimes and incidents related to the Coronavirus pandemic demonstrate the
common theme: Americans feel threatened by immigrants or individuals they
perceive may be immigrants. In the case of Coronavirus, this has resulted in
individuals racially discriminating against individuals that they perceive as
potential carriers of Coronavirus and generally expressing hostility and violence
towards the Asian race for being to blame for Coronavirus as they see it. Beyond
these blatant actions, however, I hypothesize that Coronavirus has stimulated an
increase in Xenophobic attitudes broadly in Americans. I hypothesize that Chinese
and Asian-Americans face this negative effect the strongest, but that HispanicAmericans may be affected as well.

From an additional point of view, evidence supports the hypothesis that
racism/hatred towards other racial minority groups may fall in response to rising
anti-Asian sentiment. Past research has additionally shown an inverse relationship
between how White Americans view Asian Americans and how they view African
Americans. (Ho and Jackson 2001) Ho and Jackson (2001) found that White
subjects that had more favorable stereotypes of Asian Americans tended to have
subsequent less favorable stereotypes of African Americans. They attributed this
finding to the notion that the groups are viewed in contrast to one another.
Additionally, increasing media focus and attention on Coronavirus and Asian
Americans may subsequently reduce the salience of and attention on AfricanAmericans, a "distraction" of sorts. Since African-Americans are generally viewed as
Americans and not stereotyped as immigrants or viewed as a group with a large
foreign-born population, it seems less likely that Coronavirus would prime negative
racial attitudes towards Blacks as strongly as they would towards Asians, and that
they may even benefit somewhat from the racial attitude change.

Methods
Google Trends is a publicly available feature that consists of a searchable
database of how frequently, at what times, and in what geographical areas certain
Google searches are done. This data has been increasingly used in the social
sciences to create state or geographical metrics of social phenomena. DiGrazia
(2015), for instance operationalized anti-immigrant sentiment at the state-level by
examining state-level variation in the terms "illegals" and "immigrants".
There are primarily two substantial advantages that illustrate the benefits of
using Google Trends in Social Science research. First, Google data, by which Google
Trends data is based, has a substantial sample size and thus is easier to develop
more confident metrics from compared to surveys. Second, specific topics are often
difficult to survey on because of their sensitive nature. This is particularly true for
topics such as attitudes toward race, ethnicity, nationality. DiGrazia specifically

suggests that Google data has the advantage over typical survey data of offering
more "candid insight".
Stephens-Davidowitz (2013) created a validated method for spatiallyproxying a geographical area's anti-black racial sentiment level using Google
Trends data. His proxy for anti-black sentiment rests in the proportion of searches
for a particular black slur that starts with "n", and ends with "er". StephensDavidowitz controls for the proportion of searches for another variation of the racial
slur that ends in "a" and is commonly used in rap songs, "african american(s)" (in
order to control for some areas merely having a higher interest in AfricanAmericans) and a particular swear word (to control for the fact that some
geographical areas have a higher interest in expletives). Stephens-Davidowitz found
the proxy to be significantly-correlated with other spatial measures of
racism/bigotry towards Black Americans.
To measure anti-black sentiment, I will follow the same method StephensDavidowitz utilized. To measure anti-Chinese sentiment, I will be examining the
proportion of searches for a specific racial epithet used to describe a person of
Chinese descent. To measure anti-Hispanic sentiment, I will similarly be examining
the proportion of searches for a specific racial epithet used to describe a Hispanic
person. Following in line with Stephens-Davidowitz's methodology, I will also be
controlling for the search rate for "chinese american(s)" and "hispanic american(s)"
respectively, and the proxy search rate for profanity.
Additionally, I will also measure the relationship between "coronavirus"
searches and "chinese food/restaurant(s)" and "mexican food/restaurant(s)" google
searches controlling for "restaurant(s)" search rates. Google is commonly used by
consumers to search for restaurants to solicit. Searches for "chinese
food/restaurant(s)" and "mexican food/restaurant(s)" operationalize how interested
the public is in soliciting Chinese and Mexican restaurants, respectively. Going to
restaurants was generally negatively impacted by the Coronavirus pandemic, so
controlling for the search rate for "restaurant(s)" differentiates in order to

determine whether either of two types of restaurants were disproportionally
impacted.
I perform this study utilizing the gTrendsR package in R. Using this package,
I individually download state-level data on daily Google web search rates for each
term (see Appendix) for each state during the 5-month period between February 1st
and the end of June. This time period was chosen in order for interest in
Coronavirus to be as similar in scale as possible. (Coronavirus was in the news
earlier, but the scale of interest was less than 1% of what it was during the 5-month
period) Resulting, I have daily search rates in each state for each term for the 5month period. The dataset was reshaped from long to wide form so that each
observation was a unique combination of state and day. This resulted in a total of
7550 observations. Due to dilemmas with observations involving overlapping
combinations of non-unique states and non-unique days, all subsequent modeling on
the data involves a crossed-random effects model, fixing the state and day.

Results
Figure One presents interests in Coronavirus in the US over the analyzed
time period as operationalized by the combined search volume for the terms
“coronavirus” and “covid”. As one can see, levels of interest in Coronavirus were
relatively low in the beginning of February but rose quickly at the beginning of
March, coinciding with the time a high number of cases began arising in the United
States. Inspection of all the Google Trends data found that the term “Coronavirus”
was initially much more popular than the term Covid, but that later on the term
Covid became popular. To account for this, I operationalized interest in Coronavirus
as the search volume of both terms combined. I argue that operationalizing interest
in Coronavirus based on these search terms is appropriate and assumably accurate
as others have used Google trends search volume to measure issue salience in
similar ways. (Mellon 2013) Careful longitudinal inspection was performed on all
search terms utilized in order to minimize the risk of extraneous confounding. The

only substantial peculiarity I noticed was that search volume for African-Americanrelated terms was high around the beginning of February. This may be attributed to
the fact that February is African-American history month in the United States. In
order to deal with this, I completely removed all February data from the AfricanAmerican analysis. Inspection of the data didn’t reveal any effect of this, but data
from the end of May and all of June were also removed from this specific analysis to
minimize the possibility of confounding due to reactions related to the tragic killing
of George Floyd.
Ultimately, this analysis finds significant evidence of a relationship between
interest in Coronavirus and bigotry towards Chinese and Hispanic-Americans, as
operationalized by search rates for anti-Chinese and anti-Hispanic slurs. The fixedeffects models that support this evidence are found in Table One. The scale of
Google Data makes it challenging to interpret. However, based on the model’s
estimation, an increase from the February mean (when search volume was
relatively low) to the March mean (when search volume was relatively high),
independent of the timing, would be correlated with an increase of about 24% in
searches for anti-Chinese slurs and a 14% increase in searches for anti-Hispanic
slurs. The analysis additionally finds a slight negative relationship between interest
in Coronavirus and bigotry towards African-Americans, this relationship is weaker,
however, and less robust than the other correlations. Notably, this correlation is
also based on a smaller set of observations. This slight relationship supports the
hypothesis that certain racial/ethnic groups may be viewed in contrast to one
another.
Table Two displays the results of the restaurant analysis. I find that interest
in Coronavirus was strongly inversely related to interest in Chinese
food/restaurant(s) and Mexican food/restaurant(s) after controlling for interest in
restaurants generally. Here, the relationship between Coronavirus and Chinese
food is larger than Coronavirus and Mexican food, though both are quite strong and
substantial.

Conclusion
In this paper, I attempt to take advantage of the detailed, longitudinal
nature of Google Trends to examine how the Coronavirus pandemic is related to
short-term changes in racial attitudes. While the breadth of detail Google Trends
offers is great, employing such analyses can be extremely challenging, particularly
given the immense possibility of confounding by extraneous variables. I attempted
to employ great care to inspect the Google Trends search rate data and control for
possible confounders. Ultimately, I conclude by finding that the frequency of search
interest for Coronavirus in a specific place on a specific day was strongly positively
correlated to the frequency of searches for anti-Chinese and anti-Hispanic slurs,
suggesting that the Coronavirus pandemic primes a visceral Xenophobic reaction in
Americans, specifically affecting attitudes towards Chinese and Hispanic
Americans. I also found a slight negative relationship between search rates for
Coronavirus and search rates for anti-black slurs, supporting the hypothesis that
racial/ethnic groups may be viewed in contrast to one another, and thus inverse
relationships in attitudes exist. Finally, as was supported by some past evidence, I
find evidence that interest in Chinese food/restaurants and Mexican
food/restaurants may have been disproportionality impacted by the Coronavirus
pandemic.

References
ABC7 New York. "'Where's your (expletive) mask?': Asian woman attacked in
Manhattan hate crime". 11 March 2020.
Asmelash, Leah. "UC Berkeley faces backlash after stating 'xenophobia' is 'common'
or 'normal' reaction to coronavirus". CNN.
Blalock, Hubert (1967). Toward a Theory of Minority-Group Relations. New York:
Wiley. ISBN 978-0471079330.
Bureau of Justice Statistics. "Highlights from Hate Crime Victimization, 2004–2012
– Statistical Tables".
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19)
Cases in US. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/cases-updates/cases-inus.html Accessed: March 28, 2020
City of New York. "Mayor de Blasio Encourages New Yorkers to Visit AsianAmerican Owned Small Businesses" URL: https://www1.nyc.gov/office-of-themayor/news/079-20/mayor-de-blasio-speaker-johnson-queens-chamber-commerceencourage-new-yorkers-visit#/0
Corenblum, B. & Stephan, WG. (2001). White fears and native apprehensions: An
integrated threat theory approach to intergroup attitudes. Canadian Journal of
Behavioural Science- Revue Canadienne des Sciences du Comportement, 33, 251268.
Dixon, Jeffrey C. "The Ties That Bind and Those That Don't: Toward Reconciling Group Threat and
Contact Theories of Prejudice." Social Forces 84, no. 4 (2006): 2179-204. Accessed November 16,
2020. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3844495.

Edwards, Griffin Sims and Rushin, Stephen, The Effect of President Trump's
Election on Hate Crimes (January 14, 2018). Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3102652 or http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3102652
Federal Bureau of Investigation. "Hate Crime Statistics, 2018" (PDF). ucr.fbi.gov.
Fall 2016.
Green, Donald P., Dara Z. Strolovitch, and Janelle S. Wong. "Defended
Neighborhoods, Integration, and Racially Motivated Crime." American Journal of
Sociology 104, no. 2 (1998): 372-403. doi:10.1086/210042.
Ho, C., & Jackson, J. W. (2001). Attitudes toward Asian Americans: Theory and
measurement. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 31(8), 1553–1581.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2001.tb02742.x
King, Ryan D. Darren Wheelock, Group Threat and Social Control: Race, Perceptions of
Minorities and the Desire to Punish, Social Forces, Volume 85, Issue 3, March 2007, Pages
1255–1280, https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.2007.0045
Light, M. T., Massoglia, M., & King, R. D. (2014). Citizenship and Punishment: The Salience of National
Membership in U.S. Criminal Courts. American sociological review, 79(5), 825–847.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122414543659

Lucassen, Geertje, and Marcel Lubbers. “Who Fears What? Explaining Far-Right-Wing
Preference in Europe by Distinguishing Perceived Cultural and Economic Ethnic Threats.”
Comparative Political Studies 45, no. 5 (May 2012): 547–74.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0010414011427851.
Mellon, Jonathon (2014) Internet Search Data and Issue Salience: The Properties of Google
Trends as a Measure of Issue Salience, Journal of Elections, Public Opinion and
Parties, 24:1, 45-72, DOI: 10.1080/17457289.2013.846346

Nottingham, Shawn; Alsup, Dave (15 February 2020). "Hmong men record alleged
coronavirus discrimination at Indiana hotels". CNN.
Pew Research Center, April 2019, “Race in America 2019”

Pew Research Center, October 25, 2018, “More Latinos Have Serious Concerns
About Their Place in America Under Trump”
Reilly, Katie. 2016. "Here Are All the Times Donald Trump Insulted Mexico". Time.
Retrieved
Stacey, Michele, Kristin Carbone-López, and Richard Rosenfeld. “Demographic
Change and Ethnically Motivated Crime: The Impact of Immigration on AntiHispanic Hate Crime in the United States.” Journal of Contemporary Criminal
Justice 27, no. 3 (August 2011): 278–98. doi:10.1177/1043986211412560.
Stephan, W. G.; Stephan, C. W. (2000). An integrated threat theory of prejudice. In
Oskamp, S. (Ed.) Reducing Prejudice and Discrimination (pp. 23–45). Mahwah,
N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Stephan, Walter G.; Ybarra, Oscar; Morrison, Kimberly Rios (2009). "Intergroup
Threat Theory". In Nelson, Todd D. Handbook of Prejudice, Stereotyping, and
Discrimination. Psychology Press. Taylor and Francis Group.
Stephens-Davidowitz, Seth I . The Cost of Racial Animus on a Black Candidate: Evidence
Using Google Search Data. Journal of Public Economics 118, October 2014.

Wong, Paul, Chienping Faith Lai, Richard Nagasawa, and Tieming Lin. "Asian
Americans as a Model Minority: Self-Perceptions and Perceptions by Other Racial
Groups." Sociological Perspectives 41, no. 1 (1998): 95-118. Accessed March 25,
2020. doi:10.2307/1389355.

Appendix

Search Terms: "coronavirus"+ covid", "spic + spics", "chink + chinks", "fuck",
"chinese american + chinese americans", "hispanic american + hispanic americans",
"mexican restaurant + mexican restaurants + mexican food", "chinese restaurant +
chinese restaurants + chinese food", "nigger + niggers", "african american + african
americans", "restaurant + restaurants", "nigga+niggas"

Figure One

Table One

Covid/Coronavirus
Search Rate
Profanity Search Rate
Ethnic Group Search
Rate
Similar-Word Search
Rate
State and Day Fixed
Effects
Observations

Anti-Chinese
Sentiment

Anti-Hispanic
Sentiment

Anti-Black
Sentiment

0.0530836***
0.0118877

0.046675***
0.053835*

-0.047986*
0.053813*

0.007563

-0.004709

0.031496
-0.005192

X
6795

X
6191

X
4100

Note: The number of observations vary between models slightly due to Google
Trends not making data available for specific terms in specific places when the
volume is too low.

Table Two

Covid/Coronavirus
Search Rate
Restaurant(s) Search
Rate
State and Day Fixed
Effects
Observations

Chinese Restaurant
Interest

Mexican Restaurant
Interest

-0.13802***

-0.0628***

0.16455***

0.2419***

X
7550

X
7550

