Cause for Concerns: Gender Inequality in Experiencing
the COVID-19 Lockdown in Germany
Christian S. Czymara*, Alexander Langenkamp* & Tomás Cano*
* Goethe-Universitat Frankfurt am Main, Sociology, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany

This is an original manuscript / preprint of an article published by Taylor &
Francis in European Societies on 27 Aug 2020, available online:
https://doi.org/10.1080/14616696.2020.1808692.

Abstract
COVID-19 is having a tremendous impact on gender relations, as care needs have been magnified due
to schools and day-care closures. Using topic modelling on over 1,100 open reports from a survey
fielded during the first four weeks of the lockdown in Germany, we shed light on how personal
experiences of the lockdown differ between women and men. Our results show that, in general, people
were most concerned about social contacts and childcare. However, we find clear differences among
genders: women worried more about childcare while men were more concerned about paid work and
the economy. We argue that the COVID-19 pandemic is affecting women more heavily than men not only
at the physical level of work (e.g., women are reducing more paid work hours than men), but also
through increasing the division regarding the cognitive level of work (e.g., women are more worried
about childcare work while men are about paid work). These developments can potentially contribute
to a future widening of the gender wage gap during the recovery process.

Keywords: Corona, cognitive labor, pandemic, gender, Germany, topic models

Introduction
The COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically affected Germans’ social and economic lives. To
control the virus, many countries, including Germany, took severe measures like curfews,
school and border closures or lockdowns. Beginning in March 2020, the German government
introduced universal counter measures to slow down the spread of COVID-19, which reduced
most activities and services outside the household to a minimum. There is no doubt that such
measures have increased time at home with family and children while declining time in paid

work for many people. But the main question is whether the transition to home-office, homeschooling and self-isolation is hurting women more than men.
Existing research on the Covid-19 lockdown in Germany confirms that mothers
predominantly provide childcare, with only a minority of households sharing care work equally
among both partners (Möhring et al. 2020; Kreyenfeld and Zinn 2020; Hank and Steinbach,
2020). There are similar results from the UK (Andrew et al. 2020; Zhou et al. 2020), Canada
(Shafer et al. 2020) and Spain (Farré and González 2020). However, existing gender inequality
at home did not seem to increase further by the Corona Crisis in the US (Carlson et al. 2020) or
Australia (Craig and Churchill 2020). Despite extensive research on the gendered division of
labor, we know little about the psychological experiences during the pandemic.
We contribute to the study of the gendered impact of COVID-19 in two important ways.
First, we examine the main experiences, concerns or worries individuals were reporting during
the first weeks of the lockdown. This is relevant because it shows what particular topics were
most salient in Germany. Some experiences like isolation or lack of social contacts are linked
to negative outcomes like poor mental and physical health (Thoits 2011; Hawkley and Cacioppo
2010). Second, we analyze whether personal experiences and concerns varied by gender. While
previous studies on the impact of COVID-19 on gender inequalities have primarily focused on
changes in time devoted to physical or educational tasks (e.g., doing housework,
homeschooling), we relate to the mental load (i.e., concerns, worries, personal experiences), a
theoretically relevant dimension of gender inequality that is largely overlooked in the literature
(but see e.g., Daminger 2019; Walzer 1998; Barbeta and Cano 2017). This is particularly
important because experiences and concerns reflect hopes and worries that lead to future
behavior in form of anticipation, orientation, and action (Holmstron 1999). Therefore, knowing
which topics women perceived as more (or less) important than men will inform us about the
impact of COVID-19 on the cognitive dimension of gender inequality.
By using over 1,100 open reports from an online survey fielded during the first four weeks
of the lockdown in Germany, we provide novel evidence on the experiences and concerns of
the COVID-19 Crisis. We use a mixed-methods approach separated in a two-step process. First,
we employ topic modelling, an inductive machine learning approach, to extract the issues that
concerned our respondents most. Subsequently, we statistically test how men and women differ
in their concerns. Second, we qualitatively analyze central quotes reported by respondents of
the open survey questionnaire. We believe that our mixed-method approach will help to shed
light on the understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on individuals’ every day experiences

and, ultimately, to disentangle whether this crisis is leading towards a gender convergence,
divergence or permanence.

Psychological Experiences, Cognitive Labor, and Gender Inequality during the COVID19 Pandemic
Given the characteristics of the COVID-19 pandemic, individuals have seen their lives
profoundly altered. During the COVID-19 pandemic, the economy shut down and schools were
closed in a global response to contend the virus. Starting in March 2020, social distancing
measures were at play by most countries, including Germany. Borders were closed and
recommendations to self-isolate at home and avoid close contacts were spread across
institutions, media and the public discourse (Bennhold and Eddy 2020). Such measures led
most families to combine working from home with taking care of, and homeschooling, their
children. Other families and individuals lost their jobs or had to stop working for money during
the weeks or months until social distancing measures were lifted or eased (Specht 2020).
Therefore, we expect that in the description of their personal experiences during the beginning
of the COVID-19 lockdown, individuals are particularly concerned about their social life, their
economic situation and job security, and how to care for, and educate, their children.
However, our main research question is whether these psychological experiences and
concerns differed by gender. Recent studies show that in the 2000s gender inequality remains
in place (Dernberger and Pepin 2020) and the gender convergence in paid and unpaid work is
rather slow, even during periods of economic recession — when men had significantly more
available time due to unemployment (see e.g. Cano 2019). While the Great Recession of 2008
affected men’s employment more than women’s, COVID-19 is having an opposite effect,
impacting women’s employment more than men’s (Alon et al. 2020a; Alon et al. 2020b; Collins
et al. 2020). We hypothesize, therefore, that the current pandemic is also leading toward a
gendered effect over concerns, worries, and the cognitive dimension of labor.
Following Daminger (2019: 610) cognitive labor refers to “the work of (1) anticipating
needs, (2) identifying options for meeting those needs, (3) deciding among the options, and (4)
monitoring the results”. In this study, we focus on the cognitive labor sub-dimensions 1 and 2,
that is, ‘anticipating needs’ and ‘identifying options for meeting those needs’. While Daminger
(2019) expands cognitive labor beyond previous studies that only focused on childcare work
(e.g., Walzer 1998) to a more holistic analysis of household work, in our analysis of cognitive
labor, we look beyond household work to a more holistic view of work, regardless if it is paid
or unpaid, done inside or outside the home. Therefore, we augment the scope of analysis beyond

household work, but we only look at its two first dimensions (i.e., anticipating needs and
identifying options).
‘Anticipating needs’ refers to the process of perceiving future problems or opportunities
that may arise together with upcoming necessities, while ‘identifying options’ refers to the
process where individuals or couples start thinking and working on the direction towards
meeting the needs that have been previously anticipated, which can be something between a
quick mental reflection and an extensive research, action or thought (Daminger, 2019). We
might expect that during the COVID-19 lockdown, the cognitive labor of women was more
focused on activities like childcare, while for men it was more focused on paid work or the
economy.
A key theory to explain why men tend to spend more time – thinking and doing – paid
work and women unpaid work is the doing gender theory (West and Zimmerman 1987). This
perspective considers that worrying and being concerned about specific activities and actions,
e.g. ‘care’ or ‘money’ linked ones, is another channel through which individuals do gender in
their everyday interactions, thoughts, and actions. This is because gender is constituted by “sexclass-specific ways of appearing, acting and feeling” (Goffman 1977: 303) that serve to
accomplish gender or to reaffirm membership into a categorical identity (i.e., sex-typed
behaviors that align members to each other in social situations) (Berk 1985). The
accomplishment of gender is put into practice on every-day interactions by doing specific
activities, acting in directions, or feeling in ways, that are culturally scripted as feminine or
masculine. Thus, by being particularly concerned about childcare women do gender, while
men do gender by being particularly concerned about paid work or the economy. Therefore, we
expect women to be particularly concerned about topics like childcare and social contacts, while
men be more concerned about topics like paid work and the economy.

Data
We investigate gender differences1 in personal experiences and concerns using an online survey
fielded between 27 March and 26 April 2020 in Germany (i.e., the first weeks of the lockdown).
The data are registered at: https://doi.org/10.7802/2034; the underlying code is available at:
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/6S7RP. The survey was advertised through a press release of
the University of Frankfurt shared on the website Psychologie Heute and on official Facebook
pages of German cities. Respondents were asked to report their personal situation during the

1

We focus on differences between respondents who are male and female. 15 respondents in the overall data reported a diverse
gender identity, but none of them answered the open question.

lockdown in an open question introduced with: ‘Social life of many people has changed as the
corona virus spreads. Here you get the opportunity to report your personal situation, your
family life or your experience of being together in general.’ This resulted in 1,119 analyzable
responses2 with an average response length of 562 characters. As Table 1 shows, women
dominate our sample with 78 percent. Importantly for our comparison, however, the relative
distribution of sociodemographic characteristics is similar between genders (see Table 1). For
both genders, we oversampled young and highly educated individuals: about 63 percent hold at
least a university degree, and 58 percent are younger than 45. Assuming gender equality is
higher among younger and more educated people, our findings should be understood as the
lower bounds of potential gender differences in Germany. Moreover, we are likely to
underreport, for example, financial struggles, which correlate with socio-economic status.
However, if we find a gendered impact where we would least expect it (i.e., among the younger
and highly educated), effects should be even more severe among the economically deprived.

Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Variable

Men (n=235) Women (n=884)

Age
0-17

0.85%

1.36%

18-29

22.65%

25.65%

30-44

29.91%

32.24%

45-59

28.63%

28.63%

60-74

16.24%

11.35%

75+

1.71%

0.57%

1.7%

2.73%

Secondary level

31.91%

35.49%

Tertiary level

66.38%

61.77%

With partner and child(ren)

27.78%

29.71%

With partner, no children

36.32%

28.68%

Education
Primary level or less

Household

2

We follow the ‘structural sampling model’ (Ibáñez, 1979). Therefore, the sampling was done ad hoc and intended to collect
information on the experiences and meanings given to the COVID-19 lockdown by women and men. Our intention, as in Barbeta
and Cano (2017: 16), “was not to investigate any aggregate of individual discourses, nor a population universe. The sample
developed was structural in nature and aimed to represent a discursive universe linked to macro social groups.” In our case, the
social groups were women and men living in Germany during the lockdown to study gender variations in perceptions of the
Corona crisis.

No cohabitants

15.81%

18.14%

No partner, with child(ren)

2.14%

5.44%

Other

17.95%

18.03%

Not satisfied

0.43%

3.79%

Rather unsatisfied

15.15%

12.87%

Rather satisfied

58.01%

56.32%

Satisfied

26.41%

27.01%

Financial satisfaction

Analytic strategy
We used R for the analysis. We organized the open-end survey responses in a document term
matrix (DTM), where each row corresponds to a respondent’s answer and each column to a
term (word), with each cell counting the occurrence of each term in an answer. To reduce
dimensionality, we deleted stop words, terms occurring in more than a fifth or less than 0.1
percent of all answers, non-letter characters and we stemmed terms. For these pre-processing
steps, we used the quanteda package of Benoit et al. (2018). The cleaned data resulted in a
DTM with 1,119 rows (usable answers) and 3,135 columns (relevant terms).
To identify the main topics respondents addressed in their answers, we draw upon
Structural Topic Modelling (STM) using the stm package of Roberts et al. (2014). STM
identifies which words in the data cluster together, defining each word cluster as a topic. STM
is a machine-based approach, where the only a-priori decision is the number of topics one wants
to identify. We opted for a model with eight topics. In particular, STM yields two posterior
probability distributions. First, the distribution of each term’s probability to be in each topic
(i.e. the clustering of words, Table 2 below). Every topic consists of all terms, but with a varying
probability, theoretically ranging from zero (term certainly does not belong to the topic) to one
(term certainly belongs to the topic). Second, the eight topics distribute over each individual
answer, depending on the words a respondent used. Again, every answer consists of all topics,
but with a varying probability. Theoretically, the probability of each topic in an answer ranges
from zero (topic does not appear in the answer at all) to one (answer consists only of this topic).
We include gender as a document-level covariate in the STM model, allowing topic probability
to vary between women and men (see Roberts et al. 2014 for further details on the method).

Experiences and concerns in Germany during COVID-19
Table 2 shows the terms that are most probable within each topic. One can see that two broader
aspects dominate: Social and economic themes. The former, which we consider the topics
Social Contacts, Children, Family and Society, outnumbers the latter, which corresponds to the
last two topics (Paid Work and Economy). We want to exemplify the content of selected topics
by showing those answers that most clearly belong to the respective topic (having the highest
probability of the respective topic).
As Figure 1 shows, the most salient topic overall was Social Contact, which is perhaps
not too surprising, given the nature of the lockdown. This topic has an overall probability of
about 14.9 percent to occur in a comment. The topic is mainly concerned with the rapid lack of
direct social contacts and the substitution with digital communication. The most probable
comment of this topic, coming from a childless woman in her twenties, illustrates this well:
‘Other than [seeing my boyfriend], I reduced my social life to social media […] because
my family and friends mostly live in another federal state, I do feel quite lonely and miss
the direct contact’. 3
Another female participant in a similar situation elaborates this point further:
‘It makes me sad that I cannot see my relatives. Telephone and skype is better than
nothing, but it cannot replace a hug and personal contact’.
Most respondents report similar struggles and the theme of missing social contacts is
central in most narratives. However, some highlight positive changes in their social life as well.
For instance, a young woman living with her partner states: ‘[…] At home I spend much more
time with my partner, which is very nice!’ and a young female student states: ‘Since the crisis,
I enjoy going for a walk with my boyfriend on a daily basis’. This illustrates that positive
contacts within the household can be valuable resources for some and help dealing with the
rapid reduction in social contacts with friends and families. Nevertheless, the lion’s share of
respondents reports severe struggles and worries related to social distancing. Noticeably, none
of the most probable comments in this topic come from respondents with children.
The second most salient topic is Childcare, with a probability of 13.2 percent. This
indicates the crucial importance of childcare for our respondents. To a degree, this finding
reflects the overrepresentation of women in our data. Again, the most probable comment of this
topic is written by a woman who says:

3

All translations by the authors.

‘It was very nice not to have to keep appointments with the children. We have
time for the family and the children have learned many everyday activities
(cooking, cleaning up, cleaning, washing clothes …)’.

Table 2: Most probable terms of each topic
Social

Childcare

Family

contacts
social

child

mum

Individual

Everyday

worries

life

worry

shopping

Society

Paid Work

Economy

behavi

office

economy

or
meet

school

week

financially

house

social

home

crisis

at home

homeof

house

restrict

distance

environ

action

corona

fice

ment

missing

positive

visit

parents

stop

anxiety

important

Germany

phone

stop

go

do

homeoffice

panic

simultaneo

currently

buying

usly

miss

together daugh

positive

find

old

social

strong

spend

son

corona

suffering

social

ter
alone

social

parent
s

This points to the increased care needs during the lockdown. However, the new
situation is not without problems, as she continues:
‘It is difficult to support the children in school-related matters alongside my
job. […] I notice that my batteries have to be refilled’.
On the other hand, the topic Economy mainly deals with the lockdown’s economic
impact on society. One of the top comments is from a young woman without children who is
concerned about ‘[…] many worrying developments […]: unemployment rates are rising,
recession, etc.’. A male respondent urges that the ‘health care system should be completely
regulated by the state. It cannot be that it is all about money’. Another man complains that ‘too
much attention is paid to the medical profession and too little to economists.’
Responses of the Paid Work topic also concern financial and economic consequences,
but on a more personal level. Generally, our respondents seemed rather optimistic at the point
of the survey. A woman in her thirties who is working in the public health sector says that she
does not want to fear working ‘right at the “front”’, but hopes that ‘we will keep […] the respect

for essential workers’, a point several other respondents mention as well. A mother reports that
she is glad that ‘my employer has great understanding of the challenge of home office /
childcare / homeschooling’. Similarly, a female student seems rather carefree, saying that she
has a ‘secure job that can be done easily from the home office’. However, another female
respondent in the same age group fears negative long-term consequences of being forced to
work from home: ‘I am worried about the higher level of stress caused by the delimitation of
private life and work’. Another concern comes from a young man in his twenties who reports
that ‘personal exchange is missing, whether during work or in private’. The remarkably positive
view of one’s own economic situation is surely driven by that fact that our respondents were
rather young and well educated. However, the point of this analysis is that, regardless of tone
or emotion, men were more likely to address these economic issues.
Figure 1: Overall probabilities of topic

Gender inequality in experiences and concerns during the lockdown
Figure 2 shows the effects on the probability of each topic, where we see clear gender
differences. Men talk significantly more often about Paid Work and Economy, while women
address Social Contacts and Childcare more often. Differences in topic importance, thus, reflect
the social situation of both genders: One where the division of paid and unpaid work follows
the traditional male breadwinner model – even among those relatively well educated.
That women are more worried about childcare and men about paid work is coming with
no surprise and is in tune with our theoretical expectations. We can also consider such gender
differences in concerns as part of ‘cognitive labor’, which is another key dimension of gender
inequality in the distribution of labor within different-sex couples. The sum of the stress caused
by the pandemic and the unequal gender distribution of cognitive labor might be linked with
greater deteriorating career prospects for women than for men and the widening of the gender
wage gap during the recovery process. One mother in our sample puts it in this way:
‘Currently I have to take care of three children, one at school age, one at
kindergarten age, and one baby. It is a juggling act. One has to be homeschooled, the kindergarten child wants to play, the baby still needs a lot of
care. That is stress. Added to that the limitations of social contacts, which is
particularly difficult for the children to deal with. The prospect that the
measures will continue for a long time causes me anxiety’.
The topics where we do not find gender differences show interesting results too. Women
and men seem to be similarly worried about the impact of the lockdown on Society and about
the Family in general. There are also no gender differences in topics Everyday Life and
Individual Concerns.

Figure 2: Gender differences in topic probabilities

Discussion and Conclusion
We analyzed the main experiences during the first weeks of the lockdown due to the COVID19 pandemic in Germany and how these experiences differed by gender. Our results show that
main concerns were social ones about contacts, childcare and family. Respondents in our study
were rather optimistic about the situation during the first weeks of the lockdown, which is in
line with research carried out in France, and which labelled this unexpected rise in well-being
as the “Eye of the hurricane” padarox (Recchi et al., 2020). Most importantly, handling
childcare during the lockdown was not only highly relevant for our respondents but also more
often addressed by women. In contrast, men talked more often about paid work and the
economy. We interpret these results as a critical indicator of the reproduction of gender
inequality in the cognitive dimension of labor during the COVID-19 pandemic in Germany,

which is in tune with studies focusing on gender inequality in the physical dimension of work
during the pandemic (Möhring et al. 2020; Kreyenfeld and Zinn 2020; Hank and Steinbach,
2020; Alon et al. 2020a; Alon et al. 2020b; Collins et al. 2020; Andrew et al. 2020; Zhou et al.
2020). Thus, it seems that the COVID-19 pandemic affects women more heavily than men at the
physical level of work (e.g., women are reducing more paid work hours than men) (Collins et
al. 2020). In addition, the pandemic seems to boost existing differences at the cognitive level
of work further (e.g., women are more worried about childcare work while men about paid
work). Both processes may lead to a widening of the gender wage gap during the recovery
process (Alon et al. 2020b; Grunow and Baur 2014; Leopold et al. 2018; Pfau-Effinger and
Smidt 2011).
While we believe to offer important insights, our study only shows a fraction of the
overall social situation in Germany. Since our analysis mainly includes young and highly
educated respondents, the differences we find should be significantly stronger among the
elderly or less educated, who both tend to hold more traditional values. We also do not capture
some important problems the lockdown may cause, such as increasing domestic violence, child
abuse, or mental health issues. Some of these problems relate to gender (e. g. domestic
violence), other might not. Finally, we are only covering the first four weeks of the lockdown,
but gender inequality and social tensions linked to self-isolation might have increased in
subsequent weeks.

References
Alon, T. M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J. and Tertilt, M. (2020a) The impact of COVID19 on gender equality. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
Paper No. 26947.
Alon, T. M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J. and Tertilt, M. (2020b) This Time It’s Different:
The Role of Women’s Employment in a Pandemic Recession,
https://faculty.wcas.northwestern.edu/~mdo738/research/ADOT_0720.pdf.
Andrew, A. (2020) How are mothers and fathers balancing work and family under lockdown?
London: The Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Barbeta, M. and Cano, T. (2017) ‘Toward a New Model of Fatherhood? Discourses on The
Process of Paternal Involvement in Urban Spain’. Revista Española de Investigaciones
Sociológicas 159: 13-30.
Bennhold, K., and Eddy, M. (2020) ‘Germany Bans Groups of More Than 2 to Stop
Coronavirus as Merkel Self-Isolates’, The New York Times, 22 March,

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/world/europe/germany-coronavirusbudget.html.
Benoit, K., Watanabe, K., Wang, H., Nulty, P., Obeng, A., Müller, S. and Matsuo, A. (2018)
‘quanteda: An R package for the quantitative analysis of textual data’, Journal of Open
Source Software 3(30), 774.
Berk, S. F. (1985) The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households.
New York: Plenum
Cano, T. (2019) ‘Changes in Fathers’ and Mothers’ Time with Children: Spain, 2002-2010’,
European Sociological Review 35(5), 616-636.
Carlson, D. L., Petts, R. and Pepin, J. (2020) US’ couples divisions of housework and childcare
during COVID-19 pandemic, SocArXiv. doi:10.31235/osf.io/jy8fn.
Craig, L, Churchill, B. (2020) ‘Dual‐earner Parent Couples’ Work and Care during COVID‐
19`, Gender, Work & Organization. doi: 10.1111/gwao.12497.
Collins, C., Landivar, L. C., Ruppanner, L. and Scarborough, W. J. (2020) ‘COVID‐19 and the
Gender

Gap

in

Work

Hours’,

Gender,

Work

&

Organization.

doi:

10.1111/gwao.12506.
Dernberger, B. N. and Pepin, J. R. (2020) ‘Gender Flexibility, but not Equality: Young Adults’
Division of Labor Preferences’, Sociological Science 7: 36-56.
Goffman, E. (1977) ‘The arrangement between the sexes’, Theory and Society 14 (3): 301-331.
Grunow, D. and Baur, N. (2014). ‘Die Korrespondenz von normativen Vorstellungen und
Handeln’, Comparative Population Studies 39 (3): 479-52.
Hank, K. and Steinbach, A. (2020) ‘The virus changed everything, didn’t it? Couples’ division
of housework and childcare before and during the Corona crisis’, Journal of Family
Research, Early view, 1-16.
Hawkley, L. C. and Cacioppo, J. T. (2010) ‘Loneliness matters: A theoretical and empirical
review of consequences and mechanisms’, Annals of behavioral medicine 40 (2), 218227.
Holmstrom, B. (1999) ‘Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective’, The Review of
Economic Studies 66 (1): 169-182.
Ibáñez, J. (1979) Más allá de la sociología. El grupo de discusión: técnica y crítica. Madrid:
Siglo XXI.
Kreyenfeld, M. and Zinn, S. (2020) Coronavirus & Care: How the Coronavirus Crisis Affected
Fathers’ Involvement in Germany, SOEPpapers on Multidisciplinary Panel Data
Research No 1096.

Leopold, T., Skopek, J. and Schulz, F. (2018) ‘Gender convergence in housework time: A life
course and cohort perspective’, Sociological Science 5: 281-303.
Möhring, K., Naumann, E., Reifenscheid, M., Blom, A. G., Wenz, A., Rettig, T., Lehrer, R.,
Krieger, U., Juhl, S., Friedel, S., Fikel, M. and Cornesse, C. (2020) Die Mannheimer
Corona-Studie: Schwerpunktbericht zu Erwerbstätigkeit und Kinderbetreuung,
University of Mannheim.
Pfau-Effinger, B. and Smidt, M. (2011) ‘Differences in women's employment patterns and
family policies: Eastern and Western Germany’, Community, Work and Family 14 (2):
217-232.
Recchi, E., Ferragina, E., Helmeid, E., Pauly, S., Safi, M. Sauger, N., Schradie, J. (2020) ‘The
“Eyes of the Hurricane” Paradox: An Unexpected and Unequal Rise of Well-Being
During the Covid-19 Lockdown in France’, Research on Social Stratification and
Mobility, 68.
Roberts, M. E., Stewart, B. M., Tingley, D., Lucas, C., Leder‐Luis, J., Kushner Gadarian, S.,
Albertson, B. and Rand, D. G. (2014) ‘Structural Topic Models for Open-Ended
Survey Responses’, American Journal of Political Science 58 (4): 1064–82.
Shafer, K., Milkie, M. and Scheibling, C. (2020) The Division of Labour Before & During the
COVID-19 Pandemic in Canada. SocArXiv. doi: 10.31235/osf.io/24j87.
Specht, F. (2020) ‘Zu früh für die Entwarnung: Insolvenzen und Arbeitslosigkeit werden stark
steigen‘,

Handelsblatt,

09

July,

https://www.handelsblatt.com/meinung/kommentare/kommentar-zu-frueh-fuer-dieentwarnung-insolvenzen-und-arbeitslosigkeit-werden-stark-steigen/25986710.htm
Thoits, P. A. (2011). ‘Mechanisms linking social ties and support to physical and mental
health.’ Journal of health and social behavior 52 (2), 145-161.
Zhou, M., Hertog, E., Kolpashnikova, K., Kan, M.-Y. (2020) Gender inequalities: Changes in
income, time use and well-being before and during the UK COVID-19 lockdown,
SocArXiv. doi: 10.31235/osf.io/u8ytc.10.31235/osf.io/u8ytc

