"x"
"1" "B lood  donation  and  the  global  COVID-19  pandemic : areas for social science research"
"2" "In the context of the global  COVID -19 pandemic,  blood collection agencies  (BCAs)  around the world are  operating under unprecedented conditions .  A s social scientists in donor research in Canada, Australia, and the Netherlands,  we  provide some  early  observations on donor  and public  response s  to t he pandemic   and  identify  areas for   donor  research  moving forward .   Given the significant variation among countries and BCAs, we  cannot  claim to present an exhaustive  list that will apply to all countries  and BCAs ; however,  we  consider the  following  topic  areas  to be  important   based on  our observations and knowledge of donation scholarship."
"3" "First,  how  are  donors   and non-donors  respond ing  to the crisis and  to  the appeal for donation ?   What   motivate s  their response  in the context of the  pandemic ?   Early on, many BCAs noted a  s harp  increase in donor cancelations which, combined with the cancelation of mobile events, led to a sudden and concerning drop in blood supply.  Research   from Hong Kong  and  Zhejiang province  in   China  suggest  that  anxiety  and  fear  of contracting  COVID-19   w ere   key  reasons why people did not ,  or would not ,  donat e   [1, 2] .  This is  consistent with   findings  from  previous   SARS   and avian flu outbreaks   that show that  fear of infection  deters donating   [3, 4] .  However,  following  initial declines  in donation ,  several  countries  report  strong public  response to  appeals for blood   (e.g.  US, Italy, and Denmark   [5] )   indicating  that  initial perceptions of fear  may  have  decreased,  and/ or  other factors  (e.g.,  awareness of need,  cultural values, trust)   may be  motivating  people  to  donate .  While d onors and the public  have  respond ed  to  early  appeals,   as  the pandemic progresses,  some   B CAs  are again reporting blood shortages which  may   be  the result of increasing demand ,  decreased  donation opportunities (e.g.,  severe reductions in  mobile events), and/or  waning public  support .   Donor behaviour research  face s   the challenge of teasing  apart  the impact of  various factors, including  changing  collection practices ,  loosening and tightening of   social restrictions, and donor -related considerations (e.g.,  motivations ,  time availability,  competing responsibilities,  mobility , etc. ) ."
"4" "Second, to what extent will first-time donors (FTD) responding to appeals for blood during the pandemic return? How can BCAs encourage retention of FTDs and continued donation by long-term donors? While the pandemic   clearly pos es  challenges to BCAs , short-term national emergencies have been shown to encourage donation as a symbol of national solidarity (e.g., 9/11 in the US   [6] , bushfires in Australia   [7] ).   M any who donate following a disaster are likely to be  FTDs  or previously lapsed donors ,  and early data  from  the Netherlands  and Australia  indicate this  may be  the case with COVID-19.    F ollowing an initial outpouring of public support in response to a crisis,  however,  support for blood donation can quickly wane  [7] . This may be prompted by perceptions that the immediate need for blood has passed or by a loss of trust in BCAs. Both can have highly detrimental effects on blood donation and it will be important for BCAs to promote the consistent need for blood while maintaining public trust that they are effectively managing this resource   [8] .  Given the longevity of the pandemic, the challenge for BCAs will be to retain  those  FTD s who donated in response to the initial appeals, and  to  re-engage long-term donors whose donation routines may have been disrupted by the influx of new donors."
"5" "Third ,   how   might donation mitigate  (or not)  the negative effects of  stay-at-home  measures?   R esearch on the psychological effects of  living in  quarantine   indicates   it has  negative effects ,  including post-traumatic stress symptoms, confusion, and anger   [9] .  Donation, however,  is  a socially meaningful act and an opportunity to build a sense of self as part of a network of altruistic citizens   [10] .   Donating during a time of limited activity  can  provide an opportunity to connect to a wider community and may  mitigate  the negative effects of physical distancing   [5] .  Whether this is the case and  how  the positive or mitigating effects of donation  may be  experienced by some and not others warrants further study.   Moreover,  it is important to consider  how motivation to donate for social connections  changes as restrictions relax, and  how it  is qualified (or not) by other concerns (e.g., perceptions of safety) as  BCAs  resume  normal collection regimes, including mobile units.  Whether  the nature of the act  – e.g., altruistic and socially meaningful act o f  donation versus  functional  act s such as  buying groceries – influences perception of risk  and/ or risk tolerance remains unknown.   The idea of donating with increased restrictions in place may also highlight feelings of social disconnection and isolation  for those  now   ineligible ,  or  not  able ,  to donate  during the pandemic and  some long-t erm  donors  currently  exclude d from donation  (e.g. ,  older donors)  may  ultimately  not return .  Given the contribution made by this age group relative to their representation in donor panels, re-activating these donors  may be  a key action point for BCAs."
"6" "F ourth , what are the implications for donors  of convalescent plasma ?  With  many BCAs involved in clinical trials on convalescent plasma and   prominent  appeals for plasma from people who have recovered from COVID-19 ,  there is   significant  media attention on  the importance of  plasma .  For   countries that  had set targets  to increase national self-sufficiency of plasma for fractionation prior to the pandemic, t his increased  public  awareness may  yield benefits .  For other countries,  the “stress test” of  COVID-19   and  the enactment of  protectionist measures   by many national governments  [11] ,   ,  coupled with challenges to procurement and   I ncreased public awareness  of  the need for  plasma  may present   an opportunity to make  a  case for  national  self-sufficiency  [5] .  Whether , and how frequently,   people  responding to appeals for convalescent plasma will  donate and if they then  become regular donors remains unclear.   While most  current  appeals for convalescent plasma   is for use in clinical trials, if  this product   is  an  effective  treatment  then  the  need for  plasma  donors  will increase   further .   In addition,  in settings where donors  have the  choice  of  being  a paid  (hyperimmune globulin)  or unpaid don or  (transfusion) , the pandemic may have differential effects on  these two types of donors .  A s the  money offered for  convalescent plasma increases  in some jurisdictions  (e.g., in the US),  who  is recruited  and h ow ,  and  how these  are  associated with social factors, such as socioeconomic status and ethnicity, will  be important to study."
"7" "Finally,   what  is  the impact of the  pandemic  on  donors and BCAs in  low- and middle-income countries (LMIC s )?  While we have  highlighted several areas for further donor research ,  we  recognize the limits of our own vantage points and the  need for  research  with  LMICs.  While  some countries have made public appeals for donation because of , or to prevent, critically low levels of blood (e.g.,  India  [12] ,  South Africa   [13] ) , it  is  unclear  how the public has responded .  G iven  the anticipated differential effects of COVID-19 on high-income  countries  (HIC) and  LMICs   [14] , the need for this research is imperative.  LMICs  face greater challenges than HICs in meeting blood needs and  the strategies used by BCAs in HICs  are often  not  appropriate  for LMICs   [15, 16] .  C ountries that rely heavily on family and/or replacement donors face significant challenges  [16]  and these may be exacerbated by the pandemic.   The pandemic  may also present an opportunity to  encourage regular voluntary donation  of blood and convalescent plasma  as an act of national solidarity  [17] ."
"8" "Moving forward ,  we suggest  that  a   comparative examination of  COVID-19  effects on donors , the public,  and BCAs may  increase   understanding of the strengths  of  and challenges  faced by  BCAs ,  and  provide  an opportunity to share learnings  in preparation for future pandemics .  As such, we are  conductin g  an international comparative study of the impacts of the global pandemic on donors and the responses of BCAs to the challenges posed by COVID-19.   We  welcome  ongoing discussion and debate on  donation during and following the pandemic."
"9" "References"
"10" "1 Leung JNS, Lee C-K: Impact of the COVID-19 – a regional blood centre's perspective.  ISBT Science Series ; n/a."
"11" "2 Wang Y, Han W, Pan L, et al.: Impact of COVID-19 on blood centres in Zhejiang province China.  Vox sanguinis ; n/a."
"12" "3 Masser B, White K, Hamilton K, et al.: An examination of the predictors of blood donors' intentions to donate during two phases of an avian influenza outbreak.  Transfusion  2010; 51: 548-57."
"13" "4 Shan H, Zhang P: Viral attacks on the blood supply: the impact of severe acute respiratory syndrome in Beijing.  Transfusion  2004; 44: 467-9."
"14" "5 ISBT: COVID-19 Webinar: How do we secure a safe blood supply during the current Corona Crisis? 2020."
"15" "6 Glynn SA, Busch MP, Schreiber GB, et al.: Effect of a national disaster on blood supply and safety: the September 11 experience.  Jama  2003; 289: 2246-53."
"16" "7 Lilley M, Slonim R: Gender Differences in Altruism: Responses to a Natural Disaster;  Discussion Paper Series. Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), 2016: p. 28."
"17" "8 Tran S, Lewalski EA, Dwyre DM, et al.: Does donating blood for the first time during a national emergency create a better commitment to donating again?  Vox sanguinis  2010; 98: e219-24."
"18" "9 Bavel JJV, Baicker K, Boggio PS, et al.: Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response.  Nature Human Behaviour  2020."
"19" "10 Alessandrini M, Carr A, Coghlan P: Building social capital through blood donation: The social futures project.  ISBT Science Series  2007; 2: 46-52."
"20" "11 Aaltola M: COVID-19 – A TRIGGER FOR GLOBAL TRANSFORMATION? Finnish Institute of International Affairs, 2020: p. 1-4."
"21" "12 Kapoor C: India: COVID-19 lockdown causes blood shortage;  Andalou Agency. 2020."
"22" "13 Ebrahim Z: Desperate to get out of the house during the lockdown? You can still donate blood;  health24. 2020."
"23" "14 Bong CL, Brasher C, Chikumba E, et al.: The COVID-19 Pandemic: Effects on Low and Middle-Income Countries.  Anesthesia and analgesia  2020."
"24" "15 Custer B, Zou S, Glynn SA, et al.: Addressing gaps in international blood availability and transfusion safety in low- and middle-income countries: a NHLBI workshop.  Transfusion  2018; 58: 1307-17."
"25" "16 Jenny HE, Saluja S, Sood R, et al.: Access to safe blood in low-income and middle-income countries: lessons from India.  BMJ Global Health  2017; 2: bmjgh-2016-000167."
"26" "17 World Health Organization: Message of the WHO Regional Director for Africa, Dr. Mathshidiso Moeti. 2020."
