T-Ridership: a web tool for reprogramming public
transportation fleet to minimize COVID-19 transmission

Saba Imani1, Majid Vahed 2, Mohammad Vahed 3

1

Urban Planning and Policy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 412 S. Peoria, 237 CUPPA Hall, MC 348,

Chicago, IL 60607, USA
2

Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Niayesh

Highway, Valiasr Ave, Tehran, Iran
3

David Geffen School of Medicine, UCLA, 615 Charles E. Young Drive South, lab: BSRB 346, Los

Angeles, CA 90095, USA

¶

Correspondence:

Mohammad Vahed
E-mail: mvahed@ucla.edu
Tel: +1-734-934-2556

Key words: Novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19), Social distancing, Public transit, Neural
networks, High-density, Human contact

Abstract
As the outbreak of novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) continues to spread
rapidly throughout the world, steps are being taken to limit the impact on public
health. In the realm of infectious diseases like COVID-19, social distancing is
effective to avoid exposure to the virus and reduce its spread. However, current
studies about public transit did not consider social distancing which plays a
fundamental role in the current outbreak. Therefore, it is vital to study how to
optimally manage public transit systems in order to minimize risks related to
COVID-19. In this study we present a novel web-based application, T-Ridership
based on a hybrid optimized dynamic programing inspired by neural networks
algorithm to optimize public transit for safety with respect to COVID-19.
Two main steps are taken in the analysis through Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA): the first is detecting high-density stations by input data
normalization, and then, using these results, the T-Ridership tool automatically
determines optimal station order planning.
These results can be used in expanding on and improving policy in public transit,
to better plan the schedule time of trains in a way that prevents high-volume
human contact, increasing social distance and reducing the possibility of disease
transmission (available at: http://t-ridership.com).

1. Introduction
COVID-19 is changing the world significantly by affecting all economics,
education, and transportation. The highly transmitted property of COVID-19
between individuals deserves significantly alert. The response to the COVID-19
becomes an officially pandemic after barreling through all countries and the spread
is infiltering every aspect of our lives with consideration of facing recurring
outbreaks over the next decades [1]. COVID-19 virus can be seen as a wake-up
call to improve outbreak responses, and lessons from this pandemic can be used to
keep diseases like coronavirus under control before spreading widely.
Recent findings have been detected the transmission of COVID-19 is spread by
contact, droplet, airborne routes, and even studies generate that a considerable rate
of people infected by different respiratory viruses like COVID-19 is through tidal
breathing that shows the efficacy of social distancing and also face masks in
preventing virus dissemination in exhaled breath. These causative agents,
explaining large community outbreak of COVID-19, emerging us the necessity of
social distancing as an implication for infection prevention, and all future efforts at
prevention and control must take into consideration the potential for exhaled breath
spread of this virus [2-6].
Preventive measures, such as social distancing restrictions in mass urban
transportation and public areas, need to be implemented effectively by government

agencies and other responsible institutes. These restrictions can play a highly
significant role in unpredictable future outbreaks (epidemic and pandemic disease)
to slow down the virus spread [7].
Based on this study research, there is evidence that human-to-human transmission
has occurred among close contacts. To control outbreaks happening anytime and
anywhere else, considerable primary efforts to avoid transmission are required.
Proceedings to prevent or reduce transmission should be implemented in
populations at risk, and public places, especially public transport that is the
lifeblood of our cities and should continue running as long as possible to transport
essential workers. If we have to travel using public transportation, the preference is
to use the least-crowded bus or subway car as possible. To an extent, a public
health crisis like the coronavirus outbreak, is an urban planning problem, as public
spaces impact how we interact with one another, and how a disease like COVID19 can spread [8]. The qualities that make urban places vulnerable during COVID19 are also the keys to containing the disease's spread. Public transportation, which
is one of the principal arteries of the cities, also makes them dangerous in a
pandemic. Many research institutes are trying to provide physical and public places
for recovery, besides working to defeat the virus by developing a vaccine and
identifying places and populations with the highest need. Urban places responses
to the pandemic are revealing that mandated distancing, physical, and social

structures of communities significantly influence places’ ability to cope with the
immediate crisis.
As the virus continues to spread, the physical density and design of public places
will continue to influence how well they overcome the pandemic. For many
communities and populations, the impacts of COVID-19 are likely to be dire. But
efforts that nurture and support workers and will be vital to mitigating the fallout.
Crowded and high-density public transportation systems furthered the spread of the
virus. Despite serious downsides, the quality of densely connected places like
public transportation can also make life amid social distancing more livable, and
this is causing any public transit agencies across the world to seek to ramp up plans
for contagious virus response.
Virus infections play an important role in the public transit fleet. Analyzing
subway entries as measured by turnstile entry records [9] and the number of new
cases reported by the New York City Department of Health [10] shows that newly
reported cases finally decreased around March 16th, as subway use was cratering.
It is expanding the idea of the relation between the two trends turnstile entries and
coronavirus incidence [11]. Also, in the simulations shown in other recent research,
controlling virus transmission in the public transportation system reduces the speed
of virus spread and the height of the peak by approximately 20%. Evidently, this
does not indicate a reaction of reducing public transport capacities, but more

willingly use it to plan lower densities of public transportation and thus reduced
infection rates. In addition, at home or in private vehicles, one interacts with the
same persons repeatedly, effectively decreasing the infection probability. However,
public transport is much different: One sits or stands next to other persons every
day. In consequence, public transportation is increasing possible infection paths
between different persons every day, especially while squeezed together. Since
they run back into their respective homes, public transport results in strong mixing.
[12].
However, public transportation is highly vulnerable facing with outbreaks as
COVID-19, it is essential to continue running to move needed workers, as well as
considering controlling the spread of the virus in public transport is a big step in
containing the disease [13]. Mass public crowds are an important worry in the
spread of the Coronavirus. Over the disease, which caused restrictions in public
transportation [14]. With an overview of the speed of spreading Coronavirus in the
US, it is inferred that the cities where public transportation in more common to be
used, as in New York, and other big crowded cities, the outbreak is higher than the
ones using public transportation less [11].
As a result of the experience gained after outbreaks like COVID-19, now we
should focus more and think of the different ways to define a transit system
reliable. Considering all other factors that are effective in transmitting infection

disease, public transit will be a big step forward in future plans and decisions to
prevent the disease from becoming a pandemic. In the current pandemic situation,
an increasing number of agencies have begun to define new policies for
transportation systems, trying to keep running, and are taking steps to incorporate
social distancing into the transportation planning process.
It is urgent to find concrete strategies to reduce the spread of the virus on public
transportation to limit the spread of the disease.
This study reviews methodologies for public transportation decision making, their
performance, and demonstrates a framework for incorporating social distancing
considerations in transportation planning and decision making through
predetermined dates overviewing method to reprogram transit timetabling. In the
first part of our study, we are aiming to understand how to measure the
performance of a transit line density. Through a case study using data from the
Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), and wrangling them into a form
suitable for analysis and then creating a map of the chosen MTA line stations, the
study evaluates competing for our new method for reprogramming public transit
and decision making based on predetermined dates overviewing using novel
normalizing T-Ridership web tool analyses.
In the next part, a decision support web tool, namely T-Ridership, is proposed to
analyze and visualize the data and the evaluation to effectively reflect density

changes. The proposed framework should help decision-makers with incorporating
social distancing considerations into transportation planning.
COVID-19 spreads massively among people who are in close contact for a
prolonged period. There are many guidelines to follow for practicing and
considering social distancing options to travel safely when there are demands for
running errands or commuting to and from work using public transit- for example,
when you are selecting seats on a bus or train to keep at least 6 feet distance. But
many people have personal circumstances or situations that present challenges with
practicing social distancing to prevent the spread of COVID-19, so there should be
more strict rules that automatically apply social distancing in public places such as
public transportation, apart from people's personal preferences.
In the current pandemic situation, an increasing number of agencies have begun to
define new policies for transportation systems, trying to keep running, and are
taking steps to incorporate social distancing into the transportation planning
process. This study reviews methodologies for public transportation decision
making, their performance, and demonstrates a framework for incorporating social
distancing considerations in transportation planning and decision making through
predetermined dates overviewing method to reprogram transit timetabling.

2. Materials and Methods
2.1 Hybrid optimized dynamic programing
In this paper, we designed a hybrid structure based on the inspiration from neural
network algorithms. Our idea is motivated by the design of the neural network
structures to make our network structure easy to analyze public transportation trips.
We propose a hybrid model that may lead an optimized algorithm of neural
network structure.
To make our network structure easy to generalize to other datasets, our
methodology separates the structure design and weights search. Taking inspiration
from the neural networks, that have become a powerful and most successful tool in
machine learning, our presented optimized training algorithm evolves the
performance of the fully connected model of neural network which just works with
some prepared functions.
The presented study embraced the neural network method along with dynamic
programming to analyze public transportation trip flows and minimize Coronavirus
exposure by using public transportation.
Neural network (NN) is one of the emerging technologies, which interprets novelty
detection in transportation and urban planning area. Among all different
methodologies for modeling transportation parameters and available data analysis
research tools, a neural network has been suggested as the most successful

alternative. Neural network (NN), an extremely popular class of CI models, has
been widely applied to evaluate various transportation issues [15-23].
In standard feed-forward neural network modeling that is applied to this paper,
there is one set of connections fully connecting the input layer to the next layers,
resulting in the activations of the nodes until getting the output. In this procedure,
neurons are the basic common features in neural network composition, which take
data in and joining to the next transmission process by weighted connections to
compute an output [24 and 25].
The defined method in this paper is inspired by neuron network to implement
programming and suggest a hybrid system using dynamic programming which lets
the errors in analysis to correct themselves through a recursive function and
enables the function to repeat itself several times, to eventually output the result
[26].
The study is carried out under the motivation of knowing that modeling daily trips
for traffic flow prediction will optimize the issues affecting mass density in public
transit modes.
Moreover, the suggested hybrid neural network approach and dynamic recursion
function improved the proposed models for public transit planning, and different
data analysis indicates more robust models comparing to other transportation
programming systems.

The model is calibrated based on passenger’s origin, destination, and population
density in each station. This reduces passenger’s indoor wait time, congestion,
population density, and person-to-person contact. This approach is willing to find a
solution to reduce the number of passengers in the same direction with different
destinations in peak time. The Neural network takes the processing elements from
data resources using a transfer function joining by weights connections; data flow
along with these connections and wherever finds the statistics exceed the intended
density, a recursion function through dynamic programming lets the errors to
correct themselves from the beginning, figures out the most populated stations and
skips the stations with high density and transfer it to an excessive line to divide
passengers in a common route into different trains, and repeats the procedure to
finally get to the output with the least skipped stations. Using an algorithm to
achieve the best travel estimation for less population traffic is the basis of this
study.
As shown in figure 1, in the neural network model, the neuron is the basic
component that is in place of stations, and a multilayer perceptron structure is a
fully interconnected set of layers of neurons. Each neuron (N1⋯n) of a layer is
connected to each neuron of the next layer, from the input layer to the output layer.
Figure 1 is a schematic representation of the process involved.

Calculate all
possible run

Extract best
run

Update

Fig. 1. Multilayer Perceptron Hybrid Dynamic Model.
A schematic representation of the process involved that each station is considered as a neuron
and connected to the next layer with its own weight, which is the number of passengers between
two stations. After calculation, If the number exceeds the Max, then the recursion function is
used to go back and repeat itself, to finally program 2 lines with allowed capacity consideration.

2.2 Implemented T-Ridership web tool
The idea and the created algorithm are followed by an implemented web tool
which is freely available to be used online. There are no similar web tools
comparing to our designated one, which can automatically normalize the density in
public transportation vehicles with social distancing consideration, which has

become one of the top priorities in the recent outbreak of COVID-19. Our web tool
is flexible to apply to any kind of public transit such as taxi, bus, or train.
2.3 T-Ridership
The algorithm of T-Ridership web tool works through an iterative process of
calculating transit data. The T-Ridership is implemented in C# (C-Sharp), and also,
we use several other languages.
T-Ridership is a free web tool for reprogramming the public transportation fleet to
reduce Covid-19 infection transmission by social distancing consideration. While
coding our database, we use neuron network algorithm. Each station is considered
as a neuron and connected to the next layer with its own weight, which is the
number of passengers between two stations. By considering the capacity of each
bus or each train car that social distancing is applied, a maximum number is fixed,
and the system automatically skips the stations that exceed the fixed number.
The designated T-Ridership web tool works with two methods; the first method
calculates the number of passengers in a route; when we just have passenger’s
statistics in each station without knowing their origin and destination station. In
other words, when the only available data is the number of passengers entering and
exiting each station, without knowing each passenger’s specific origin and
destination and how many stations are traveling by each.

In our second method which is designed to be used by knowing the number of
passengers with their specific origin and destination with creating an n × n matrix
that n is the number of stations in one route, and contains our input data consisting
of the columns, showing the number of passengers exit in different stations from a
specific origin, and the rows showing the number of exit passengers from diverse
origins but in a particular destination. The last column of the matrix indicates the
number of passengers transit between two continuous stations.
The significance of this method is, besides having its complexity for collecting
input data and calculations, it is highly accurate (Figure 2). First method (A)
calculates number of passengers in a route according to each station’s entrance and
exit, without considering the number of stations traveled by individual passenger.
Second method (B) calculates number of passengers in a route according to each
station’s entrance and exit, considering the number of stations traveled by
individual passenger.

(A)

(B)

Fig. 2. T-Ridership Web Tool:
This shown template is the computational structure and it is designated to be user-friendly. (A)
The first method: calculates the number of passengers in a route according to each station’s
entrance and exit, without considering the number of stations traveled by individual passengers.
(B) Second method: calculates the number of passengers in a route according to each station’s
entrance and exit, considering the number of stations traveled by individual passenger.

As the output of the designated web tools, the result is shown as text and also
graphical illustration, featuring all stations divided into different lines with their
stops and skipped stations (Figure 3).

(A)

(B)

Fig. 3. Web tool output.
As the output of the designated web tools, the result is shown as text and also graphical
illustration, featuring all stations divided into different runs with their stops and skipped stations.

In the first step, the main aim is finding the real number of passengers traveling
inside a public transportation vehicle in a route, which is essential in our research
as it is affecting the virus transmission. The first step capacity calculation is based
on real data extracted from available turnstile open data. User can input any time
limit data in the web tool and get result.
A public transit route has n stations. The number of passengers who are expected
to get on and off at the ith station during a given time period are known, donated as
xi and yi respectively.

At each station i, the total of passengers leaving for the next station is donated Pi

Pi = x1, i=1 Pi-1 + xi – yi, 1< i<=n

Then suppose social distancing policy allows no more than S passengers in the
vehicle at any given time, and a feed-forward process is done:
(1) Ridership feed-forward parameters (n, xi, yi, Pi, S)
(2) for i=1 to n
(3) do
(4) if (Pi > S)
(5) skip station i
(6) Pi+1 = Pi – yi - xi

//in first train
//subtract number of passengers entering and exiting

passengers in station i from next station
(7) Until reach the last station
(8) return skipped stations

With this algorithm train 1 is set with its stops and skipped stations.
Then for the next train we use the following algorithm:
(1) Recursion algorithm to find next train stops
(2) given: skipped stations from first train m[1..j]

(3) for i=m to 1

//until first station or the previous skipped station

(4) do
(5) find biggest Pi and skip it
(6) call feed-forward

//for current train

//to check maximum capacity

(7) return skipped stations
Start

Input
parameters

Yes
Use origin and destination of passengers

No

Do you have
Origin and
destination?

Read Data
P0= 0, i=1

!"#$ %#&'()[(, ,]

i++, j++

$
Xi= ∑!"#
"#$%&'[&, *]
Yj= ∑ $
%"# "#$%&'[&, *]

Yes

Pi=Pi-1 + Xi - Yi

If(i<=n)

i++

No

If(i<=n)

Update Pi

Update Matrix[i , j]

i++

Pi=Pi-1 + Yi – Xi-1
Yes

No

If(i<=n)

Yes

No

go to first station,
i=1

go to first station,
i=1

Yes

Yes
Yes

S > Pi

i++
No

Skip Station Run1, (R1[1:k])

!"#$%&[%, )] = 0
i++

S > Pi

i <= n

No

No
Move to Run2

Skip Station Run1 (R1[1:k])

Show result (Graphically
and Text Format)

i++
Pi=Pi-2 + Xi – Yi– Yi-1

Yes

i <=
n?
No
Move to Run2

Show result (Graphically
and Text Format)

Re-read Data
Find skipped stations of
Run 1
Find Maximum P from R1k to first
station
Skip Stations for Run2 (R2[1:k]),
except skipped stations of Run1
Return to first station for update and
check Pi<S
repeat all process as Run1

Fig. 4. Algorithm flowchart.
We considered two ways to find route updates in our algorithm. First, when users have access to
detailed data including each passenger's origin and destination, and second when users just have
access to entering and exiting passengers of each station. Based on what kind of data is available
we go through this algorithm to gain the first run, and relatively re-reading the data for having
the second run.

3. Case study
3.1 Input data set
As the basis of input data, automatic passenger counting can be done by contacttype counters, optical sensors, vision-based systems, and IC cards. All these
counters can be applied in many public places with entrances, such as subways and
bus stations. Subway passenger flow has obvious time-varying characteristics with
easily identifiable peaks [27].
We are using open transit data Toolkit [9] that is helping to utilize transit data.
Through the analysis of IC card data, we can understand the time distribution
characteristics of bus passenger flow, make in planning the frequency of shifts, and
improve the operating efficiency of the entire bus system.
3.2 Case Study Dataset
In this section, we present the dataset used for our study, as well as the preprocessing step conducting in order to make statistical analysis of the data obtained
from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) that is a public benefit
corporation responsible for public transportation in the U.S. state of New York
[26]. As the first step, we used Open Transit Data Toolkit for measuring and
analyzing the transit systems to be used in the next step, which in programming the

prepared data and visualizing transit data. These data are not clear enough to use
directly in T-Ridership web tools. At first, we did the clarifying to be used for the
next step.
After examining the peak hour and density of each station, we will map each
station’s density.
However, there were different days and months’ data had been examined and had
the same result; we looked into using data for the first week in May 2020 to
illustrate the results in charts.
We captured data for the Q Line in New York City Subway in Brooklyn, entering
the turnstile at the Prospect Park stop, located within the 40.66161 latitudes and 73.96225 longitude, to the station at the Ocean Pkwy stop at the end of the line,
from May 2nd to May 8th, 2020, knowing that missing or incomplete data is a
frequent challenge in data wrangling.
Figure 5 superimposes the stops that tens of thousands of passengers take every
day back and forth between stations in downtown Brooklyn.

Fig. 5. New York Subway plan with chosen stations in Brooklyn [27].
Superimposes the stops that tens of thousands of passengers take every day back and forth
between stations in downtown Brooklyn.

3.3. Result of selected line stations’ density
As shown in figure 6, each station in line Q consisting of 15 stations from May 2,
2020, to May 8, 2020, is analyzed individually. As a result, obviously,
neighborhoods with more population and density had more crowded stations. As
shown in figure 5, the King's Highway and Church Av had the most passengers
and density.

Fig. 6. MTA Subway Turnstile Entries from May 2nd to May 8th. Each station in line Q
consisting of 15 stations from May 2, 2020, to May 8, 2020, is analyzed individually. As a result,
obviously neighborhoods with more population and density had more crowded stations.

Policy determiners can use the result of the current study to make decisions and
change the public transit ordination to avoid over-crowded stations and trains. By
detection of T-Ridership web tool, identified stations with high density should
change their time-table scheduled time and frequency.

3.4 Results of T-Ridership
We use statistics and information of ridership to illustrate the lines’ density, and by
comparing the target lines, we figure out the most ridership lines. Therefore, there
is a high-resolution human contact in those routes that plays a fundamental role in
infectious disease transmission.
The data resulted in the previous section can be performed in the measurement that
trains transfer within a defined period of time. The stations that each train should
stop in a scheduled time and decide the stations that should be skipped.
By the location coordinates of the stations, the following chart shows our sample
of the line in Brooklyn neighborhood in the New York subway. As explained
before in this section, we chose a sample with real data for May 2020 containing

15 sequence stations, with evaluating their entry and exit for one week and as a
result, two stations recognized as the most crowded in comparison with others as
shown in figure 6, Then we took out an average from our first results to put in the
T-Ridership web tool, and it shows the best performance to decrease the number of
passengers in overcrowded stations. Figure 7 shows the efficiency of the TRidership web tool to decrease the number of passengers in a route and divide
them into two different timetable transit.

Line1

Line2

Normal

25000

# of passengers

20000

15000

10000

5000

0
5/2/2020

5/3/2020

5/4/2020

5/5/2020

5/6/2020

5/7/2020

5/8/2020

Date

Fig. 7. Passenger Density comparison after and before Application of T-Ridership Web Tool.
It shows the efficiency of the T-Ridership web tool to decrease the number of passengers in a
route and divide them into two different timetable transit.

4. Discussions and Conclusions
In this paper, we use the inspiration from neural networks to design an optimized
hybrid dynamic programming that can capture sequence analysis tasks. The
effectiveness of the proposed methodology was evaluated using a real dataset
issued from the public transport network of New York in the US. We also
investigated the effect of this information on the transportation system on the
social distancing accuracy. The results obtained from T-Ridership web tool that
can use both subway and bus data do indeed improve on all the data set prediction
performances.
All investigations have been carried out to enhance and consolidate these results.
Particular attention has been given to reduce human-to-human contact. Our
simulation system and T-Ridership web tool are minimizing the contact of
passengers in an indoor place like bus and train by preventing getting overcrowded
that results in reducing coronavirus outbreak.
Thus, allowing for better optimization of public transportation setup, this
methodology can be extended to the whole public transport network, and policy
determiners can use the result of the current study to make decisions and change
the public transit ordination to avoid over-crowded stations and trains. By

detection of T-Ridership web tool, identified stations with high density should
change their time-table schedule time and frequency.
The main limitation of this research was the capacity of adding vehicles in the
public transportation system, due to limited transportation earmarked funding.
Although adding more vehicles in high-density routes could help the better
performance of our work, it is not practically possible. Based on this, our research's
main idea is not to add any vehicle, and change the frequency and timetabling of
trains in a route. In this method, the only problem is that the waiting time for some
limited passengers in skipped stations increases; however the other passengers will
wait less for the train and also spend less time inside the vehicle. Despite the
increase in waiting time in some stations, this is still beneficial in the outbreak to
avoid shutting down public transportation entirely.
If we can solve the funding problem, we intend to add a maximum of one vehicle
to optimize the increase in waiting time. The more our idea makes financial sense,
the more it encourages decision-makers to follow and use it.

Declarations
Availability of data and material
Project name: T-Ridership
Project home page: http://t-ridership.com/
Operating systems: Platform independent

Programming language: C#
License: GNU v3
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: No

Authors' contributions
Saba Imani, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. Majid Vahed participated in designing
and coordinating the study. Mohammad Vahed initiated, implemented the software, supervised
the project, and wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Prof. Satoshi Okada (Chiba University, Japan) and Prof. Kazuya
Kawamura (University of Illinois at Chicago, USA) for their fruitful discussions.

References
1- Resnick, B. (2020, March 17). Scientists warn we may need to live with social distancing for a year
or more. Retrieved from Vox website: https://www.vox.com/science-andhealth/2020/3/17/21181694/coronavirus-covid-19-lockdowns-end-how-long-months-years
2- Wölfel, R., Corman, V. M., Guggemos, W., Seilmaier, M., Zange, S., Müller, M. A., … Wendtner,
C. (2020). Virological assessment of hospitalized patients with COVID-2019. Nature.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2196-x
3- Guan, W., Ni, Z., Hu, Y., Liang, W., Ou, C., He, J., … Zhong, N. (2020). Clinical Characteristics of
Coronavirus Disease 2019 in China. New England Journal of Medicine.
https://doi.org/10.1056/nejmoa2002032
4- Leung, N. H. L., Chu, D. K. W., Shiu, E. Y. C., Chan, K.-H., McDevitt, J. J., Hau, B. J. P., …
Cowling, B. J. (2020). Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face
masks. Nature Medicine, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-020-0843-2
5- Shiu, E. Y. C., Leung, N. H. L., & Cowling, B. J. (2019). Controversy around airborne versus droplet
transmission of respiratory viruses. Current Opinion in Infectious Diseases, 32(4), 372–379.
https://doi.org/10.1097/qco.0000000000000563
6- Bourouiba, L. (2020). Turbulent Gas Clouds and Respiratory Pathogen Emissions. JAMA.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.4756
7- Pham, Q.-V., Nguyen, D. C., Huynh-The, T., Hwang, W.-J., & Pathirana, P. N. (2020). Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Big Data for Coronavirus (COVID-19) Pandemic: A Survey on the Stateof-the-Arts. https://doi.org/10.20944/preprints202004.0383.v1

8- Is the Coronavirus Changing How We Look At Public Spaces? | The Takeaway. (n.d.). Retrieved
August 14, 2020, from WNYC Studios website:
https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/takeaway/segments/coronavirus-public-spaces
9- mta.info | Turnstile Data. (n.d.). Retrieved August 14, 2020, from web.mta.info website:
http://web.mta.info/developers/turnstile.html
10- New York State Department of Health. (n.d.). Retrieved August 14, 2020, from health.ny.gov
website: https://health.ny.gov/
11- Harris, J. E. (2020). The Subways Seeded the Massive Coronavirus Epidemic in New York
City. SSRN Electronic Journal. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3574455
11- Muller, S. A., Balmer, M., Neumann, A. (2020). Mobility traces and spreading of COVID19. MedRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.27.20045302
13- Wong, Y. Z. (n.d.). To limit coronavirus risks on public transport, here’s what we can learn from
efforts overseas. Retrieved August 14, 2020, from The Conversation website:
https://theconversation.com/to-limit-coronavirus-risks-on-public-transport-heres-what-we-canlearn-from-efforts-overseas-133764
14- How COVID-19 Spreads in Public Places and How to Protect Yourself. (n.d.). Retrieved from
Healthline website: https://www.healthline.com/health-news/public-places-and-the-coronaviruswhat-to-know
15- Vlahogianni, E. I., Karlaftis, M. G., & Golias, J. C. (2005). Optimized and meta-optimized neural
networks for short-term traffic flow prediction: A genetic approach. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 13(3), 211–234. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2005.04.007

16- Çetiner, B., Sari, M., & Borat, O. (2010). A Neural Network Based Traffic-Flow Prediction
Model. Mathematical and Computational Applications, 15(2), 269–278.
https://doi.org/10.3390/mca15020269
17- Ma, X., Tao, Z., Wang, Y., Yu, H., & Wang, Y. (2015). Long short-term memory neural network for
traffic speed prediction using remote microwave sensor data. Transportation Research Part C:
Emerging Technologies, 54, 187–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2015.03.014
18- Faghri, A., & Hua, J. (n.d.). Evaluation of Artificial Neural Network Applications in Transportation
Engineering. Retrieved from http://onlinepubs.trb.org/Onlinepubs/trr/1992/1358/1358-012.pdf
19- Karlaftis, M. G., & Vlahogianni, E. I. (2011). Statistical methods versus neural networks in
transportation research: Differences, similarities and some insights. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 19(3), 387–399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2010.10.004
20- Haykin, S. S. (1999). Neural networks : a comprehensive foundation. Upper Saddle River, N.J.:
Prentice Hall.
21- Celikoglu, H. B., & Cigizoglu, H. K. (2007a). Modelling public transport trips by radial basis
function neural networks. Mathematical and Computer Modelling, 45(3–4), 480–489.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mcm.2006.07.002
22- Celikoglu, H. B., & Cigizoglu, H. K. (2007b). Public transportation trip flow modeling with
generalized regression neural networks. Advances in Engineering Software, 38(2), 71–79.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.advengsoft.2006.08.003
23- Hawkins, J., & Boden, M. (2005). The Applicability of Recurrent Neural Networks for Biological
Sequence Analysis. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Computational Biology and
Bioinformatics, 2(3), 243–253. https://doi.org/10.1109/tcbb.2005.44

24- Dougherty, M. (1995). A review of neural networks applied to transport. Transportation Research
Part C: Emerging Technologies, 3(4), 247–260. https://doi.org/10.1016/0968-090x(95)00009-8
25- Mitten, L. G. (1974). Preference Order Dynamic Programming. Management Science, 21(1), 43–46.
https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.21.1.43
26- Toque, F., Come, E., El Mahrsi, M. K., & Oukhellou, L. (2016). Forecasting dynamic public
transport Origin-Destination matrices with long-Short term Memory recurrent neural
networks. 2016 IEEE 19th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITSC). https://doi.org/10.1109/itsc.2016.7795689
27- MTA - Transportation Network. (n.d.). Retrieved August 14, 2020, from web.mta.info website:
http://web.mta.info/mta/network.htm
28- Qu, E., Ns, B., Oo, K., & Yn. (n.d.). WESTCHESTER THE BRONX. Retrieved from
https://new.mta.info/map/7551

