Collaborative Autoethnography:
An Approach to Deliver Learning Objectives of a Community-Engaged Research Course
for Health Science Undergraduates during Pandemic Times
Angie Mejia
University of Minnesota Rochester, amejiame@r.umn.edu

This is the final submitted version of a text forthcoming in the Fall 2020 edition of Scholarship
and Practice of Undergraduate Research (SPUR))
Recommended citation: Mejia, A. Collaborative Autoethnography: An Approach to Deliver
Learning Objectives of a Community-Engaged Research Course for Health Science
Undergraduates during Pandemic Times. Scholarship and Practice of Undergraduate
Research (SPUR), 4(1). [Forthcoming])
Community Collaborative is an upper-division, community-engaged course at the University
of Minnesota Rochester geared to health science majors. Each term, several groups of
undergraduates collaborate on service-learning or research-based projects for local community
agencies working on issues of health. A process was implemented to meet one learning
objective in the syllabus (introduction to qualitative data methods) as a response to pandemicimposed limitations on community-engaged learning activities at UMR. The hope was for one
group of students to meet these objectives by engaging in a collaborative autoethnography
instead of collecting data in the community.
The students and the faculty mentor planned to write, collect, analyze, and synthesize their
reflections while conducting a review of autobiographical texts by health-care workers,
educators, and researchers writing about their experiences making sense of the COVID-19
impact in their lives and communities. They would then engage in a systematic analysis by
focusing on the social dimensions of a pandemic as they relate to different identity
positionalities within a health sciences campus. The group met with the faculty mentor several
times (at least once a week, sometimes more) to code, interpret, and synthesize more than
10,000 words of reflections (dubbed the “pandemic dataset”) according to themes. Also, some
students in this group had signed up for additional summer credit hours and wanted to
continue working on the project. After the faculty mentor agreed to supervise their summer
coursework, the next step was to outline a conference poster/paper with a potential publication
to be produced later.
The article was submitted in response to a peer-reviewed journal’s call for submissions on
anthropological perspectives and analyses on the pandemic. Although it was a lot of work, a
collaborative autoethnographic approach allowed the students to meet the course’s learning
objectives while gaining experience in the manuscript writing process and a deeper
appreciation of qualitative research methods. One student stated how “being vulnerable” by
writing collectively on the pandemic helped her gain “a shared sense of purpose,” not only
with members of this group but also other students in similar circumstances. Another student
indicated that the process pushed her to critically reflect on her identity as a woman of color
and future medical professional in a changing health-care context. Another became more open

to the possibilities of exploring written work in the medical humanities as a way to balance the
more “STEM-focused material” of his fall coursework. Finally, all the students felt that
collaborative autoethnography was a positive experience that could benefit their graduating
cohort. Some of the students and the faculty mentor received funding from the university to
support UMR third- and fourth-year students in creating written and video narratives on their
experiences navigating a “pandemic summer.” These will be disseminated via social media
and archived in the university library’s digital repository.

