"x"
"1" "COVID-19: impact on the urban food retail system, diet and health inequalities in the UK"
"2" "Commentary -  Currently Under Review"
"3" "Steven Cummins 1* , Nicolas Berger 1 , Laura Cornelsen 1 , Judith Eling 1 , Vanessa Er 1 , Robert Greener 1 , Alexandra Kalbus 1 , Amanda Karapici 1 , Cherry Law 1 , Denise Ndlovu 1 , Amy Yau 1"
"4" "1 Population Health Innovation Lab, Department of Public Health, Environments & Society,"
"5" "Faculty of Public Health & Policy, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, 15-17 Tavistock Place, London, WC1H 9SH"
"6" "* Corresponding author. Email: steven.cummins@lshtm.ac.uk"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "COVID-19 has focused minds on the resilience of the urban food system in supplying adequate food to the whole population as the result of a massive external shock. In this commentary we sketch out  four  of the plausible changes to urban food retail systems that might occur as a result of the pandemic in the UK, and how this might affect population diet and dietary inequalities."
"9" "Keywords"
"10" "COVID19; diet; health inequalities"
"11" "Background "
"12" "Modern food systems can be characterised as complex, multi-scale networks of interdependent entities involved in the production, manufacture, processing, storage, transportation, marketing and retailing of food.  Casti   (2012)   argues that complex systems, such as the food system, are vulnerable to X-events, rare, unexpected events of human origin that cause  these  system s  to shift abruptly from one state to another. The current COVID-19 pandemic has been described as one such X-event, exposing the fragility of the food system and  raising  questions about food system resilience."
"13" "Th e pandemic  may have a lasting impact on  consumer behaviour;   food availability, affordability, choice and price; and  lead to the  reshap ing of  urban food retail systems. Disruptions to global supply chains and food availability as a result of increased demand and panic- buying, and   rises in  food  in security  among  low-income households have emerged as key immediate challenges during the ongoing crisis  (Costa-Font &  Revoredo-Giha  2020) . All of which may have plausible impacts on diet, health and health inequalities."
"14" "Though short-term effects are important, here we focus on  four   p ossible  medium-to-long term pandemic-related changes that might occur in the UK, and how th ey  might affect diet and dietary inequalities in urban populations.  First, the potential re-localisation of the urban food retail system. Second,  an  accelerated transition to digital food purchasing. Third,  restructuring of the fast-food environment. Fourth,  reduction in capacity of the emergency food aid system. W e  end by  briefly outlin ing  the challenge of shaping a healthier and more equitable food retail system."
"15" "Re-localisation of the urban food system"
"16" "R ecent data suggests there ha s  been  a  significant increase in grocery sales  and large reductions in sales of out-of-home foods (takeaways, restaurants, and food-on-the-go)  as  a result of  physical distancing interventions  and food business closures  ( Kantar 2020 ) . As a result,  more food is being prepared and consumed at home and  there  has  b een an increase in  the  use of local food retailing as households shop closer to home and source food items from a wider range of retailers. Convenience stores have reported a 39% increase in sales ,  with market share increasing from  12.4% to 16.3%  ( Lee  2020 ) . This ‘re-localisation’ of consumer behaviour is likely to be sustained as physical distancing and work from home advice will remain in force for some time. The crisis may also catalyse a longer-term shift in the proportion of people homeworking, suggesting a potential opportunity for urban planners to support the development of rebalanced, healthier and more sustainable local food systems, reducing reliance on national multiple supermarkets, shrinking supply chains and stimulating the development of the local food retail sector. In this context, a key challenge will be to mitigate the immediate local economic effects of post-pandemic recession. Many independent food businesses may not survive extended periods of closure, and bankruptcies are more likely to be concentrated in lower income areas with higher rates of unemployment and less resilient local economies, and where food businesses are less profitable."
"17" "A new emphasis on re-localising food systems as a result of changes to consumer behaviour may have impacts on diet. In the medium-term continued physical distancing will likely have a negative impact on the local   out-of-home  food market as households eat out less often and the sector shrinks as more marginal businesses fail. This may have the unintended consequence of improving diet as exposure to the out-of-home sector reduces and the number of occasions that households consume takeaway food also declines. However, it is very unclear what types of food retail will benefit or suffer in the medium term from the pandemic and  therefore   requires  careful monitoring. As people use their local food environment more often and the economy recovers, there is a significant opportunity for planners to  use existing powers  shape local food systems so that they maximise the potential health and environmental benefits. This might involve rebalancing the local food system by restricting takeaways, encouraging local markets, products and food supply chains,  encouraging  retail diversity and  creating  vibrant destinations with attractive healthy food offers."
"18" "Accelerating the transition to  digital grocery"
"19" "T hough there has been a steady  pre-pandemic  increase in online food and non-food sales, the current crisis has accelerated this trend . Nielsen reports a 14% increase in online  grocery  sales, which equates to an extra 600,000 households shopping  for food  online for the first time  ( Nielsen   2020) .   T his increase would have been larger if capacity of the distribution network to fulfil online orders had not been exceeded.  The current  (temporary)  increase in  overall  grocery sales  is likely masking the underlying transition from use of large format supermarkets (where sales are stagnant) to online and  local  convenience food retailing.  Combined with the shift in consumer behaviour towards convenience stores and the reduction in demand for non-food products which larger  food  stores rely on  for profitability , the potential medium-term impacts of this may be to reduce overall demand for physical supermarket and hypermarket retail and prompt further rationalisation of supermarket estates through store closures and site disposal. However, an important caveat is that potential change will be moderated by the extent to which online grocery will replace physical as significant uncertainty still remains over its long-term commercial viability  ( Eley , 2019 )."
"20" "This  accelerated shift to digital  grocery  will likely benefit more affluent households at a faster rate than the less affluent. More affluent households have the financial capacity to meet minimum spend requirements for grocery, pay delivery costs and take advantage of the cost savings associated with bulk purchasing.  The digital purchase of groceries may also result in a healthier  overall basket as consumers are less influenced by in-store marketing and promotions.   T he retreat of physical and the expansion of digital  also raises the prospect of a  re-emergence of  food access  problems if this is  unequally distributed. Lower income households  with less access to the internet,  located in less affluent areas , are  likely to be the most disadvantaged, especially outside of the major urban centres  were digital distribution capacity is less well developed .  To what extent this may impact diet and dietary inequalities is unknown .   T hough pre-existing e vidence for the influence of  physical  access to grocery stores and  a  diet is mixed  ( Caspi et al 2012) , the advent of novel technologies within the grocery sector suggests   that  active  monitoring  of the impact on dietary inequalities is required in order to avoid a new digital divide."
"21" "Restructuring of the fast-food environment"
"22" "As we have outlined abo ve  there is likely to be an increase in  eating at home  and  a reduction in   purchase s  of foods prepared outside of the home. In the me dium term, a   w eaker economy  and  maintenance of physical distancing may well  lead to  lower overall  takeaway and restaurant  sales  as people venture out less often.  The take-away sector  will therefore adapt. For example ,  there has already been relaxation of planning rules to allow the r epurposing of restaurants to takeaway  service in order to preserve businesses. In addition, many chain fast-food restaurants such as McDonalds are actively i ncreas ing   the  provision of drive through and curbside delivery  services. However, independent takeaway businesses are likely to be  m ost affected as they are less able to weather the effects of a prolonged economic downturn. This may r educe  the  overall  number of independent fast-food outlets  available. In addition, there is also likely to be an i ncrease d  use of digital  fast-food  delivery services ."
"23" "There is a  great deal of un certainty over which parts of the  out-of-home  sector will benefit and which will lose out. It may be that there will be s hrink age in the  total numbers of takeaways in  the whole  sector,  and a reduction in overall takeaway food sales  but  conversely   market share  for multiples/ chain  may increase. There may also be  innovations and diversification in mode of service,  with  the result being that  more  prepared and  takeaway foods  are  eaten at home rather than out of home . Supermarkets may also  become more important and  increase  their  market share for prepared foods  that were traditionally the preserve of the out of home market ( eg  pizzas and chicken) , as people  utilise   grocery  more often ."
"24" "The implications for diet are uncertain.  As noted earlier,   t here may be an overall total reduction in exposure to fast-food, but large-scale corporations might become more important and innovate to make it easier for households to purchase and consume fast-food , increase market share and grow overall sales.  This may have negative impacts on dietary inequalities if the  impacts of these changes  are unevenly distributed."
"25" "Food banks and emergency food aid"
"26" "The current crisis has exacerbated existing food insecurity for many people who already use food banks and increased the numbers of economically vulnerable households (Power et al 2020).  T h e pandemic has also had an  immediate negative effect on the availability and accessibility of  emergency food supplies  delivered  through food banks at a time of increased demand . This is  due to reduced  household  donations to food banks ,  lower availability of surplus food from food businesses and the inability of food banks to bulk purchase foods from wholesalers and supermarkets as a result of rationing  ( Power et al 2020 ) .  Post-pandemic, there will be many  continuing  organisational and structural challenges within the food-banking system.  F ewer people  will  donat e  food,  there  may  be  fewer volunteer s  available  and it remains to be seen how services will be safely delivered while maintaining physical distancing. The economic downturn will see reductions in household income due to rising unemployment and recession, tipping more households into food insecurity at a time when food banks  were  already at capacity. This will have an immediate impact on low-income households’ ability to purchase and consume a nutritionally adequate diet  and impacts on diet will be felt most acutely among food insecure individuals within the food banking system.  The impacts  on diet and health inequalities  are obvious."
"27" "The challenge for research, policy and planning"
"28" "The current pandemic has shown that although the modern food system works for most people, most of the time, it doesn’t work for everyone all of the time  - impacts   will  likely  be socio-economically and spatially patterned.  The challenge for researchers, policymakers and planners is to monitor how the food system changes, mitigate the harmful impacts of these changes, and ensure equity of outcome for the whole population. Th ough the  current crisis  may  have negative impacts on diet and food security, especially  for  the most disadvantaged, there is also an opportunity for those involved in urban practice to actively rebalance their local food systems for the better. With foresight and careful long-term planning ,  a healthier, more resilient and sustainable local food system  may well be  possible ."
"29" "Ethical Approval"
"30" "None required"
"31" "Competing Interest Statement"
"32" "All authors have completed the ICMJE uniform disclosure form,  there are no competing interests."
"33" "Funding Statement."
"34" "NB, LC, CL are supported by a UK Medical Research Council Career Development Award to LC. RG is supported by  a  MRC Studentship. A. Ka lbus  is supported by a Bloomsbury Studentship. A.  Karapici  and DN are supported by NIHR Doctoral Studentships"
"35" "References"
"36" "Casti  J ( 2012 )  X-Events: The Collapse of Everything.  Harper Collins"
"37" "Caspi C, Sorensen G, Subramanian S,  Kawachi  I   (2012) The local food environment and diet: systematic review  Health & Place  18(5) 1172-87"
"38" "Costa-Font M,  Revoredo-Giha  C (2020) Covid-19: the underlying issues affecting the UK’s food supply chains LSE Business Review  https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/businessreview/2020/03/25/covid-19-the-underlying-issues-affecting-the-uks-food-supply-chains/  Accessed May 12 th  2020"
"39" "Eley  J (2019) The difficulties of making online delivery pay.  Financial Times  March 1 st  2019 .  https://www.ft.com/content/8aa756ac-3c35-11e9-b72b-2c7f526ca5d0 . Accessed May 12 th  2020"
"40" "Kantar  ( 2020 )  Grocery growth slows and habits change as nation adapts.  Kantar  WorldPanel   https://www.kantarworldpanel.com/en/PR/Grocery-growth-slows-and-habits-change-as-nation-adapts  Accessed May 12 th  2020"
"41" "Lee M (2020) How will coronavirus change the way we shop for groceries long-term?  The Grocer  May 4 th  2020  https://www.thegrocer.co.uk/consumer-trends/how-will-coronavirus-change-the-way-we-shop-for-groceries-long-term/604550.article  Accessed May 12 th  2020"
"42" "Nielsen (2020)  COVID-19: U.K.  quarantine living preparations lead to a massive spike in FMCG sales  https://www.nielsen.com/uk/en/insights/article/2020/covid-19-uk-quarantine-living-preparations-lead-massive-spike-fmcg-sales/  Accessed May 12 th  2020"
"43" "Power M, Doherty B,  Pybus  K, Pickett K (2020)  How Covid-19 has exposed inequalities in the UK food system: The case of UK food and poverty.  Emerald Open Res ,  2 :11"
