Dashboarding The Online Strategic
Communications of Anti-slavery Organizations
During COVID-19
Benjamin Lucas1 , Liana Bravo-Balsa1 , Vicky Brotherton1 , Nicola
Wright1 , and Todd Landman1
1

Rights Lab, University of Nottingham, United Kingdom

October 2020
Abstract
In this working paper, we investigate high-level changes in the online
strategic communications of organizations engaged with SDG 8.7 (ending
modern slavery) during the COVID-19 crisis. We present preliminary
evidence of important semantic and thematic shifts based on data from
Twitter during this time, with an emphasis on developing the SOLACE
(Social Listening and Communications Engagement) dashboard, and with
recommendations for important future research involving the use of social
media data as a basis for distilling organizational-agenda proxies based
on digital campaigns and activism during times of crisis.

1

Introduction

Online strategic communications (OSCs) are an important part of the broader
communications arsenal for organizations addressing grand challenges, such
as those articulated as part of the United Nations Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). Leveraging the prominence of platforms including social media,
and the rise of social media activism (see for example: Fisher, 2019), NGOs,
government bodies, and various other civil society and activist actors make
use of the wide-reach and ubiquitous nature of online communication to build
support for their causes. This involves a mixture of carefully engineered campaigns, timely reactive commentary, and the re-sharing of, and participation
in, the discussions of other actors on a real-time basis.
In times of crisis, both planned campaigns, longer-term activism and social
movement development, and the general pace of ad-hoc discourse participation
is thrown into disarray. In very simple terms, and phrased as a core question:
how does an organization get the public to pay attention to an issue such as
1

human exploitation (or for that matter: climate change, poverty, and hunger,
among others), when the world’s media and social media is overwhelmed with
a global pandemic crisis?
To begin to answer this question, we present an initial overview of the
SOLACE (Social Listening and Communications Engagement) dashboard,
developed using the R ecosystem. The aim here is to collect, distill and present
information related to high-level thematic and semantic changes in the OSCs
of organizations engaged with SDG 8.7 (ending modern slavery) during the
COVID-19 crisis. We do so against a backdrop of using visualization tools to
support faster insight generation and decision making around (1) anti-slavery
legislation (e.g. Allain and Schwarz, 2020), (2) COVID-19 in general (e.g.
Lucas et al., 2020; Rufai and Bruce, 2020), and, (3) other major societal
challenges (Nica-Avram et al., 2020), as well as recent developments in the
deployment of novel data analytics approaches within human rights research
(e.g. Landman, 2020).

2

Method and Dashboard Demonstration

To develop SOLACE, first, we collected data using the R package ’rtweet’
(Kearney et al., 2020) to retrieve all available Tweets and Retweets from a precompiled list of the most Twitter-active anti-slavery organizations from around
the world via interfacing with the public Twitter API. For this demonstration,
we use a dataset comprising 30001 Tweets and 16231 Retweets made by these
organizations between the 1st of January 2020 and the 31st of August 2020
(244 days in total).
After data manipulation (using a collection of ancillary packages), we used a
series of group-by functions to construct counts for a selection of terms used
within Tweets and Retweets (showing the usage of focal terms as a percentage
of all daily Tweets / Retweets). We used the R package ggplot2 (Wickham et
al., 2020) to create base visualizations, and then plotly (Sievert et al., 2020) for
dashboarding. Figure 1 shows an overview of the Tweets by our focal organizations mentioning Coronavirus and COVID-19. This was achieved by filtering
and counting Tweets containing the term “coronavirus ” or the stem “covid ”
(either in text or in Hashtags). One notable peak in activity was on May 2nd,
where 43.14% of all Tweets made by our focal organizations contained “covid ”.
More specifically, the term “coronavirus ” began showing up in Tweets
at the end of January, but it was not until mid-March that it began to be
widely used. It reached its peak on April 18th. Tweets containing the word
“covid ” began to appear almost a month later, in the second half of February,
but by the end of March it was more widely used than “coronavirus ”, to the extent of almost replacing it entirely - a trend that has continued to date. This is
likely partly reflective of the development and evolution of naming conventions

2

earlier on in the pandemic (see for example: World Health Organization, 2020).

Figure 1: Coronavirus and COVID-19 Usage

As demonstrated in Figure 1, using the plotly engine allows us to first customize visualizations (in ggplot2), and then dashboard them, using interactive
navigation functionality provided within the package, and exportable in html
format for web hosting. Here, we have added a navigation bar, to allow users to
change the viewing resolution down to a daily level (by selecting time windows
of interest).

Figure 2: Anti-slavery Themes within Tweets during COVID-19 (1)

Figures 2 and 3 capture core anti-slavery themes within Tweets, representing
the strategic communication agendas of focal organizations (Figure 3 also shows
an example of optional hover labels added to the navigation functionality). We
make use of word stems to provide a simple overview of the thematic content
within a Tweet. For this demonstration, these are grouped alphabetically, with
Figure 2 showing “child ”, “domestic ”, “fashion ” and “fish ”, capturing issues
related to child exploitation, domestic violence, domestic abuse and domestic
3

slavery, exploitation in the garment industry, and exploitation in the fishing
industry (the latter two being common industrial case studies within the antislavery sphere), and Figure 3 showing “homeless ”, “migrat ”, “refugee ” and
“sex ”, capturing issues linking homelessness and modern slavery, migration
and immigration, and its links to modern slavery, and relatedly, refugees and
issues around displaced persons and modern slavery, and finally, issues related
to sexual exploitation and sex trafficking.
More specifically, our focal anti-slavery organisations have (based on this
dataset), focused more on communicating issues related to children (e.g.
exploitation) than on domestic abuse or the fishing and garment industry
cases. From January to September, Tweets mentioning the word stem “child ”
have been considerably more prevalent than those that mention the word
stems “domestic ”, “fashion ” and “fish ”. Tweets containing “domestic ” only
surpassed those containing ’child’ on June 16th, possibly coinciding with a
debate in the House of Commons on the Domestic Abuse Bill 2019-21 in the
UK. Meanwhile, “fashion ” overtook “child ” on July 5th, the same day the
Leicester fast-fashion scandal broke. The peak in the usage of the word stem
“refugee ” corresponds with World Refugee Day (June 20th). Tweets containing “refugee ” were more prevalent than those containing “migrat ”, “sex ”
or “homeless ”. This trend became even more pronounced from mid-March
onwards.

Figure 3: Anti-slavery Themes within Tweets during COVID-19 (2)
Our final example (Figures 4 and 5) uses word stems to capture what Lucas
and Landman (2020) call semantic versus thematic capture in the context of
anti-slavery strategic communications. Here, we use the stems “risk ”, “surviv ”, “victim ”, and “vulnerab ” to capture common anti-slavery parlance (see:
Nicholson et al., 2018), and emergent trends in terms of shifts in language tense
and issue framing brought about by the COVID-19 crisis (e.g. possible shifts
from discussions around victims and survivors of modern slavery toward communications around vulnerable populations). Figure 4 also demonstrates the
use of interactive functionality to zoom in on daily resolution, while Figure 5
shows a comparison between two different higher-resolution time windows.
4

Figure 4: Key Anti-slavery Word Stems within Tweets during COVID-19

Figure 5: Key Anti-slavery Word Stems within Retweets during COVID-19

3

Trend Distillation

Figures 6 and 7 show semantic word stems distilled into curvilinear trend
lines using LOESS smoothing in ggplot2. The y axis once again shows usage
as percentages. Specifically, these figures serve to illustrate and emphasize
the fact that although the interactive raw data visualizations presented above
provide useful insights (e.g. in terms of allowing researchers to draw their own
conclusions and to zoom in on specific days and weeks, guided by particular

5

news events and high-level trends), it is important to look at other levels of
resolution and different noise handling approaches to establish patterns of
activity. Here, usage (in percentage terms) varies considerably between word
stems (representing semantic focus), and between Tweet and Retweet content.
For example, the word stems displayed here for Tweets:
“risk ”
(4.15%±2.35%), “surviv ” (4.66%±2.58%), “victim ” (5.47%±2.90%), “vulnerab ” (3.59%±2.49%), and Retweets: “risk ” (3.22%±3.24%), “surviv ”
(4.30%±3.94%), “victim ” (5.04%±4.40%), “vulnerab ” (3.07%±3.30%), do
not exhibit major differences between word stems and content types (Tweets
and Retweets) at the most basic statistical levels, although the simple transformations used in Figures 6 and 7 do indeed reveal distinct patterns, when taken
with reference to the evolution of the COVID-19 crisis.

Figure 6: Summary of Semantic Trends from Tweets

Figure 7: Summary of Semantic Trends from Retweets

6

4

Concluding Remarks

This working paper demonstrates a working prototype of our proposed SOLACE dashboard, focusing on high-level changes in the OSCs of organizations
engaged with SDG 8.7 (ending modern slavery) during the COVID-19 crisis.
The main takeaways are as follows:
(1) Granular monitoring and data visualization, as facilitated by dashboard tools is a key part of building future multi-disciplinary understanding
around complex social phenomena such as online mass-communication, digital
activism and digital campaign management. Toolkits such as the one presented
here, allow decision makers (e.g. activists, policy makers) to zoom in on the
timelines of specific events, such as those triggered by news media and public
discourse developments, to understand and draw their own conclusions about
how a given issue unfolds, in terms of (a) the changing priorities and agendas
(based on campaign and messaging proxies) of organizations involved, and
(b) the most relevant and effective semantic terms being used to frame and
present a given issue, with the collective goal being, (c) to maximize salience
and engagement around as wider spectrum of relevant stakeholders as possible.
Agenda analysis in this format will also involve filtering out the noise of
COVID-19 as a dominant headline, to establish meaningful patterns of activity
reflecting substantive agenda shifts and the assessment and forecasting of
present and ongoing risks respectively - including sector-specific concerns (both
policy and industrial).
(2) More specifically, whilst terms such as ’social listening’ often refer to the
monitoring of public discussion - the tracking of organization-side strategic
communications at scale offers an important avenue for future research and
practice development along the lines of thematic and semantic engineering.
Specifically, dashboard tools should capture the engineering process of messages
that are both timely (in thematic terms), and salient (in semantic terms). This
means capturing key topics highlighted by the news media and the engagement
of the general public, as well as developing a ’tone’ that best communicates
current priorities and urgencies. Issues for anti-slavery organizations to avoid
via their OSCs in the current climate include becoming ’lost’ in the wave
(or aforementioned noise) of COVID-19 related messaging and ’compassion
fatigue’ (see: Maier, 2015).
(3) Future extensions of our work will include dashboarding #Hashtags
and @Mentions to present information around user-indexed themes, and
the often complex networks of actors involved in public discussion (across
different geographic areas) respectively. Simple statistical overviews of metrics
such as participation in #Hashtags and the volume of Tweet and Retweet
activity from specific organizations (and associated engagement metrics) are
important in and of themselves. Future work will also extend into dashboarding other relevant Twitter-streams within the SDG 8.7 sphere (e.g. law
7

enforcement, grass-roots activism and collective action). Importantly, future
research will also use the general dashboarding template presented here to
advance discovery along the lines of thematic and semantic extraction, by
employing methods such as sentiment dynamics extraction and topic modeling
(see for example: Kim et al., 2016 and Stokes et al., 2020) within the apparatus.
(4) Perhaps the most important opportunity for extension arising from
this working paper involves the formal operationalization of frameworks, such
as that proposed in Gardner et al. (2020) (i.e. where vocabulary from datastreams such as social media is mapped to expert-defined dimensions of a given
anti-slavery combat framework or anti-slavery agenda). Other questions can
also be asked of the information generated by our agenda-proxy-focus approach,
such as the extent to which relevant anti-slavery actors are engaging in proactive
versus reactive agenda and campaign formulation, any issues around lag and
latency, and the extent to which communication in strategic communication
and campaign formats is consistent or divergent with other paradigms (e.g.
especially the frontline survivor narrative approach - see: Nicholson et al.,
2018). Another central question here is that of issue displacement, where core
anti-slavery themes and emergent topics are replaced by newer and more salient
issues over time.
In conclusion, we hope this work is seen as an important, complementary addition to the broader remote sensing (see: Jackson and Lucas, 2020),
social movement, and strategic communications perspectives emergent in
modern slavery scholarship.

8

5

References

Allain, J. and Schwarz, K., 2020.
Visualisation Toolkit. [Link]

Antislavery in Domestic Legislation World Mapping

Fisher, D.R., 2019. The Broader Importance of #FridaysForFuture.
Change, 9(6), pp.430-431.

Nature Climate

Gardner, A., Northall, P. and Brewster, B., 2020. Building Slavery-free Communities:
A Resilience Framework. Journal of Human Trafficking, pp.1-16.
Jackson, B. and Lucas, B., 2020.
Research. Delta 8.7 Forum. [Link]

A COVID-19 Response to Modern Slavery using AI

Kearney, M.W., Heiss, A. and Briatte, F., 2020. R Package ‘rtweet’. [Link]
Kim, E.H.J., Jeong, Y.K., Kim, Y., Kang, K.Y. and Song, M., 2016. Topic-based
content and sentiment analysis of Ebola virus on Twitter and in the news. Journal of
Information Science, 42(6), pp.763-781.
Landman, T., 2020. Measuring Modern Slavery: Law, Human Rights, and New Forms of
Data. Human Rights Quarterly, 42(2), pp.303-331.
Lucas, B., Elliot, B. and Landman, T., 2020.
COVID-19. arXiv preprint arXiv :2004.07183.
Lucas, B. and Landman, T., 2020.
Rights Lab Working Paper.

Online Information Search During

Social Listening, Modern Slavery and COVID-19.

Maier, S.R., 2015. Compassion fatigue and the elusive quest for journalistic impact:
A content and reader-metrics analysis assessing audience response. Journalism Mass
Communication Quarterly, 92(3), pp.700-722.
Nica-Avram, G., Harvey, J., Goulding, J., Lucas, B., Smith, A., Smith, G. and Perrat, B., 2020, FIMS: Identifying, Predicting and Visualising Food Insecurity. In Companion
Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020 (pp. 190-193).
Nicholson, A., Dang, M. and Trodd, Z., 2018. A Full Freedom: Contemporary Survivors’ Definitions of Slavery. Human Rights Law Review, 18(4), pp.689-704.
Rufai, S.R. and Bunce, C., 2020. World Leaders’ Usage of Twitter in Response to
the COVID-19 Pandemic: A Content Analysis. Journal of Public Health, 42(3), pp.510–516,
Sievert., C. Parmer, C., Hocking, T., Chamberlain, S., Ram, K., Corvellec, M., Despouy, P., and Plotly Technologies Inc., 2020. R package plotly. [Link]
Stokes, D.C., Andy, A., Guntuku, S.C., Ungar, L.H. and Merchant, R.M., 2020. Public
Priorities and Concerns Regarding COVID-19 in an Online Discussion Forum: Longitudinal
Topic Modeling. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 35(7), pp.2244–2247.
Wickham, H., Chang, W., Henry, L., Pedersen, T.L., Takahashi, K., Wilke, C., Woo,
K., Yutani, H., Dunnington, D. and RStudio. 2020., R package ggplot2. [Link]
World Health Organization., 2020.
the Virus that Causes it. [Link]

Naming the Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) and

9

