Powering Social Media Footage: Simple Guide for the Most Vulnerable to Make
Emergency Visible
Marvin Starominski-Uehara, PhD*

Abstract
Eyewitness media was boosted by ubiquitous smartphones and social media use.
User-generated content by non-professionals, or netizens, has shed light on issues they deem
important by capturing and sharing footage appealing to their inner digital network and
mainstream media. However, the influence that digital testimonials exerts on activism and
indexing has been restricted to those possessing some media training. This paper aims to fill
this gap by providing a framework to guide vulnerable people experiencing harsh conditions to
leverage the power of social media. The expectation is that such a guideline would help the
most vulnerable draw the attention of other members of the community, authorities and
mainstream media to the conditions they are in. The proposal of this framework is based on the
theory of mediatized conflict and analysis of the hashtag #FallecidosCovid19Ec on Twitter. This
hashtag helped organize scattered experiences, raise media attention and pressure officials to
respond to urgent demands.
Keywords: user-generated content; video activism; indexing; social media; covid-19; Ecuador
*Risk Management Consultant, Japan. muehara79@gmail.com

Introduction
Politicians are susceptible to mainstream news (​Street, 2010)​. They are aware of the necessity
to quickly respond to or debunk media narratives to enforce their agenda (​Green-Pedersen &
Stubager, 2010)​. Authorities have resorted to social media platforms to address unfavorable
media reports (​Lee & Xu, 2018)​. Social media platforms allow authorities to directly
communicate with their constituents at their own pace and convenience (​Yang et al., 2016)​.
Authorities no longer rely on large media networks to reach society to spread and reinforce their
political views (​Hong & Kim, 2016). The same is true for constituents. They can now directly and
publicly reach politicians to voice their concerns and easily and quickly share experiences with
others (​Straus, & Glassman, 2016)​. They can do so using text or image.

Eyewitness media is a byproduct of this mode of direct and instant communication. People at
the frontline can instantly share what they are seeing on the ground (​Ristovska, 2016)​. They
need, however, access to a smartphone and wireless connection to register and distribute these
experiences. When these resources are absent, they rely on journalists or savvy citizens to
uncover what is happening on the ground. This is what happened, for instance, during the
covid-19 epidemic in the city of Guayaquil in Ecuador. After a local journalist exposed the
collapse of the public health and emergency systems, this emergency quickly came under the
mainstream media spotlight (MisionesOnline, 2020). This paper argues that the plight of the
vulnerable in this Ecuadorian city could have been anticipated and further mitigated had citizens
received some basic training on how to leverage the power of social media. This is the problem
that this paper tackles. It does so by analyzing the development and structure of the content
associated with the hashtag #FallecidosCovid19Ec. The objective is to transfer this practical
knowledge to those aiming to empower the most vulnerable with skills and resources that
reduce risks observed in precarious livelihoods (​Carr et al., 2018).
Theory
Mortensen (2014) lays out a theory on the role of eyewitness in contemporary journalism.
Mortensen’s theory is called mediatized conflict. Mortensen developed this theory out of
previous work on ​mediatization theory. Mediatization argues that the media is an intrinsic part of
institutions and organizations. The media is essential in shaping the perceptions of culture and
society (Mortensen, 2014). Mediatized conflict explores the tension between opposing interests
and strategies in the context of media and conflict (Mortensen, 2014).
Mortensen’s theory specifically looks at the conflict between top-down and bottom-up efforts to
produce and distribute media content. The top-down dimension is controlled by central
authorities. They make use of institutionalized news media to push their vested interests
(Mortensen, 2014). The bottom-up dimension consists of non-elite actors. These actors often
challenge the elite framings of conflict. These non-professionals rely on social networks to
spread news as they do not possess access to established media networks (Mortensen, 2014).
The advent of digital technologies has served as a springboard to the bottom-up movement.
Camera phones connected to the Internet help non-professionals produce and circulate their

images (Mortensen, 2014). Eyewitness recordings have already been part of many major
conflicts and disasters since the terrorist attack in the US on September 11th, 2001 (Mortensen,
2014). Diffused recordings have helped governments respond to crises such as the Boston
Marathon Bombing in 2013 and communities object top-down narratives like the abuse of
inmates in the Abu Ghraib prison in 2004 (Mortensen, 2014). The battle between these two
forces consist mainly on who can control and shape the public’s mediated knowledge and
experience of conflict (Mortensen, 2014).
Mortensen adds that the bottom-up movement faces critical challenges in its fight against
institutionalized channels of communication. Mortensen (2014:4) explains that non-professional
images are ‘habitually considered authentic on account of their urgency, immediacy, and
handheld ‘amateur’ aesthetics’. Amateur aesthetics, however, are generally not founded on
objectivity, autonomy, and transparency, which are integral parts of standard journalistic
procedure (Mortensen, 2014). The framework proposed in this article makes recommendations
for non-professionals on how they can meet journalism standards while keeping the
documentation of their experiences authentic.
Method
The covid-19 epidemic collapsed the public health and emergency systems in the city of
Guayaquil, Ecuador. As a result, the sick started dying at home. The local government struggled
to collect all the deceased. In response to this calamity, a local journalist created on March 31st,
2020, a thread on Twitter with the hashtag #FallecidosCovid19Ec under which she started
posting information on the deceased not collected from homes (Pesantes, 2020). This hashtag
helped local authorities locate the bodies.
The news posted in this thread depicts the battle over narrative control. For instance, the first
tweet of this journalist on the novel coronavirus happened on February 29th, 2020 (Pesantes,
2020a). The content of this tweet leads to an article in which local authorities aimed at setting
expectations over an uncertain scenario. However, on March 21st, 2020, this journalist made
public that the local government was struggling to collect all the dead bodies across the city
(Pesantes, 2020b).

One of the first recordings of an uncollected body in Ecuador posted on Twitter apparently
caused by the novel coronavirus appeared on March 26th, 2020 (ManabaDice, 2020). This
footage, from a hindsight, can be trusted. Its content, however, could not be immediately
considered a reliable source as it could not be traced to the person who recorded it. Despite this
shortcoming, the framework of such an account provides a guideline to be replicated by other
people willing to bring attention to the dire situation they find themselves in.
Testimonial videos need to be short and focused (​Finkler & Leon, 2019). ​Media values content
that are brief, unexpected and informative (​Caple, 2018). ​Under these features, the framework
of an impactful digital account can be divided into three parts: i) subject, ii) structure and iii)
platform (Figure 1).
The ​subject part of the video covers three parts. Authorship attribution is facilitated when the
person recording starts off revealing his/her identity and accurately informs where the event is
taking place (​Rocha et al., 2016). ​The next step is object description which requires a clear
description of the problem (​Campbell et al., 2018) ​from a first person narrative supported by
visuals (​Labrecque et al., 2020). ​In this description, it is also important to cite actions that
attempted to amend this problem if they exist. The third step is emotional valence and this
occurs by openly revealing how an experience has psychologically affected the author of the
video (​Nikolinakou, & King, 2018).
As for the ​structure of testimonial digital footages, the issue under consideration needs to be
engulfed in a sense of urgency and thus requiring immediate attention and action (​Baccarella et
al., 2018). The author’s focus is on adding as much visual information as possible about the
problem and its context (​Grosser et al., 2019). ​The quality of the video itself is less important as
viewers are not seeking for aesthetics but information cues that showcase that such a piece is
genuine, original and trustworthy (Mortensen, 2014). The last step before publishing is carefully
selecting the hashtags that will help the target audience, beyond the author’s followers, locate
this video and amplify the call for action (​Enli & Simonsen, 2018)​.
Hashtags need to be descriptive. They should be accompanied by a brief text explaining the
main reason for publishing and distributing such a video. They serve to i) summarize a problem;

ii) determine specific, regional and national locations; and iii) add a particular experience to a
collective concern or movement already in place (​Wang et al., 2016).
Platform is the last part of this guideline. The first choice is selecting the social media to transmit
or submit the footage recorded. This paper suggests Twitter because of its simplicity and
penetration in mass media networks and among decision makers (​Krutka & Carpenter, 2016).
Twitter also helps users easily identify and connect with people facing similar issues (​Jost et al.
2018). ​This platform also helps users directly send their content to journalists and politicians by
adding their usernames to messages. This direct mode of communication ensures that a
problem is publicly registered under the attention of authorities responsible for addressing it
(​Shapiro & Hemphill, 2017).
Users uploading original content onto social media platforms need to make themselves
available to respond to media and public inquiries. Quick turnaround to these inquiries ensure
that a piece of digital content can be trusted and clarified (​Godler & Reich, 2017). The last step
is consistency which means that users need to provide regular updates on how the
development of an issue reported has so far been addressed (​Pershad et al., 2018). ​These
updates encourage others to share similar experiences. They also help the audience increase
trust levels of shared content and gauge how they could contribute to responding to this
emergency.

Figure 1. Social Media Video Guide

Results
The effective use of Twitter by an Ecuadorian journalist helped the most vulnerable in
Guayaquil. This journalist closely followed the development of this pandemic through
international, national and local news. This position allowed the journalist to appraise the
initiative of organizing uncollected bodies through a social media platform. The information
distributed through Twitter and the journalist’s existing professional network amplified the
experiences that the relatives of the deceased were facing. It also exposed the failure of the
local government to plan and respond to this emergency.
The public service provided by this journalist revealed a disorganized but widespread
bottom-up movement. In despair, the most vulnerable recorded their conditions but struggled to
translate the severity and magnitude of their experiences into action. It was a voluntary
intervention that allowed vulnerable families to have their voices reach authorities and share

with the country and the international media the tragic effects of the collapse of the public health
and emergency systems in Guayaquil.
This event shows that non-professionals can also tap into the power of social media to amplify
their concerns and gather support for their messages. The provision of a simple guideline on
how raw footage should be recorded, structured and distributed is expected to help the most
vulnerable and those working closely with them to grasp the basic lessons of effective
communication through social media in times of crisis. Such media training expects to help
individuals experiencing harsh conditions draw the attention of local authorities and have them
respond to their urgent needs (​Bennett & Pfetsch, 2018)​.
Discussion
The most vulnerable members of communities at risk have not yet harnessed the power of
social media to draw attention to their livelihood and counterbalance mainstream narratives.
They still require the help of media professionals to voluntarily side with them or random
individuals to empathize with their plight. The main issues of such deterrents are delay in
communication processes, social dependence (​Golpayegani et al., 2019)​, and prolonged and
unnecessary suffering. This paper aims to empower vulnerable individuals by providing a simple
guideline to amplify their voices in emergencies. It aims to help them directly connect with others
as well as authorities and professionals that can help address the urgent situations they are in.
It is expected that from such training, these individuals can more effectively start making calls
for actions. And they should no longer wait for others to make these calls on their behalf. The
expectation of creating and distributing digital stories without intermediaries is that a threat can
be earlier identified and mitigated.
There are some assumptions that weaken the implementation of this rhetoric and
communication strategy. It is correct to assume that a great number of people from vulnerable
groups cannot be characterized as netizens, or those that voluntarily create content for social
media platforms. This is because of their limited access to essential resources such as
smartphones and the Internet. It can also be wrongly assumed that vulnerable netizens can use
the proposed guideline to draw the attention of the media and authorities to every problem they
face. The underlying argument in this paper requires a sense of urgency to be in place for the

validation of a testimonial footage from a bottom-up perspective. Individuals, however, may still
draw attention to an upcoming threat if they effectively use social media to explain why an
emerging issue requires urgent action and how it might affect the livelihood of a great number of
people.
There are also the risks of privacy and safety in registering sensitive events. Individuals
recording a personal experience and revealing their identity to the public risk being stigmatized,
ostracized and misjudged (​MacPherson & Kerr, 2019). ​The other risk involved in registering
authentic experiences is the environment itself. Spontaneously recording an event may heighten
the risks of physical and verbal abuse for the individual doing so (​Gregory et al., 2005)​. Finally,
this paper assumes that netizens can directly reach professionals and authorities through
Twitter but this assumption does not hold true in many situations.
Acknowledgement
No conflict of interest to report. No funding to declare.
References
Baccarella, C. V., Wagner, T. F., Kietzmann, J. H., & McCarthy, I. P. (2018). Social media? It's
serious! Understanding the dark side of social media. ​European Management Journal​, ​36(​ 4),
431-438.
Bennett, W. L., & Pfetsch, B. (2018). Rethinking political communication in a time of disrupted
public spheres. ​Journal of Communication​, ​68(​ 2), 243-253.
Campbell, R., Martin, C., & Fabos, B. (2018). ​Media essentials: A brief introduction​. Bedford/St.
Martin's.
Caple, H. (2018). News values and newsworthiness. In ​Oxford Research Encyclopedia of
Communication​.
Carr, P. R., Pluim, G. W., & Howard, L. (2018). Engagement with the Mainstream Media and the
Relationship to Political Literacy: The Influence of Hegemonic Education on Democracy1. In
Democracy 2.0​ (pp. 65-81). Brill Sense.

Enli, G., & Simonsen, C. A. (2018). ‘Social media logic’ meets professional norms: Twitter
hashtags usage by journalists and politicians. ​Information, Communication & Society​, ​21​(8),
1081-1096.
Finkler, W., & Leon, B. (2019). The power of storytelling and video: a visual rhetoric for science
communication. ​Journal of Science Communication​, ​18(​ 5), A02.
Godler, Y., & Reich, Z. (2017). Journalistic evidence: Cross-verification as a constituent of
mediated knowledge. ​Journalism,​ ​18​(5), 558-574.
Golpayegani, F., Dusparic, I., & Clarke, S. (2019). Using social dependence to enable
neighbourly behaviour in open multi-agent systems. ​ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology (TIST),​ ​10​(3), 1-31.
Green-Pedersen, C., & Stubager, R. (2010). The political conditionality of mass media influence:
When do parties follow mass media attention?. ​British Journal of Political Science,​ ​40(​ 3),
663-677.
Gregory, S.; Caldwell, G.; Avni, R.; Harding, T. (2005). ​Video for Change: a guide for advocacy
and activism.​ Pluto Press London, Ann Harbor, MI.
Grosser, K. M., Hase, V., & Wintterlin, F. (2019). Trustworthy or shady? Exploring the influence
of verifying and visualizing user-generated content (UGC) on online journalism’s
trustworthiness. ​Journalism Studies​, ​20(​ 4), 500-522.
Hong, S., & Kim, S. H. (2016). Political polarization on twitter: Implications for the use of social
media in digital governments. ​Government Information Quarterly,​ ​33(​ 4), 777-782.
Jost, J. T., Barberá, P., Bonneau, R., Langer, M., Metzger, M., Nagler, J., ... & Tucker, J. A.
(2018). How social media facilitates political protest: Information, motivation, and social
networks. ​Political psychology​, ​39,​ 85-118.
Krutka, D. G., & Carpenter, J. P. (2016). Participatory learning through social media: How and
why social studies educators use Twitter. ​Contemporary Issues in Technology and Teacher
Education,​ ​16​(1), 38-59.
Labrecque, L. I., Swani, K., & Stephen, A. T. (2020). The impact of pronoun choices on
consumer engagement actions: Exploring top global brands' social media communications.
Psychology & Marketing​.
Lee, J., & Xu, W. (2018). The more attacks, the more retweets: Trump’s and Clinton’s agenda
setting on Twitter. ​Public Relations Review​, ​44​(2), 201-213.

MacPherson, E., & Kerr, G. (2019). Sport fans’ responses on social media to professional
athletes’ norm violations. ​International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology​, 1-18.
ManabaDice [@ManabaDice]. (2020, March 26). Insólito este gobierno. [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/ManabaDice/status/1242986972643307520
MisionesOnline (2020, April 1st). ​Coronavirus: se viralizó el dramático pedido de un periodista
ecuatoriano quien se quiebra ante cámaras por las decenas de muertos en las calles. R
​ etrieved
from
https://coronavirus.misionesonline.net/2020/04/01/coronavirus-se-viralizo-el-dramatico-pedido-d
e-un-periodista-ecuatoriano-quien-se-quiebra-ante-camaras-por-las-decenas-de-muertos-en-las
-calles/
Mortensen, M. (2014). ​Journalism and eyewitness images: Digital media, participation, and
conflict​. Routledge.
Nikolinakou, A., & King, K. W. (2018). Viral video ads: Emotional triggers and social media
virality. ​Psychology & Marketing​, ​35(​ 10), 715-726.
Pershad, Y., Hangge, P. T., Albadawi, H., & Oklu, R. (2018). Social medicine: Twitter in
healthcare. ​Journal of clinical medicine​, ​7(​ 6), 121.
Pesantes, B. M. [@Blankimonki]. (2020, March 31). En este hilo, para ayudar, publicaré a todos
los cadáveres a los que no han recogido. [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/Blankimonki/status/1244784847626874880
Pesantes, B. M. [@Blankimonki]. (2020a, Feb 29). El IESS desmiente que exista un caso de
coronavirus en Guayaquil. [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/Blankimonki/status/1233418505900503040
Pesantes, B. M. [@Blankimonki]. (2020b, March 21). Ese cadáver lleva ya 15 horas sin que se
haga nada. Se trata de una adulta mayor que en sus últimas horas de vida presentaba un
cuadro de afección respiratoria y tos. [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/Blankimonki/status/1241087530495348737
Ristovska, S. (2016). The rise of eyewitness video and its implications for human rights:
Conceptual and methodological approaches. ​Journal of Human Rights,​ ​15​(3), 347-360.
Rocha, A., Scheirer, W. J., Forstall, C. W., Cavalcante, T., Theophilo, A., Shen, B., ... &
Stamatatos, E. (2016). Authorship attribution for social media forensics. ​IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security,​ ​12​(1), 5-33.

Shapiro, M. A., & Hemphill, L. (2017). Politicians and the policy agenda: Does use of Twitter by
the US Congress direct New York Times content?. ​Policy & internet,​ ​9(​ 1), 109-132.
Straus, J. R., & Glassman, M. E. (2016). ​Social media in congress: The impact of electronic
media on member communications.​ Congressional Research Service.
Street, J. (2010). ​Mass media, politics and democracy.​ Macmillan International Higher
Education.
Wang, R., Liu, W., & Gao, S. (2016). Hashtags and information virality in networked social
movement. ​Online Information Review.​
Yang, X., Chen, B. C., Maity, M., & Ferrara, E. (2016, November). Social politics: Agenda
setting and political communication on social media. In ​International Conference on Social
Informatics​ (pp. 330-344). Springer, Cham.

