Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021

Pp. 307

-317

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.23
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19
Pandemic:A Reflection of a Procedural Writing Class
Listyani
English Language Education Program (ELEP)
Faculty of Language and Arts (FLA)
Universitas Kristen Satya Wacana
Salatiga, Indonesia

Received: 3/5/2021

Accepted: 4/12/2021

Published: 4/26/2021

Abstract
One of the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic in the world of education is the implementation
of online learning. Almost all teaching/learning activities must be changed and adjusted with the
virtual classes. One among other activities commonly done in an English language education
program is group work or collaborative work between or among students. Due to the pandemic
situation, this particular activity should also be done online. This study aims to describe
freshmen’s perspectives on collaborative work done in a Procedural Writing class. The teacher of
the writing class randomly paired the students to work collaboratively. There is only one
research question in this study: What challenges do Procedural Writing students experience in
doing collaborative learning during the pandemic COVID 19? Data were derived from
reflections that fourteen (14) Procedural Writing students at an English Language Education
Program (ELEP), UKSW, Indonesia, wrote in the sixth week of Semester II/ 2020-2021
academic year, and from interviews with two participants who said that they were not happy with
collaborative learning. Findings showed that in general, the freshmen felt that collaborative work
helped them write better, they got more ideas, helped in their grammar, and exchanged
knowledge. Only two students felt unhappy due to misunderstanding and ideas which were not
delivered successfully. This study will hopefully be useful for writing teachers, practitioners in
education, as well as students so that they will have a wider horizon of what writing students feel
and experience in collaborative learning during this pandemic era.
Keywords: freshmen, challenges, collaborative learning, Procedural Writing, COVID-19,
pandemic
Cite as: Listyani, L. (2021). Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during
COVID-19 Pandemic:A Reflection of a Procedural Writing Class . Arab World English Journal
(AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021 (1) 307-31.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/covid.23

307

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

Introduction
Online learning is a massive revolutionary in many companies. Up to 90% of
corporations use online learning by the year 2020. In 1995, it was only 4%. The E-learning
market is predicted to grow another 8% in 2026 (Anna, 2019). The world has been drastically
changing in many aspects for the past year. It was the outbreak of Coronavirus which caused all
these changes. The world seemed to start a new era in which the digital and virtual world is now
rising and becoming the top priority. The world of education is not an exception. All teaching/
learning processes and activities have shifted from offline to online ones.
According to Higley (2018), online learning environments are different from traditional
classroom learning opportunities. Online learning fosters additional learning experiences where
learners can interact, collaborate, and take ownership of their own learning. Cooperative work
has also changed in its form. It cannot be done directly anymore. Students have to meet virtually.
Many teachers still assign students to work collaboratively despite the pandemic COVID because
cooperative learning including group work can give many benefits to students. Laal and Ghodsi
(2012) mentioned that through collaborative learning, students learn to solve a problem,
complete a task, or complete a project.
Considering the positive values of collaborative work, like understanding and
appreciating others’ opinions as well as negotiation of meaning, the researcher perceived the
need to conduct this present study. The rationale underlying this study is that it is necessary to
describe and share what freshmen’s perspectives are about collaborative learning during
pandemic COVID. This study will hopefully add its value and significance as it will shed a light
to research under the area of collaborative learning and enrich more literature in that field.
This study is guided by one research question: What challenges do Procedural Writing
students experience in doing collaborative learning during the pandemic COVID 19? This
research is therefore aimed to describe what Procedural Writing students experience in doing
collaborative learning during the pandemic COVID 19. It is hoped that the results of this study
can help English teachers in the future to implement and maximize the use of collaborative
learning in the classroom to improve students’ procedural essays. Hopefully, EFL writing
teachers will still see the benefits of collaborative learning. Students can hopefully feel the
advantages as well.
Literature Review
Online Learning
Over the past year, since the outbreak of Coronavirus, many changes have happened in
the field of education. One way to keep the teaching and learning process going on is through
online learning. Online or distance learning has been very popular these days. Almost all systems
are shifting from direct or face-to-face activities to online ones. All learners should move to an
area where all teaching-learning processes are digitally and virtually done. Students of all levels
of education have to adapt and adjust themselves to this so-called virtual distant education.
Rudghhoff (2006) mentioned that online education or learning plays an important role in
language learning and teaching (as cited in Cinganotto, 2019). In line with Rudghhoff, Song,
Rice, and Oh (2019) also argued that online learning environments can be well understood as a
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

308

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

phenomenon of many facets or simply said, a phenomenon affected by many aspects.
Purarjomandlangrudi and Chen (2019) believed that online education is an educational medium
that enables both learners and teachers to interact with one another. Nonetheless, these learners
and teachers are located in different geographical locations. They can meet virtually at the same
time, or at different times.
Student interaction becomes one of the most important factors related to online learning,
according to Berg (2019). Teachers should ensure that all students are active and engaged, can
create their own knowledge, and can reach a high level of achievement. Interaction in distance
learning has been divided into three categories. They are interacting with content; interaction
with the instructor; and interaction with peers (Moore, 1989, as cited in Berg, 2019). Bouhnik
and Marcus (2006) added the fourth category of interaction. It is interaction with the system (as
cited in Berg, 2019).
Just like what a famous saying mentions, every coin has two sides; it means that
everything has its strengths and weaknesses. Online education is not an exception. Hameed,
Taiar, O'Leary and Kaynge (2018) claimed that there are many challenges of conducting online
distance learning. A potential lack of the required technology is the first challenge. The examples
are Internet access, laptops, or desktop computers. This further deals with the fees of subscribing
to these online learning templates. Then, there can also be problems around the need to have
technical support, and logistic issues. These technical problems can cause bad internet access. In
turn, it will affect the functioning of the virtual team. The choice of an experienced online
platform must, therefore, be considered carefully.
Secondly, Hameed, Taiar, O'Leary, and Kaynge (2018) explained that there may be
ethical issues about the protection of confidentiality in these sessions. This requires knowledge
of the relevant professional requirements, like the tutor team, for example. Other than that, the
student-teacher relationship has traditionally been trademarked by direct face-to-face or direct
contact and being present at the same time and place, that is, in the classrooms surrounded by
walls. Consequently, learners and educators may be less satisfied with online learning. For these
reasons, the concept of blended learning, which is an integration of online learning with the faceto-face learning experience, has been developed to overcome the limitations of stand-alone
online or face-to-face learning and has been found effective and applicable in various settings.
The third challenge is that all kinds of distance online learning programs must understand
and support the existence of the training provision as well as arrangements, both in the classroom
and in the workplace. This means liaison and cooperation with the training providers and
institutions are required. Liauw, Huang, and Cheng (2007) added that the base of learning
activity in online learning is learner autonomy and interactive learning actions (as cited in Omar,
Hassan & Atan, 2012).
Since the first quarter of 2020, the world “has been forced” to apply the online teachinglearning process due to the pandemic. Whether they were ready or not or whether they liked it or
not, they had to shift from the ordinary face-to-face Teaching/Learning Process (TLP) to the
virtual, digital one. Four-wall classrooms have been substituted by virtual classrooms without
walls. There has been a massive change from a normal offline TLP to the online one. With these
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

309

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

great changes, all parties, the government, teachers, parents, as well as students have to adapt to
the new system. All learning activities have been designed in such a way that they can be done
virtually. This includes collaborative work which should also be done online. Not much research
has been done in this area, which therefore creates a gap between the ideal condition of
collaborative learning and the reality experienced by foreign language learners. Discussed below
is the implementation of online collaborative learning during the pandemic.
Collaborative Learning
Working collaboratively with other people may not be easy. There can be different ideas,
different opinions, as well as difficulties in interrelating ideas. Misunderstanding often happens,
leading to uneasiness between and among learners. However, there are many positive sides of
collaborative learning that can be explored. According to Laal and Ghodsi (2011), one benefit of
using collaborative learning in the classroom is that it involves students, and they will absolutely
be more actively engaged in classroom activities. Students are also “forced” to communicate and
interact with others when playing games.
In spite of the benefits that can be felt from collaborative learning, there are also
challenges that arise during the implementation. Firstly, all learners have different styles of
learning. There are students who like to work in groups, but there are also learners who dislike it.
Not everyone can work with others successfully. Secondly, students who do not like working in
groups will participate less because of their lack of confidence or low self-esteem, which
possibly leads to inferiority to their peer students. In order to suit the students’ characteristics,
while they are still in the transitional phase from junior to senior high school and they still like to
play, teachers need to be aware of the different kinds of approaches for activities in the
classroom.
Laal and Ghodsi (2011) defined collaborative learning as an educational approach in
teaching and learning where the learners work together in a group in order to complete a task,
solve a problem, or create a product. Gerlach (1994) pointed out that collaborative learning is
based on the participants’ interaction through their conversations when the learning occurs (as
cited in Bishnoi, 2017). Problems, questions, or the challenge to create something all drive the
group activity, and everyone is supposed to be actively participating. It a situation where two or
more people learn together.
Methods like cooperative learning, group learning, peer learning, learning community,
and constructive learning are often used interchangeably with collaborative learning (Campbell
& Li, 2006). Collaborative learning is a kind of method that has a positive impact on students. It
is a powerful tool in learning and has the potential to be used in ways that can make a great
impact on classroom language learning. According to Overtoom (2001), collaborative learning
has benefits in enhancing the students’ employability skills because it supports active learning
and self-discovery.
Another expert, Hedge (2000), further claimed that anytime students of different
performance levels work together in one group, they will be responsible for their peers’ learning
process instead of merely being accountable for their own interests. In collaborative learning, the
ideas and information shared by the students are a valuable learning source for every student in
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

310

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

the class. The interactions among the participants in a group, such as feedback or revisions, are a
means of identifying strengths and weaknesses to improve performance and even to develop
speaking skills. Many researchers have conducted studies on how collaborative learning provides
benefits - especially in teaching speaking. However, not much has been done in the area of
online collaborative learning.
Another study by Pattanpichet (2011) found a surprising fact that working in groups can
grow familiarity and friendships among students. When collaborative learning is used in large
classrooms such as arranging students into group work, it helps to create an atmosphere or habit
of sharing knowledge. With the help of collaborative learning, students also learn to work in a
team. This can help them develop their social skills which will be useful for their work
environment in the future.
Higley (2018) argued that online collaborative learning should be maintained.
Collaborative learning rooted in constructivism. It views learning as a process, learners actively
engage in new ideas through collaborative grouping situations. Still, according to Higley,
constructivism is a good theoretical framework for E-Learning considering that it guarantees that
learning happens among all learners. Through collaborative learning, all learners are actively
engaged.
In line with Higley, McLeod (2019) also explained the idea of constructivism. It states
that learners construct meaning through active engagement with the world. They do this through
experiments or real-world problem-solving. Vygotsky (1978) believed that the community plays
an essential role in the process of meaning-making (as cited in McLeod, 2019). Still, according
to Vygotsky the environment where children grow up will influence their way of thinking and
what they think about (as cited in McLeod, 2019). Therefore, all teaching and learning is a
matter of sharing and negotiating the “socially-constituted knowledge” (Vygotsky, as cited in
McLeod, 2019). It is within the zone of proximal development that children and their peers
construct knowledge.
Methods
This study was conducted in Semester II, 2020/2021 academic year, in English Language
Education Program (ELEP), in UKSW, a private university in Central Java Indonesia. Data from
this study were derived from fourteen (14) students’ reflections submitted online to a learning
management system on February 20, 2021. Online interviews through WhatsApp call on March
1, 2021, were also conducted with two students. In the sixth week of the semester, after they
experienced collaborative work twice with their peer students, they were asked to write their
reflections on what they thought of the collaborative work in that particular class. Two students
were then interviewed for the sake of data triangulation.
Participants
The participants in this study were fourteen (14) freshmen who took Procedural Writing
class, group C. Their age range was between 19 and 20 years old. There were five male and nine
female students. These students were in the second semester of their college years. They entered
the study program in 2020. It means that since the beginning of their study up to the time the
research was conducted, they had never had offline classes. Altogether there were 42 students of
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

311

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

parallel Procedural Writing classes. The class taught by the researcher was group C. All the
students in group C were involved as research participants. The sampling technique is thus
considered convenience sampling since the researcher was also the teacher of group C.
Instruments
This current study only used two research instruments, the first one is guided reflections
submitted on February 20, 2021, and the other is online interview protocol via WhatsApp call on
March 1, 2021. There is only one guiding question for the reflection: How did you feel about the
collaborative work with your peer students? Was it easy? Was it difficult?
The second instrument is the in-depth interview. The interview questions are
confirmation for unclear statements, starting with What do you mean by…please explain. All
participants were allowed to answer either in English or Indonesian, both in the reflections and
online interviews. All of them used English for the reflections, and Indonesian for the interviews,
considering that this was to avoid misunderstanding. Besides that, they did not have to think of
the English grammar and vocabulary.
Research Procedures
Procedural Writing class is a compulsory subject to be taken by the second-semester students of
an ELEP, in a private university in Central Java. It is the second writing class that they have to
take, after the Creative Writing class. It is a writing course in which students are taught to write
procedural essays. The objective of the course is to make students able to write pieces of writing
showing series of procedures (ELEP, 2021). Altogether, they have to write four procedural
essays; the first three of which are written collaboratively. The first writing that the participants
had to make was one paragraph only, the second a three-paragraph essay, the third a fiveparagraph essay and the fourth was an individual five-paragraph essay. The fourteen participants
in this study were second-semester freshmen.
Results
Throughout the semester, the participants had to write pieces of writing collaboratively.
Data were taken after they wrote their second essays, which means that they had experienced
writing essays twice with their peers. All of the participants admitted that they had online
discussions via WhatsApp messages. Shown below is Table one consisting of the fourteen
Procedural Writing students’ opinions on collaborative learning.
Table 1. Procedural students’ opinions on collaborative learning
Students’
Initials
A
(M)

Students’ Opinions
First, there was no problem. We were having an online discussion. The problem
dealt with a cellular network and the ideas that we had, but everything was still
going on well till the work was done.

B
(M)

I could have more ideas. However, we had problems finding time to work
together. It took more time.

C
(M)

I enjoy it. Though we discuss online, we don't have any significant problem.
Sometimes, there is a problem with the network of our mobiles. Besides that,

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

312

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

sometimes there are ideas that cannot be conveyed because we don't meet face to
face. However, in terms of the division of tasks, sharing of opinions, and giving
suggestions, we don't have any problem.
D
(F)

I am happy to collaborate with my partner. We've been through a lot of repeating
sentences, checking them again, and again. Sometimes we have problems with
the network. We feel it difficult, but we are happy.

E
(M)

I feel happy because I work with a friend I have known before. We can discuss
things and share our opinions comfortably. However, we have a little problem in
deciding the topic, but we have a good discussion about it.

F
(F)

I feel full of the spirit because there is fun and we can share our own opinions
and combine them.

G
(F)

It's been a unique experience for me. We discussed things through group chats or
virtual meetings. It's hard to communicate that way because sometimes people
misunderstand us.

H
(F)

I find it enjoyable, we can share opinions when writing essays. Working with
friends can add relationships and tell each other if there are errors in writing the
essay.

I
(F)

I feel happy and it helps me to do the assignment. I like it and I'm happy because
now I have a close friend. I feel lonely doing an assignment alone.

J
(F)

Happy and grateful because I can make a good relationship with my friend
during the collaborative work, I also divided the work with my friend, so we
could finish faster.

K
(F)

Sometimes there is misunderstanding and confusion in choosing the right words
for our essay, thank God we got feedback from the lecturer, so we can fix our
draft.

L
(M)

I have good discussions with my friend. We always exchange ideas for our tasks.

M
(F)

It's very good. I can share my opinions and we can share knowledge and opinions
about the materials and assignments given.

N
(F)

I have good cooperation with my partner. My partner always did his part fast and
enthusiastically. I have no complaints about him.

From the online interviews with Student G and Student K on March 1, 2021, both
explained that the misunderstanding happened because they used written texts to communicate.
Sometimes their partners did not use any punctuations at all which made them unable to get the
points. “We just discussed things via WA messages. I did not know my friend’s intonation in
“speaking”. One day, when editing our essay, my partner misunderstood me and edited another
part, not the one I asked her to,” Student K stated. Student G added, “Maybe if we meet face-toface, the situation would be different. There could be chemistry between us.” Further analysis
will be presented in the discussion section.
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

313

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

Discussion
As previously mentioned, students were asked to write a reflection in the sixth week of
the semester. The answers were summarized in Table one. From Table one, it can be clearly seen
that 12 out of 14 students (85.71%) felt happy with the collaborative work in writing. Only
Student G and Student K (14. 29%) seemed unhappy with the collaborative work. These two
students were good students. They always achieved high in their courses. Unfortunately, their
partners in writing happened to be their peer students who were less able than they were. Indeed,
this could be a problem when the students working collaboratively were not compatible in terms
of proficiency. Andriessen et al. (2003), as cited in Noroozi, Weinberger, Biemans, Mulder, and
Mohammad Chizari (2012), mentioned that differences in positions or incompatible views while
learners are constructing counter-arguments might potentially trigger socio-cognitive conflicts.
Dealing with time or schedule clash, there is only one participant, Student B, who
admitted that he had problems finding the right time with his partner. This is in line with what
Tamm (2019) and Anna (2020) stated, that one of the disadvantages of online learning is ELearning requires strong time management skills. Included in time management are the
arrangement, organization, making of schedules, and plan. It is about someone’s time with the
goal of achieving both effective work and output. This also means allocation distribution which
is deliberate and the structuring of time among competing demands. All this is based on priority.
People cannot store time and its accessibility cannot be enlarged over twenty-four hours
(Adebayo & Omojola, 2015, as cited in Tambaya, 2019).
Four participants, Student E, Student H, Student I, and Student J mentioned that they
were happy with the collaborative work since they could make new friends. These students were
from the 2020 class year who never met face-to-face before. For them, it was a special blessing
to have new friends and they could get close to these new partners. Student I showed her
contentment dealing with this matter, “I feel happy and it helps me to do the assignment. I like it
and I'm happy because now I have a close friend. I feel lonely to do an assignment alone.”
Getting a chance to share knowledge is another reason for liking collaborative learning.
As many as seven students (50%) felt glad because they could share knowledge as well as
opinions with their partners. These are Student B, Student C, Student E, Student F, Student H,
Student L, and Student M. This was also stated by Hedge (2000). She mentioned that that
anytime students of different performance levels work together in one group, they will be
responsible for their peers’ learning process instead of merely accountable for their own
interests. In collaborative learning, the ideas and information shared by the students are a
valuable learning source for every student in the class.
There is another opinion of the participant dealing with English structure. One student
mentioned that she was helped in terms of grammar. This was stated by Student D, “I am happy
to collaborate with my partner. We've been through a lot of repeating sentences, checking them
again, and again. Sometimes we have problems with the network. We feel it difficult, but we are
happy.” A study conducted by Ghorbani & Nezamoshari’e (2012) on 62 female freshmen
majoring in different fields like Law, Accounting, and Economics at Ashkhane Distance
Learning University, Ashkhane, Iran, also found that collaborative learning improved both high
as well as low achievers. All these respondents were native speakers of Persian.
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

314

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

Problems with the cellular network were experienced by Student A, Student C, and
Student D. This is a very common problem experienced by many students who are doing online
learning. Caballé, Xhafa, and Barolli (2021) asserted that modern mobile collaborative learning
environments have to provide advanced enablement for the distribution of learning activities.
The necessary functionalities and learning resources should also be provided to all participants,
regardless of where the participants and resources are located, and whether this location is static
or dynamic. However, all the participants in this present study stayed in their hometowns all over
Indonesia. In some parts, internet network availability was still unstable. Dealing with internet
data plans, Efriana (2021) explained that even though the internet is in students’ hands, they still
face difficulty accessing the internet network because of the areas where they live. A study
conducted by Nashruddin, Alam, and Tanasy (2020), as cited in Efriana (2021), found that some
students live in remote rural areas which are not covered by the internet. In addition, their
cellular network is sometimes unstable. This is caused by the geographical location which is far
from the signal coverage. This becomes a problem that happens to many students who take
online learning. This results in less effective implementation of online learning.
Besides data from the reflections, four students were also interviewed. From Participants
E, J, H, and I’s answers about friendship, it could be seen that collaborative work can become a
kind of “platform” for these freshmen to make friends. This is in line with a study done by
Pattanpichet (2011). He found a surprising fact that working in groups can grow familiarity and
friendships among students. When collaborative learning is used in large classrooms such as
arranging students into group work, it helps to create a “knowledge-sharing atmosphere”. With
the help of collaborative learning, students also learn to work in a team, and this can help in
developing their social skills for the work environment in the future.
Conclusion
As previously mentioned, there is only one research question addressed in this study, that
is, What challenges do Procedural Writing students experience in doing collaborative learning
during the pandemic COVID 19? From the discussion above, there are several conclusions that
can be drawn. First, in both online and offline situations, collaborative learning is necessary to
build students’ soft skills. They can learn to share ideas, opinions, knowledge, as well as
information. Besides that, they could learn to express their opinions, argue, accept, and negotiate
others’ opinions with good mannerism. Secondly, collaborative learning is good to build good
relationships between and among students. EFL teachers should think of various ways of
assigning students to do collaborative activities including group and pair work.
There are however some limitations of this current study. This study was limited in the
number of participants. Future researchers can have more participants involving more students
and employing more research instruments for data triangulation. Future studies can also be
conducted on different levels of writing classes with different levels of students like semaphores
or third-year students. This study hopefully can add useful insights both for teachers and students
of writing in general, particularly of Procedural Writing class.
The pedagogical implications of this study are stated as follows. It is time that EFL
teachers, not only at the tertiary level but also at the secondary level, think of online
collaborative activities which are suitable for their students. All activities should ideally be
Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

315

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

adjusted with the students’ condition and proficiency level. The idea is to make students learn
from one another during this pandemic without any pressure. The group should work together for
the betterment of all group members. It is just like what Phil Jackson mentions, “The strength of
the team is each individual member. The strength of each member is the team” (Alexander, 2017,
p. 1).
About the Author:
Listyani has been a lecturer at ELEP/ PBI, FLA/ FBS, UKSW, Indonesia, since March 1999. In
August 2017, she got her Doctorate degree from UNNES Indonesia, majoring in English
Language Education. In November 2020, she got her professorship from the Indonesian
Government, majoring in the same field. ORCiD ID:http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3284-9434

References
lexander, M. (2017). 60 quotes to inspire collaboration in the new year. Retrieved from
https://blog.mavenlink.com/60-quotes-to-inspire-collaboration-in-the-new-year
Anna. (2020). Our top 5 advantages and disadvantages of online learning. Retrieved from
https://www.easy-lms.com/knowledge-center/lms-knowledge-center/advantages-anddisadvantages-of-online-learning/item12529
Berg, G.V.D. (2019). How important is interaction to students? A case study in open distance
learning. Retrieved from
http://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=4&sid=427c3ef3-db594417-b19e-910a42affade%40sessionmgr103
Bishnoi, N. (2017). Collaborative learning: A learning tool advantages and disadvantages. Indian
Journal of Health and Well-being, 8(8), 850-852.
Caballé, S., Xhafa, F., & Barolli, L. (2021). Using mobile devices to support online collaborative
learning. Retrieved from:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220056796_Using_Mobile_Devices_to_Suppor
t_Online_Collaborative_Learning
Campbell, J., & Li, M. (2006). Asian students’ perceptions of group work and group assignments
in a New Zealand tertiary institution. Proceedings of EDU-COM International
Conference (pp. 78-89). Perth Western Australia: Edith Cowan University. Retrieved
from http://ro.ecu.edu.au/ceducom/64
Cinganotto, L. (2019). Online interaction in teaching and learning a foreign language: an Italian
pilot project on the companion volume to the CEFR. Je-LKS Pre-Reviewed Papers –
Embracing language awareness and language diversity in the 21st century, 5(1), 136152. Retrieved from
http://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=13&sid=40287c75-e8b0440a-b195-bf14b340209b%40pdc-v-sessmgr04
Efriana, L. (2021). Problems of Online Learning during Covid-19 Pandemic in EFL Classroom
and the Solution. JELITA: Journal of English Language Teaching and Literature, 2(1),
38-47.
ELEP, UKSW. (Producer). (2021). Procedural Writing Handbook. Salatiga: ELEP, UKSW.
Ghorbani, M.R. & Nezamoshari’e, M. Cooperative Learning Boosts EFL Students’ Grammar
Achievement University of Bojnord, Bojnord, Iran. Theory and Practice in Language
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
316
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on Covid 19 Challenges April 2021
Indonesian Freshmen’s Challenges in Collaborative Learning during COVID-19

Listyani

Studies, 2(7), 1465-1471. Retrieved from
http://www.academypublication.com/issues/past/tpls/vol02/07/18.pdf
Hameed, Y., Taiar, H.A., O'Leary, D., & Kaynge, L. (2018). Can Online Distance Learning
improve access to learning in conflict zones? The Oxford Psychiatry in Iraq (OxPIQ)
Experience. British Journal of Medical Practitioners, 11(2), 19-26. Retrieved from
http://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=5&sid=427c3ef3-db594417-b19e-910a42affade%40sessionmgr103
Hedge, T. (2000). Teaching and learning in the language classroom. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Higley, M. (2018). Reasons why collaborative online learning activities are effective. Retrieved
from https://elearningindustry.com/collaborative-online-learning-activities-reasons-effective
Laal, M., & Ghodsi, S. M. (2012). Benefits of collaborative learning. Procedia - Social and
Behavioral Science. 31, 486-490. doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.12.091.
McLeod, S. (2019). Constructivism as a theory for teaching and learning. Retrieved from
https://www.simplypsychology.org/constructivism.html
Noroozi, O., Weinberger , A., Biemans, H.J.A., Mulder, M., and Chizari, M. (2012).
Argumentation-Based Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (ABCSCL): A
synthesis of 15 years of research. Educational Research Review, 7(12), 79-106. Retrieved
from https://www.mmulder.nl/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/Noroozi-2012Argumentation-based-computer-supported-collaborative-learning-ABCSCL.pdf
Omar, N.D., Hassan, H., & Atan, H. (2012). Student engagement in online learning: Learners
attitude toward E-Mentoring. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 67, 464 – 475.
Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/257718366_Student_Engagement_in_Online_L
earning_Learners_Attitude_Toward_E-Mentoring
Overtoom, C. (2001). Employability skills: An update. 20-35 35.
Pattanpichet, F. (2011). The effects of using collaborative learning to enhance students’ English
speaking achievement. Journal of College Teaching & Learning, 8(11), 1-10. Retrieved
from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ952409
Purarjomandlangrudi, A., & Chen, D. (2019). A causal loop approach to uncover
interrelationship of student online interaction and engagement and their contributing
factors. Research in Learning Technology, 27, 1-16. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.25304/rlt.v27.2058
Song, D., Rice, M., & Oh, E.Y. (2019). Participation in Online Courses and Interaction With a
Virtual Agent. International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning,
20(1), 43-63. Retrieved from
http://web.b.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdfviewer/pdfviewer?vid=8&sid=40287c75-e8b0440a-b195-bf14b340209b%40pdc-v-sessmgr04
Tambaya, L. (2019). Relationship between examination anxiety and time management among
university students. Master’s thesis. Near East University Graduate School of Social
Sciences General Psychology Program. Nicosia. Retrieved from
http://docs.neu.edu.tr/library/6727597846.pdf
Tamm, S. (2019). The disadvantages of E-Learning. Retrieved from
https://e-student.org/disadvantages-of-e-learning/

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

317

