Maintaining trust in a pandemic: Blood collection agency messaging to donors and the public during
the early days of COVID-19
Jennie Haw,1,2 Rachel Thorpe,3,4 and Kelly Holloway5, 6
Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, 1800 Alta Vista Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1G 4J5, Canada

1

Department of Health Sciences, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6,

2

Canada
Clinical Services and Research, Australian Red Cross Lifeblood, 417 St. Kilda Road, Melbourne, Victoria

3

3005 Australia
Centre for Health Equity, Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of

4

Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia
Centre for Innovation, Canadian Blood Services, 67 College Street, Toronto, ON, M6G 2M1, Canada

5

Abstract
COVID-19 has posed unprecedented challenges to health systems around the world, including blood
collection agencies (BCAs). Many countries, such as Canada and Australia, that rely on non-remunerated
voluntary donors, saw an initial drop in donors in the early days of the pandemic followed by a return to
sufficient levels of the blood supply. BCA messaging plays a key role in communicating the needs of the
blood operator, promoting and encouraging donation, educating, and connecting with the public and
donors. This paper reports on discourse analysis (Bloor and Bloor, 2013) of BCA messaging in Canada
and Australia from March 1-July 31, 2020 to understand how BCAs constructed donation to encourage
donation during this period and what this can tell us about public trust and blood operators. Drawing on
multiple sources of online content and print media, our analysis identified four dominant messages
during the study period: 1) blood donation is safe; 2) blood donation is designated an essential activity;
3) blood is needed; and 4) blood donation is a response to the pandemic. In Canada and Australia, our
analysis suggests that: 1) implicit within constructions of blood donation as safe is the message that
BCAs can be trusted; 2) messages that construct blood donation as essential and needed implicitly ask
donors to trust BCAs in order to share in the commitment of meeting patient needs; and 3) the
pandemic has made possible the construction of blood donation as both an exceptional and
commonplace activity. For BCAs, our analysis supports donor communications that are transparent and
responsive to public concerns, and the local context, to support public trust. Beyond BCAs, health
organizations and leaders cannot underestimate the importance of building and maintaining public trust
as countries continue to struggle with containment of the virus and encourage vaccine uptake.

Keywords:
Blood donation; blood collection agencies; public trust; COVID-19; messaging; discourse analysis

1. Introduction
On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared COVID-19 a global pandemic posing unprecedented
challenges to health, social, and economic systems around the world. Since then, blood collection
agencies (BCAs) worldwide have experienced challenges in maintaining adequate blood supplies,
reporting decreases in donations of up to 30% in some areas early in the pandemic (Gammon et al.,
2021, Leung and Lee, 2020, Loua et al., 2021, Silva-Malta et al., Stanworth et al., 2020). Many countries
responded to concerns about the impact of the pandemic on blood supplies by implementing measures
to reduce the demand for blood, such as cancelling elective surgery (Stanworth et al., 2020), while BCAs
issued call outs for donors (Mohammadi et al., 2020). Studies have reported that these measures
successfully mitigated shortages in the short-term, however the problem of maintaining the blood
supply in these unprecedented circumstances is a long-term one, given the longevity and unique
features of this pandemic, and ongoing demand for blood for procedures that require transfusion
(Nieto-Calvache et al., 2020). During previous national crises, such as 9/11 in the United States and
bushfires in Australia, donors and non-donors have been shown to respond positively to calls to donate
blood (Glynn et al., 2003, Spekman et al., 2021, Tran et al., 2010). However, during COVID-19 social
distancing measures and government lock-downs have limited people’s movement and mobility and the
ability of BCAs to hold mobile collection events. Beyond the logistical challenges of following public
health guidelines, maintaining physical distancing and limiting the numbers of people that can
congregate, BCAs must also respond to the social and psychological concerns of donors, the general
public, and staff during these times of uncertainty and increased anxiety (Haw et al., 2020, Stanworth et
al., 2020). Many BCAs also started collecting convalescent plasma and have faced challenges
encouraging donors to come forward for this purpose (Gehrie et al., 2020). Despite these challenges, In
Australia and Canada, following initial increases in donor cancellations, blood supply has maintained
sufficient levels suggesting strong public and donor response (Dawkins, 2020, Tomazin, 2020).

BCA messaging plays a key role in communicating the needs of the blood operator, promoting
and encouraging donation, educating, and connecting with the public and donors. To be effective, BCA
messages must draw on sociocultural scripts regarding blood donation that make sense and are
understandable to the communities and publics that they aim to reach (Healy, 2000, Raivola, 2020).
Moreover, messaging plays a role in shaping, constructing, and re-constructing these scripts that aim to
communicate a shared, and perhaps aspirational, understanding of the relations between the blood
operator, donors, and patients. Through these scripts, messaging communicates ideas about roles,
responsibilities, expectations, and commitments between these various social actors. In many western
countries, including Canada and Australia, trust is a key component in the relationship between BCAs
and donors and underlies sociocultural scripts on blood donation (Raivola 2020). Beyond its importance
in ensuring sufficiency of the blood supply during COVID-19, public trust in health organizations and
leaders is increasingly recognized as critical to encouraging adherence to public health
recommendations and, more recently, vaccine uptake (Goldenberg 2020).
This paper is a discourse analysis of messaging by CBS and Lifeblood to donors and the public
during the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic. To our knowledge, no research has examined BCA
messaging during a pandemic and none has considered how BCAs construct donation during a national
crisis and what this can tell us about public trust and blood operators. The guiding questions in our
analysis were: How do CBS and Lifeblood construct blood donation in their messaging to the public and
donors? What can the messaging tell us about the trust relationship between BCAs and donors in the
context of a pandemic?

1.1. Background
BCAs are embedded within health, regulatory, and administrative structures that shape blood
collection systems, including who and how they recruit and how blood is collected. They operate within

specific historical, political, and sociocultural contexts which influence their messaging and rhetorical
strategies and the sociocultural scripts that underlie these messages (Charbonneau & Smith 2015). The
messages have to “make sense” to the public in order for them to respond to the call for donations.
Moreover, blood donation is a social practice that requires not only individual resources and personal
motivations but is shaped by institutional and sociocultural factors that influence who is able to donate
and why they donate (Charbonneau and Smith, 2015, Healy, 2006, Piliavin, 1991). For example,
sociologists have argued that notions of individual altruism as motivating donation must be understood
in the context of organizational opportunities (Healy 1998).
Blood operators in countries that rely on voluntary non-remunerated (VNR) donors focus on risk
mitigation and ensuring safety with an aim to build and maintain a trust relationship between donors,
recipients and the blood operator (Brailsford et al., 2015, Farrell, 2006, Wittock et al., 2019). Research
with donors in these countries has found that regular donors demonstrate high levels of trust in blood
operators due to organizational reputation and history, and because of positive interactions with blood
collection staff (Busby, 2010, Raivola et al., 2019). However, the trust relationship between BCAs and
the public is dynamic and must be continuously negotiated and re-negotiated according to changing
conditions (Charbonneau and Quéniart, 2015, Charbonneau and Smith, 2015). In Canada, where there is
a long shadow of the “tainted blood crisis,” Canadian Blood Services is ever mindful of the importance of
maintaining public trust in the safety of the blood supply (Smith et al., 2011). The global pandemic has,
no doubt, altered conditions of donation and introduced new safety concerns not only to the recipient,
but also to the donor. While BCAs and the public are adapting to these changes, the potential for
disruption or destabilization of the trust relationship between the two exists with the potential fallout of
decreased trust even more concerning since during a crisis BCAs may need to recruit large numbers of
new donors who may not be familiar with the organization. BCA resources and messaging may be

mobilized to foster trust with donors and the public and ensure that they are able to meet the demand
for blood.
To contain and suppress the spread of COVID-19, public health officials in most jurisdictions
were recommending, and in some cases requiring, the public to alter their behaviour by minimizing
going out and in-person contact, maintaining physical distance, wearing a mask, and hand washing
frequently. While research conducted early in the pandemic demonstrated public support for these
measures, data also suggest that increased public health messaging may lead to greater anxiety for
some (Barari et al., 2020). Approaches to public health messaging must also be mindful of “information
overload” and the limits of information to change behaviours (Barari et al. 2020). Consistency of public
health messaging during COVID-19 has also been a challenge in many jurisdictions, which is concerning
given the importance of public trust in encouraging behavioural compliance (Cairns et al., 2013). In
Canada, qualitative analysis of messaging from provincial chief medical officers of health found that
messages were similar across provinces in the early days of the pandemic but diverged over time (Fafard
et al., 2020). However, the authors argue that the lack of consistency in messaging across all the
provinces was not necessarily a problem since they were taking into account the specific conditions in
their province. Analysis of government messaging in Australia also found inconsistencies between
federal and state government advice (Rajkhowa, 2020). Qualitative analysis of COVID-19 information
sources in Australia demonstrates that people consider some sources of COVID-19 information more
trustworthy than others; however, expressed a high degree of trust in the advice of government and
public health, as well as others considered to have expert knowledge, such as healthcare professionals
(Lupton and Lewis, 2021).
Research on blood donation during prior viral outbreaks suggest that fear has had a negative
impact on willingness to donate. Survey research conducted with donors about their intentions to
donate during a potential avian influenza outbreak found that those perceiving themselves to be at a

lower risk of contracting avian influenza were more likely to intend to donate (Masser et al., 2011). This
is in line with findings from the SARS epidemic in Beijing that fear of increased susceptibility to SARS
infection from donating blood deterred some members of the public from donating (Shan and Zhang,
2004). More recently, however, survey research conducted with donors and non-donors during the
COVID-19 pandemic found that the association between intention to donate and beliefs about COVID-19
was more complex than perceived risk of infection necessarily deterring donation (Masser et al., 2020).
Researchers found that trust in the blood organization was key to informing survey participants’ beliefs
about donating during the pandemic. They also found that perceived risk comprised one component of
the perceived costs of donating, which was balanced by an individual’s perception of the positives of
donating and confidence to donate during the pandemic (Masser et al, 2020). Masser et al. (2020)
recommend that blood operators use communications to build and maintain trust with donors. This is
consistent with research that demonstrates that the effectiveness of messaging to encourage particular
behaviours, both from public health sources and BCAs, depends on maintaining public trust (Henderson
et al., 2020, Smith et al., 2011, Udow-Phillips and Lantz, 2020). Therefore, how BCAs encourage and
sustain trust with the public and donors during the pandemic through their messaging is important to
consider.
Given their similarities and differences, Canada and Australia offer interesting case studies of
BCA messaging in two jurisdictions during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic. Both countries have
centralized national blood operators (Canadian Blood Services i and Australian Red Cross Lifeblood), rely
on voluntary non-remunerated blood donors, have publicly-funded healthcare systems, and have similar
political systems and sociocultural histories. BCAs in both countries are part of international blood
organizations that share knowledge and information and have been in close communication throughout
the pandemic. Canada and Australia, however, differ in their location and geography, and the
epidemiology and spread of COVID-19. As an island nation, Australia was able to more effectively close

its borders; however, from mid-March to early April (in some provinces in Canada), both countries
enacted various measures including: issuing travel advisories; closing borders, closing schools, public
facilities, and non-essential businesses; requiring self-isolation and quarantine measures, and stay-athome orders. By late April/early May, both countries started to loosen restrictions. In addition, Australia
entered 2020 in the midst of an unprecedented bushfire crisis prompting a national call out for blood
donors in early January which meant donors responding to this call were not eligible to donate in March,
at the start of the pandemic, given the mandatory minimum wait period between donations. In Canada
(population=37.6M), by July 31, 2020 (the end of the study period), the total number of positive COVID19 cases were 116,312 and the total number of deaths were 8,935. ii In Australia (population=25.5M) the
total number of positive COVID-19 cases was 16,905 and the total number of deaths was 196.3

2. Material and methods
2.1. Methodological approach
This paper is a discourse analysis of Canadian Blood Services’ and Lifeblood’s messaging from
March 1, 2020 – July 31, 2020. This period marks the early days of the pandemic from initial
announcements, to enacting restrictions, and gradual easing of restrictions following what many refer to
as the “first wave” (see Tables 1 and 2 for government and BCA measures, respectively, implemented
during this period). Applying a discourse analytic approach, words and messages are both language and
more than language (Bloor and Bloor, 2013) and include the broader social and political context, the
audience for the text, and social codes and meanings in its interpretive analysis (Bloor & Bloor 2013).
This analytic approach enables examination of the explicit and implicit messages to the public and
donors and elucidates how the broader sociocultural context both informs and is informed by the
messages.

2.2. Data sources
Various sources of online content and print media were drawn upon to produce the dataset. To
be included in the dataset, the following inclusion criteria were applied: 1) the target audience of the
content or document be donors and/or the general public; 2) there be sufficient text to be analyzed; and
3) the content be posted or published between March 1 – July 31, 2020. Based on these criteria and
different communication materials produced by CBS and Lifeblood, the specific datasets for the two
BCAs were comparable, but not identical.
For CBS, the dataset included: 1) stories and COVID-19-related content on their website
(https://www.blood.ca/en/covid19); 2) direct emails to donors and prospective donors; and 3) national
print media. In addition to specific COVID-19-related webpages providing information about the
donation screening process during the pandemic, CBS’ website features stories which act as an
important platform to communicate with its donors and the general public. From March 1, 2020 – July
31, 2020, 71 stories had been posted with 57 aimed at donors and the public. National print media were
also included in the dataset: The National Post, The Globe and Mail, and Toronto Star. A Factiva search
was conducted using the keyword, Canadian Blood Services, from March 1 – July 31, 2020. Results found
120 articles. Following deletion of duplicate articles and inclusion of articles only that mentioned
Canadian Blood Services and blood or plasma donation, the final number of articles was 11. Social media
posts were not included because they did not provide new content not found on the website (i.e.,
primarily used to direct people to the website).
For Lifeblood, the dataset included: 1) the COVID-19 Information page on the website
(donateblood.com.au); 2) direct emails and SMS’ to donors; 3) national print media; 4) social media
posts; and 5) media releases. National print media included The Sydney Morning Herald and/or The Age;
The Australian; The Herald Sun and/or Daily Telegraph; The Australian Financial Review. A Factiva search

was conducted using the keyword, Australian Red Cross, from March 1 – July 31, 2020. Results found
105 articles. Following deletion of duplicate articles and articles that did not mention blood or plasma
donation, the final number was 14. Social media posts by Australian Red Cross Lifeblood (Facebook and
Twitter) were included if these provided new content not also featured on the website.

2.3. Data analysis
Following the compilation of the datasets (XX and YY for CBS, ZZ for Lifeblood), all authors read a
representative selection of documents to become familiar with the data and to identify emergent
themes. The three authors together developed a coding framework based on these emergent themes
and prior categories of interest. Applying this coding framework, XX and YY coded the same two
documents independently and came together to resolve any differences in coding to ensure inter-coder
reliability. XX and YY coded the data for CBS and ZZ coded the data for Lifeblood. Media articles were
analyzed for the message sent by the BCA and not the reporter’s view or opinion presented in the
article. In iterative fashion, during the coding and analytic stages, authors looked to the literature to gain
a better understanding of public health messaging during COVID-19 and other social science research
examining donors, the public, and the pandemic. Following completion of coding, the authors met
several times via videoconference to discuss key themes, differences and similarities between Canada
and Australia, and the themes in relation to the pandemic context.

3. Results
Our analysis identified four dominant messages that blood operators in Canada and Australia
communicated to donors and the public during the study period: 1) blood donation is safe; 2) blood
donation is designated an essential activity; 3) blood is needed, given threats to supply; and 4) blood
donation is a response to the pandemic. While the messages of blood donation as safe and blood as
needed were not unique to the pandemic, they took on different meanings given the concerns and

restrictions related to the pandemic. Constructions of blood donation as essential and a response to the
pandemic were novel to the conditions produced by COVID-19.

3.1. Blood donation is safe
For both CBS and Lifeblood, a dominant theme in their messaging throughout the period of
analysis is that blood donation is safe both in terms of: 1) the safety of the blood supply, and 2) the
safety of donors and staff in donor centres. These constructions of blood donation as safe were both an
amplification of pre-pandemic messages regarding safeguarding the blood system from emerging
pathogens, and an adaptation in response to the concerns of safety for donors and staff arising from the
novel coronavirus. Even before the WHO declared COVID-19 a global pandemic, the BCAs were actively
sending the message that the virus does not pose a threat to the safety of the blood system. CBS and
Lifeblood supported their claims of safety by referencing evidence and aligning themselves with
scientific expertise:
“There is absolutely no evidence of transfusion transmission for COVID-19, or any other
coronavirus,” says Dr. Steven Drews, associate director of microbiology at Canadian Blood
Services. “This family of respiratory viruses just doesn’t appear to be transfusion-transmitted.”
(CBS, website stories, March 9)
There is no evidence that coronavirus is transmissible by blood transfusion (Lifeblood, donor
email, March 3)
The blood operators moved very quickly to assure donors and the public that it is safe to donate
blood and that their donor centres are safe. While the message of safety to donors has been consistent
over the period analyzed, how this message has been framed evolved over the study period for both
BCAs. In the very early days, immediately after government guidelines against non-essential movement
and travel were issued, CBS messaging reassured donors and the public that donor centres were safe

because they are a “rare setting” within the healthcare system that welcomes only healthy people. This
exceptional status, coupled with implementation of new hygiene and wellness checks, would ensure
donor safety:
As for social interaction at clinics, MacDonald [CBS territory manager] noted they are a rare
health-care setting where only healthy people are welcome. New procedures at the door
include hand sanitizer and questions for potential donors about how they feel and recent travel.
(CBS, news media, March 19)
Lifeblood also referred to their donor centres as “places of wellness” and assured their donors that
centres were safe since they had revised their screening to defer people who had travelled abroad in the
prior 28 days from donation. In effect, their message was new screening measures would keep the virus
out:
… our strict screening process means we don’t allow people who are unwell to donate blood.
Our donor centres are safe places to visit and we will take all necessary steps to ensure that
stays the case. (Lifeblood, donor email, March 3)
However, as community transmission of COVID-19 increased, along with evidence of
asymptomatic carriers, BCA messaging stopped framing donor centres as places of wellness and shifted
to emphasize the implementation of “enhanced wellness measures,” including wellness checks at the
door, limiting the number of donors at any one time, and heightened cleaning to ensure donor safety:
We’ve always had hospital-level cleaning processes, but because of the pandemic we’ve added
even more measures to help protect you and our team (Lifeblood, donor email, March 20)
Donor centres have robust measures in place to protect donors, staff and volunteers (CBS,
online stories, March 25)

Messages of enhanced safety measures suggest a more active approach by the BCAs to ensure
donor safety. They were sent at a time when donors and the public were dealing with significant
changes to their lives and experiencing fear and anxiety of infection (Brooks et al., 2020, Fitzpatrick et
al., 2020). By assuring “protection,” both organisations implicitly acknowledged the risks and fear people
may be feeling and took responsibility for keeping them safe. Lifeblood followed government advice and
indirectly protected donors perceived to be most vulnerable to infection by asking people aged 70 and
over, those with compromised immune systems and some chronic medical conditions not to donate:
The only exception to this [to come out and donate] is our generous donors aged 70 and over
who are still being advised to stay at home and self-isolate for their own protection (Lifeblood,
Website, April 1
As the epidemiology of COVID-19 evolved along with changing public health guidelines, the BCAs shifted
their messages of safety to demonstrate responsiveness to and alignment with these changes. By doing
so, the messages can be viewed as increasing confidence in donors that BCAs can be trusted to follow
public health expertise (Masser et al. 2020) and that they will take responsibility for ensuring safety in
the donor centres.

3.2. Blood donation is essential
Authorities in both countries classified blood donation as an “essential” activity iii and BCAs
reminded donors and the public in their messaging of this formal designation. BCAs also used the
language of essential to urge donors to continue to donate. In Australia, as case numbers increased in
March, national and state-based restrictions on movement to prevent the spread of COVID-19 were
introduced and rapidly tightened from stage 1 to stage 3 limiting the services deemed essential and
allowed to remain open:

As many states prepare to limit non-essential activities, it is important to remember blood &
plasma donation remains absolutely vital and is excluded from any restrictions to movement
and venue restrictions (Lifeblood, Print media, website, twitter, Facebook from March 23 until
early April)
Beginning mid-March, provinces and territories across Canada also enacted various closures and
stay-at-home measures to contain the growing number of positive cases. In this context, CBS sent the
message to donors and the public that donating blood is essential and exempt from lockdown and stayat-home orders:
… it’s essential for healthy eligible donors to keep booking and honouring their appointments
during the COVID19 pandemic. In provinces that have declared a state of emergency, the bans
on social and recreational gatherings don’t apply to blood donor centres. (CBS, online story,
March 25)
The message that blood donation is essential and an essential activity speaks to how “vital” it is
and to its exemption from state and public health restrictions limiting movement and activities. In the
context of COVID-19, an essential designation situates blood donation within the same framing as
essential healthcare and frontline services and thereby suggests an implicit opportunity for donors and
the public to participate in lifesaving healthcare.

3.3. Blood donation is needed
From the start of the study period, both BCAs communicated the message that the need for
blood continues despite lockdown measures and suspension of non-urgent surgeries and medical
procedures. While the above measures would decrease the need for blood, the BCAs were quick to
highlight the various procedures that continued to require a constant supply of blood:

Some hospitals have cancelled elective surgeries, but there still is a constant demand as a result
of trauma from accidents and for cancer patients who need regular transfusions, [Dr. Isra] Levy
[VP, Medical Affairs and Innovation] said. (CBS, news media, March 17)
Messages about the ongoing need for blood from both organizations employed metaphors of a
marathon, “Let’s all think of this as a marathon, not a sprint” (quote from Dr. Sher, CBS CEO, news
media, March 27) suggesting that meeting the ongoing need for blood would require pacing, stamina,
determination, and ongoing commitment by donors and the public.
Lifeblood also directly referenced local events, such as panic buying of toilet paper, that took
place when social restrictions were first introduced to highlight the need for blood. By drawing on
immediate local concerns related to COVID-19, Lifeblood made the constant need for blood
understandable to a public that was reacting, and highly sensitized, to the potential scarcity of everyday
products:
Blood is like milk, not toilet paper. You can’t just buy a lot of it and save it for later – you need to
have a regular, fresh supply for patients who need it (Lifeblood, Twitter/Facebook, March 31)
By bringing together the information about the limited shelf-life of blood with the continuous, albeit
volatile, need for blood during the pandemic, an implicit suggestion was that even when blood supply is
sufficient it is always a temporary state. In other words, the need for blood is constant may also be
interpreted as the potential threat of insufficient blood is constant.
As the number of positive COVID-19 cases began to drop, hospitals across Canada resumed
elective surgeries and lockdown measures eased resulting in increasing demand for blood. This was
addressed in CBS messaging as they modified their message from “the need for blood is constant” to
“the need for blood is rising.” The BCA situated the need for blood directly within the context of the
evolving epidemiology of COVID-19 and its related public health measures.

The need for blood is gradually increasing as hospitals resume procedures that were put on hold
due to COVID-19. Elective surgeries will gradually ramp up across the nation in the coming
weeks, while urgent surgeries continue. Dr. Jeannie Callum is seeing this transition firsthand in
her role as a transfusion medicine specialist at Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre in Toronto.
(CBS, online story, May 28)
As COVID-19 numbers dropped, hospitals resumed procedures that had been put on hold and the need
for blood increased. At the same time, people were increasing their activities as lockdown measures
were loosened creating the possibility that as the need for blood increased, people may be busy with
other activities and pay less attention to donating blood. To address this, CBS drew on the expertise of a
transfusion medicine specialist in a busy urban hospital to provide a first-hand, frontline account of the
rising need for blood. This shift in messaging did not occur in Australia during the study period. Instead
messaging acknowledged the response from donors during the pandemic while also reinforcing the
messages of blood donation being essential, needed and safe.

3.4. Blood donation is a response to the pandemic
Unique to COVID-19 conditions, BCA messaging constructed blood donation as a response to the
pandemic with slight differences in Canada and Australia. In Canada, from the early days, public health
leaders recognized the toll the pandemic was taking on people’s mental health given the restrictions and
perceived lack of control. In a context where authorities were asking the public to limit their activities
outside of the home and people were dealing with the strain resulting from the loss of social interaction,
blood donation was presented as way for people to leave their homes and exercise personal agency
during challenging times. By quoting public health leaders, CBS aligned themselves with health experts
and reinforced the message that blood donation was a way to respond to the negative toll the pandemic
was taking on individuals:

Giving can also benefit donors, according to Dr. Deena Hinshaw, Alberta’s chief medical officer
of health. “Blood donation can help address the feeling of helplessness people have in the face
of COVID-19,” said Dr. Hinshaw in a public statement on Mar. 16, 2020. “Gaining a sense of
control by helping others can contribute to an overall sense of well-being.” (CBS, online story,
March 17)
Unlike Lifeblood, CBS also communicated the message of donation as a rare opportunity to
contribute to the community under pandemic conditions through their online stories that featured
donors. In these personal narratives, the pandemic was framed as eliminating the usual ways in which
people contributed to their community leading some people to turn to blood donation to do something
“to feel valuable and useful in the community” (CBS, online story, April 24). Another donor constructed
blood donation as a way to address feelings of fear associated with the pandemic:
“When faced with hard times, the church community always asks, ‘what then shall we do?’” says
Kevin. For him, an answer came during an address by Justin Trudeau, in which the prime
minister called on Canadians to donate blood during the pandemic. “The community was afraid
and focused on everything they couldn’t do anymore because of the lockdown,” he says. “I
decided that donating blood was the one thing we could do.“ (CBS, online story, June 10)
Perhaps no other type of donation is more exemplary as a response to COVID-19 than donating
convalescent plasma for clinical trials. The pandemic created the opportunity for a new kind of donation
that both CBS and Lifeblood were responsible for collecting and administering. During the study period,
both BCAs started recruiting people who had recovered from the virus to donate their plasma for use in
these clinical trials. For CBS, online stories that featured convalescent plasma donors constructed
donation as a response to COVID-19 by “pushing back” against the effects of the pandemic:

Patrick donated in Toronto on May 6. Like his father, it was his first donation of a blood product,
and he was thrilled to donate for this purpose. “I was happy to contribute what I could,” he said.
“You just feel so helpless right now. I’d love to do my part to kind of push the world back to a
state of normalcy.” (CBS, online story, May 6)
Lifeblood also communicated messages of donating convalescent plasma to respond to the
pandemic, specifically aimed at people who had recovered from the virus to help others infected by it.
By helping others suffering from the illness, convalescent plasma donors were being invited to “be part
of” a group of people who can help others:
Donating plasma is a simple, powerful act that could help a patient struggling to fight the
disease. It’s a real opportunity for people who have battled COVID-19 to become part of a
potential solution (Lifeblood, Convalescent plasma webpage, May 11 onwards)
Stories of convalescent plasma donors were also featured in Lifeblood and general news media.
Reflecting the messaging used by Lifeblood, donors tended to talk about donation as a way to help and
as a responsibility. For example, Dean saw donating as way to help others “It's an opportunity to help
those in dire need of assistance to overcome the virus” (Lifeblood, Facebook, June 11), while Max talked
about donating convalescent plasma as an aspect of civic duty, "We live in a society, and we have a
responsibility to help others as part of that society” (Lifeblood, Print media. July 30).

4.

Discussion and conclusion
Overall, BCA messages from March 1, 2020 – July 31, 2020 were simple, clear, and consistent
and constructed blood donation as safe, essential, needed, and as an opportunity to respond to the
pandemic. In the context of public health and government guidelines and recommendations that many
have found confusing and contradictory (Rajkhowa 2020), the straightforward and clear messaging from
the BCAs is significant and noteworthy. While we cannot claim a causative relationship between
messaging and public response, we do suggest that the messaging strategies contributed to overall
donor response. In Canada and Australia, where sociocultural scripts underlying donation emphasize
trust in the blood operator, our analysis suggests the following: 1) implicit within constructions of blood
donation as safe is the message that BCAs can be trusted; 2) messages that construct blood donation as
essential and needed implicitly ask donors to trust BCAs in order to share in the commitment of meeting
patient needs; and 3) the pandemic has made possible the construction of blood donation as both an
exceptional and commonplace activity. We discuss each of these further in the remainder of the
discussion.
BCA messaging that emphasized the safety of blood donation during the pandemic was both
aided by the trust that the public has in CBS and Lifeblood (Masser et al. 2020) and reassured the public
that the BCAs could be trusted during these uncertain times. As for previous pandemics, this early focus
on safety was necessary given the context of the identification of a new virus with uncertain potential
for transmission via transfusion (Shan and Zhang, 2004, Stanworth et al., 2020). Research shows the
importance of trust in encouraging people to donate during a pandemic (Masser et al. 2020). By
ensuring protection in their messaging and demonstrating safety through wellness measures in donor
centres, CBS and Lifeblood acknowledged the fear felt by the public and agreed to take responsibility for
the health and wellbeing of donors. By recognizing and legitimizing the concerns of donors, the BCAs

were demonstrating sensitivity to the public’s fears associated with the pandemic. This
acknowledgement and sensitivity, coupled with accepting responsibility for ensuring safety, may
contribute to stabilize the trust relationship between BCAs and donors.
Through their messaging, BCAs were inviting donors and the public to make, and renew, a
shared commitment to meet patient needs. Bringing together the constructions of donation as safe,
essential, and needed, we suggest Lifeblood and CBS outlined their commitment to ensure safety and
asked donors to share the responsibility and commitment of the BCAs to meet patient blood needs.
Inviting the public to share in CBS’ responsibility and commitment to meet patient needs is consistent
with the blood operator’s branding as “Canada’s Lifeline”, as it is with Lifeblood’s brand “Together we’re
Australia’s Lifeblood.” Messages aligning the need for blood with citizenry and larger body politic evoke
a sense of nationhood, with the donor and organization positioned as jointly working to keep the
national blood supply strong even during the pandemic. In this way, the Lifeline or Lifeblood that
connects donor to recipient through the constant need for blood reinforces the aspirational symbolic
image of a unified national “body” that, like a physical body, requires the continuous flow of blood.
The message of the constant need for blood juxtaposed against the changes and disruptions
caused by pandemic, constructs blood donation as a state of exception. COVID-19 produced conditions
that allowed for this construction of blood donation as exceptional while also maintaining its
commonplace status. CBS and Lifeblood messaging included both constructions of blood donation in
reaching out to the public. On the one hand, they emphasized that the need for blood remains constant
throughout the otherwise unstable and unpredictable nature of the pandemic, likening it to milk
(Lifeblood) and referring to its uses in treatments and interventions prior to the pandemic when life was
“normal.” On the other hand, donor centres were framed as exceptions within the healthcare system
where healthy people congregated, blood donation’s exemption from lockdown orders framed it as an

exceptional act and provided a rare opportunity for people to assert some control over otherwise
limited options.
For BCAs, our analysis supports donor communications that are transparent and responsive to
public concerns, and the local context, to support public trust. In this context, special attention may
need to be paid to those people and populations who are excluded from donation during this time when
BCAs are making urgent appeals for donation. For example, in Canada, the pandemic context has
enlivened efforts by gay, bisexual and other men who have sex with men (gbMSM), their allies, and
some political leaders, to address donor deferral policies viewed as discriminatory of and inequitable for
members of these communities (Campbell, 2020, Wright, 2020). Moreover, although the BCAs
messaging was successful in increasing donor numbers, it is less clear who was able to respond to these
call-outs and why, and whether there are any differences in perceptions of the risk of donation and trust
in government by people from racialized backgrounds. Research indicates that people from Black
communities in North America, Australia and some European countries participate less in blood
donation because of mistrust in healthcare systems given experiences of systemic racism and
mistreatment (Grassineau et al., 2007, Polonsky et al., 2011, Tran et al., 2013). How the pandemic has
affected specific communities in relation to blood donation and donating convalescent plasma, remains
an important area for further research. A limitation of our study is that both jurisdictions examined in
this paper are high-income countries where public trust in government is relatively high and state
officials showed strong support for public health evidence during the pandemic. While the approaches
taken by these organisations was successful in these contexts other BCAs may have to adapt messaging
to the local context in order to build and maintain trust with donors and the public.
Beyond BCAs, health organizations and leaders cannot underestimate the importance of
building and maintaining public trust as countries continue to struggle with containment of the virus and
encourage vaccine uptake. Any public health effort that requires people to interact with health

professionals will be challenging during a pandemic, where public health advocates must address the
tension inherent in recommendations to limit exposure by staying home, while also encouraging people
to travel to a healthcare facility. This issue has come up in health promotion activities like cancer
screening (Issaka and Somsouk, 2020, Smetherman, 2020, Tan and Lau, 2020), and in declining
admission for medical emergencies like acute cardiovascular illness (Ebinger and Shah, 2020). This
tension may also be a challenge as vaccines for COVID-19 are rolled out. Prior to COVID 19, vaccine
hesitancy – reluctance or refusal to vaccinate – was listed by the World Health Organization as one of
the ten threats to global health in 2019 (WHO, 2019). Already, there are indications that vaccine
hesitancy is at play for the COVID-19 vaccines (Dror et al., 2020, Kwok et al., 2021, Murphy et al., 2021),
and one element of that hesitancy that has not yet been explored, is possible hesitancy about interface
with a healthcare professional and exposure to COVID-19. Recently, a strong argument has been made
for re-focusing on and re-building trust in science and healthcare to address vaccine hesitancy
(Goldenberg 2021). In this context, insight from BCAs that have maintained a trust relationship with
donors and have succeeded in bringing individuals donor centres during COVID-19 may be relevant and
instructive.

References
BARARI, S., CARIA, S., DAVOLA, A., FALCO, P., FETZER, T., FIORIN, S., HENSEL, L., IVCHENKO, A.,
JACHIMOWICZ, J., KING, G., KRAFT-TODD, G., LEDDA, A., MACLENNAN, M., MUTOI, L., PAGANI, C.,
REUTSKAJA, E. & SLEPOI, F. R. 2020. Evaluating COVID-19 Public Health Messaging in Italy: Self-Reported
Compliance and Growing Mental Health Concerns. medRxiv, 2020.03.27.20042820.
BLOOR, M. & BLOOR, T. 2013. The practice of critical discourse analysis: An introduction. The Practice of
Critical Discourse Analysis: An Introduction, 1-207.
BRAILSFORD, S. R., KELLY, D., KOHLI, H., SLOWTHER, A. & WATKINS, N. A. 2015. Who should donate
blood? Policy decisions on donor deferral criteria should protect recipients and be fair to donors.
Transfus Med, 25, 234-8.
BROOKS, S. K., WEBSTER, R. K., SMITH, L. E., WOODLAND, L., WESSELY, S., GREENBERG, N. & RUBIN, G. J.
2020. The psychological impact of quarantine and how to reduce it: rapid review of the evidence. The
Lancet, 395, 912-920.
BUSBY, H. W. 2010. Trust, nostalgia and narrative accounts of blood banking in England in the 21st
century. Health (London), 14, 369-82.
CAIRNS, G., DE ANDRADE, M. & MACDONALD, L. 2013. Reputation, Relationships, Risk Communication,
and the Role of Trust in the Prevention and Control of Communicable Disease: A Review. Journal of
Health Communication, 18, 1550-1565.
CAMPBELL, E. A. R., SELENA. 2020. Blood ban for gay men extends to post-COVID-19 plasma, Montreal
man learns. CTV News, May 13, 2020.

CHARBONNEAU, J. & QUÉNIART, A. 2015. The influence of blood collection organizations on blood
donation motivations and practices in Québec, Canada. Giving Blood: The Institutional Making of
Altruism, 109-128.
CHARBONNEAU, J. & SMITH, A. 2015. Introduction: Blood donation and the range of historical and
institutional trajectories. Giving Blood: The Institutional Making of Altruism, 1-18.
DAWKINS, G. 2020. Gift of life: Cdn Blood Services puts out plea for donations, COVID-19 precautions in
place. Winnipeg Sun.
DROR, A. A., EISENBACH, N., TAIBER, S., MOROZOV, N. G., MIZRACHI, M., ZIGRON, A., SROUJI, S. & SELA,
E. 2020. Vaccine hesitancy: the next challenge in the fight against COVID-19. European Journal of
Epidemiology, 35, 775-779.
EBINGER, J. E. & SHAH, P. K. 2020. Declining Admissions for Acute Cardiovascular Illness: The COVID-19
Paradox. J Am Coll Cardiol, 76, 289-291.
FAFARD, P., WILSON, L. A., CASSOLA, A. & HOFFMAN, S. J. 2020. Communication about COVID-19 from
Canadian provincial chief medical officers of health: a qualitative study. CMAJ Open, 8, E560-E567.
FARRELL, A.-M. 2006. IS THE GIFT STILL GOOD? EXAMINING THE POLITICS AND REGULATION OF BLOOD
SAFETY IN THE EUROPEAN UNION. Medical Law Review, 14, 155-179.
FITZPATRICK, K. M., HARRIS, C. & DRAWVE, G. 2020. Fear of COVID-19 and the mental health
consequences in America. Psychol Trauma, 12, S17-s21.
GAMMON, R. R., PRICHARD, A. B., GANNETT, M. S. & YORDANOV, B. 2021. The effect of COVID-19 on
blood donation habits. Transfusion, n/a.

GEHRIE, E. A., FRANK, S. M. & GOOBIE, S. M. 2020. Balancing Supply and Demand for Blood during the
COVID-19 Pandemic. Anesthesiology, 133, 16-18.
GLYNN, S. A., BUSCH, M. P., SCHREIBER, G. B., MURPHY, E. L., WRIGHT, D. J., TU, Y. & KLEINMAN, S. H.
2003. Effect of a national disaster on blood supply and safety: the September 11 experience. Jama, 289,
2246-53.
GRASSINEAU, D., PAPA, K., DUCOURNEAU, A., DUBOZ, P., BOËTSCH, G. & CHIARONI, J. 2007. Improving
minority blood donation: anthropologic approach in a migrant community. Transfusion, 47, 402-409.
HAW, J., HOLLOWAY, K., MASSER, B. M., MERZ, E. M. & THORPE, R. 2020. Blood donation and the global
COVID-19 pandemic: areas for social science research. Vox Sang.
HEALY, K. 2000. Embedded Altruism: Blood Collection Regimes and the European Union's Donor
Population. American Journal of Sociology, 105, 1633-1657.
HEALY, K. 2006. Last best gifts: Altruism and the market for human blood and organs, Chicago, University
of Chicago Press.
HENDERSON, J., WARD, P. R., TONKIN, E., MEYER, S. B., PILLEN, H., MCCULLUM, D., TOSON, B., WEBB, T.,
COVENEY, J. & WILSON, A. 2020. Developing and Maintaining Public Trust During and Post-COVID-19:
Can We Apply a Model Developed for Responding to Food Scares? Frontiers in Public Health, 8.
ISSAKA, R. B. & SOMSOUK, M. 2020. Colorectal Cancer Screening and Prevention in the COVID-19 Era.
JAMA Health Forum, 1, e200588-e200588.
KWOK, K., LI, K.-K., WEI, W., TANG, A., WONG, S. & LEE, S.-S. 2021. Influenza vaccine uptake, COVID-19
vaccination intention and vaccine hesitancy among nurses: A survey. International Journal of Nursing
Studies, 114, 103854.

LEUNG, J. N. S. & LEE, C.-K. 2020. Impact of the COVID-19 – a regional blood centre's perspective. ISBT
Science Series, 15, 362-364.
LOUA, A., KASILO, O. M. J., NIKIEMA, J. B., SOUGOU, A. S., KNIAZKOV, S. & ANNAN, E. A. 2021. Impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on blood supply and demand in the WHO African Region. Vox Sang.
LUPTON, D. & LEWIS, S. 2021. Learning about COVID-19: a qualitative interview study of Australians' use
of information sources. BMC Public Health.
MASSER, B. M., HYDE, M. K. & FERGUSON, E. 2020. Exploring predictors of Australian community
members' blood donation intentions and blood donation-related behavior during the COVID-19
pandemic. Transfusion, 60, 2907-2917.
MASSER, B. M., WHITE, K. M., HAMILTON, K. & MCKIMMIE, B. M. 2011. An examination of the predictors
of blood donors' intentions to donate during two phases of an avian influenza outbreak. Transfusion, 51,
548-57.
MOHAMMADI, S., TABATABAEI YAZDI, S. M., ESHGHI, P. & NOROOZNEZHAD, A. H. 2020. Coronavirus
disease 2019 (COVID-19) and decrease in blood donation: experience of Iranian Blood Transfusion
Organization (IBTO). Vox Sang, 115, 595-596.
MURPHY, J., VALLIÈRES, F., BENTALL, R. P., SHEVLIN, M., MCBRIDE, O., HARTMAN, T. K., MCKAY, R.,
BENNETT, K., MASON, L., GIBSON-MILLER, J., LEVITA, L., MARTINEZ, A. P., STOCKS, T. V. A., KARATZIAS, T.
& HYLAND, P. 2021. Psychological characteristics associated with COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy and
resistance in Ireland and the United Kingdom. Nature Communications, 12, 29.
NIETO-CALVACHE, A. J., QUINTERO-SANTACRUZ, M., MACIA-MEJÍA, C., LÓPEZ-GIRÓN, M. C., VERGARAGALLIADI, L. M. & ARIZA, F. 2020. Dangerous shortage of blood banks as an indirect effect of SARS-CoV2: An obstetrics perspective. International Journal of Gynecology & Obstetrics, 151, 424-430.

PILIAVIN, J. A., AND CALLERO, P. L. 1991. Blood Donation, Social Structure and the Influence of Social
Norms. In: CALLERO, J. A. P. A. P. L. (ed.) Giving Blood: The Development of an Altruistic Identity.
Baltimore and London: The Johns Hopkins Press.
POLONSKY, M. J., BRIJNATH, B. & RENZAHO, A. M. N. 2011. “They don’t want our blood”: Social inclusion
and blood donation among African migrants in Australia. Social Science & Medicine, 73, 336-342.
RAIVOLA, V. 2020. The gift of life – does it apply to donation for research? ISBT Science Series, 15, 11-18.
RAIVOLA, V., SNELL, K., HELÉN, I. & PARTANEN, J. 2019. Attitudes of blood donors to their sample and
data donation for biobanking. European Journal of Human Genetics, 27, 1659-1667.
RAJKHOWA, A. 2020. COVID-19 dissensus in Australia: Negotiating uncertainty in public health
communication and media commentary on a novel pandemic. Pacific Journalism Review : Te Koakoa, 26,
253-263.
SHAN, H. & ZHANG, P. 2004. Viral attacks on the blood supply: the impact of severe acute respiratory
syndrome in Beijing. Transfusion, 44, 467-9.
SILVA-MALTA, M. C. F., RODRIGUES, D. D. O. W., CHAVES, D. G., MAGALHÃES, N. N. S., RIBEIRO, M. A.,
CIOFFI, J. G. M. & MARTINS, M. L. Impact of COVID-19 in the attendance of blood donors and production
on a Brazilian Blood Centres. Transfusion Medicine, n/a.
SMETHERMAN, D. H. 2020. Breast Cancer Screening and the COVID-19 Pandemic. Journal of Breast
Imaging, 3, 3-11.
SMITH, A., FIDDLER, J., WALBY, K. & HIER, S. 2011. Blood donation and institutional trust: risk, policy
rhetoric, and the men who have sex with men lifetime deferral policy in Canada. Can Rev Sociol, 48, 36989.

SPEKMAN, M. L. C., RAMONDT, S., QUEE, F. A., PRINSZE, F. J., HUIS IN 'T VELD, E. M. J., VAN DEN HURK,
K. & MERZ, E.-M. 2021. New blood donors in times of crisis: Increased donation willingness, particularly
among people at high risk for attracting SARS-CoV-2. Transfusion, n/a.
STANWORTH, S. J., NEW, H. V., APELSETH, T. O., BRUNSKILL, S., CARDIGAN, R., DOREE, C., GERMAIN, M.,
GOLDMAN, M., MASSEY, E., PRATI, D., SHEHATA, N., SO-OSMAN, C. & THACHIL, J. 2020. Effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic on supply and use of blood for transfusion. The Lancet Haematology, 7, e756-e764.
TAN, K. K. & LAU, J. 2020. Cessation of cancer screening: An unseen cost of the COVID-19 pandemic? Eur
J Surg Oncol, 46, 2154-2155.
TOMAZIN, F. 2020. Fears of blood shortages as donations drop during coronavirus. The Sydney Morning
Herald, March 29, 2020.
TRAN, N. Y. L., CHARBONNEAU, J. & VALDERRAMA-BENITEZ, V. 2013. Blood donation practices,
motivations and beliefs in Montreal's Black communities: the modern gift under a new light. Ethnicity &
Health, 18, 508-529.
TRAN, S., LEWALSKI, E. A., DWYRE, D. M., HAGAR, Y., BECKETT, L., JANATPOUR, K. A. & HOLLAND, P. V.
2010. Does donating blood for the first time during a national emergency create a better commitment
to donating again? Vox Sang, 98, e219-24.
UDOW-PHILLIPS, M. & LANTZ, P. 2020. Trust in Public Health Is Essential Amid the COVID-19 Pandemic.
Journal of Hospital Medicine, 15.
WITTOCK, N., DE KROM, M. P. M. M. & HUSTINX, L. 2019. Blood’s ontologies-entangled: Qualitative
inquiry into the enactment, representation, and organizational modes of coordination of blood’s
multiplicity in a Belgian blood establishment. Organization, 26, 470-491.
WRIGHT, T. 2020. Calls grow for Trudeau to end ban on gay blood donors. National Post, June 13, 2020.

Table 1 –Covid-19 public health and government responses in Australia and Canada
Event

Australia

Canada

Date
First COVID-19

Date

29 Jan

First case confirmed in Australia

25 Jan

First case confirmed in Canada

01 Mar

Travel restrictions and self-isolation measures introduced for

05 Mar

Provinces begin implementing mandatory 14-day self-

case
Travel
restrictions

people returning from international travel

isolation for those returning from international travel

11 March - WHO declares covid-19 a pandemic
Travel

15 Mar

restrictions
Border

surgeries

14 Mar

international travel
20 Mar

restrictions
Elective

The Australian Federal Government introduces a ban on all

Travel restrictions: Only Australian citizens, residents and

against all non-essential travel outside Canada
18 Mar

immediate family members can travel to Australia
24 Mar

Temporary suspension of elective surgery 24 March

Government of Canada issues travel advisory warning

Travel restrictions on entry of all foreign nationals (except
from US); extended to US foreign nationals (21 Mar)

15-23

Most provinces and territories in Canada suspend non-

Mar

urgent surgeries and medical services

16 Mar

Canada’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Theresa Tam,

suspended

makes a public statement that blood donation is essential
and encourages Canadians to continue to donate

19 Mar

Canada’s Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, encourages
Canadians to continue to donate blood

Service and

23 Mar

Stage 1 restrictions introduced: restrictions on services allowed

14-21

Various levels of government enact measures to close

social

to open, gatherings, social distancing recommended, avoid non-

Mar

schools, public facilities, non-essential businesses, and place

restrictions

essential travel

limits on the number of people who can gather indoors and

introduced

outdoors. Work-from-home guidelines are established. The
public is encouraged to maintain physical distance, limit
social gatherings, and go out for essential activities only

Service and

25 Mar

social

Stage 2 restrictions introduced: tighter service and social
restrictions

restrictions
tightened
Service and

30 Mar

Stage 3 restrictions introduced: tighter service and social

social

restrictions – non-essential venues closed; limits on leaving

restrictions

home except for essential reasons; gatherings limited to no

tightened

more than two people

Reintroduction
of some

27 Apr

Re-introduction of some elective surgeries from

01-26

Most provinces and territories in Canada resume non-

May

urgent surgeries and medical services

elective
surgeries
Easing of

28 Apr

service and

Some states and territories begin easing service and social

Early

Staged easing of Covid-19 restrictions in all provinces and

restrictions

May –

territories in Canada

social

late Jul

restrictions
Re-

30 Jun

introduction

State of Victoria introduces stronger restrictions following start
of second wave of infections

of service and
social
restrictions

Table 2 - Key operational changes and announcements made by Lifeblood and CBS
Changes

Lifeblood (Australia)
Date

Additional
Donor

03 Mar

CBS (Canada)
Date

28-day deferral introduced for people returning from high
prevalence countries on

16 Mar

New screening measures for COVID-19 applied: anyone
asked by public health to place themselves under
observation or self-quarantine are not allowed to donate

screening

13 Mar

measures

28-day deferral extended to anyone returning from international

for 14 days from the date of their last contact with a case or

travel

suspected case of COVID-19; anyone with a case or
suspected case in their household cannot donate for 14
days after the infected person’s recovery; anyone with a
confirmed case of COVID-19 are not allowed to donate for
56 days after full recovery from the infection

03 Mar

Lifeblood sends email to all active donors with an update on

19 Mar

actions taken by Lifeblood related to COVID-19

CBS posts a video message by CEO, Dr. Graham Sher,
thanking the Prime Minister and public health leaders for
sharing the message of the ongoing need for blood. Asks the

17 Mar

Lifeblood Media release calling for 14,000 donors

public and donors to continue to donate to sustain blood
inventory levels

Additional

19 Mar

safety
measures in
donor centres

Additional disinfecting and cleaning measures introduced in

Mid-

New enhanced cleaning measures, physical distancing, and

donor centres

late

additional wellness measures implemented in donor centres

Mar

across the country

23 Mar
Social distancing measures introduced into donor centres

Implemented a plan for PPEs for staff in collection sites

Walk-ins no longer accepted; donation by appointment only

New advice

31 Mar

for vulnerable

Advice for people aged over 70 or with existing health
conditions not to donate

groups

Additional

01 Apr

Wellness checks introduced in donor centres

04 Apr

safety

Wellness checkpoints implemented at all donor centres
across the country

measures
Collection of

11 May

Collection of convalescent plasma starts

29 Apr

CBS collects first plasma donation for CONCOR-1 clinical trial

11 Jul

Face masks introduced for staff and donors in areas of

04 May

Face masks mandatory for all frontline staff in centres

convalescent
plasma starts
Introduction
of PPE
PPE use

i
ii
3

Melbourne
31 Jul

Face masks for staff and donors in Victoria and NSW

across the country
11 May

Face masks mandatory for all donors

Canadian Blood Services is the national blood operator for all provinces and territories in Canada except Quebec.
https://news.google.com/covid19/map?hl=en-CA&mid=%2Fm%2F0d060g&gl=CA&ceid=CA%3Aen, downloaded March 4, 2021.
https://www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2020/08/coronavirus-covid-19-at-a-glance-31-july-2020.pdf, downloaded March 19, 2021.

iii

https://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/ntnl-scrt/crtcl-nfrstrctr/esf-sfe-en.aspx, downloaded March 8, 2021.

