"x"
"1" "STEM  undergraduates’  perspectives of  instructor  and university respons es"
"2" "to the COVID-19 pandemic in S pring 2020"
"3" "Sherry Pagoto, 1 *  Kath rine A. Lewis, 2 ,3  Laurie Groshon, 1  Lindsay Palmer, 2 ,3   Molly E. Waring, 1   Deja Workman, 4   Nina De Luna, 4   and Nathanial  P.  Brown 4"
"4" "1 Department of Allied Health Sciences,  University of Connecticut , Storrs, Connecticut, United States of America"
"5" "2 Department of Psychology, The P ennsylvania  State University , University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America"
"6" "3 Department of Women’s, Gender, and Sexuality Studies, The Pennsylvania State  University, University Park, Pennsylvania,  United States of America"
"7" "4 Department of Mathematics, The Pennsylvania State  University, University Park, Pennsylvania,  United States of America"
"8" "*Corresponding author"
"9" "Email:  sherry.pagoto@uconn.edu  (SP)"
"10" "Abstract"
"11" "Objectives:  We examined undergraduate STEM students’ experiences during Spring 2020 when universities switched to remote  instruction  due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Specifically,  we sought to understand actions by universities and instructors that students found  effective  or  ineffective , as well as instructor behaviors that conveyed a sense of caring or not caring  about their students’ success ."
"12" "Methods:  In July 2020 we conducted 16 focus groups with STEM  undergraduate  students  enrolled in US   colleges and universities  (N=59) .  Focus groups were stratified by gender, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status.  Thematic analyses were  conducted  on the data ."
"13" "Results:  P articipants (N=59 ; 51% female ) were  racially/ethnically diverse  ( 76 %  race/ethnicity other than  non- Hispanic  white) and   from 32 colleges and universities .   The most common effective i nstructor strategies  mentioned  included hybrid instruction (3 5 %)   and  use of  multiple tools for learning and  student engagement (2 7 %). The most common i neffective strategies  mentioned were  increasing the course workload or difficulty level (18%) and  use of  pre-recorded lectures (1 5 %).  The most common behaviors cited as making students feel the  instructor  cared about their success were   exhibiting  leniency and/or flexibility regarding course policies or assessments (2 9%)  and  being  responsive and accessible to students (2 5 %).  The most common b ehaviors  cited as  convey ing   the instructors did not care  include d  poor  communication skills  (2 8 %) and increasing the difficulty of the course (1 5 %). University actions students found helpful included  flexible policies  (4 1 %) and  moving  key  services  online   (e.g.,  tutoring, c ounseling ;  2 4 %).  Students felt  univ ersities  should have   creat ed  policies for faculty and departments to increase consistency (26%) and  ensured   communication strategies we re honest, prompt, and transparent (23%)."
"14" "Conclusions:  To be prepared for future emergencies, u niversities should  devise  evidence-based policies for   remote operations  and a ll i nstructors should  be  train ed in best practices for remote instruction .  Research is needed to identify and ameliorate negative impacts of the pandemic on STEM education."
"15" "Introduction"
"16" "On March 11, 2020, when the World Health Organizat ion declared COVID19 a pandemic  (1) ,  colleges and universities around the US swiftly made plans to  close their campuses, send students home , and move  to  emergency  remote instruction   in a 1-2 week period. This period was rife with confusion  and anxiety as many students had  difficulty securing housing   (2)  and  others  were forced into  living situations  th at were  not conducive to  remote instruction   (3) .   Some  universities were criticized for h ow they handled the abrupt move  (4) .  Once courses went online, the degree of disruption  intensified ,  with some courses more affected than others . Courses in the STEM fields (science, technology, engineering, and math) are inherently difficult to move online  with no preparation  or  instructor  training  given the  frequent use  of laboratory experiences, group projects, and the common use of “chalk talks” ,  all of which  present unique challenges and  require  the use of specialized  technologies  to  conduct  remotely . We know little about STEM undergraduate students ’  perceptions of how their  universities  and  instructor s handled  remote instruction  under  these  emergency circumstances . Such insights  can  inform  institutions’ strategies for insuring effective teaching and learning since it is likely that the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to impact higher education  well into the 2021 -20 22 academic year."
"17" "As universities shutdown  instructor s  had little time  to pivot to remote  instruction   and   their  success  largely hinged upon   their   previous  knowledge and abilities, availability of training  at their institutions , and  the time available  to be  train ed .  Although much research establishing best practices for  remote instruction  exists, it has not been well disseminated outside the fields of educational tech nology and instructional design  (5) .   A recent survey study of undergraduate students revealed a great deal o f variability in course modalities used by  instructor s  in Spring  2020 , such that  65%  of students surveyed  reported recorded lectures, 60% reported live lectures, 55% reported pre-recorded video, and 25% reported brea kout groups during a live class  (6) .   One study  found  that course workloads also changed during the shutdown, with  about one- quarter of students  r eport ed   that their  instructor s  decreas ed   the  workload while one - third report ed   that their  instructor s  increas ed the  workload  (7) .   Much variability was also reported in terms of  grading  in Spring 2020 , with 60% of students reporting  that they were  given a choice between grade and pass/fail, 34% reporting no pass/fail option, and 6 % reporting mandatory pass/fail  (6) .   The  same study found that the proportion of students rating their course as somewhat or very satisfying from pre-shutdown to post-shutdown dropped from 87% to 59%; and only 17% said they were satisfied with how much they were learning after the shutdown.  The pandemic’s disruption to higher education in the spring appears to have been substantial: 13%   of students will delay graduation as a result and 40% lost  a job, internship, or job offer  (8) .  These numbers are sure to rise as the pandemic continues through 2020 and 2021."
"18" "The pandemic will affect at least 2 cohorts of undergraduate students in the US.  Research  on  STEM  student s’  perceptions of the  abrupt  shift to  remote instruction   is  now  needed given the unique challenges associated with  conducting  STEM courses online and the potential impact on academic performance and retention, as STEM courses  are already notorious   for  “weed ing  out” students  (9) .   Research is  also  needed on  STEM students ’  perspectives on how their  instructor s handled the move to  remote  instruction not only in terms of the tools and technologies that were  used, but also in how much  instructor s  conveyed  their  investment in student success under  circumstances  that were stressful both for students and instructors ."
"19" "The variability in course modality,  technologies used, instructor  preparedness, quality of instruction and grading  in Spring 2020  point to a role for universities in developing policies that  create a more cohesiv e approach to  remote instruction  and for those policies to be guided by the large body of research on online instruction .  Given the unprecedented nature of the  pandemic ,  it is unlikely that  universities had policies for closing campus or how to  implement campus-wide   remote instruction  and  they had  little time to create and enforce new policies.  Institutional p olicies are now needed to guide a more seamless transition but this needs to be data-driven and informed by the most imp ortant stakeholders: students. S tudents ’  perspectives of universities responses, including what students felt their university did tha t was effective and ineffective   may be useful to inform   policies  and   the development of university  playbook s  on how emergency  responses can be more evidence - based  in the future. Such knowledge could be leverag ed in the context of this pandemic ,  future pandemics ,   and   other emergency situations that  force  school closures  (e.g., wild fires, snowstorms)  (10) ."
"20" "To address the s e needs,   in virtual focus groups,   we queried a diverse sample of STEM undergraduate students about their perspectives of how their universities and  instructor s handled campus closures and the move to  remote instruction  in Spring 2020. Specifically, we asked about strategies, tools, and technologies that universities and  instructor s used that were effective and ineffective. Then, we asked about  instructor  behavior that made them feel the  instructor  cared  or did not care  about their  success ."
"21" "Methods"
"22" "In July 2020 we recruited undergraduate students attending US colleges  and  universities to participate in a study about their experiences in spring 2020 related to the abrupt transition to  remote instruction .  P articipants completed an online survey   (11)  and participated in focus groups  conducted via video conferencing software .   Focus groups were stratified by gender, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status (SES)."
"23" "Recruitment.  We recruited students through f aculty in the Math Alliance, a national organization of faculty in mathematics,  by  ask ing them  to forward a recruitment email to their students and other faculty teaching courses in the calculus sequence.  Recruitment ads were also posted on  Reddit  in  subreddits that targeted student and/or STEM interests and through course listservs.  Researchers targeted students within the calculus sequence as these courses are required of  most  STEM majors. Interested individuals completed a brief online survey to assess eligibility. Eligible students were aged 18 years or older, enrolled full-time in a college or University in the United States in spring 2020, STEM majors, and met criteria for inclusion in one of 16 demographic-stratified focus groups. STEM majors included students who had a declared major within the natural sciences (e.g., biology, physics), engineering, mathematics, and technology but excluded students in the social sciences (e.g., economics, psychology).  Participants reported their gender as woman, man, or with an ‘other’ write-in option; students who did not identify as women or men were excluded. Participants reported whether they identified their ethnicity as Hispanic/Latinx, and reported how they describe their race(s). Based on responses, we categorized participants as non-Hispanic  Caucasian , Hispanic/Latinx, non-Hispanic Black, non-Hispanic Asian, or other race/ethnicity; participants identifying as another race/ethnicity were excluded from participation. For socioeconomic status, we categorized students  as low SES if they:  1) were eligible  for work study or Pell grants,  2) reported that it was hard for their family to pay for basics (e .g., rent, heat, food), and/or 3 )  reported that  parental education was less than or equal to a high-school diploma or GED and a household income of less than $75,000. Students were categorized as higher SES students as students whose parental education was a Bachelor’s degree or higher, who were not eligible for work study, were not eligible for a Pell Grant, and reported that it was not hard at all or somewhat hard to pay for  basics. Students whose responses to questions about financial aid, parental education, household income, and financial strain did not place them in either of the above groups were excluded from the study."
"24" "Of the 416 respondents to the initial eligibility screener, we emailed the 154 who were eligible and recruited participants into gender-SES-race/ethnicity focus groups with a cap of 6 students per focus group. A total  of 5 9   st udents  participated in a focus group. Participants received a $50 gift card. The Penn State  University  and University of Connecticut Institutional Review Boards approved this study."
"25" "Focus Groups. Focus groups were  stratified by gender ( male, female ), so cioeconomic status (SES; low, moderate/ high), and race/ethnicity (non-Hispanic  Caucasian ,   Hispanic/Latinx  non-Hispanic Black ,  non-Hispanic Asian) , resulting in  16 focus groups . They were  conducted over videoconference and lasted 60 minutes. Transcription software was used to produce transcripts that were then reviewed and edited for accuracy by research assistants. The focus group script posed the following questions:"
"26" "What are some examples of strategies, tools, or technologies that your  instructor s used that you found to be very effective (in that they made it easier to learn) during  remote instruction ?"
"27" "What are some examples of strategies, tools, or technologies that your  instructor s used that you found to be ineffective (in that they did not help you learn) during  remote instruction ?"
"28" "What are some things your  instructor s did during  remote instruction  that made you feel like they cared about their students?"
"29" "What are some things your  instructor s did during  remote instruction  that made you feel like they did not care about their students?"
"30" "What are some things that your university did to help students be successful during   remote instruction ?"
"31" "What do you wish your university did to better help students be successful during   remote instruction ?"
"32" "Statistical analysis .  We summarized participant characteristics using descriptive statistics. We conducted a directed content analysis   (12)  of the responses to the  six  focus group   questions .  For each question we developed a codebook after an initial review of responses , resulting in a total of 46  themes . The responses  by each student  to each question were  independently  coded by two members from the research team , after which they met to discuss and resolve discrepancies.  Interrater agreement   r anged from  81 % to  100 %  and  Cohen’s kappa stat istic s  ranged from  0. 202  to  1.0 , with only 2 of the 46 having a Kappa of <.5 ."
"33" "Data management and descriptive analyses  of the survey data  were conducted using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, Inc, Cary, NC)   while   interrater reliability statistics   were calculated with   SPSS 26   (IBM, Armonk, NY) ."
"34" "Results"
"35" "F ocus group  participants   (N=59)  had a median age of  19  years old,  51 % were women,  47 % were low SES, and the sample was racially/ethnically diverse ( Table  2 ).  In Spring 2020, participants were enrolled in  29   US colleges/universities, including private colleges/universities (n=4, 1 4 % of schools), public   universities (n= 23 , 7 9 %), and community colleges (n= 2 ,  7 %). When surveyed in July 2020, students were living in 20 US states/territories including Puerto Rico, with two students living   outside the US ."
"36" "Table 2 : Characteristics of undergraduate students majoring in STEM fields  at US colleges/universities who participated in focus groups in summer 2020 , n (%)"
"37" "Age (years)"
"38" "18 years"
"39" "19 years"
"40" "20 years"
"41" "21 years"
"42" "22 years"
"43" "36 years"
"44" "15 (2 6 )"
"45" "25 (4 2 )"
"46" "1 1  ( 19 )"
"47" "4 ( 7 )"
"48" "2 (3)"
"49" "1 (2)"
"50" "Gender"
"51" "Female"
"52" "Male"
"53" "3 0  (5 1 )"
"54" "29  (4 9 )"
"55" "Race/ethnicity"
"56" "Non-Hispanic white"
"57" "Non-Hispanic Middle Eastern"
"58" "Non-Hispanic Black"
"59" "Hispanic (any race)"
"60" "Non-Hispanic South East/East Asian"
"61" "Non-Hispanic South Asian"
"62" "1 4  (2 4 )"
"63" "2 (3)"
"64" "1 4  (2 4 )"
"65" "1 2  (20)"
"66" "6 ( 10 )"
"67" "11 (1 9 )"
"68" "Socioeconomic status (SES)*"
"69" "Low SES"
"70" "Higher SES"
"71" "28  (47)"
"72" "3 1  (53)"
"73" "Highest parental education"
"74" "High school/GED"
"75" "Trade/tech/some college/Associate’s degree"
"76" "Bachelors or higher"
"77" "8 (1 4 )"
"78" "5 (8)"
"79" "46  ( 78 )"
"80" "Hard for family to pay for basics"
"81" "Not at all hard"
"82" "Somewhat hard"
"83" "Very hard"
"84" "4 0  (6 8 )"
"85" "19  (3 2 )"
"86" "--"
"87" "Eligibility for federal aid programs"
"88" "Work study"
"89" "Pell grant"
"90" "Other need-based loans or grants (e.g., Stafford Loans)"
"91" "1 4  (2 4 )"
"92" "1 6  (2 7 )"
"93" "1 0  (1 7 )"
"94" "Class rank in college in Spring 2020"
"95" "1 st  year/freshman"
"96" "2 nd  year/sophomore"
"97" "3 rd  year/junior"
"98" "4 th  year/senior"
"99" "40 (6 8 )"
"100" "1 4  (2 4 )"
"101" "5  ( 8 )"
"102" "--"
"103" "Effective  Instructor  Strategies , Tools, and Technologies .    The  59 participants  provided 9 3  responses  to the question : “ What are some examples of strategies, tools, or technologies that your instructors used that you found to be very effective (in that they made it easier to learn)  during remote instruction? ”   T wo major themes  and three minor the mes  emerged  in responses  (Table 3) . The most common (3 5 %; n=3 3 ) response referred to  hybrid instruction, meaning  the instructor’s use of   both synchronous and asynchronous modalities . For instance, many participants  preferr ed  live   remote  lectures that  were also recorded  and posted , allowing students  who experienced  disrupt ions  during the live portion to wat ch later at their convenience. The next most common theme (2 7 %;  n=2 5 )  referred to   instructors’ use of  multiple  tools to reach and engage students , such as discussion boards, study groups (e.g., in breakout rooms), or supplementary materials like making lecture notes or slides available to students.  Specific technologies mentioned include  communication platforms (e.g.,  Piazza , Discord,  Nectir ,  Gauchospace , Slack,  GroupMe , Blackboard Collaborate Ultra) and streaming/video conferencing platforms (e.g., Zoom, Boing, Microsoft Teams, Twitch).   Minor  themes included instructor’s c ommunication  strategy   (1 5 %;  n=1 4 )  such as quick and clear email  res ponses to student inquiries;  recorded lectures (1 2 %; n=11);  leniency  ( 5% ; n=5); and  live lectures at the regularly scheduled class time s  (3%; n=3) . Finally,  two  responses  ( 2% )   indicated there was nothing the   student  found  particularly  effective."
"104" "Table 3 : Effective  instructor  strategies, tools, and technologies  (N=5 9 participants; N=93 responses )"
"105" "Theme"
"106" "Responses  N (%)"
"107" "Illustrative examples"
"108" "Hybrid Instruction:  combination of asynchronous and synchronous instruction"
"109" "33 (3 5% )"
"110" "“Yeah, the two class styles I liked was some would do live lectures and then posted afterwards so you'd have the opportunity, or you'd have the option of viewing it live or later, and others would post the recorded lecture before class. And then they would open up class for like an office hours  session where you can just talk to them live and get questions answered. I think both of those were effective.”"
"111" "Multiple Resources:  use of supplementary materials, discussion boards, study groups, break-out rooms, or review sessions in addition to lectures."
"112" "25 (27 % )"
"113" "“PROBLEM SOLVING TOGETHER IN BREAKOUT ROOMS ARE THE ABSOLUTE BEST.” [Emphasis in original]"
"114" "“They opened discussion spaces via  Nectir  or  Gauchospace .”"
"115" "Communication:  timely, clear communication from  instructor s"
"116" "14 (15 % )"
"117" "“They responded to emails a lot quicker than they did during the year.”"
"118" "“Our  instructor  used to mail us r egularly with what to do and  how much we needed to do and complete by the week.”"
"119" "Pre-recorded lectures:  preferred pre-recoded lectures over other instructional modalities"
"120" "1 1  (1 2% )"
"121" "“The one thing I did find that was a positive change was… pre recorded  lectures.”"
"122" "“ Instructor s often pre-recorded lectures which allowed us to watch them at our convenience.”"
"123" "Leniency:  more lenient with grading, assignment due dates, or course content"
"124" "5 (5 % )"
"125" "“Some  instructor s sort of were more lenient. Gave more extra credit, stuff like that.”"
"126" "“You can do open notes on your test, which was, I mean, yeah, that was definitely helpful.”"
"127" "Keeping the same schedule:  preferred courses that kept the same schedule"
"128" "3 (3 % )"
"129" "“I liked when they   posted their class at the same time as it normally met, because it  helped me  keep on a schedule.”"
"130" "Nothing:  did not mention anything that they found effective"
"131" "2 (2 % )"
"132" "“During  remote instruction , some things my  instructor s have been doing haven't been too special.”"
"133" "Ineffective  instructor  strategies , tools, and technologies .   The 59 participants made a   total of 68  responses  to the question:  What are some examples of strategies, tools, or technologies that your instructors used that you found to be ineffective (in that they did not help you learn) during remote instruction?   About 1/5 of students (n=14 ;  21% )  had  no examples of ineffective strategies, tools, and technologies  to share .   Otherwise, 5 major themes  and 1 minor theme  emerged  (Table  4) . The most common  theme  (n=12; 18%) encompassed any strategy that instructors used that served to increase the difficulty level or workload of the course relative to how the course was conducted pre-shutdown. Such measures included increasing the weighting of proctored exams to reduce the impact of cheating on final grades, adding new tasks such as participation on discussion boards, or changing exam and assignment formats in ways that would avoid cheating but also increase the difficulty level for students (e.g., open-ended responses instead of multiple choice or replacing exams with time intensive projects). The next most common theme  (n=1 0 ; 1 5 %) was instructors using pre-recorded lectures.  Responses cited that pre-recorded lectures that were used in pl ace of live lectures made it  harder to feel motivated to attend and harder to learn from given the lack of opportunity to ask questions in the moment.   An equally prevalent theme (n=10; 15%) was instructors’ lack of a communication strategy, tool, or technology, with examples including no formal ways to interface with the instructor or poor email responses.  Another major theme (n= 9 ; 1 3 %) was the use of any technologies that  had frequent technical difficulties , were inefficient, required bandwidth or computer storage that  not all  students  had , or that required more training than  was  provided. Examples included test taking platforms  in which  students  experienced  technical difficulties that interfered with test performance  and/ or the time available to take the test, dissemination of large files that students didn’t have the ability to download, use of breakout rooms with little guidance on how students should utilize the time, and the use of online tests that didn’t allow students to skip  difficult  questions and return to them later.  The next theme (n= 8 ;  1 2 %) was related to instructors’  approach es  to lecturing, including the use of long-form recorded or live  remote  lectures,  posting outdated lecture recordings, and   use  of poor quality recordings.  One  minor theme  was  instructor s  requiring  attendance  at live  lectures   (n=4; 6%).  One  response w as  coded as  “other” because  it  did not fit into any of these categories."
"134" "Table 4 : Ineffective  instructor  strategies, tools, and technologies  (N=5 9 ;  N=68  responses)"
"135" "Theme"
"136" "N (%)"
"137" "Illustrative examples"
"138" "Increasing  Difficulty  or Workload"
"139" "Instructor assigning a dditional material, assignments ,  or stricter grading  to adjust to online format and/or to prevent cheating."
"140" "12 (18% )"
"141" "“He  changed the weighting of the final from  40% to 50%... because he wan ted to ensure that people were   being honest because there was a proctored final. ”   “ Excessive assignments such as discussion boards for each daily meeting of our  class.”"
"142" "“He used  free response on exams (something he previously did not do) in order to combat cheating. He did not alter the time allotted to take the test. ”"
"143" "Pre-r ecorded  lectures"
"144" "Use of lectures recorded in advance and posted for students to view."
"145" "1 0  ( 15% )"
"146" "“I was more likely to attend a live session than I was to  just go and look at already pre- recorded material.”"
"147" "“T here wasn't anything that was live it was just pre-recorded. ”"
"148" "Inad equate communication strategies  Instructor n ot responsive to email or infrequent interactions with students"
"149" "10  ( 15% )"
"150" "“I found the most ineffective form of teaching was when they would just basically just give us slides, and just say good luck, you're on your own.”"
"151" "“When you send an email  they respond like really vague so that that wasn't great.”"
"152" "Technology Failures  Technologies that frequently failed, were inefficient, or required bandwidth/storage that not all students had access to"
"153" "9  ( 13% )"
"154" "“My calc  instructor  decided to randomly switch the format  for our final  to this website …that kicked people out or made you resubmit your answers .”"
"155" "“There  was no backtracking  [in online tests] , so if you didn't know the answer, you just have t o guess. You couldn’t just skip it and come back to it later.”"
"156" "Long-form or outdated lecture  formats"
"157" "Instructor use of l ength y lectures,  outdated recordings , and/or poor quality video or audio."
"158" "8 (12% )"
"159" "“So because lectures were online they weren't  restricted to  50 minute s …so they would just make the lectures an hour and a half to fit all.“"
"160" "“He was just posting notes  and then reciting the notes in an  mp3 recording .”"
"161" "“I had one  instructor  that was using  [video]  lectures from 2014. So they were  outdated . Like if, this  lecture video said chapter 13, it was like chapter 25 in my current book.”"
"162" "Required attendance at live lectures"
"163" "Instructors making attendance at live lectures part of the course grade."
"164" "4 (6% )"
"165" "“This was a demotivator because when it is when you are attending a lecture in person it's much d ifferent from attending it via Zoom. So requiring Z oom attendance just I don't know why but it just doesn't work.”"
"166" "“I think a lot of students had trouble attending [live lectures]…since you're home…you can't block out the same amount of time.”"
"167" "Other"
"168" "Did not fit other categories"
"169" "1  ( % )"
"170" "“Um I personally hated group projects.“"
"171" "Nothing"
"172" "Had no examples of ineffective strategies, tools, or techniques"
"173" "14 ( 21% )"
"174" "“Yeah, nothing comes to mind at the moment.”"
"175" "Instructor  Caring Behavior .   The 59 participants made a  total of  87  responses  to the question: “ What are some things your instructors did during remote instruction that made you feel like they cared about their students? ”   Two major th emes and 4  minor themes emerged  (Table 5) . The most common response, accounting for  2 9 % (n=2 5 ) of responses related to  instructor  leniency and/or  flexibility with respect to course policies or assessments.  Examples included use of pass/fail or other  flexible  grading policies, allowing homework to be turned in past the deadline, and allotting more time for assignments.  The next most common theme   (2 5 %;  n=2 2 )  was  instructor   responsive ness   and  accessibility  to  students .   Examples included  prompt replies to student emails ,   flexible  office hours ,   and  frequent  engagement on  discussion boards. About 13% (n=11) of responses related to  instructor s bonding with the class, such as through words of encouragement  or just spending time acknowledging the pandemic and asking how students  were  coping .  Similar  to  this  theme which refers to  instructor s’  interactions with the entire class, another 13% (n=11)  of responses  related to  the  instructor  offering   one-on-one opportunities to  check in with students and  provide emotional support . The next theme,  comprising 9% (n=8)  of responses   related to  any sign  the  instructor   put  in effort  to ensure the class was a success, including  learning  and using  new technologies,  expressing enthusiasm , or generally  seeming to  put in significant effort  to maintain high - quality  instruction. About 7% (n=6) of responses related to  instructor s seeking  student feedback on how the course was going. T he remaining 5% (n=4)  of responses suggested the student could not think of any examples of caring instructor behaviors."
"176" "Table  5 : Actions that made students feel their  instructor  cares  (N=5 9 ;  N=87  responses )"
"177" "Theme"
"178" "N (%)"
"179" "Illustrative examples"
"180" "Leniency:  relaxing policies (e.g., grading) or deadlines, and accommodating unforeseen challenges like technology issues."
"181" "2 5  (2 9% )"
"182" "“Reduced the number of tests.”"
"183" "“S howed extra leniency for technological issues or late assignments. ”"
"184" "Responsive and available:  instructors being available (e.g., discussion forums, extra office hours) and responsive to email and other inquiries"
"185" "2 2  (2 5 % )"
"186" "“They had more office hours, and they just responded faster to emails.”"
"187" "“Some  instructor s were active all the day on the forum.”"
"188" "Bonding:  attempts to bond through casual chatting about pandemic news, offering encouragement or conveying empathy for challenges faced by students"
"189" "11   (13 % )"
"190" "“W e'd just talk about how stuff is going and if everyone's staying healthy and stuff.”"
"191" "“They routinely offer encouraging words to us.”"
"192" "Individual support:  openness to or encouragement of one-on-one discussions of experiences or challenges"
"193" "11   (13 % )"
"194" "“O ffering one on one help both academically and emotionally.”"
"195" "“S he used to like, personally ask everyone, \"how are you doing?\""
"196" "Put in effort:  made ample efforts to insure good instruction was happening, such as learning technology or providing additional study materials, and/or maintain a positive environment"
"197" "8   (9 % )"
"198" "“ Instructor s that  tried  new technologies, even though they did not know how it worked,  instructor s who the made the effort to, you know, go the extra mile.”"
"199" "“I had the one very enthusiastic  instructor .”"
"200" "Sought student feedback:  instructor s asked class was going, how to improve, and valued their input"
"201" "6   (7 % )"
"202" "“A lot of my classes actually didn't proctor exams or anything like that, especially after students talked about privacy concerns.”"
"203" "“He was trying to adjust to how we would take quizzes in the class and he sort of like tried a couple different formats and he was like, oh, do you like this? If it doesn't work like you can do corrections on it. We can try a different format.”"
"204" "Nothing:  did not answer or gave no examples"
"205" "4   (5 % )"
"206" "“Um, not much really.”"
"207" "Instructor  Uncaring Behavior .   The 59 participants made a   total of 7 2  responses  to the question:  What are some things your instructors did during remote instruction that made you feel like they did not care about their students?   Over one-quarter of responses (2 5 %; n=18)  had no  examples of  uncaring behavior by  instructor s  to share .  Otherwise, two major themes and three minor themes emerged  (Table 6) . The most common  response   (2 8 %;  n= 20 )  referred to poor  communication ,  including  unanswered  email s,  lack  of  empathy  conveyed in communications ,   and   scolding   the  class  for underperformance .  The next most common response (1 5 %;  n=11)  referred to  instructor s  increas ing the  difficulty  of the  course ,  including  making exams harder to  offset the assumed impact of  cheating ,   assigning more work, or grading harder .  Minor  theme s included  instructor s being unprepared or  disorganized  (13%; n=9) ,  including   expending  minimal effort into  the  online format, posting assignments at the last minute, and frequently changing requirements, rules, and standards.  Another minor  theme (1 1 %;  n= 8 ) was inflexibility  which included the  instructor  making   no accommodations for  students including  international students ,  students with   unreliable technology/ internet access ,   students in different  time zone s , or  students  with  special  educational  needs. The final  minor  theme was  insufficient instruction or guidance  ( 8 % ,  n=6) .   Examples include d   instructor s posting assignments and lectures and leaving students to work on their own with no guidance, minimal or no opportunities to engage with the  instructor , and minimal instruction provided for assignments."
"208" "Table 6 : Actions that made students feel their  instructor  doesn’t care  (N=59 participants, N=72 responses)"
"209" "Theme"
"210" "N (%)"
"211" "I llustrative examples"
"212" "Poor  Communication :  unresponsive to emails, communication lacked empathy or was discouraging, or did not answer students questions adequately."
"213" "20  (2 8% )"
"214" "“We all emailed him, no response, and then we had to email the TA. And the TA also was like, he went MIA on he's not responding to my emails.”"
"215" "“He is so pessimistic about the future, I mean, whether it's true or not, it just didn't really need to be said.”"
"216" "Increased difficulty:  Exams, assignments, course activities and/or grading became more difficult, stringent, or more laborious."
"217" "11   (1 5% )"
"218" "“Just blat antly making [an exam] harder  because he doesn't want students to cheat.”"
"219" "“Lengthening lectures. That hurt. let's see, also just kind of like raising the standards.”"
"220" "Unprepared:  instructor s were disorganized, changed rules or standards, put little effort into moving course online, or posted last minute announcements"
"221" "9   (13 % )"
"222" "“My Calculus class didn’t let us know what the format of final would be until the last minute, which lead to the spread of misinformation.”"
"223" "“Not updating students about the course syllabus changes in a timely manner.”"
"224" "“The ones that didn't put as much effort just like seemed like they didn't really care about it as much.”"
"225" "Inflexible:  did not  accommodate special circumstances or needs, including time zones, or generally was inflexible with rules"
"226" "8  (1 1% )"
"227" "“I had a…major  timezone  difference. And so…refusing to post lectures online and requiring live attendance…caused problems for me and I just felt like they weren't going out of their way.”"
"228" "“ H e would take off 10 points per 30 seconds late.”"
"229" "Insufficient instruction or guidance:  not providing  clear instructions, holding consistent class meetings, or leaving students unsure about requirements and standards"
"230" "6   ( 8% )"
"231" "“When you're not doing the lab [in person] and you're just kind of like getting a dataset and a  couple videos, you have no idea what's actually going on.”"
"232" "“But if [you] had to actually ask about everything and you know, everything was unclear. So, to me, they'll like Oh, they don't really care.”"
"233" "Nothing : did not answer or mention a concrete example"
"234" "18   (2 5% )"
"235" "“I did not have an experience like this. All of my  instructor s were great.”"
"236" "What Universities Did Well.   The 59 participants made a  total of 116  responses  to the question:  What are some things that your university did to help students be successful during remote instruction?     Two major themes and 6 minor themes emerged  (Table 7) . The most common response (4 1 %; n= 48 ) was classified as a dministrative flexibility, examples of which included  university-wide pass/fail policies, waiving limits on counseling sessions, and extending administrative deadlines. The next most common response (2 4 %; n=2 8 ) was provision of remote services such as tutoring, counseling, and advising. One minor theme was agile response  (9%; n=10)  which referred to how quick ly and smoothly  university  services changed to meet student needs. Other minor themes included seeking student input during the process via town halls, surveys, and direct email solicitations (6%; n=7); provision of technology  such as  wifi  hotspots or laptops  (4%; n=5);  effective communication strategies  (4%; n=5); and financial assistance in the form of fee waivers and refunds ( 3 %; n= 4 ).   A small percentage of responses ( 8 %; n= 9 )  suggested the student could not think of any examples of what the university did well."
"237" "Table 7 : University actions which helped students be successful in Spring 2020  (N=59 participants, N=116 responses)"
"238" "Theme"
"239" "N (%)"
"240" "Illustrative examples*"
"241" "Flexibility:  students felt administrative flexibility  such as pass/fail options for final grades, waiving limits on counseling sessions, or extending administrative deadlines was helpful"
"242" "48  (4 1% )"
"243" "“W e went the pass/fail option was the big thing because that that is a lifesaver and a grade saver.”"
"244" "“I f you went to counseling on campus I think there was a limit to how many you could go to, but they lifted the limit.”"
"245" "Remote services : students felt remote services such as advising, tutoring or mental health counseling were helpful"
"246" "2 8  (2 4% )"
"247" "“Tutoring it was also being done through zoom.”"
"248" "“They also did provide remote counseling services which was really helpful.”"
"249" "Agile response :  students felt their university was prepared  and quickly took  steps to minimize disruptions"
"250" "10 (9 % )"
"251" "“I would say they were very quick in moving everything online.”"
"252" "“They kept the library open if you didn' t have internet in your place.”"
"253" "Sought student feedback : students appreciated university’s efforts to get their input through townhalls, surveys, or direct email solicitation"
"254" "7 (6 % )"
"255" "“My university held townhalls on COVID.”"
"256" "“They were very attentive to the students voices.”"
"257" "Technology : students felt assistance with technology issues such as internet access, laptops, webcams or online resources were helpful"
"258" "5 (4 % )"
"259" "“They made sure that every student has some form of internet access.”"
"260" "“They were providing loans , laptop s  to borrow, to the students .”"
"261" "Good communication : students felt university’s efforts to keep them informed were helpful"
"262" "5 (4 % )"
"263" "“They explained their plan as it was going along so it kind of gave some closure as the decisions that the y  were making and what steps they were  gonna  take for next semester.”"
"264" "Financial assistance : students felt fee waivers, refunds and other financial support was helpful"
"265" "4 ( 3% )"
"266" "“They also had some type of like funding, where if students had financial need they could fill out a form and get up to like $1,000.”"
"267" "“We also had our Distance Education fees for the summer waived.”"
"268" "Nothing:  students did not mention any helpful actions"
"269" "9  ( 8% )"
"270" "“I think the university did a bad job.”"
"271" "What Universities Could Have Done Better.     The 59 participants made a   total of 69  responses  to the question:  What do you wish your university did to better help students be  successful during remote instruction?   Three major themes and six minor themes emerged  (Table 8) . The most common response  (26%; n=18)  was that students wanted the university to create policies for faculty and departments to increase  the  consistency in how courses  were carried out in terms of grading and teaching modalities. The second most common response (23%; n=16) was a university communication strategy that was honest, prompt, clear, and transparent. The next most common response (1 0 %; n= 7 ) was to improve the responsivity and support provided by university offices and services (e.g., financial aid, counseling, tutoring). Minor themes included engaging student input to crisis response (6%; n=4), provision of technology (4%; n=3), provide specific accommodations for international students (4%; n=3), refund fees for services not rendered (3%; n=2), provide opportunities for students to interact with one another (3%; n=2), and provide more effective policies to prevent cheating (3%; n=2). The remaining responses (1 7 %; n= 12 )  suggested the s tudent  could not think of examples of things the university could have done better ."
"272" "Table  8 : Things students wish their university had done better  (N=59 participants, N=69 responses)"
"273" "Theme"
"274" "N (%)"
"275" "Illustrative examples"
"276" "Policies for Faculty and Departments:  student felt faculty and departments should receive clear and unified policies, not just guidelines or suggestions, to ensure uniformity and fairness."
"277" "18 (26)"
"278" "“I would have preferred if their guidelines were actual policies, as many  instructors chose to ignore them.”"
"279" "“Put down harsher restrictions on  instructor s to make sure they do not harm  students.”"
"280" "Communication : student wanted university  communication to be more  honest, humble, clear, consistent, transparent, or less abrupt"
"281" "16 (23)"
"282" "“ I just felt like the way that they were reaching out wasn't very effective…it just seemed very superficial.”"
"283" "“Communicate that they don't know what they're doing.”"
"284" "Nothing : student was generally satisfied with their university’s actions"
"285" "1 2  (1 7 )"
"286" "“Yeah, nothing  nothing  really comes to mind. I think they did the best they could and I wouldn't have any suggestions.”"
"287" "Offices and Resources:  student felt university offices could have been more responsive and support for resources increased"
"288" "7  (1 0 )"
"289" "“ I think the central offices of the universities could have been more organized like financial aid…they were really unavailable to everyone and took like months to reply.”"
"290" "“ I know one girl mentioned her school provided counseling resources and I wish my school did that.”"
"291" "“W hen it comes to like tutoring, like it was kind of hard for me to like find people that will actually help me.”"
"292" "Student Input:  student felt university should collect and incorporate student input into their actions and policies"
"293" "4 (6)"
"294" "“ In general, just taking in student input and gauging how students feel about this, or this decision or that decision uh would have helped out a lot.”"
"295" "“ I wish my university let us give feedback on the  instructor s and their teaching methods so that changes to cater to each student could be made through the semester.”"
"296" "Technology:  student felt technology  for remote  instruction  or training for faculty in said technology could have been better"
"297" "3 (4)"
"298" "“ I wish they had better software systems in place to help with  remote instruction  because the one s they used weren't effective.”"
"299" "“T hey should teach some of the  instructor s to be more tech savvy.”"
"300" "International Students:  student felt issues impacting international students could have been handled better"
"301" "3 (4)"
"302" "“ I think with a university such uh with a huge number of international students should have been more considerate about the international student.”"
"303" "“I guess as an international student there was a lot of confusion about visa. So I wish [my university] was more transparent with what they were doing regarding it.”"
"304" "Fees:  student felt fees should be reduced or eliminated to reflect services provided"
"305" "2 (3)"
"306" "“ I wish my university refunded us for on-campus services that we couldn't use such as our gym and health center fees.”"
"307" "Student Interactions:  student felt opportunities to engage with each other were lacking"
"308" "2 (3)"
"309" "“ I'm not sure what this would have looked like, but I feel like it would have been nice to have another more ways to connect with other students in the course since we didn't have that like face to face.”"
"310" "Cheating:  student felt policies to prevent cheating could have been improved"
"311" "2 (3)"
"312" "“ I wish my university had a lot stricter guidelines to reduce cheating during tests…I feel like a lot of my like anxiety…was literally just from worrying about the curve being destroyed by cheaters.”"
"313" "Discussion"
"314" "The results of the present study revealed  that g enerally   students  expressed that  hybrid instruction  and the  use  of  multiple  complementary  resources and technologies  were  preferred , while  reliance on  pre-recorded lectures, poorly functioning technology, and  insufficient  opportunities to communicate with the  instructor  interfered with their ability to learn  course material .  The preference for live  over pre-recorded  lectures is consistent with a recent study that showed that 80% of undergraduate students said video chat and live streaming have made   remote instruction  better and 72% said the ability to connect with  instructor  and other student s over live video was important  (13) .   Interestingly, some students  valued   recorded lectures  due to  the flexibility they provide , and this may be particularly important for them to juggle school, work and home   life . However, when recordings were  in lieu of   live  class time,  lengthy , low  quality, or   clearly  recycled from a previous semester , they were  often  found to be insufficient.  Even though the convenience of recorded lectures was mentioned, many students voiced that it was harder to get motivated and pay attention when classes were reduced to  viewing  recordings.   More  work  is needed to  examine  the impact of  live versus recorded lectures  during the pandemic  on attendance/views and student engagement  as well as academic performance and int entions to stay in a STEM major  (14, 15) ."
"315" "Results also revealed university actions that  students  percei ved as beneficial  including lenient grading policies (e.g., pass/fail), a quick and smooth response to the emergency, and  remotely offering  campus  services. Many students reported that they experienced too much  variability  in policies and practices between faculty  and  departments which for them signaled a need for the university to step in and create campus-wide policies. They felt this would not only help them stay focused and organized but also prevent particularly egregious  instructor  practices such as  instructor s  being largely inaccessible to students,  conducting the entire course by simply  posting lecture notes, or  increa sing the difficulty level and/or workload of  course s .  Research on student performance across multiple courses under conditions of varying modalities across courses may be needed.  Another area for improvement was  related to  the response of  university services  (e.g., financial aid)  d uring campus closures which was often  cited as slow and inefficient .  Research suggests that for remote instruction to be effective it must be accompanied by an educational ecosystem to support the  remote  learner  (5) .  Unfortunately, t he  abrupt  mov e of campus employees to  work-from- home appeared to at least temporarily affect their ability to meet students ’  needs during the pandemic. Campus employees  likely  weren’t used to working from home but many were also likely to be juggling children  who were  schooling from home wh ile attempting to do their jobs  (16) .  Provision of safe  and affordable  childcar e options for  campus  employees  have been called for in general  (17)  and the pandemic has revealed this need further .  Universities may also need to develop protocols for an online ecosystem that provides students efficient access to services and resources when the campus is closed in an emergency."
"316" "A cross-cutting theme, emerging in response s  to every question  we asked  about both  instructor s and universities , was communication.  Students desired  communication  from both instructors and universities  that  was  re sponsiv e , transparen t , timel y, and empathetic .  Consistent  with prior research  (18) ,  w hen these qualities were conveyed by  instructor s and/or universities, students felt more aware of what was expected of them and more valued  and respected .  In Fall 2020, some universities were called out for  harsh messaging to students that shames and blames them   for  COVID19  spread on campuses  (19) .  Our findings suggest such an approach to communication is not likely to be well-received by students.   Interestingly, a survey of undergraduate students in Fall 2020 found that 37% of students said their opinion of their university declined during the semester   (13) ,   s uggesting that  some  students have  not  been  satisfied with how their universities have handled the pandemic."
"317" "Research  has demonstrated  that student-instructor and student-student interactions can promote student achievement   (20) ,  perceived learning, and student satisfa ction during remote instruction  (21) .   Our  finding s  on  communication   suggest  that  instructor s  need to   create   more  opportunities to  engage  with students during remote  instruction  and  to  frequently evaluate whet her their  engagement  plan  meet s  students’ needs. E ffective  engagement  strategies  were mentioned by students , many of which  are supported by prior research  (22) ,  includ ed  the   use of formal communication platforms,  quick  email  response  time s, remote office hours, offers to meet  one-on-one , and live lectures that allow for students to ask questions and hear other students ask and get answers to their questions. When live lectures are not offered, the onus is on  instructor s to provide alternative  ways to engage with students  while being  mindful  that voluntary forms such as virtual office hours may  not be sufficient to accommodate large class sizes and may  be underutilized  by students who are bashful,  have erratic schedules , or  do not wish their home environment  to be seen on video ."
"318" "Some students mentioned  appreciating  the use of  n ovel communication platforms  (e.g., Piazza) that allow ed  them to ask questions any time  ( without having to send emails ) , post  questions anonymously,  get  incentivize d   for  answer ing  each other’s questions, organize conversations into searchable threads, and  access everything  via a mobile app.  T he rel iance  on email to communicate with students  is  proving  to be insufficient as evidenced by a  study  that  found that student s  who were provided  novel  tools to communicate with  instructor s and other students  this fall  rated their motivation and engagement with learning outsid e of class significantly higher  (13) .   The importance of student engagement is underscored by e merging research that  shows  undergraduate students continue to feel  in adequately engaged by their  instructor s . A recent survey of 3,412 undergraduate students in the middle of the Fall 2020 semester found that only 40% agreed that their  remote instruction  experience is engaging  during class time  and only 32% agreed  they are being adequately  engag ed  outside  class time   (13) .   That same study showed that 85% of students felt that  instructor s  should  foster   a sense of community among  the  students  in online courses .  This signals the need for  better implementation and dissemination of  best practices for engaging  student s   during  online  instruction   (23) .   R esearch is needed on   how  novel  technology-based  communication platforms  influence  both  instructor - student engagement  and student-student engagement and ultimately, student motivation  and  academic  performance ."
"319" "Two themes emerged across questions that we suspect are related. Students emphasized the need for leniency in grading, assignments, and expectations ,  while also expressing concern regarding  increased  difficulty level  and/or workload  of courses.  Although the  stress and  d isruption related to the pandemic   likely contributed  to students’  pleas  for leniency,  instructor s should consider that plea s  for leniency may  also  be a result of  increases   in  difficulty level   and  course  workload  that may be occurring intentionally or unintentionally .  Consistent with our findings, a  survey of 148 undergraduates  found  nearly one-third  reported one or more of their  instructors had increa sed the workload in Spring 2020  (24) .  Some practices may have created more work for s tudents than  instructor s realize . For example, students reported that to avoid online cheating ,   some  instructor s replaced exams with class projects  that e nded up  requiring more time  to accomplish  than  the time they would have spent  studying for an exam .  They also reported that  instructor s increased the difficulty level  of courses as a way to offset the impact of online cheating,  by replacing multiple choice exams  with  free response without allocating sufficient time  to complete the exam  or by  simply  increasing the stringency of the grading curve.  In addition to increased difficulty, students are reporting numerous  other  challenges associated with anti-cheating software, including  having to read and follow elaborate instructions on how to take the test, anxiety and discomfort associated with being watched through your computer during an exam, and being accused of cheating  when  internet connection  issues disrupt the exam  (25) .     Another example   students gave regarding  increased   workload was   instructors  post ing  lecture videos that  exceeded  the usual lecture time . This may have occurred  because nothing stops  an instructor  from running over time when recording a video  as opposed to in -person  lectures which have  a hard stop  time .  Even when  video  lectures matched th e length of in- person  lectures,  students said these  took longer to digest because  watching videos  was   more cognitively taxing compared to live lectures where interaction occurs.   Class  interaction breaks up the monotony of  a  lecture  and also allows students to ask  the  instructor  to clarify concepts and answer  questions  in the moment  and  hear answers to other student’s questions , all of which can facilitate learning   (26, 27) .  Some  students said they need ed  to take frequent breaks  when watching lecture videos , rewind and re-listen to parts they didn’t absorb, and work much harder to stay focused , all of which made the time spent on the lecture go beyond the t ime they would spend in an in- person lecture .  Interestingly, their experience was that the extra time  they  spent  on  lectures  did not result in  better learning compared to in- pe rson classes, but instead , worse  learning .  Breaking up video lectures into  short  units, recording live lectures so that class interaction is captured  in the video , and allowing students to interact while they are watching may be ways to  enhance  the experience of watching class by video.  Another way students said  workload  was  negatively impacted  was   when  instructor s  posted  their lecture videos  at the end of the week  or at erratic times  rather than at class time,  which made it difficult for students to manage their  time .  Interestingly, t he problems  students  cited were often things that could be remedied by changing practices and/or leveraging available technologies.  Inadequate  instructor   practices may be driving the common sentiment that r emote learning is generally worse than in- person.  Indeed, a  recent survey of undergraduate students found that 68% said  remote   instruction is less effective than in- person instruction  (13) .   This sentiment runs counter to research on remote instruction  outside of the context of emergencies  which shows positive outcomes on student performance   (28-31)  and no dif ferences in student satisfaction relative to  in person instruction   (32) ;  however, as discussed elsewhere, it is doubtful that  best practices for  remote instructio n were being implemented widely in Spring and Fall 2020  (5) ."
"320" "The present study has some limitations.  Though participants were diverse in terms of gender, SES, and race/ethnicity,  our sample size was too small  to compare results by  those  demographic  factors  and did not represent the entire range of racial/ethnic diversity in the US .  Further, students were asked about their experiences in Spring 2020 which may not generalize to Fall 2020 when instructors had more time to prepare.  The results of this study  were  used to  gain insights to  inform  a larger  survey  study  that is currently underway assessing students’ experiences in Fall 2020 ."
"321" "Our f indings reveal ed  that  many   students felt  universities  and instructors  lack ed  a cohesive strategy for  emergency   remote instruction . To be sure, few anticipated the circumstances of 2020  and  students, instructors, and administrators were all under enormous stress . However,  a robust literature on online instruction exists   (33, 34)  and  evidence points to the increasing possibility that pandemics  and other natural disasters  are likely to  occur in the future   (35, 36) .   Done well, remote instruction can actually increase STEM participation and diversity, which signals the urgent need for b road adoption of best practices  (37) .   Going forward, all instructors need to be pr oficient in remote instruction.  Universities could help by  develop ing  protocols for campus closure and  remote instruction  that incorporate  1)  their data on what worked well and what did not  in Spring and Fall 2020,  2)  the vast body of research on best  practices in remote instruction  (34) ,   and  3)  iterative  input from their  student bodies  being sure to include  diverse voices .  University-level  policies  should  address course modalities, grading policies,  student engagement  strategies , and faculty training requirements . For example, universities should consider prohibiting course modalities that are proving to be unacceptable and/or ineffective , mandating  instructor  training in  remote instruction  tools and effective student engagement strategies , and examining the relationship between course modalities and student  course  evaluations to identify  modalities  that  aren’t working well or  are being executed poorly ."
"322" "Similarly,  instructor s should produce  remote instruction  protocols for their courses  that are informed by  best practices identified in the remote instruction literature .   Effective  remote instruction  requires a design process that takes into account myriad factors including instructor-student ratio, modality, synchrony, pedagogical style ( e.g.,  explorato ry, collaborative) among others  (5) .   To identify training gaps on the part of instructors, research is needed to examine how instructors approached remote instruction in Spring and Fall 2020 and to what extent it reflected  best practices.  Finally, effective strategies should be shared in venues that reach the academic community given the lack of implementation and dissemination of evidence-based practices for remote instruction thus far. A great example of such a venue is the Facebook group Pandemic Pedagogy which currently has 32.7K members and emerged shortly after the pandemic commenced as a forum for faculty to share their experiences with remote instruction."
"323" "A plan is now needed to address the potential negative consequences to STEM education caused by the pandemic. U niversities  urgently  need to devise strategies to  1)  identify and  assist students who have exhibited declines in academic performance , 2)   follow-up with students who have  switched out of a STEM major  since Spring 2020, and 3 )  re-engage students who have  unenrolled temporarily or permanen tly as a result of the pandemic  (38) .   A generation of college students is at risk for long-term impacts of the pandemic on their education al  and economic pote ntial. G iven the disproportionate impact of COVID19 on the very racial/ethnic groups that are underrepresented in the ST EM fields  (39-41) ,   the pandemic may   cause  a nother  gaping leak in the STEM pipeline.  Future r esearch is needed to accelerate the implementation and dissemination of  best practices fo r online STEM education and  how  to identify and ameliorate the negative impacts of the pandemic on STEM undergraduate students ."
"324" "Acknowledgements"
"325" "This project was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (PI: Brown, NSF #2028344; PI: Pagoto, co-PI Waring, NSF # 2028341 ). Additional support for Dr. Pagoto was provided by National Institute of Health (NIH) grant K24HL124366."
"326" "References"
"327" "1. www.who.int . WHO Director-General's opening remarks at the media briefing on COVID-19 - 11 March 2020: World Health Organization; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.who.int/director-general/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-2020"
"328" "2. Su A. Students Scramble to Find Last-Minute Housing After Being Displaced By Coronavirus Measures: The Harvard Crimson; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.thecrimson.com/article/2020/3/12/housing-scramble-coronavirus/ ."
"329" "3. Levin D. No Home, No Wi-Fi: Pandemic Adds to Strain on Poor College Students: The New York Times; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.nytimes.com/2020/10/12/us/covid-poor-college-students.html ."
"330" "4. www.npr.org . Colleges Face Student Lawsuits Seeking Refunds After Coronavirus Closures: NPR; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.npr.org/2020/05/29/863804342/colleges-face-student-lawsuits-seeking-refunds-after-coronavirus-closures ."
"331" "5. Hodges C, Moore S, Lockee B, Trust T, Bond A. The Difference Between Emergency Remote Teaching and Online Learning: EDUCAUSE Review; 2020 [Available from:  https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning#fn8 ."
"332" "6. Means B, Neisler J, Langer Research Associates. Suddenly Online: A National Survey of Undergraduates During the COVID-19 Pandemic. San Mateo, CA: Digital Promise; 2020."
"333" "7. Eduljee N, Croteau K. College Student Transition to Synchronous Virtual Classes during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Northeastern United States. Pedagogical Research. 2020;5(4)."
"334" "8. Aucejo EM, French J, Ugalde Araya MP, Zafar B. The impact of COVID-19 on student experiences and expectations: Evidence from a survey. Journal of public economics. 2020;191:104271."
"335" "9. Weston TJ, Seymour E, Koch AK, Drake BM. Weed-Out Classes and Their Consequences. In: Seymour E, Hunter A-B, editors. Talking about Leaving Revisited: Persistence, Relocation, and Loss in Undergraduate STEM Education. Cham: Springer International Publishing; 2019. p. 197-243."
"336" "10. Sheehan MC, Fox MA. Early Warnings: The Lessons of COVID-19 for Public Health Climate Preparedness. Int J Health Serv. 2020;50(3):264-70."
"337" "11. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic data capture (REDCap) --A metadata-driven methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J Biomed Inform. 2009;42(2):377-81."
"338" "12. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. Qual Health Res. 2005;15(9):1277-88."
"339" "13. tophat.com. Higher Ed Students Grade the Fall 2020 Semester: Top Hat; 2020 [Fall 2020 Edition:[Available from:  https://tophat.com/teaching-resources/interactive/student-survey-report/ ."
"340" "14. Chi M, Wylie R. The ICAP Framework: Linking Cognitive Engagement to Active Learning Outcomes. Educational Psychologist. 2014;49(4):219-43."
"341" "15. Wiggins BL, Eddy SL, Grunspan DZ, Crowe AJ. The ICAP Active Learning Framework Predicts the Learning Gains Observed in Intensely Active Classroom Experiences. AERA Open. 2017;3(2):2332858417708567."
"342" "16. Krukowski RA, Jagsi R, Cardel MI. Academic Productivity Differences by Gender and Child Age in Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics, and Medicine Faculty During the COVID-19 Pandemic. J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2020."
"343" "17. Carson J, Mattingly M. COVID-19 Didn’t Create a Child Care Crisis, But Hastened and Inflamed It: University of New Hampshire; 2020 [Available from:  https://carsey.unh.edu/publication/child-care-crisis-COVID-19 ."
"344" "18. Sitzman K, Leners DW. Student Perceptions of CARING in Online Baccalaureate Education. Nursing Education Perspectives. 2006;27(5)."
"345" "19. Marcus J, Baral S, More Than 100 Other Scholars. An Open Letter to University Leadership. 2020."
"346" "20. Bernard RM, Abrami PC, Borokhovski E, Wade CA, Tamim RM, Surkes MA, et al. A Meta-Analysis of Three Types of Interaction Treatments in Distance Education. Review of Educational Research. 2009;79(3):1243-89."
"347" "21. Alqurashi E. Predicting student satisfaction and perceived learning within online learning environments. Distance Education. 2019;40(1):133-48."
"348" "22. Martin F, Wang C, Sadaf A. Student perception of helpfulness of facilitation strategies that enhance instructor presence, connectedness, engagement and learning in online courses. The Internet and Higher Education. 2018;37:52-65."
"349" "23. Meyer KA. Student Engagement in Online Learning: What Works and Why. ASHE Higher Education Report. 2014;40(6):1-114."
"350" "24. Murphy L, Eduljee N, Croteau K. College Student Transition to Synchronous Virtual Classes during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Northeastern United States. Pedagogical Research. 2020;5:em0078."
"351" "25. www.washingtonpost.com . Cheating-detection companies made millions during the pandemic. Now students are fighting back.: The Washinton Post; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2020/11/12/test-monitoring-student-revolt/ ."
"352" "26. Flaherty C. The Power of Peer Interaction: Inside Higher Ed; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.insidehighered.com/digital-learning/article/2020/11/03/power-active-learning-during-remote-instruction ."
"353" "27. Flaherty C. Zoom Boom: Inside Higher Ed; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2020/04/29/synchronous-instruction-hot-right-now-it-sustainable ."
"354" "28. Dell CA, Low C, Wilker JF. Comparing student achievement in online and face-to-face class formats. Journal of online learning and teaching. 2010;6(1):30-42."
"355" "29. Weber JM, Lennon R. Multi-course comparison of traditional versus Web-based course delivery systems. Journal of educators online. 2007;4(2):n2."
"356" "30. Warren LL, Holloman Jr HL. On-line instruction: Are the outcomes the same? Journal of Instructional Psychology. 2005;32(2):148."
"357" "31. Lack KA. Current Status of Research on Online Learning in Postsecondary Education. 2013."
"358" "32. Allen M, Bourhis J, Burrell N, Mabry E. Comparing Student Satisfaction With Distance Education to Traditional Classrooms in Higher Education: A Meta-Analysis. American Journal of Distance Education. 2002;16(2):83-97."
"359" "33. Chen B, Bastedo K, Howard W. Exploring Best Practices for Online STEM Courses: Active Learning, Interaction & Assessment Design. Online Learning; Vol 22, No 2 (2018)DO - 1024059/oljv22i21369. 2018."
"360" "34. Means B, Bakia M, Murphy R. Learning Online: What Research Tells Us About Whether, When and How. New York, NY: Routledge; 2014. 232 p."
"361" "35. Curseu D, Popa M, Sirbu D, Stoian I. Potential Impact of Climate Change on Pandemic Influenza Risk. Global Warming. 2009:643-57."
"362" "36. Tollefson J. Why deforestation and extinctions make pandemics more likely. Nature. 2020;584(7820):175-6."
"363" "37. Drew JC, Oli MW, Rice KC, Ardissone AN, Galindo-Gonzalez S, Sacasa PR, et al. Development of a Distance Education Program by a Land-Grant University Augments the 2-Year to 4-Year STEM Pipeline and Increases Diversity in STEM. PLOS ONE. 2015;10(4):e0119548."
"364" "38. Johnson E. As Students Flock to Gap-Year Programs, College Enrollments Could Suffer: The Chronicle of Higher Education; 2020 [Available from:  https://www-chronicle-com.ezproxy.lib.uconn.edu/article/as-students-flock-to-gap-year-programs-college-enrollments-could-suffer ."
"365" "39. Kirby T. Evidence mounts on the disproportionate effect of COVID-19 on ethnic minorities. The Lancet Respiratory Medicine. 2020;8(6):547-8."
"366" "40. Tai DBG, Shah A, Doubeni CA, Sia IG, Wieland ML. The Disproportionate Impact of COVID-19 on Racial and Ethnic Minorities in the United States. Clin Infect Dis. 2020."
"367" "41. Farlie R, Couch K, Xu H. The Impacts of COVID-19 on Minority Unemployment: First Evidence from April 2020 CPS Microdata. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Series. 2020;27246."
