Models and methods to analyse the interaction of evidence and policy in the
first 100 days of the UK government’s response to COVID-19.
Mike Weed*
Professor of Applied Policy Sciences | Pro Vice-Chancellor (Research & Enterprise)
Canterbury Christ Church University, North Holmes Campus, Canterbury, CT1 1QU
* Correspondence: mike.weed@canterbury.ac.uk
th

v1.1 – updated following further publication of government documents on 29 May 2020

Abstract
Background
The COVID-19 pandemic is both a global
health crisis, and a civic emergency for
national governments, including the UK.
With currently no vaccine and no
treatment, there is no medical solution.
Consequently, the questions for evidence
and policy are complex, draw on multiple
streams, and are about management
rather than medicine. This working paper
sets out models and methods for a
forthcoming study to analyse the
interaction of evidence and policy in the
first 100 days of the UK government’s
response to COVID-19.
Models
Drawing on chaos theory and insights
from the policy sciences, three models of
evidence-based policy are discussed: a
linear cipher model, a multiple streams
model, and a melee model. The nonlinear
melee model is adopted for the
forthcoming study, in which multiple
forms of evidence (science, economic,
political, social) and actors interact in real
time, and supposedly independent
evidence streams concomitantly consider
evidence from other streams, creating an
apparently chaotic melee in which it is
unclear where, how and by whom
decisions originate or are made. This is
normal, and much closer to how policy
decisions emerge than the process

represented by rational, ideal-type, linear
models.
Methods
Design: An analysis of evidence in and of
the policy response to COVID-19 by the
UK government for the 100 days from 1st
February 2020 to 11th May 2020 will be
undertaken.
Data: Three data sources will be accessed:
papers from the Scientific Advisory Group
for Emergencies (SAGE) and its feeder
groups
and
committees;
formal
government statements, information and
guidance; BBC News coverage of
government press briefings and further
documents and/or coverage snowballing
from them.
Analysis: A thematic content analysis, prestructured by the four evidence streams in
the melee model, will be undertaken to
identify critical incidents for a strict
contemporaneous analysis using only
information available at the time of the
incident, and referring only to the
contemporaneous context for the
incident.
Assumptions: Illustrative critical incidents
will be sufficient to provide evidence for
the explanatory utility of the melee
model. Comprehensive coverage of all
incidents would unnecessarily supersaturate the analysis.

Keywords:
Evidence; policy; melee model; COVID-19
1

Introduction
Following 213 global deaths and 9,800
infections, on 30th January 2020 the World
Health Organisation categorised COVID-19
as a Public Health Emergency of
International Concern (PHEIC), and five
weeks later, on 11th March, as a
pandemic, at which point 118,000 cases
and 4,291 deaths in 114 countries had
been reported. The first cluster of COVID19 cases were recorded in Wuhan, China
on 21st December 2019, and the first
death on 11th January 2020. In the UK,
the first domestically contracted case was
recorded on 28th February, and the first
death on 5th March. By 11th May, when
the UK government published its COVID19 recovery strategy after six weeks of
lockdown, there had been 223,060 cases
and 32,065 deaths.
In response, the UK government had
convened an extraordinary meeting of its
New and Emerging Respiratory Virus
Threats Advisory Group (NERVTAG) on
13th January 2020, and by the end of
March a further 17 meetings had been
held. Other parallel groups, the Scientific
Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling
(SPI-M) and the Independent Scientific
Pandemic Influenza Group on Behaviours
(SPI-B), also met during this time. Each of
these groups feeds their conclusions into
the government’s Scientific Advisory
Group for Emergencies (SAGE) which,
according to papers published on 29th
May, had met 40 times up to and
including 7th May 2020 to consider
evidence and provide advice on the
COVID-19 response.
In parallel, the
government’s
Civil
Contingencies
Committee, COBR (Cabinet Office Briefing
Rooms), which is convened to handle
matters of national emergency, and to
which SAGE provides advice, considered
COVID-19 for the first time on January
22nd under the chairpersonship of the

Secretary of State for Health, Matt
Hancock. On 30th January, in parallel with
the WHO declaring COVID-19 to be a
PHEIC, the government raised the threat
level of the virus to the health of the UK
population from “low” to “moderate”.
Six weeks later, on March 12th, the
threat level was raised from “moderate”
to “high”, and the Prime Minister told the
country, “I must level with you…more
families, many more families, are going to
lose loved ones before their time”.
Two months later, the publication on
th
11 May of the COVID-19 recovery
strategy, marked the first 100 days (since
the raising of the UK threat level to
moderate at the end of January) of the
government’s COVID-19 response. During
this time there have been criticisms
levelled by the media and the public, and
by scientists and politicians, of the
interaction between evidence and policy
in this response, with many accusing the
government of politicising science advice,
and some accusing scientists of allowing
themselves to be advised by government.
Others have accused the government of
privileging the health of the economy over
the health of the nation. This paper sets
out models and methods to consider
these criticisms and to explore evidence in
and of policy during the first 100 days of
the UK COVID-19 response.

Models of Evidence and Policy
Largely as a reaction to the development
of policy driven by ideology in the 1980s,
and following the development of
evidence-based medicine and evidencebased practice, the then UK government’s
intent to utilise an evidence-based policy
(EBP) approach was set out in a White
Paper published in 1999 (1). Since then,
the expectation that policy will be
evidence-based has been a feature of
subsequent
governments’
stated
2

approaches to policy-making, although
stated approaches have not always
matched reality (2) (3).
Proponents of EBP argue that it brings
an objectivity to government decisionmaking (4), particularly if it draws on best
evidence such as randomised controlled
trials and systematic reviews of evidence
(5) (6). This suggests a linear cipher model
(figure 1a) where scientific evidence leads,
directly and unmoderated, to the
development of policy.
Critics have

argued, firstly, that randomised controlled
trials are not sufficient, nor always
appropriate, to undertake policy decisions
(7), and secondly that such a linear model
underestimates complexity and does not
understand the multiple influences on the
way policy is made, including that policy is
political (8). This suggests a multiple
streams model in which “the science”
feeds into a political decision about policy
alongside, for example, economic factors
and public opinion (figure 1b).

However, an assumption of linearity
remains in the multiple streams model (9),
with evidence streams assumed to be
independent of each other, and to
independently feed into a subsequent
political decision. Yet, policy domains are
dynamic, human, and involve multiple
relationships
between
constituent
elements that interact, evolve and vary in
their stability over time (10). Borrowing
from chaos theory (11), feedback occurs
across variables as multiple evidence
streams interact and feed into each other
in real time, resulting in wide and wild
variations and an appearance of chaos
and chaotic behaviours and decisions (12).
This can be magnified by the urgency of
the required response and the complexity
of the problem (13).

There is also often an assumption that
only “the science” counts as evidence,
linked to ideas about hierarchies of
evidence (14). Critics have argued that,
despite EBP’s best intentions, ideology
remains a factor in policy-making (15)
(16), while others suggest that ideology
cannot be separated from evidence (17)
and that the production of evidence is an
inherently value-driven process (18). A
further view, drawing on the tradition of
the policy sciences (19), which is
concerned with evidence in and of policy –
i.e., how evidence is used in the policy
process, and evidence of how policy is
developed (20) – suggests that a complete
understanding of decisions is achieved
only when all inputs to the policy process
are considered (21) (22), and that all
3

inputs, including ideology, should be
considered as evidence.
Together chaos theory and the policy
sciences suggest a nonlinear melee model
(figure 1c) in which multiple forms of
evidence and actors interact in real time,
and supposedly independent streams
concomitantly consider evidence from
other streams, and in which it is unclear
where, how and by whom decisions
originate or are made (8) (23).
Furthermore, this is normal, and much
closer to how policy decisions emerge
than the process represented by rational,
ideal-type, linear models (8) (10).
The four streams proposed for the
melee model are: science evidence,
economic evidence, political evidence and
social evidence.
Science evidence
includes that within and without the
formal structures of government science
advice, incorporating all branches of
science
(e.g.
medical,
biological,
mathematical, behavioural), and including
contested science within and across those
fields. Economic evidence includes a
range
of
inputs,
including
the
government’s own analysis, analysis from
formally ‘independent’ national agencies
such as the Bank of England, the Office for
Budget Responsibility and the National
Audit Office, analyses from a range of
independent think tanks and economists,
as well as national and international data
on, for example, employment rates, GDP,
borrowing requirements and inflation.
The science and economic evidence
streams are those most commonly
understood to be legitimately associated
with EBP (24), with a related assumption
of some form of linear model: that a linear
cipher model should operate, but that a
multiple streams model does operate (25).
This suggests that such assumptions
acknowledge that there is a difference
between ideal (the linear cipher model)
and perceived reality (the multiple

streams model), but also that there is still
a belief that there should be, and that
there structurally and systemically is, a
separation between each evidence
stream, and between ‘independent
evidence’ and political decision (26).
However, the melee model, drawing on
chaos theory and the policy sciences,
suggests that streams that are rarely
regarded as legitimate sources of
evidence in EBP should be regarded as
such in order to understand the
relationship between evidence and policy,
as well as how decisions develop and
emerge.
Consequently, political evidence is
conceived within the melee model as
including the specific personal ideologies
and beliefs of key political figures, the
more general ideology of political parties
and related pressure groups, the views
and influence of powerful lobby groups
(e.g. political donors, business leaders),
the relationship of current proposals to
previous decisions, and current and
previous public commitments and
manifesto promises. While proponents of
EBP may not consider this to be legitimate
evidence (27), it is undoubtedly
considered and given parity with science
and economic evidence in the chaotic
melee from which policy decisions emerge
(18) (28). Conceptually and practically,
therefore, it is evidence both in and of
policy.
Finally, social evidence is included as
comprising the wider consent that does or
does not exist across society for policy
decisions and outcomes, including the
extent to which that consent is contested.
It includes opinion polling, media
coverage, social survey insights, and
impactful anecdote. Aspects of social
evidence can often be ephemeral, and
shifts slow to occur. Decades of evolving
tobacco control policy provide an

4

excellent example of how social evidence
is a part of the policy melee (29).

Methods for Analysing Evidence
and Policy in the first 100 days
of the UK’s COVID-19 response
Design
The primary research will focus on 100
days from 1st February 2020 to 11th May
2020, a period stretching from just after
the UK government raised the COVID-19
alert level from “low” to “moderate” to
the date on which it published its recovery
plan. A critical policy sciences approach
will be taken (20) to analyse evidence in
and of the policy response to COVID-19 by
the UK government during this period.
Data
Three data sources will be accessed:
• Minutes,
information
papers,
consensus statements and other
analyses and commentaries on
evidence (comprising 193 separate
documents) produced or considered by
NERVTAG, SPI-M, SPI-B and/or SAGE up
to and including 11th May 2020, and
published by government on 14th
February, 26th March, 5th May and 29th
May 2020.
• Formal
government
statements,
information and guidance related to its
response to COVID-19 hosted on
www.gov.uk, and issued up to and
including 11th May 2020.
• BBC News coverage of (a) daily
government press briefings on COVID19 instituted on 16th March 2020 up to
and including 11th May 2020; (b)
COVID-19 related government press
briefings prior to 16th March; (c) further
documents
and/or
coverage
referenced in, or snowballing from, (a)
and (b).

Analysis
The data sources will be analysed via a
pre-structured thematic content analysis
(30), to identify critical incidents (31) (32).
The theme structure will be provided by
the four evidence streams shown in the
melee model (figure 1c): scientific
evidence, economic evidence, political
evidence and social evidence. The data
sources will be analysed for content
relating to each of these evidence
streams, and critical incidents will be
identified as those occasions where two
or more evidence streams overlap. A
strict contemporaneous analysis of these
critical incidents will be undertaken, using
only information available at the time of
the incident, and referring only to the
contemporaneous context for the
incident.
Assumptions
Critical incidents will be used to explore
evidence in and of policy during the first
100 days of the UK government’s COVID19 response, and to illustrate that
evidence and policy interact in a nonlinear chaotic melee, from which it is
unclear where, how and by whom
decisions originate or are made. The
underpinning
assumption
is
that
illustrative critical incidents of this melee
will be sufficient to provide evidence for
its existence, and that comprehensive
coverage of all such incidents would
super-saturate the analysis, and therefore
will be superfluous (33).

Summary
This short working paper sets out models
and methods to underpin a forthcoming
study of the interaction of evidence and
policy during the first 100 days of the UK
government’s COVID-19 response.

5

The study is currently in progress, and
the full pre-print will be posted on SocRxiv
and linked to this working paper.
Conflict of Interests
None declared.
Funding
No dedicated funding has supported this
work.

Bibliography
1. Cabinet Office. White Paper:
Modernising Government. London :
HMSO, 1999.
2. Hammersley, M. The Myth of ResearchBased Policy and Practice. London : Sage,
2013.
3. Parkhurst, Justin. The Politics of
Evidence: from Evidence Based Policy to
the Good Governance of Evidence.
London : Routledge, 2017.
4. Bullock, H, Mountford, J and Stanley,
R. Better Policy-Making. London : Cabinet
Office Policy Studies Directorate, 2001.
5. Haynes, L, et al. Test, Learn, Adapt:
Developing Public Policy with Randomised
Controlled Trials. London : Cabinet Office
Behavioural Insights Team, 2012.
6. Boaz, A, Ashby, D and Young, K.
Systematic Reviews: What have they got
to offer evidence based policy and practice
(Working Paper 2). London : ESRC UK
Centre for Evidence Based Policy and
Practice, 2002.
7. Cartwright, N and Hardie, J. EvidenceBased Policy: A Guide to Doing It Better.
Oxford : Oxford University Press, 2012.
8. Cairney, P. The Politics of EvidenceBased Policy Making. London : Palgrave
Pivot, 2016.
9. John, P. Is there life after policy
streams, advocacy coalitions, and
punctuations: using evolutionary theory
to explain policy change. Policy Studies
Journal. Vol. 31, 4, pp. 481-98.

10. Thompson, D D. Non-linear Policy
Change. [book auth.] A Farazmand. Global
Encyclopedia of Public Administration,
Public Policy and Governance. Champaign,
IL : Springer, 2017.
11. Marion, R. The edge of organisation:
chaos and complexity theories of formal
social systems. Thousand Oaks : Sage,
1999.
12. Keil, L D and Elliott, E W. Chaos
Theory in the Social Sciences: foundations
and applications. Michigan : University of
Michigan Press.
13. Cairney, P. Complexity theory in
politicial science and public policy.
Political Studies Review. Vol. 10, 3, pp.
346-58.
14. Pettigrew, M. Evidence, hierarchies,
and typologies: Horses for courses.
Journal of Epidemiology and Community
Health. 2003, Vol. 57, 7, pp. 527-9.
15. Belfield, C and Levin, H M. Vouchers
and Public Policy: When ideology Trumps
Evidence. American Journal of Education.
2005, Vol. 111, 4, pp. 548-567.
16. Godlee, F. Treat addictions with
evidence, not ideology. BMJ. 2017, 357, p.
j1925.
17. Hart, J T. Evidence not ideology: No
evidence is without ideology. BMJ. 2005,
Vol. 331, 7522, p. 964.
18. Cairney, P and Oliver, K. Evidencebased policymaking is not like evidencebased medicine, so how far should you go
to bridge the divide between evidence
and policy? Health Research Policy and
Systems. 2017, Vol. 15, 35.
19. Lasswell, H D. The Policy Orientation.
[book auth.] H D Lasswell and D Lerner.
The Policy Sciences. Palo Alto, CA :
Stanford University Press, 1951.
20. Weed, M E. Evidence for physical
activity guidelines as a public health
intervention: efficacy, effectiveness and
harm - a critical policy sciences approach.
Health Psychology and Behavioural
Medicine. 2016, Vol. 4, 1.

6

21. Lewin, A Y and Shakun, M F. Policy
Sciences: Methodologies and Cases. New
York : Pergamon Press, 1976.
22. Sinclair, T A. Previewing Policy
Sciences: Multiple Lenses and Segmented
Visions. Politics and Policy. 2006, Vol. 34,
3, pp. 481-504.
23. Cartwright, N and Hardie, J. Evidencebased policy. Oxford : Oxford University
Press, 2012.
24. Oliver, K, et al. A systematic review of
barriers to and facilitators of the use of
evidence by policymakers. BMC Health
Services Research. 2014, Vol. 14, 2.
25. Oliver, K, Lorenc, T and Innvaer, S.
New directions in evidence-based policy
research: a critical analysis of the
literature. Health Research Policy and
Syatems. 2014, Vol. 12, 34.
26. Embrett, M G and Randall, G E. Social
determinants of health and health equity
policy research: Exploring the use, misuse,
and nonuse of policy analysis theory.
Social Science and Medicine. 2014, Vol.
108, pp. 147-55.
27. Pearce, W and Raman, S. The new
randomised controlled trials (RCT)
movement in public policy: challenges of
epistemic governance. Policy Sciences.
387-402, Vol. 47, 4.
28. Nilsson, M, et al. the use and non-use
of policy appraisal tools in public policy
making: An analysis of three European
countries and the European Union. Policy
Sciences. 2008, Vol. 41, 4, pp. 335-55.
29. Hagger, M S and Weed, M E. DEBATE:
Do interventions based on behavioural
theory work in the real world?
International Journal of Behavioural
Nutrition and Physical Activity. 2019, Vol.
16, 36.
30. Braun, V and Clarke, V. Using
Thematic Analysis in Psychology.
Qualitative Research in Psychology. 2006,
Vol. 3, 2, pp. 77-101.
31. Chell, E. The Critical Incident
Technique. [book auth.] M Lewis-Beck, A

Bryman and T Liao Futing. The SAGE
Encyclopedia of Social Research Methods.
London : Sage, 2003.
32. Viergever, R F. The Critical Incident
Technique: Method or Methodology.
Qualitative Health Research. 2019, Vol.
29, 7, pp. 1065-79.
33. Saunders, B, et al. Saturation in
qualitative research: exploring its
conceptualisation and operationalisation.
Quality and Quantity. 2018, Vol. 52, 4, pp.
1893-1907.
34. Pope, C and Mays, N. Synthesising
Qualitative Research. Qualitative Research
in Health Care. London : Blackwell.

7

