"x"
"1" "US Policies Increase Vulnerability of Immigrant Communities to the COVID-19 Pandemic"
"2" "Fernando A. Wilson, PhD, University of Utah, fernando.wilson@utah.edu"
"3" "Jim P. Stimpson, PhD, Drexel University, james.p.stimpson@drexel.edu"
"4" "Corresponding Author: Jim P. Stimpson, Drexel University,  Dornsife  School of Public Health, 3215 Market St, Philadelphia, PA 19104, james.p.stimpson@drexel.edu"
"5" "Word Count: 7 14"
"6" "Acknowledgements: None"
"7" "Conflict of Interest: None"
"8" "Funding: None"
"9" "A ll authors had access to the data and a role in writing the manuscript"
"10" "Article type: Letter to editor"
"11" "Key words: pandemic; covid-19; immigrant; United State: health policy; health care access"
"12" "Running head: Vulnerability of Immigrants to COVID-19"
"13" "The adverse policy environment in the United States (US) has made immigrant communities particularly vulnerable to uncontrolled community spread of COVID-19. There  are  still very limited  data on how the outbreak is impacting immigrant communities,  although states and counties with high  densities of  immigrants also  tend to/ have  high  numbers of infections, hospitalizations and deaths (1). Past and recent federal and state policy actions may exacerbate undetected community spread in immigrant communities and commensurate economic impact (2)."
"14" "President Trump is using his emergency powers during the pandemic to push his broader agenda which includes locking down the southern US border to severely limit immigration. This crackdown includes eschewing safeguards that protect minors and asylum seekers, allowing border control to turn them away or deport them. The stated rationale is to keep Americans safe from immigrants infected with the virus. However, there are no apparent limits on these border control tactics leaving open the possibility that this executive order may last longer than the COVID-19 crisis and possibly throughout Trump’s term. The rationale that strict border control will limit American exposure is contradictory  to what  we  learn  from  reports of immigrants in ICE detention centers testing positive for COVID-19; the overcrowded and unsanitary conditions and lack of healthcare lead to uncontained infection spread in these detention centers (3)."
"15" "Immigrants, particularly undocumented immigrants, to the US face substantial economic and legal barriers to accessing healthcare. The recently passed Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act  does  not provide any social safety net support to the millions of undocumented immigrants. Many undocumented immigrant families live in poverty, and an equal number have no health insurance. Undocumented immigrants and most recent authorized immigrants are ineligible for federally funded public insurance programs (2). This situation extends to most state-funded programs, even for children of immigrants; for example, most states do not provide any Medicaid benefits to pregnant immigrants if they are undocumented, less than half do not provide benefits to recently immigrated Legal Permanent Resident (LPR) children, and nearly all states do not provide any public health insurance benefits to undocumented children (2)."
"16" "Immigration policies such as the ‘public charge rule’ may further disincentivize even authorized immigrants to seek care if they develop symptoms (2). Many immigrants  from Mexico  rely on medical care provided by Mexico. However, the US-Mexico border is now closed to non-essential travel. Given these factors, it is likely that more immigrants will be forced to rely on emergency departments (ED) for preventable care, thus further limiting capacity in EDs as they address COVID-19 (4). The lack of healthcare access for immigrants, and fear of getting detained if going to the hospital, may even place US-born citizens at greater risk of infection if immigrants are unable to get tested or treated (2, 4) ."
"17" "Compounding these issues, the US economy is expected to contract substantially.  I ndustries   in which many  workers are immigrants  are expected to be  severely impacted (1). Shortages of personal protective equipment (PPE) in the US will likely mean that few if any immigrant workers will have access to effective PPE for work. In addition, reduced staff in American embassies during the pandemic will slow processing of H2-A visa applications for seasonal agricultural workers. This situation may place food supply chains in jeopardy if fewer migrant workers are available for agriculture, and labor shortages emerge for certain agricultural sectors. Acute hardships experienced by immigrants will likely have serious ramifications for their families and communities in their home countries. COVID-19 will be challenging for under-resourced healthcare systems in developing nations, and they are more constrained in the monetary and fiscal measures that can be implemented compared to the US which benefits from having the US dollar as the world’s reserve currency."
"18" "The long-term impact of COVID-19 and commensurate health and economic impact on families, communities, and state and federal governments will be a topic of research for many years. As this crisis unfolds, the impact on migrants from other countries could be telling for US policy. Lack of governmental leadership, cooperation and coordination can jeopardize lives  (5) . Given the importance of immigrants to the US economy and society, and the human toll this pandemic is having on migrants worldwide, federal and state policies should pivot to find ways to improve access to healthcare for immigrants ( 2-5 )."
"19" "References"
"20" "Batalova  J, Blizzard B, Bolter J Frequently Requested Statistics on Immigrants and Immigration in the United States. Migration Policy Institute. February 14, 2020.  https://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/frequently-requested-statistics-immigrants-and-immigration-united-states"
"21" "Wilson FA, Stimpson JP. Federal and state policies impacting immigrant access to health care. JAMA Health Forum. 2020 April 6.  doi : 10.1001/jamahealthforum.2020.0271  https://jamanetwork.com/channels/health-forum/fullarticle/2764349"
"22" "Keller AS, Wagner BD. COVID-19 and immigration detention in the USA: time to act. Lancet Public Health. March 31, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-2667(20)30081-5"
"23" "Page KR,  Venkataramani  M,  Beyrer  C, Polk S. Undocumented U.S. Immigrants and Covid-19. NEJM. March 27, 2020.  https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp2005953"
"24" "Daniels JP. Venezuelan migrants “struggling to survive” amid COVID-19. The Lancet. 2020;395(10229 ):P 1023.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30718-2"
