Faith in Trump, Moral Foundations, and Social Distancing
Defiance During the Coronavirus Pandemic

Amanda Graham
Georgia Southern University
Francis T. Cullen
University of Cincinnati
Justin T. Pickett
University at Albany
Cheryl Lero Jonson
Xavier University
Murat Haner
University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee
Melissa M. Sloan
University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee

Direct correspondence to Amanda Graham, Georgia Southern University, School of Criminal
Justice and Criminology, PO Box 8105, Statesboro, GA 30460 (e-mail:
akgraham@georgiasouthern.edu)

Faith in Trump, Moral Foundations, and Social Distancing
Defiance During the Coronavirus Pandemic

Abstract

Purpose: Over the past several months, the coronavirus has infected nearly 2 million Americans
and killed more than 100,000. Governors have issued stay-at-home orders, and prosecutors have
filed criminal charges against individuals for defying those orders. And yet, many Americans
have still refused to keep their distance from their fellow citizens, even if they had symptoms of
infection. This study explores the underlying causes for those who intend to defy these norms.
Methods: Using national-level data from a March 2020 survey of 989 Americans, we explore
intentions to defy social distancing norms by testing an interactionist theory of foundation-based
moral behavior in combination with faith in President Trump. The analysis controls for a range
of variables, including measures of low self-control and deterrence.
Results: Low self-control is the strongest predictor of defiance intentions. Consistent with
interactionist theory, defiance intentions are significantly higher for those holding a specific faith
in Trump and those endorsing binding foundation. Furthermore, the interaction of these two
variables is significant and in the predicted direction. The results hold for two different measures
of faith in Trump.
Conclusions: Even with a strong effect for low self-control, faith in President Trump is a strong
predictor of refusal to social distance, and its effect is largest among individuals high in binding
foundations.

Keywords: COVID-19, social distancing, President Trump, moral foundations, pandemic

First appearing in the United States on January 21, 2020, in Snohomish County,
Washington, the coronavirus (COVID-19) has drastically changed the lives of Americans
(Coronavirus in the U.S., 2020). Once seen only in Hollywood pandemic movies, the concepts of
“social distancing,” “self-isolation,” and “quarantining” have now become part of Americans’
everyday experience. Using national-level survey data collected on March 28 and 29, 67 days
after the United States’ first known infection and 28 days after its first death, the current
investigation focuses on defiance of social distancing directives.1
At the time, officials reported 123,653 coronavirus cases and 2,135 deaths in the United
States (Coronavirus in the U.S., 2020). In response, governors in 26 states had issued mandatory
stay-at-home orders, and advisory warnings to practice social distancing had become nearuniversal (Mervosh, Lu, & Swales, 2020). In several instances, criminal charges were filed
against those who exposed others to their oral fluids (e.g., licked products at a store, coughed on
an officer) or held large gatherings such as parties or church services (Burke, 2020a, 2020b;
Koop, 2020; Peel, 2020; Winton & Fry, 2020). Prosecutors in New Jersey, for example, had by
the end of March filed charges against more than 20 people for defying social distancing
directives (Dean & Rushing, 2020).
The reality of the threat posed by the coronavirus (COVID-19) was unavoidable—the
public was paying attention. Indeed, in our sample, only 4% of the respondents stated they were
following the news on the coronavirus crisis “not too closely” and the percentage of those
answering “not closely at all” was but 0.4%. By contrast, 95.7% answered they were following
this news either “very closely” (66.6%) or “fairly closely” (35.1%). In this context, an important

Various criminological theories use the term “defiance” to refer to different constructs (e.g., Sherman, 1993; Tittle,
1995). In the current paper, we define it simply as the refusal to follow formal (governors’) or informal (health
professionals’) directives to social distance.
1

1

issue arises: Would Americans be willing to endanger others and themselves by ignoring
emergent social distancing norms—and, if so, why? This project, conducted as the coronavirus
crisis was gaining force, was designed to address this matter.
Criminological theories are useful for explaining conduct that exists near, and at times
over, the border between crime and what might be called “deviant” or “analogous” behavior (see,
e.g., Cullen, Latessa, & Jonson, 2012; Gottfredson & Hirschi, 1990). Three approaches, which
the data allow us to test, seem particularly relevant. First, Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990)
general theory of crime would predict that those with low self-control would violate social
distancing norms, due to a desire for immediate gratification, a preference for risk, and a lack of
concern for consequences. Empirical support for this perspective is consistent (Pratt & Cullen,
2000; Vazsonyi, Mikuška, & Kelley, 2017). Second, rational choice/deterrence theory highlights
the salience of perceived costs (Paternoster, 2018; Paternoster & Bachman, 2013). In the current
context, compliance with social distancing norms should be greater among those who perceive a
higher certainty of death and who are afraid of being infected and harmed. Third, Agnew’s
(2014, p. 5) social concern theory argues that crime will be less likely among people who “give
more consideration to others than to their own interests.” Altruistic fear embodies this concern
for others’ welfare and should encourage social distancing, as a defensive or precautionary
behavior that helps guard others from infection (see Drakulich, 2015; Warr & Ellison, 2000).
Social distancing in the United States, however, is enmeshed in a moral-political context.
In most other societies (President Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil is a notable exception), national
leaders, such as Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and German Chancellor Angela
Merkel, are preaching communitarian values and adherence to safe social practices (Brewington,
2020; Rising & Moulson, 2020). Their influence, if any, would be to increase social distancing.

2

This effect might well be the opposite in the United States, where President Trump has
dominated public discourse surrounding the coronavirus crisis. Although evolving, his
messaging has been to downplay the risks of the outbreak and to accuse Democrats of using the
crisis as a means (“their hoax”) to undermine him (Rupar, 2020a). Charismatic and connected to
the public through social media, it is possible that people who have “faith in Trump” would be
less likely to comply with social distancing norms.
Moreover, Haidt’s (2012) The Righteous Mind argues persuasively that politics cannot be
reduced to partisanship but rests on a foundation of moral intuitions. Although making inroads
into criminology (Pereira, 2017; Silver & Abell, 2016; Silver & Silver, 2017), Haidt’s moral
foundation theory (MFT) has not been used extensively to explain offending. The decision to
socially distance is a moral decision for two reasons. First, it involves weighing individual
preferences against the possibility of spreading harm to others. Second, given the political
context, it involves weighing the moral importance of signals from authority—from the President
himself—about group interests and cohesion. Haidt’s framework thus has implications for
individual choice as well as for the effects of allegiance to President Trump.
As this discussion suggests, the current project’s research strategy is to examine
behavioral intentions to offend—to engage in conduct that violates norms of social distancing
(e.g., disobeying the governor’s order to stay at home, socializing with friends, holding planned
social events, not avoiding close contact and going out in public with symptoms). Beyond a
range of socio-demographic controls, the analysis examines the impact of self-control, perceived
certainty of death, personal fear, and social concern, anticipating that defiance intentions would
be increased by low self-control and decreased by measures of deterrence and concern. Most
important, the study focuses on whether faith in Donald Trump—in general or in relation to the

3

coronavirus crisis specifically—and certain moral intuitions interact to reduce compliance with
social distancing norms. As will be shown, such effects occur, indicating the potential
importance of considering moral-political factors in criminological inquiries.
President Trump’s Moral Influence
Why There is an Influence
Three possible reasons exist as to why President Trump might influence the public’s
social distancing behavior. First, Trump’s potential to sway public opinion and behavior is not
unique to him. In fact, previous research finds that presidents have the capacity to influence
public views because their role is that of the lead policymaker and representative of the country
(see, e.g., Cohen, 1995, 1997; Cohen & Hamman, 2003; Lawrence, 2004). As such, the
president’s words carry weight as a means of shaping public opinion (Druckman & Jacobs, 2009;
Hawdon, 2001; Tulis, 1987). For example, in Cohen’s (1995) longitudinal study on the impact of
presidents’ State of the Union addresses, he finds that the policy issues mentioned in the
addresses see a subsequent increase in public concern with those policies. Ramirez (2013) found
that presidential statements had strong effects on crime attitudes among both Democrats and
Republicans. Likewise, in his analysis of the communitarian, individualistic, and rehabilitative
presidential rhetoric surrounding the “war on drugs” between 1984 and 1992, Hawdon (2001, p.
438) argues that Reagan, “masterfully incited the public and helped create a moral panic. The use
of communitarian arguments rallied support for an aggressive war on drugs.”
Second, and relatedly, Trump has endeavored to transform the role of the presidency into
his being America’s first “Influencer in Chief.” As a former reality television star, Trump is
viewed by many as charismatic (P. Jackson, 2019; Khazan, 2016; Post & Doucette, 2019), a
characteristic that, in combination with the boundless impact of social media, he uses to speak to
4

his supporters. For example, despite advice to curb the use of tweets, as president, Trump has
tweeted over 14,000 times (an average of over 14 times per day) to his 75.8 million followers
(Trump Twitter Archive, 2020; Trump, 2020a). As an avowed social media president, Trump has
nearly unfettered access to communicate with the public in a way that previous presidents have
not. Additionally, much like any other social media influencer, Trump is obsessed with his
ratings. For example, consider his March 29th tweet: “Since reviving the daily White House
briefing Mr. Trump and his coronavirus updates have attracted an average audience of 8.5
million on cable news, roughly the viewership of the season finale of ‘The Bachelor.’ Numbers
continue to rise” (Trump, 2020b). Similarly, he is highly concerned with his polling numbers as
indicators of success as an “influencer”’—claiming, for instance, that his “Gallup Poll numbers
on the handling of this situation are outstanding, the best” (Trump, 2020c).
Furthermore, as the “influencer in chief,” early research points to his capacity to truly
shape the minds and behaviors of Americans—for better or for worse. In a 2017 survey of
Blacks in America, respondents’ worries about being arrested, imprisoned and brutalized by the
police increased as a result of Trump’s election and his “war on crime” rhetoric (McManus,
Cullen, Jonson, Burton, & Burton, 2019). Additionally, Trump has been used as the “inspiration”
for violence against immigrants (Schanzer, 2019), Black Americans (Harper, 2016; KOMO
Staff, 2016), Trump critics (Swaine & Adolphe, 2019) and LGTBQ+ Americans (Filosa, 2017).
Likewise, researchers have found correlations between the timing of Trump statements and
influxes in FBI-reported hate crimes (Levin & Nakashima, 2019), including the recent verbal and
physical victimization of Asian Americans in the context of the “China virus” accusation
(Johnson, 2020; Tavernise & Oppel, 2020). Thus, his ardent supporters seem to be heeding his

5

message and placing it into action, even when doing so involves breaking laws; indeed, Trump
has sometimes promised pardons for lawbreakers who follow his directives (Graham, 2019).
A final example of Trump’s sizable influence is Republicans’ views on political issues.
As Hale and Kamenchuk (2020) note, “Trump has successfully converted many of his party’s
rank and file to his views on issues from free trade to the abandonment of bedrock ideological
principles….this also includes their views on Russia and Putin.” Their polling reveals that 6 in
10 Republicans see Putin as a “good leader for Russia,” a figure that climbs to 68% in Red states.
These results are stunning given the GOP’s longstanding hostility to Russia and the reality that,
“not long ago, association with anyone in the Kremlin was politically damaging in the United
States” (Hale & Kamenchuk, 2020).
Third, Trump’s messaging may also hold unique influence due to the reinforcement of his
messages by news networks, such as Fox News, and by conservative talk radio hosts, such as
Rush Limbaugh, who also achieve strong levels of viewership. For example, Fox News holds the
top ratings position for networks, averaging 3.5 million primetime viewers daily (Wulfsohn,
2020). Similarly, as the most-listened-to radio program in the United States, Rush Limbaugh’s
show bends the ears of over 25 million listeners each month (Forbes, 2020). But it is not only
their viewership and the hosts’ commentaries that pass along Trump’s influential messages—
Trump himself often appears on or calls into these networks (e.g., DePaolo, 2020; Hains, 2019)
and consults with the hosts about presidential decisions. For example, at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago
estate, he met with Fox News host Tucker Carlson to discuss coronavirus policies, with Carlson
attempting to stress the seriousness of this virus to the president (Sullivan, 2020).

What the Influence Is

6

Beyond the magnitude of Trump’s influence, the question arises as to how his messaging
has affected the direction of public views on the coronavirus and the need to social distance.
Under normal circumstances, virtually any U.S. president regardless of party would have
conveyed a consistent message supporting the seriousness of the outbreak and the risks to public
health it posed (see, e.g., Bush, 2003; Mosk, 2020; Obama, 2014). Their effect likely would have
been to increase the public’s willingness to engage in social distancing. With President Trump,
however, the messaging, and thus potential effect, are in the opposite direction.
Starting with his initial statements about the virus, numerous observers have documented
that President Trump downplayed the seriousness of this pandemic (Cillizza, 2020; Evon, 2020;
Leonhardt, 2020; Lipton, Sanger, Haberman, Shear, Mazzetti, & Barnes, 2020; Paz, 2020; Qui,
2020; Rupar, 2020b). For example, on January 22, 2020, the day after the first cases in the
United States was identified, Trump asserted that “We have it totally under control. It’s one
person coming in from China, and we have it under control. It’s going to be just fine” (Cillizza,
2020). The day before, he referred to it as “their new hoax,” referencing his Democratic rivals
(Rupar, 2020a). Likewise, he labeled COVID-19 as the “China virus” (March 18; Vazquez &
Klein, 2020) and stated it was “like a flu” (February 26). He proclaimed that the coronavirus
would “disappear one day….like a miracle” (February 27) and that the United States has
“tremendous control of” the virus (March 15) (Cillizza, 2020). As the infected and death tolls
mounted and the economy dramatically declined, Trump (2020d) tweeted, “WE CANNOT LET
THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM ITSELF,” alluding to the desire to protect the
economy at the expense of American lives. He went even further on March 24 to say that he
wanted to have “packed churches all over our country” shortly thereafter on April 12 for Easter

7

(Breuninger, 2020). These messages all downplayed the need for social distancing as well as the
seriousness of the virus itself.
Trump was not alone, however, in spreading these messages diminishing the threat posed
by the coronavirus (see Table 1 for quotes from selected supporters of President Trump). They
were reinforced by conservative leaders, such as Devin Nunez of California (Behrmann, 2020),
who voiced that “it’s a great time to just go out, go to a local restaurant” and to “Go to your local
pub,” and Jerry Falwell, Jr. of Liberty University (Williamson, 2020), who felt it was
“irresponsible for so many universities to just say ‘closed, you can’t come back,’ push the
problem off on other communities and sit there in their ivory towers.” Likewise, the vast
majority of Republican governors (Brownstein, 2020a) supported these messages with some
saying “we must get back to work before our nation totally collapses” (LeBlanc, 2020) and that
they refuse to use “dictator models like China” to constrict public movement as a means of
controlling the virus (Pettus, 2020).
On Fox News, just days before our survey, Texas’s lieutenant governor suggested loyal
Americans should be willing to die for the U.S. economy (Rodriguez, 2020). Another
Republican congressman echoed that message, calling for the reopening of the country, even if it
kills Americans; he argued doing so would be “the lesser of these two evils” (Levin, 2020).
Other Trump allies have suggested “social-distancing rules are a government attack on
Christianity” (Lurie, 2020, p. 1). Trump’s acting director of the Office of National Intelligence
went even further. He put a photo of the Bill of Rights on social media and told his followers:
“Signed Permission Slip to Leave Your House” (Sommer, Branco, & Stein, 2020).
-----Insert Table 1 About Here-----

8

As these messages reverberated through the conservative echo chamber, megachurches
and churches alike insisted on holding services (Murdock, 2020), many states won by Trump in
2016 declined to impose shelter orders (Ortiz, 2020), several Red-state governors have pushed
back against their Blue cities’ calls for aggressive social distancing measures (Brownstein,
2020b), and Falwell’s Liberty University boldly reopened (Williamson, 2020). In this context,
faith in President Trump generally and in his views on the coronavirus specifically would be
anticipated to foster defiance of social distancing norms.

Who Should be Influenced Most
Two facts about the relationship between politics and morality are now clear. The first is
that it is strong (Haidt, 2012; Hatemi, Crabree, & Smith, 2019). “Ideological commitments are
moral commitments,” Graham, Haidt, and Nosek (2009, p. 1029) explain. The second is that it
involves moral concerns about more than just protecting individuals. “When morality is equated
with the protection of individuals, the central concerns of conservatives … fall outside the moral
domain” (Graham, Haidt, & Nosek, 2009, p. 1030). Conservatives’ moral concerns center
instead on group solidarity, which can lead them to support policies and engage in behaviors that
harm individuals (Haidt & Graham, 2009). Their moral concerns are those of “Planet
Durkheim,” according to Haidt and Graham (2009, p. 371), where people “crave, above all else,
being tightly integrated into strong groups,” and where there is a consensus that “anyone whose
actions weaken social cohesion is evil.”
Moral Foundations Theory (MFT) expands the moral domain beyond individual
protection, clarifies its connection to ideology, and explains its influence on decision-making
(Haidt, 2012). According to MFT, evolution has given humans “first draft” moral intuitions,
which yield intuitive solutions to problems that were common in our ancestors’ social
9

environments (Graham et al., 2009, p. 1031). As the brain is to learning, these intuitions are to
moral socialization: they provide “innate but modifiable” foundations (Graham et al., 2009, p.
1030). There are five foundations: harm/care, fairness/reciprocity, ingroup/loyalty,
authority/respect, and purity/sanctity. And each influences intuitive reactions to a specific type of
behavior (Silver, 2017). All five are inborn in everyone, but differences in cultural and political
socialization cause some foundations to develop more than others, resulting in different “moral
cuisines” (Haidt, Graham, & Joseph, 2009, p. 110). The moral cuisines of liberals and
conservatives in the United States differ primarily on the last three foundations (Graham et al.,
2009), which explains much of the political divide in attitudes and behavior (Haidt, 2012; Silver
& Silver, 2017).
Because the individual is the moral unit for the first two foundations, harm/care and
fairness/reciprocity, they are “individualizing foundations” (Graham et al., 2009). They
emphasize the importance of protecting individuals, are associated with empathy and
compassion, and promote altruism and prosocial behavior (Clark et al., 2017). By contrast, the
last three foundations, ingroup/loyalty, authority/respect, and purity/sanctity, are “binding
foundations”; their moral unit is the social group, and they emphasize the importance of selfsacrifice, obedience, duty, protecting cultural boundaries, and vigilance for traitors (Graham et
al., 2009). The binding foundations bind “individuals into roles and duties in order to create
tightly ordered communities” (Milesi & Alberica, 2018, p. 238). They are the foundations that
underpin collective action in conservative social movements (Milesi & Alberica, 2018).
MFT is germane for understanding responses to the COVID-19 pandemic for many
reasons, but perhaps the most important is that it is an interactionist theory of moral behavior. At
its heart is the assumption that personal and environmental characteristics interact with particular

10

moral cuisines to influence attitudes and decision-making (Feng, Xu, Xu, & Zhang, 2017; Malka
et al., 2016; Smith, Aquino, Koleva, & Graham, 2014). As Süssenbach, Rees, and Gollwitzer
(2019, p. 123) explain:
[M]oral foundations are proposed to elicit intuitive responses (i.e., automatic evaluations)
to a set of relevant environmental triggers … In other words, MFT assumes a systematic
(“synergistic”) person x situation interaction: People who endorse a specific moral
foundation are more attentive toward (“functionally equivalent”) cues that indicate a
violation or threat of the respective moral standards inherent in that foundation.
In a series of studies, Süssenbach et al. (2019) have shown that the individualizing
foundations interact with the presence of human suffering and need to increase prosocial
intentions. For those high on binding foundations, however, the relevant environmental triggers
differ. To such Durkheimians, group cohesion matters more than individual suffering (Haidt &
Graham, 2009). Indeed, in Süssenbach et al.’s (2019) studies, participants scoring high on the
binding foundations were either not impacted by suffering and need, or actually became less
prosocial in response to it.
What should be a relevant trigger to those high on binding foundations? Their group
leader’s example and directives. Binding foundations, by amplifying the moral significance of
deference, duty, and solidarity, should bind people to their group and its leader (Haidt, 2012;
Wolsko, Ariceaga, & Seiden, 2016). If the group leader takes a threat seriously, “binders” should
too; if the leader does not, neither should they. The group leader’s effect on binders should be
especially strong during crises, such as pandemics. Indeed, evidence suggests that binding
foundations are activated by the threat of a pathogen-transmitted disease (Van Leeuwen, Park,
Koenig, & Graham, 2012). By extension, it is among Americans high on binding foundations
that President Trump should be the influencer-in-chief for social distancing; it is their behavioral
intentions that should be most sensitive to his lead. Our study tests this possibility.

11

Methods
Sample
Like scholars in other disciplines, criminologists increasingly are turning to Amazon
Mechanical Turk (MTurk) to study moral behavior and intuitions, because of its diversity and
nationwide reach (e.g., Barnum & Solomon, 2019; Herman & Pogarsky, 2020; Pickett, Roche, &
Pogarsky, 2018; Silver, 2017). Our study’s data come from a nationwide opt-in online survey
using MTurk, which was fielded between March 28 and 29, 2020. Amazon’s MTurk platform
allows eligible “workers” to select and perform various tasks for a small financial incentive—in
this case, $2.30 for completing an online survey. Compared to other data collection modes,
online opt-in surveys result in more honest and accurate self-reports (less social desirability bias,
less satisficing, less speeding, and no interviewer effects) (Anson, 2018; Chang & Krosnick,
2009; Weinberg, Freese, & McElhattan, 2014). Eligible respondents for our study were MTurk
workers 18 years old or older who lived in the United States and who, for high-quality
respondents, had completed over 500 previous HITS (human intelligence tasks) and had a 95%
or higher approval rating (Peer, Vosgerau, & Acquisti, 2014).
From 1,000 respondents, the sample was reduced to an analytic sample of 989
respondents based on listwise deletion for items with missing values (<5%). As such, the sample,
compared to the 2018 American Community Survey estimates (in parentheses) is 68.8% White
(72.2%), 40.6% female (50.8%), and 45.4% married (47.8%), with an average age of 38.38 years
old (46.92 years old). Compared to the 2018 PEW Research Center estimates (in parentheses),
28.6% (26%) of the sample identify as Republicans. The descriptive statistics are presented in
Table 2.
-----Insert Table 2 About Here----12

Dependent Variable: Defiance Intentions
Following other researchers (Antonaccio & Tittle, 2008; Barnum & Solomon, 2019;
Kroneberg, Heintze, & Mehlkop, 2010; Nagin & Pogarsky, 2001; Paternoster, Jaynes, & Wilson,
2018; Pickett et al., 2018; van Gelder & de Vries, 2012), we analyze projected offending—in this
case, intentions to defy social distancing norms. Behavioral intentions are valid measures of
criminality (Pogarsky, 2004) and also “are logically better for dealing with causal order,” due to
their future orientation (Antonaccio & Tittle, 2008, p. 493). Additionally, at the time of our
survey, respondents’ opportunities to defy social distancing directives mostly lied in the future,
as governors were just beginning to issue stay-at-home orders.
To measure defiance intentions, we use a mean index based on six Likert items (1=
strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree) that asked about norm-violating behaviors. The items in
this scale are listed in Table 3. They load on a single factor (loadings: .881 to .921) and have
high internal reliability (α = .957).
-----Insert Table 3 About Here----Independent Variables
Faith in Trump. Two measures of this construct are used in the analysis. First, general
faith in Trump is drawn from previous research by the Authors (2020) and measures support for
the president’s leadership views, style, and efficacy. It is a mean index based on five Likert items
(1= strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree) that asked respondents about their general attitudes
toward President Trump (e.g., “I believe that President Trump will make America great again”).
The items have high internal reliability (α = .968) and load on a single factor (loadings: .923 to
.958). The previous research, based on a 2019 national-level YouGov survey, reported similar

13

scale statistics (loadings: 920 to .974, α = .974) (Authors, 2020). See Table 4 for the question
wording of each item.
Second, specific faith in Trump is a mean index that gauges beliefs and support for
Trump as they related specifically to the COVID-19 crisis. This index is based on ten Likert
items (1= strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree) that asked respondents to report their agreement
with statements made by Trump or about Trump during the pandemic (e.g., “President Trump
will make America healthy again”). The items load on a single factor (loadings: 633 to .872) and
have high internal reliability (α = .898). See Table 4 for all items used in this scale.
-----Insert Table 4 About Here----Moral Foundations. We used 20 Likert items (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree)
adapted from Graham et al. (2009) to measure respondents’ moral foundations (see Appendix
A), with four items representing each foundation: authority/respect (loadings: .650 to .823, α =
.859); purity/sanctity (loadings: .843 to .866, α = .924); ingroup/loyalty (loadings: .434 to .791, α
= .721); fairness/reciprocity (loadings: .468 to .773, α = .775); harm/care (loadings: .412 to .507,
α = .639). For each foundation, we averaged the four respective items, and then we factor
analyzed the resulting five indices. They loaded on the two theoretically expected factors,
corresponding to binding foundations (loadings = .634 to .818), and individualizing foundations
(loadings = .636 and .658). Accordingly, and following previous research (Malka et al., 2016;
Smith et al., 2014; Van Leeuwen & Park, 2009), we averaged the three group-focused indices
(authority/respect, purity/sanctity, and ingroup/loyalty) to generate an overall binding
foundations index (α = .794), and we averaged the two individual-focused indices
(fairness/reciprocity and harm/care) to generate an overall individualizing foundations index (r =
.527). See Appendix A for a listing of items and factor loadings.

14

Low Self-Control. The measure of low self-control is a mean index based on six Likert
items (1= strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree) from the Grasmick, Tittle, Bursik, and Arneklev
(1993) scale, each measuring one of the six dimensions of low self-control (see Appendix B for
the items). The same six items have been used in previous research to measure low self-control
(Herman & Pogarksy, 2020; Pickett et al., 2018).
Rational Choice/Deterrence. Because growing evidence shows that risk perceptions and
deterrent emotions both influence criminal decision-making (Barnum & Solomon, 2019; Pickett
et al., 2018; van Gelder & de Vries, 2012), we measured both. Perceived certainty is an indicator
of respondents’ perceived probability of death if they become infected with coronavirus, and has
seven response options ranging from “under 1%” to “Over 40%.” Personal fear is a mean index
based on six items that asked how worried respondents were (1 = not worried at all, 4 = very
worried) about various aspects of the virus (e.g., “being exposed to the virus”; “becoming
seriously ill from the virus”). See Appendix B for a listing of the items.
Social Concern. Agnew (2014) theorizes the importance of social concerns in crime
decisions, and Warr and Ellison (2000) have documented the importance of prosocial emotions
in behavior. Thus, we include a mean index, altruistic fear, that is based on seven items that
asked respondents how often (1 = very rarely, 5 = very often) they worried about the virus
making certain people (e.g., “your family members”; “doctors and nurses”) sick. All items are
listed in Appendix B.
Control Variables
To help isolate the effects of these key independent variables, we include several
ideological and sociodemographic controls in the multivariate analyses. First, we control for
partisan identification (1 = Republican, 0 = others), and political ideology, with the latter

15

measured ordinally (1 = very liberal, 5 = very conservative), similar to prior research
(Baranauskas & Drakulich, 2018; Enns & Ramiriez, 2018). We also control for libertarian views,
measured similarly to past research (Filindra & Kaplan, 2016) by counting the number of times
in three forced-choice questions respondents chose the libertarian option (e.g., “The less
government, the better”) over a non-libertarian one (e.g., “There are more things that the
government should be doing”) (α = .739). See Appendix B for the items.
The sociodemographic controls include: Age (in years), sex (1 = female, 0 = male), race
(1 = White, 0 = Non-White), marital status (1 = married, 0 = other), education (measured
ordinally: 1 = “less than high school degree” to 7 = “Doctoral degree”), and 2018 annual
household income (measured ordinally: 1 = “0-$9,999” to 7 = “$100,000+”). Additionally, given
the news coverage of this crisis, respondent’s attention to the news, or news awareness, about
COVID-19 was captured on a scale of 1, “Not closely at all,” to 4, “Very closely.”

Analytic Plan
In order to assess our overarching research question, the analysis unfolds in three phases.
First, we descriptively review the responses to the dependent variable (i.e., defiance intentions)
and key independent variables (i.e., general faith in Trump, specific faith in Trump). Second,
using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression, we assess the impact of general faith in Trump
on intent to defy social distancing directives. We then explore the impact of the interaction
between binding foundations and faith in Trump on respondents’ defiance intentions. Third, we
repeat this analysis using COVID-19-specific faith in Trump to examine the robustness of the
findings. We examined the potential for multicollinearity; the highest variance inflation factor
(2.93) is below the recommended cutoffs (Belsley, Kuh, & Welsch, 1980), suggesting
multicollinearity is not a concern.
16

Results
About one in six respondents reported defiance intentions. As seen in Table 3, those who
expressed agreement that they would violate a social distancing norm ranged from 15.1% (Item
4—attending a scheduled wedding or party) to 17.2% (Item 1—going out during stay at home
orders). When “neither agree nor disagree” responses are considered, about a fourth of the
sample (ranging from Item 6—22.5% to Item 1—26.7%) were open to behavioral defiance. Our
calculations (not reported in Table 3) also found that 28.1% of the respondents agreed or strongly
agreed with at least one of the items regarding defiance intentions.
Table 5 presents two estimated OLS regression models assessing predictors of these
intentions to defy social distancing norms. This analysis explores the implications of holding a
general faith in Trump. In Model 1, which explains 64.6% of the variation in defiance intentions,
being younger, male, Non-White, more educated, married, lower income, and less aware of the
news about COVID-19 significantly increased intentions to defy social distancing norms.
Turning to the criminological variables, personal fear of the virus was negatively and
significantly related to intentions to defy norms (β = ‒.145, p < .001), as deterrence theory would
anticipate, but the opposite held for perceiving a greater certainty of death from infection (β =
.126, p < .001). Altruistic fear, on the other hand, was not significantly related to defiance
intentions. Notably, low self-control, which had the strongest effect of any variable in the model,
was associated with higher defiance intentions (β = .458, p < .001).
Most important, the findings are consistent with the proposed interactionist theory of
foundation-based moral behavior. First, general faith in Trump was the second strongest
predictor of defiance intentions Trump (β = .275, p < .001). Second, as expected, the binding and
individualizing moral foundations also significantly influenced these intentions, with binding

17

foundations increasing defiance intentions (β = .087, p < .01), and individualizing decreasing
reported intentions (β = ‒.049, p < .05). Third, as seen in Model 2 in Table 5, the interaction
effect of faith in Trump and binding foundations is highly significant and in the predicted
direction (β = .093, p < .001). Those with greater faith in Trump and who more strongly endorse
binding foundations are especially likely to express defiance intentions.
Notably, these effects are mirrored in Table 6, which examines the influence of holding
COVID-19-specific faith in Trump on intentions to defy social distancing norms (adjusted R2 =
63.8%). First, with regard to criminological factors, low self-control again had the largest effect
on defiance intentions (β = .483, p < .001), whereas perceived certainty was positively related
and personal fear negatively related to such intentions. Furthermore, being younger, male, NonWhite, more educated, married, lower income, and less aware of the COVID-19 news coverage
significantly influenced intentions to defy social distancing norms. Most importantly, defiance
intentions were significantly higher among those holding a specific faith in Trump (β = .227, p <
.001) and among those endorsing binding foundation (β = .099, p < .001). And as seen in Model
2 in Table 6, the interaction of these two variables was again significant and in the predicted
direction (β = .075, p < .01).
-----Insert Table 5 and 6 About Here----Figure 1 graphs the interaction between faith in Trump, both global (panel a) and specific
(panel b), and endorsement of binding foundations. The figure shows the effect of faith in Trump
among those scoring low (below the mean, by a standard deviation) and high (above the mean,
by a standard deviation) on binding foundations. Among both groups—those low and high on
binding foundations—both types of faith in Trump are strongly and positively association with
defiance intentions. However, in both panels, the positive relationship between faith in Trump

18

and defiance intentions is much stronger (has a steeper slope) among those scoring higher on
binding foundations. The implication is clear: faith in Trump matters—it increases intentions to
put oneself and others at risk—but it matters most among those with moral beliefs that
emphasize group cohesion (loyalty, respect for authority) over individual protection.
-----Figure 1 About Here----As a check on the robustness of the results reported in Tables 5 and 6, we re-estimated
the models after controlling for state policy decisions that were enacted in each state at the time
the survey was fielded. The respondents’ zip codes were used to code their state of residents. A
database from the University of Washington made available online provided for each state social
distancing regulations, including having a stay-at-home order, the closure of non-essential
businesses, and having restrictions on gatherings (Fullman, Bang-Jensen, Amano, Adolph, &
Wilkerson, 2020). Using the day the survey was fielded (March 28) as a temporal cutoff point,
three dummy indicators were created signifying the state-wide presence of a stay-at-home order
(1 = yes, 0 = no), the closure of non-essential businesses (1 = yes, 0 = no), and having any
restriction on gatherings (1 = yes, 0 = no). These state-wide policies had no effect on the models
presented in Table 5 or 6, and the rest of the findings were substantively unchanged.

Discussion
A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights, and heal our division. . . .
Together, we will make America great again.
—President Donald Trump (January 20, 2017), in his inaugural address.

Since assuming office, Trump has taken complete control of the Republican Party. He
has characterized politicians who challenged his authority as traitors. “They are lying & cheating
like never before in our Country’s history in order to destabilize the United States of America,”

19

he has tweeted, while asking his followers: “Arrest for Treason?” (D. Jackson, 2019). The
president has earned deep allegiance from his base, who don MAGA hats and attend his political
rallies. As commentators have shown, the president appeals to the moral and emotional interests
of these Americans, letting them know that it is permissible to put their group first, to despise
political correctness, to resent immigrants who purportedly threaten their safety and seek to turn
the United States into a nation no longer demographically and culturally White, and to see
Obama and his liberal-elite cronies as unpatriotic socialists (Hochschild, 2018; Jardina, 2019;
Kaufmann, 2019; Maxwell & Shields, 2019). Above all else, President Trump has emphasized
the importance of his unrestrained authority; “I’ll be the oversight,” he has said about the
coronavirus stimulus bill (Steib, 2020); “I alone can fix it,” he has said about America (Rucker &
Leonnig, 2020, p. 1); “When somebody is president of the United States, your authority is total,”
he has said about his ability to override states’ stay-at-home orders (Liptak & Hoffman, 2020).

The Faith in Trump Effect
All of this—the attacks on rivals’ loyalty and patriotism, the emphasis on putting country
first, the calls for devotion and for total faith in his authority—set the moral stage for the
disastrous effects of President Trump’s downplaying of the coronavirus. In January, Health and
Human Services Secretary Alex Azar briefed Trump about the dangers of the coronavirus, but
the president saw him as an “alarmist,” he said (Boot, 2020). Peter Navarro, President Trump’s
trade advisor, also warned in January “that a coronavirus pandemic could cost the country
trillions of dollars and endanger millions of Americans” (Visser, 2020). His warning, too, was
treated with skepticism by aides to the president and, it appears, by Trump himself, who claimed
at the time that the outbreak was “totally under control,” was “one person coming from China,”
and would have “a very good ending” (Boot, 2020; Visser, 2020). Consistent with President
20

Trump’s messages downplaying the coronavirus threat, Republican states (Ohio being an
exception) were tardy in imposing social distancing mandates and engaged in less social
distancing (Adolph, Amano, Bang-Jensen, Fullman, & Wilkerson, 2020; Allcott et al., 2020).
Public opinion polls have repeatedly shown that Republicans have been far less likely than
Democrats to see the coronavirus as posing a threat to them personally or to others (Doherty,
Kiley, & Asheer, 2020; NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist Poll, 2020; Yahoo News/YouGov, 2020).
Our findings go further than existing polls, however, and show that it is not partisanship
itself that matters. Instead, the evidence points to the consequences of having “faith in Trump” at
this particular historical juncture. Controlling for partisan identification, political ideology, as
well as a host of other variables, such as libertarianism, we find that having faith in Trump
generally and having faith in Trump’s handling of the coronavirus specifically are both powerful
predictors of intentions to defy social distancing directives. Those who believe in President
Trump are more likely to say they will endanger themselves and their fellow citizens by leaving
their homes, going on trips, attending social events, and getting within six feet of others. In fact,
they are more likely to say they will do these things even if they have symptoms. This
association between faith in Trump and defiance of social distancing is illustrated in the protests
across the country of various states’ stay-at-home orders. Demonstrators, standing unmasked and
side-by-side (not the recommended six feet apart), proudly don MAGA hats and waive
Trump/Pence flags while demanding governors reopen states (Burnett & Slodysko, 2020). We
return to this issue in the concluding paragraphs.

Moral Foundations and the Trump Effect
Our findings also show that Trump’s self-proclaimed “cheerleading” matters more to
some kinds of individuals than to others. Faith in Trump, both general and specific, is most
21

strongly associated with intentions to defy social distancing directives among individuals who
are high on binding foundations—whose moral concerns center on respect for authority, group
cohesion, obedience, and self-sacrifice. Theoretically, per MFT (Graham et al., 2009; Haidt,
2012), these are the people who should be most sensitive to their group leader’s lead, because,
being from “Planet Durkheim,” what they crave most is tight integration into a strong group
under a strong leader (Haidt & Graham, 2009, p. 371). Our findings are consistent with that
theory. Our interactive findings are also consistent with a growing body of research that supports
an “interactionist account … of foundation-based moral behavior” (Süssenbach et al., 2019, p.
130). Studies have found that different moral foundations, binding or individualizing, interact
with political identity (Malka et al., 2016), moral identity (Smith et al., 2014), and visual cues of
suffering (Süssenbach et al., 2019) to influence attitudes and behavior. Our study is the first, to
our knowledge, to show that moral foundations also interact with views of group leaders,
particularly in the context of a national crisis. The results suggest that, for better or worse, in
crisis, such as pandemics, binding foundations bind individuals to their leaders; if their leaders
downplay a viral threat and call for opening the country up for business, binders will follow suit.
More generally, our findings show that moral foundations also have main effects on
social distancing intentions. Those who endorse binding foundations are more defiant of social
distancing, whereas those who endorse individualizing foundations—the foundations associated
with empathy, compassion, altruism, and sensitivity to human suffering (Graham et al., 2009;
Haidt, 2012; Süssenbach et al., 2019)—are more likely to say they will engage in social
distancing. These findings not only provide support for MFT but also reaffirm behavioral
economic findings showing that endorsement of individualizing over binding foundations
increases prosocial behavior (Clark et al., 2017). A key theoretical and empirical implication is

22

that criminologists would do well to incorporate MFT in their studies of crime-related decisionmaking, attitudes, and behavior (Silver, 2017; Vaughan, Holleran, & Silver, 2019).

Relevance of Criminology
Our analysis also reveals that other factors, highlighted by criminological theories, are
associated significantly with intent to defy social distancing directives. Consistent with
Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990) perspective, low self-control has general effects, increasing
defiance intentions. Specifically, those with less self-control are more likely to say they will put
themselves and others at risk by going out, even if they have symptoms. By contrast, and
somewhat surprisingly, we find no evidence that social concerns (Agnew, 2014)—as measured
by altruistic fear (Drakulich, 2015; Warr & Ellison, 2000)—influence defiance intentions. At the
bivariate level, there is a significant negative association between altruistic fear and defiance, but
it goes away in the multivariate models. Thus, one possibility is that the association between
altruistic fear and social distancing is spurious, perhaps reflecting the confounding influence of
individualizing foundations, which increase altruistic emotions (Haidt, 2012; Süssenbach et al.,
2019). Future research is needed that explores this possibility and, more generally, that examines
the direct and indirect effects of moral foundations on deviant behavior.
The findings herein are also relevant to deterrence theory, suggesting that deterrent
perceptions and emotions can have divergent effects that are perhaps contextually dependent.
Prior research has shown that the only deterrence perception that is consistently negatively
related to offending is perceived certainty (Paternoster, 2018; Paternoster & Bachman, 2013)—
the so-called “certainty principle” (Apel, 2013, p. 73). Surprisingly, in our study, the perceived
certainty of death upon infection was positively associated with defiance intentions—those who
perceived greater risk were more likely to say they would defy social distancing directives. At
23

first blush, this seems to contradict deterrence theory. However, there are at least two possible
explanations. First, the finding may reflect the question wording, which asked about the
probability of death, conditional on infection, but did not ask about the probability of infection.
Respondents who perceived the coronavirus to be deadlier also may have perceived infection to
be less likely. Second, unlike for the certainty of arrest—the typical focus in deterrence
research—there is an abundance of information about the coronavirus’s mortality rate. Thus,
overestimating the certainty of death may reflect carelessness and inattention, if not motivated
ignorance. The implication is that the effect of certainty perceptions on decision-making may
vary depending on the information environment.
What does not contradict deterrence theory in our study, however, is the effect of
deterrent emotions. One of the main advancements in recent years in the literature on criminal
decision-making has been the recognition that deterrent emotions matter (Barnum & Solomon,
2019; Pickett et al., 2018; van Gelder & de Vries, 2012); indeed, studies that have included both
cognitive and emotional measures have found stronger effects of deterrent emotions, suggesting
that “deterrence ultimately may be emotional” (Pickett et al., 2018). Our findings are consistent
with that interpretation. We find that personal fear of coronavirus consequences is significantly
and negatively related to intentions to defy social distancing directions. In other words,
independent of certainty perceptions and other factors, those who are more afraid of infection are
more willing to follow health guidelines. The implication is that, after decades of focusing
exclusively on deterrent cognitions—perceptions of certainty, severity, and celerity (Apel,
2013)—there is now “a general need for the ﬁeld to devote greater attention to theorizing and
testing the role of deterrent emotions in crime causation” (Pickett et al., 2018, p. 46).

Limitations and Future Research
24

Four limitations of our analysis bear mention, which provide opportunities for future
research. First, like much recent research (Barnum & Solomon, 2019; Pickett et al., 2018; Silver,
2017), we use an MTurk sample, which, although diverse and national in scope, is nonetheless a
convenience sample. That means our findings may not generalize to the American population.
We believe they will, but definitive conclusions about their generalizability must await
replications with probability samples.
Second, our outcome variable measured behavioral intentions, not behavior. This, too, is
quite common in criminological studies (Antonaccio & Tittle, 2008; Barnum & Solomon, 2019;
Paternoster et al., 2017), and for good reason (Pogarsky, 2004). Nonetheless, it is important to
know whether similar findings emerge in models predicting behavior. Thus, an important
direction for future research is to replicate our study using data on individuals’ actual social
distancing practices. Cell phone data hold promise for this purpose (see Gollwitzer, Martel,
Brady, Knowles, & Van Bavel, 2020; Sharkey, 2020).
Third, as with any research, our study could have omitted relevant variables. For
example, in a Vox news story, Sharkey (2020) analyzed macro-level data and found that counties
with more global warming deniers (a proxy for scientific literacy) were less likely to social
distance. Whether this or other variables matter at the individual level and would attenuate the
effects of general and specific faith in Trump remains to be seen. Sharkey (2020) did not include
a contemporaneous measure of faith in Trump, for example, so his findings may have been
spurious. In our study, the Trump effects are large and robust, and they render partisanship and
political beliefs (conservatism, libertarianism) non-significant. The unique interaction effects
with binding moral foundation also are unlikely to be reduced by the inclusion of other variables.

25

Still, we welcome future research that adds measures to our design and can increase the
explained variation beyond 63%.
Fourth and perhaps most important, it remains an empirical question whether the results
based on data collected at the end of March would emerge now (end of May) or at later dates. It
is possible to find among Trump’s wealth of communications cautionary comments about the
pandemic. After our survey was completed, for example, the president extended the federal
social distancing recommendation to remain in place until April 30 (Santucci, Fritze, &
Subramanian, 2020). Still, ample reasons exist to conclude that Trump’s effect on social
distancing intentions has, in the least, remained stable.
Supportive evidence comes from a macro-level study (not yet peer reviewed) led by Yale
psychologist Anton Gollwitzer and colleagues (2020) that assessed geo-tracking data drawn from
17 million smartphone users from March 9 until May 8. They reported 16% less physical
distancing in U.S. counties that voted for Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton in the 2016
presidential election. Lower physical distancing also was found for counties that watched more
conservative media (Fox News) and in states that have a higher Trump approval. Most notable,
although the researchers had made the pre-registered prediction that the effects of voting for
Trump would decrease over time “as the pandemic worsened and people became more aware of
the dangers of COVID-19,” they “found the opposite.” “As the pandemic progressed,” note
Gollwitzer et al. (2020), “counties’ percentage of votes for Trump over Clinton became an
increasingly negative predictor of physical distancing in terms of both general movement and
visits to nonessential services.” This partisan divide, which we measure on the individual level
by faith in Trump, has disturbing consequences. Lower levels of social distancing in “strongly
pro-Trump counties…was associated with a 27% higher growth rate in COVID-19 infections.”

26

The stability, if not deepening, of the faith in Trump effects is likely attributable to the
president’s skill in influencing his followers. In messaging about the pandemic, the president has
continually downplayed the need for Americans to engage in social distancing and has often
encouraged defiance of restrictions. Consider what has transpired since our survey was
conducted. Thus, Trump’s tweets have repeatedly instructed followers to “liberate” themselves
against Democratic governors’ stay-at-home orders, which he characterized as “too tough”; his
tweets were messages in support of demonstrators in states such as Michigan and Minnesota
(Chalfant & Samuels, 2020; Stanley-Becker, Olorunnip, & Kim, 2020). At these rallies,
protesters displayed numerous signs expressing their defiance of social distancing norms (e.g.,
“We will not comply”). Indeed, rather than advise patience and prudence, the president has
publicized quack panaceas. Who can forget his urging Americans to take the unproven drug of
hydroxychloroquine and then claiming he was doing so (Cha & McGinley, 2020)? Or his
suggesting that a “tremendous” ultraviolet light or ingesting a disinfectant might kill the
coronavirus—the latter remark leading to increased calls to state poison control centers (Foley,
2020; Zhao, 2020)? He has also constantly called to reopen the economy, churches, schools, and
even meatpacking plants ravaged by infections and deaths (see, e.g., Strauss, 2020; Sun &
Dawsey, 2020; Trumpka, 2020). Trump has now threatened to move the Republican national
convention out of Charlotte, North Carolina if Governor Roy Cooper does not guarantee the
gathering can be held “with no face masks and social distancing” (Sullivan & Nobles, 2020).
Most salient, the president has failed to practice social distancing in public appearances,
stubbornly refusing to wear a mask—the ultimate symbol of responsible social distancing. He
has done so despite 15 states passing laws making the wearing of masks mandatory in certain
public and work settings (Pike, 2020).

27

As the nation opens up more and more, compliance with social distancing laws and
informal norms will be consequential; public health is at stake (Gollwitzer et al., 2020; Sharkey
& Wood, 2020). We (the authors) have all experienced instances in which individuals have
violated social distancing in our spaces, such in supermarkets or along jogging trails. Collective
examples of mass normative defiance are even more disturbing, such as patrons crowding into
bars in Wisconsin after the state’s high court struck down Governor Tony Evers’s “safer at
home” order (a ruling “praised by Trump”) and, on Memorial Day weekend, unmasked poolparty attendees packed together in Lake of the Ozarks, Missouri (Levensen & Jackson, 2020;
“Wisconsin Bars Reopen,” 2020). In past times, we might have expected a President Bush or
Clinton to urge us to unify as a nation and to pursue the common good through safe interactions.
In the current context, however, our data suggest that a charismatic and influential leader is
evoking social distancing defiance, especially among those bound to his authority. Faith in
Trump matters.

28

References
Adolph, C., Amano, K., Bang-Jensen, B., Fullman, N., & Wilkerson, J. (2020). Pandemic
politics: Timing state-level social distancing responses to COVID-19. Unpublished paper,
Department of Political Science, University of Washington.
Agnew, R. (2014). Social concern and crime: Moving beyond the assumption of simple selfinterest—2013 Presidential Address to the American Society of Criminology.
Criminology, 52, 1–32.
Allcott, H., Boxell, L., Conway, J., Getzkow, M., Thaler, M., & Yang, D. (2020). Polarization
and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during COVID-19.
Unpublished paper, New York University.
Anson, I. G. (2018). Taking the time? Explaining effortful participation among low-cost online
survey participants. Research & Politics, 5, Advance online publication. doi:
2053168018785483.
Antonaccio, O., & Tittle, C. R. (2008). Morality, self-control, and crime. Criminology, 46, 479–
510.
Apel, R. (2013). Sanctions, perceptions, and crime: Implications for criminal deterrence. Journal
of Quantitative Criminology, 29, 67–101.
Baranauskas, A. J., & Drakulich, K. M. (2018). Media construction of crime revisited: Media
types, consumer contexts, and frames of crime and justice. Criminology, 56, 679–714.
Barnum, T. C., & Solomon, S. J. (2019). Fight or flight: Integral emotions and violent intentions.
Criminology, 57, 659–686.
Behrmann, S. (2020, March 16). Nunes walks back ‘go to your local pub’ comments, blames
media for creating coronavirus panic. USA Today. Retrieved from
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/16/coronavirus-devin-nuneswalks-back-go-your-local-pub-comments/5065469002/
Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. E. (1980). Regression diagnostics: Identifying influential
data and sources of collinearity. New York, NY: John Wiley.
Boot, M. (2020, April 5). The worst president. Ever. The Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/04/05/worst-president-ever/

29

Breuninger, K. (2020, March 24). Trump wants ‘packed churches’ and the economy open again
on Easter despite the deadly threat of coronavirus. CNBC Politics. Retrieved from
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/03/24/coronavirus-response-trump-wants-to-reopen-useconomy-by-easter.html
Brewington, A. (2020, April 6). The Queen gives a stirring tutorial in leadership. Washington
Post. Retrieved from https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/04/06/with-britaincrisis-queen-elizabeth-breaks-her-usual-silence/
Brownstein, R. (2020a). Red and blue American aren’t experiencing the same pandemic. The
Atlantic. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2020/03/howrepublicans-and-democrats-think-about-coronavirus/608395/
Brownstein, R. (2020b). Coronavirus is dividing blue cities from their red states. CNN. Retrieved
from https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/31/politics/red-states-blue-citiescoronavirus/index.html
Burke, D. (2020a, April 1). Second pastor charged with violating public orders says church doors
will still be open on Sunday. CNN. Retrieved from
https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/31/us/louisiana-pastor-arrest-tony-spell/index.html
Burke, D. (2020b, March 30). Police arrest Florida pastor for holding church services despite
stay-at-home order. CNN. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/30/us/floridapastor-arrested-river-church/index.html
Burnett, S., & Slodysko, B. (2020, April 17). Pro-Trump protesters push back on stay-at-home
orders. PBS NewsHour. Retrieved from https://www.pbs.org/newshour/nation/pro-trumpprotesters-push-back-on-stay-at-home-orders
Bush, G. W. (2003, April). Executive Order 13295: Revised list of quarantinable communicable
diseases. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/sars/quarantine/exec-2004-04-03.pdf
Cha, A. E., & McGinley, L. (2020, May 22). Antimalaria drug touted by President Trump is
linked to increased risk of death in coronavirus patients, study says. Washington Post.
Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2020/05/22/hydroxychloroquine-coronavirusstudy/
Chalfant, M., & Samuels, B. (2020, April 17). Trump defends demonstrators protesting social
distancing restrictions. The Hill. Retrieved from
https://thehill.com/homenews/administration/493445-trump-defends-demonstrators30

protesting-social-distancingrestrictions?fbclid=IwAR1GaCjwZVtoFtFA6PROw9wm0T87cebDfSRZ8kKJpWXUfjIkBLC9CT3-yw
Chang, L., & Krosnick, J. A. (2009). National surveys via RDD telephone interviewing versus
the Internet: Comparing sample representativeness and response quality. Public Opinion
Quarterly, 73, 641-678.
Cillizza, C. (2020, April 1). 11 times Donald Trump has ‘belittled’ coronavirus. CNN Politics.
Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/01/politics/donald-trump-coronavirusmike-pence/index.html
Clark, C. B., Swails, J. A., Pontinen, H. M., Bowerman, S. E., Kriz, K. A., & Hendricks, P. S.
(2017). A behavioral economic assessment of individualizing versus binding moral
foundations. Personality and Individual Differences, 112, 49–54.
Cohen, J. E. (1995). Presidential rhetoric and the public agenda. American Journal of Political
Science, 39, 87–107.
Cohen, J. E. (1997). Presidential responsiveness and public policy. Ann Arbor, MI: University
of Michigan Press.
Cohen, J. E., & Hamman, J. A. (2003). The polls: Can presidential rhetoric affect the public's
economic perceptions? Presidential Studies Quarterly, 33, 408–422.
Coronavirus in the U.S.: Latest Map and Case Count. (2020, March 28). New York Times. Retrieved
from https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-us-cases.html

Cullen, F. T., Latessa, E. J., & Jonson, C. L. (2012). Assessing the extent and sources of NCAA
Rule Infractions: A national self-report study of student-athletes. Criminology and Public
Policy, 11, 665–706.
Dean, M. M., & Rushing, E. (2020, March 31). When people defy social distancing directives
during pandemic, what are others to do? Retrieved from
https://www.inquirer.com/health/coronavirus/coronavirus-covid-19-social-distancingviolators-philadelphia-20200331.html
DePaolo, J. (2020, March 30). 5 key moments from Trump’s off the rails coronavirus interview
on Fox & Friends. Retrieved from https://www.mediaite.com/trump/5-key-momentsfrom-trumps-off-the-rails-coronavirus-interview-on-fox-friends/

31

Doherty, C., Kiley, J., & Asheer, N. (2020, March). Worries about coronavirus surge, as most
Americans expect a recession—or worse. Retrieved from https://www.peoplepress.org/2020/03/26/worries-about-coronavirus-surge-as-most-americans-expect-arecession-or-worse/
Drakulich, K. M. (2015). Concerns for self or family? Sources of and responses to altruistic fear.
Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 30, 1168–1207.
Druckman, J. N., & Jacobs, L. R. (2009). Presidential responsiveness to public opinion. In G. C.
Edwards & W. G. Howell (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of the American presidency (pp.
160–181). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Enns, P. K., & Ramirez, M. D. (2018). Privatizing punishment: Testing theories of public
support for private prison and immigration detention facilities. Criminology, 56, 546–
573.
Evon, D. (2020, March 18). Is this timeline of Trump’s coronavirus response accurate? Snopes.
Retrieved from https://www.snopes.com/fact-check/timeline-trump-covid19-responses/
Feng, Q., Xu, Y., Xu, R., & Zhang, E. (2017). Moral foundations tell us why guilt induces unfair
allocation in multi-party interactions. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 20, 191–200.
Filindra, A., & Kaplan, N. J. (2016). Racial resentment and Whites’ gun policy preferences in
contemporary America. Political Behavior, 38, 255–275.
Filosa, G. (2017, June 15). Gay-basher yelled ‘You’re in Trump country now’ offers to hug his
victims. Miami Herald. Retrieved from
https://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/community/floridakeys/article156277994.html
Foley, A. (2020, April 26). Calls to poison control centers spike after Trump disinfectant
comments. The Hill. Retrieved from https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/494744-poisoncontrol-centers-report-increase-in-calls-pertaining-to-exposure-to
Forbes. (2020). #18 Rush Limbaugh. Forbes. Retrieved from
https://www.forbes.com/profile/rush-limbaugh/#79123a2669cc
Fullman, N., Bang-Jensen, B., Amano, K., Adolph, C., & Wilkerson, J. (2020, April 14). Statelevel social distancing policies in response to COVID-19 in the US. Version 1.16.
Retrieved from https://github.com/COVID19StatePolicy/SocialDistancing
32

Gollwitzer, A., Martel, C., Brady, W. J., Knowles, E. D., Bavel, J. J. (2020). Partisan differences
in physical distancing predict infections and morality during the coronavirus pandemic.
Unpublished paper (not yet peer-reviewed). Department of Psychology, Yale University.
doi: 10.239/ssrn.3609392.
Gottfredson, M. R., & Hirschi, T. (1990). A general theory of crime. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Graham, D. A. (2019, August 28). Trump’s unpardonable admission about his border wall. The
Atlantic. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/08/trumppardons-border-wall/596962/
Graham, J., Haidt, J., & Nosek, B. A. (2009). Liberals and conservatives rely on different sets of
moral foundations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1029–1046.
Grasmick, H. G., Tittle, C. R., Bursik, Jr., R. J., & Arneklev, B. J. (1993). Testing the core
empirical implications of Gottfredson and Hirschi's general theory of crime. Journal of
Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30, 5-29.
Haidt, J. (2012). The righteous mind: Why good people are divided by politics and religion. New
York, NY: Vintage.
Haidt, J., & Graham, J. (2009). Planet of the Durkheimians: Where community, authority, and
sacredness are foundations of morality. In J. T. Jost, A. C. Kay, & H. Thorisdottir (Eds.),
Series in political psychology. Social and psychological bases of ideology and system
justification (pp. 371–401). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Haidt, J., Graham, J., & Joseph, C. (2009). Above and below left-right: Ideological narratives
and moral foundations. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 110–119.
Hains, T. (2019, November 22). Trump calls into “Fox & Friends” amid impeachment probe,
upcoming FISA report. RealClear Politics. Retrieved from
https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2019/11/22/trump_calls_in_to_fox__friends_am
id_impeachment_probe_upcoming_fisa_report.html
Hale, H. E., & Kamenchuk, O. (2020, February 4). Why are Republicans using Putin’s talking
points? This study helps explain. Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2020/02/04/why-are-republicans-using-putins-

33

talking-points-this-study-helps-explain/
Harper, J. (2019, January 11). Cleveland man threatens black neighbors with slur, says ‘Donald
Trump will fix them,’ police say. Cleveland.com. Retrieved from
https://www.cleveland.com/court-justice/2016/06/cleveland_man_calls_neighbors.html
Hatemi, P. K., Crabtree, C., & Smith, K. B. (2019). Ideology justifies morality: political beliefs
predict moral foundations. American Journal of Political Science, 63, 788–806.
Hawdon, J. E. (2001). The role of presidential rhetoric in the creation of a moral panic: Reagan,
Bush, and the war on drugs. Deviant Behavior, 22, 419–445.
Herman, S., & Pogarsky, G. (2020). Morality, deterrability, and offender decision making.
Justice Quarterly. Advance online publication.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07418825.2019.1709884?journalCode=rjq
y20
Hochschild, A. R. (2018). Strangers in their own land: Anger and mourning on the American
Right. New York, NY: The New Press.
Jackson, D. (2019, September 30). “Treason,” spying,” “civil war”: Donald Trump lashes out at
impeachment accusers. USA Today. Retrieved from:
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2019/09/30/donald-trump-attacksimpeachment-accusers-tweets/3817248002/
Jackson, P. (2019, July 19). Donald Trump is the archetypal far-right charismatic leader. But his
magic won’t last. The Guardian. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/jul/19/donald-trump-archetypal-farright-charismatic-leader
Jardina, A. (2019). White identity politics. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Johnson, M. (2020, April 1). FBI may charge man who attacked Asian Americans over
coronavirus with hate crime: Report. The Hill. Retrieved from
https://thehill.com/homenews/state-watch/490692-fbi-may-charge-man-who-attackedasian-americans-over-coronavirus-with
Kaufmann, E. (2018). Whiteshift: Populism, immigration and the future of white majorities. New
York, NY: Abrams Press.

34

Khazan, O. (2016, October 13). Why people fall for charismatic leaders. The Atlantic. Retrieved
from https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2016/10/why-people-fall-forcharismatic-leaders/503906/
KOMO Staff. (2016, August 17). African-American man stabbed in Olympia, attacker mentions
Black Lives Matter. Author. Retrieved from https://komonews.com/news/local/africanamerican-man-stabbed-in-olympia-attacker-mentions-black-lives-matter
Koop, C. (2020, March 20). Woman licks freezer door handle at grocery to ‘protest’ coronavirus,
Wisconsin cops say. Kansas City Star. Retrieved from
https://www.kansascity.com/news/coronavirus/article241377711.html
Kroneberg, C., Heintze, I., & Mehlkop, G. (2010). The interplay of moral norms and
instrumental incentives in crime causation. Criminology, 48, 259–294.
Lawrence, A. B. (2004). Does it matter what the presidents say? The influence of presidential
rhetoric on the public agenda, 1946–2003 (Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation).
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
LeBlanc, P. (2020, March 24). Coronavirus: Texas Lt. Gov. under fire for comments. Mercury
News. Retrieved from https://www.mercurynews.com/2020/03/24/coronavirus-texas-ltgov-under-fire-for-comments/
Leonhardt, D. (2020, March 15). A complete list of Trump’s attempts to play down coronavirus.
New York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/15/opinion/trumpcoronavirus.html
Levensen, E., & Jackson, A. (2020, May 24). Pool party at Lake of the Ozarks in Missouri draws
a packed crowd. CNN. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/24/us/ozarksmissouri-party/index.html
Levin, B. (2020). GOP Congressman: Lawmakers must “put on our big boy and big girls pans”
and let Americans die. Vanity Fair. Retrieved from:
https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2020/04/trey-hollingsworth-coronavirus-economy
Levin, B., & Nakashima, L. (2019). Report to the nation: 2019 factbook on hate & extremism in
the U.S. and internationally. San Bernardino, CA: Center for the Study of Hate and
Extremism.

35

Liptak, K., & Hoffman, J. (2020). Trump lashes out in grievance-filled briefing claiming ‘total’
authority as president. CNN. Retrieved from
https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/13/politics/trump-coronavirus-defense-fauci/index.html
Lipton, E., Sanger, D. E., Haberman, M., Shear, M. D., Mazzetti, M. & Barnes, J. E. (2020, April
11). He could have seen what was coming: Behind Trump’s failure on the virus. New
York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/04/11/us/politics/coronavirus-trump-response.html
Lurie, D. R. (2020). Republicans cheer as Trumpist judge launches holy war against government.
The Daily Beast. Retrieved from https://www.thedailybeast.com/republicans-cheer-astrumpist-judge-justin-walker-launches-holy-war-against-government
Malka, A., Osborne, D., Soto, C. J., Greaves, L. M., Sibley C. G., & Lelkes, Y. (2016). Binding
moral foundations and the narrowing of ideological conflict to the traditional morality
domain. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 42, 1243–1257.
Maxwell, A., & Shields, T. (2019). The long southern strategy: How chasing white voters in the
south changed American politics. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
McManus, H. D., Cullen, F. T., Jonson, C. L., Burton, A. L., & Burton, Jr, V. S. (2019). Will
Black lives matter to the police? African Americans’ concerns about Trump’s
presidency. Victims & Offenders, 14, 1040–1062.
Mervosh, S., Lu, D., & Swales, V. (2020, April 3). See which states and cities have told residents
to stay at home. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html
Milesi, P., & Alberici, A. I. (2018). Pluralistic morality and collective action: The role of moral
foundations. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 21, 235–256.
Mosk, M. (2020, April 5). George W. Bush in 2005: ‘If we wait for a pandemic to appear, it will
be too late to prepare.’ ABC News. Retrieved from
https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/george-bush-2005-wait-pandemic-lateprepare/story?id=69979013
Murdock, J. (2020, March 23). U.S. churches hold public Sunday services despite coronavirus
outbreak: ‘This is dangerous.’ Newsweek. Retrieved from
https://www.newsweek.com/church-sunday-service-open-despite-coronavirus-covid19health-advice-social-distancing-1493756
36

Nagin, D. S., & Pogarsky, G. (2001). Integrating celerity, impulsivity, and extralegal sanction
threats into a model of gender deterrence: Theory and evidence. Criminology, 39,865–
892.
NPR/PBS NewsHour/Marist Poll. (2020, March 17). Coronavirus. Retrieved from
http://maristpoll.marist.edu/npr-pbs-newshour-marist-poll-resultscoronavirus/#sthash.Sx1nFrEP.PkA2FB82.dpbs.
Obama, B. (2014, October 25). Obama weekly address on Ebola: “We can beat this disease”.
RealClear Politics. Retrieved from
https://www.realclearpolitics.com/video/2014/10/25/obama_weekly_address_on_ebola_
we_can_beat_this_disease.html
Ortiz, J. L. (2020, March 30). Coronavirus in the US: How all 50 states are responding-and why
there is no federal stay-at-home order. USA Today. Retrieved from
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/03/30/coronavirus-stay-home-shelterin-place-orders-by-state/5092413002/
Paternoster, R. (2018). Perceptual deterrence theory. In D. S. Nagin, F. T. Cullen, & C. L. Jonson
(Eds.), Deterrence, choice, and crime: Contemporary perspectives (Advances in
Criminological Theory, Vol. 23, pp. 81–106). New York, NY: Routledge.
Paternoster, R., & Bachman, R. (2013). Perceptual deterrence theory. In F. T. Cullen & P.
Wilcox (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of criminological theory (pp. 649–671). New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Paternoster, R., Jaynes, C. M., & Wilson, T. (2017). Rational choice theory and interest in the
“fortune of others.” Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 54, 847–868.
Paz, C. (2020, March 24). All the president’s lies about the coronavirus. The Atlantic. Retrieved
from https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2020/03/trumps-lies-aboutcoronavirus/608647/
Peel, C (2020, April 3). Police: Woman coughed in Jacksonville officer’s face, told him she had
coronavirus. Retrieved from https://www.news4jax.com/news/local/2020/04/03/policewoman-coughed-in-jacksonville-officers-face-told-him-she-had-coronavirus/
Peer, E., Vosgerau, J., & Acquisti, A. (2014). Reputation as a sufficient condition for data quality
on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Behavior Research Methods, 46, 1023-1031.
37

Pereira, A. (2017). The decision to participate in mediation and individual factors: the role of
moral foundations and their relation to restorative and retributive
orientations. Restorative Justice, 5, 221–250.
Pettus, E. W. (2020, March 25). Governor: Mississippi not ‘dictator’ on limits during virus. The
News & Observer. Retrieved from
https://www.newsobserver.com/news/article241495111.html
PEW Research Center. (2018, March 20). Trends in party affiliation among demographic groups.
PEW Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.people-press.org/2018/03/20/1trends-in-party-affiliation-among-demographic-groups/
Pickett, J. T., Roche, S. P., & Pogarsky, G. (2018). Toward a bifurcated theory of emotional
deterrence. Criminology, 56, 27–58.
Pike, L. (2020, May 29). Why 15 states suddenly made masks mandatory. Vox. Retrieved from
https://www.vox.com/2020/5/29/21273625/coronavirus-masks-required-virginia-chinahong-kong
Pogarsky, G. (2004). Projected offending and contemporaneous rule-violation: Implications for
heterotypic continuity. Criminology, 42, 111–135.
Post, J., & Doucette, S. R. (2019). Dangerous charisma: The political psychology of Donald
Trump and his followers. New York: Pegasus Books.
Pratt, T. C., & Cullen, F. T. (2000). The empirical status of Gottfredson and Hirschi's general
theory of crime: A meta‐analysis. Criminology, 38, 931-964.
Qui, L. (2020, March 27). Analyzing the patterns in Trump’s falsehoods about coronavirus. New
York Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/27/us/politics/trumpcoronavirus-factcheck.html
Ramirez, M. D. (2013). Punitive sentiment. Criminology, 51, 329–364.
Rising, D. & Moulson, G. (2020, March 29). Angela Merkel rises to the coronavirus leadership
challenge. Christian Science Monitor. Retrieved from
https://www.csmonitor.com/World/Europe/2020/0329/Angela-Merkel-rises-to-thecoronavirus-leadership-challenge

38

Rodriguez, A. (2020, March 24). Texas’s lieutenant governor suggests grandparents are willing
to die for the US economy. USA Today. Retrieved from
https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2020/03/24/covid-19-texas-officialsuggests-elderly-willing-die-economy/2905990001/
Rucker, P., & Leonnig, C. (2020). A very stable genius: Donald J. Trump’s testing of America.
New York, NY: Penguin Press.
Rupar, A. (2020a, February 29). Trump’s Friday night effort to weaponized coronavirus against
his enemies has already aged poorly. Vox. Retrieved from
https://www.vox.com/2020/2/29/21159294/trump-coronavirus-hoax-south-carolina-firstdeath
Rupar, A. (2020b, March 18). Trump spent weeks downplaying the coronavirus. He’s now
pretending that never happened. Vox. Retrieved from
https://www.vox.com/2020/3/18/21184945/trump-coronavirus-comments-then-versusnow
Santucci, J., Fritze, J., & Subramanian, C. (2020, March 29). Trump extends federal socialdistancing guidelines to April 30 after floating Easter deadline. USA Today. Retrieved
from https://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/2020/03/29/coronavirus-trumpextends-social-distancing-guidelines-april-30/2937504001/
Schanzer, D. (2019, August 5). We must call the El Paso shooting what it is: Trump-inspired
terrorism. The Guardian. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2019/aug/05/trump-inspired-terrorism-elpaso
Sharkey, P. (2020, April 10). The US has a collective action problem that’s larger than the
coronavirus crisis. Vox. Retrieved from
https://www.vox.com/2020/4/10/21216216/coronavirus-social-distancing-texas-unacastclimate-change
Sharkey, P., & Wood, G. (2020). The causal effect of social distancing on the spread of SARSCoV2. Unpublished Manuscript. Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International
Affairs, Princeton University. https://www.vox.com/2020/4/10/21216216/coronavirussocial-distancing-texas-unacast-climate-change
Sherman, L. W. (1993). Defiance, deterrence, and irrelevance: A theory of the criminal sanction.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 30, 445–473.

39

Silver, E., & Abell, L. (2016). Beyond harm and fairness: A study of deviance and
morality. Deviant Behavior, 37, 496–508.
Silver, J. R. (2017). Moral foundations, intuitions of justice, and the intricacies of punitive
sentiment. Law & Society Review, 51, 413–450.
Silver, J. R., & Silver, E. (2017). Why are conservatives more punitive than liberals? A moral
foundations approach. Law and Human Behavior, 41, 258–272.
Smith, I. H., Aquino, K., Koleva, S., & Graham, J. (2014). The moral ties that bind … even to
out-groups: The interactive effect of moral identity and the binding moral foundations.
Psychological Science, 25, 1554–1562.
Sommer, W., Branco, E., & Stein, S. (2020). Trumpists urging people to leave their homes to
own the libs. The Daily Beast. Retrieved from https://www.thedailybeast.com/trumployalists-and-allies-urge-defiance-of-coronavirus-safety-measures
Stanley-Becker, I., Olorunnip, T., & Kim, S. M. (2020, April 17). Trump foments resistance to
Democratic-imposed shutdowns, but some Republican governors are also wary of
moving too fast. Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-foments-resistance-to-democraticimposed-shutdowns-but-some-republican-governors-are-also-wary-of-moving-toofast/2020/04/17/5595e5fa-80c2-11ea-9040-68981f488eed_story.html
Steib, M. (2020, March 23). Trump on GOP’s $500 billion slush fund: ‘I’ll be the oversight.’
New York Magazine. Retrieved from https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2020/03/trump-onusd500-billion-slush-fund-ill-be-the-oversight.html
Strauss, V. (2020, May 25). Trump tweets schools should open ‘ASAP’ (after a Fox News host
said the same thing Sunday night). Here are some responses. Washington Post. Retrieved
from https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2020/05/25/trump-tweets-schoolsshould-open-asap-after-fox-news-host-said-same-thing-sunday-night
Sullivan, K., & Nobles, R. (2020, May 29). North Carolina governor: Trump insisted on full
convention with no face masks or social distancing. CNN. Retrieved from
https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/29/politics/north-carolina-governor-trump-convention-noface-masks/index.html
Sullivan, M. (2020, March 18). Surrounded by experts, Trump still needed an intervention by
Tucker Carlson to take coronavirus seriously. Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/media/surrounded-by-experts-trump-still40

needed-an-intervention-by-tucker-carlson-to-take-coronavirusseriously/2020/03/18/3cf67cb0-6922-11ea-9923-57073adce27c_story.html
Sun, L. H., & Dawsey, J. (2020, May 28). White House and CDC remove coronavirus warnings
about choirs in faith guidance. Washington Post. Retrieved from
https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/white-house-and-cdc-remove-coronaviruswarnings-about-choirs-in-faith-guidance/2020/05/28/5d9c526e-a117-11ea-95901858a893bd59_story.html
Süssenbach, P., Rees, J., & Gollwitzer, M. (2019). When the going gets tough, individualizers
get going: On the relationship between moral foundations and prosociality. Personality
and Individual Differences, 136, 122–131.
Swaine, J. & Adolphe J. (2019, August 2019). Violence in the name of Trump. The Guardian.
Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2019/aug/28/in-thename-of-trump-supporters-attacks-database
Tavernise, S. & Oppel, Jr., R. A. (2020, March 24). Spit on, yelled at, attacked: ChineseAmericans fear for their safety. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/23/us/chinese-coronavirus-racist-attacks.html
Tittle, C. R. (1995). Control balance: Toward a general theory of deviance. Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Trump, D. J. (2020a). Donald J. Trump. [Twitter profile]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump
Trump, D. J. (2020b). “President Trump is a ratings hit. Since reviving the daily White House
briefing Mr. Trump and his coronavirus updates have attracted an average audience of
8.5 million on cable news, roughly the viewership of the season finale of ‘The Bachelor.’
Numbers are continuing to rise... [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1244320570315018240
Trump, D. J. (2020c). “Gallup Poll numbers on the handling of this situation are outstanding, the
best. Thank you!” [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1234305307439923201
Trump, D. J. (2020d). “WE CANNOT LET THE CURE BE WORSE THAN THE PROBLEM
ITSELF. AT THE END OF THE 15 DAY PERIOD, WE WILL MAKE A DECISION

41

AS TO WHICH WAY WE WANT TO GO!” [Tweet]. Retrieved from
https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/1241935285916782593
Trump Twitter Archive. (2020). Trump Twitter Archive. Retrieved from
http://www.trumptwitterarchive.com/
Trumpka, R. (2020, May 7). Trump’s dangerous decision on meatpacking plants. New York
Times. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/07/opinion/trump-meat-plantscoronavirus.html
Tulis, J. (1987). The rhetorical presidency. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
van Gelder, J., & de Vries, R. E. (2012). Traits and states: Integrating personality and affect into
a model of criminal decision making. Criminology, 50, 637–671.
Van Leeuwen, F., & Park, J. H. (2009). Perceptions of social dangers, moral foundations, and
political orientation. Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 169–173.
Van Leeuwen, F., Park, J. H., Koenig, B. L., & Graham, J. (2012). Regional variation in
pathogen prevalence predicts endorsement of group-focused moral concerns. Evolution
and Human Behavior, 33, 429–437.
Vaughan, T. J., Holleran, L. B., & Silver, J. R. (2019). Applying Moral Foundations Theory to
the explanation of capital jurors’ sentencing decisions. Justice Quarterly, 36, 1176–1205.
Vazquez, M., & Klein, B. (2020, March 19). Trump again defends use of the term ‘China virus.’
CNN Politics. Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/17/politics/trump-chinacoronavirus/index.html
Vazsonyi, A. T., Mikuška, J., & Kelley, E. L. (2017). It’s time: A meta-analysis on the selfcontrol-deviance link. Journal of Criminal Justice, 48, 48–63.
Visser, N. (2020, April 7). Trump defends his weeks downplaying coronavirus: I’m a
cheerleader. HuffPost. Retrieved from https://www.huffpost.com/entry/trumpcoronavirus-cheerleader_n_5e8d0872c5b6e1a2e0fb7aeb?ncid=APPLENEWS00001
Warr, M., & Ellison, C. G. (2000). Rethinking social reactions to crime: Personal and altruistic
fear in family households. American Journal of Sociology, 106, 551–578.

42

Weinberg, J. D., Freese, J., & McElhattan, D. (2014). Comparing data characteristics and results
of an online factorial survey between a population-based and a crowdsource-recruited
sample. Sociological Science, 1, 292–310.
Williamson, E. (2020, March 29). Liberty University brings back its students, and coronavirus
fears, too. New York Times. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/29/us/politics/coronavirus-liberty-universityfalwell.html
Winton, R., & Fry, H. (2020, April 4). Coronavirus scofflaws arrested, criminally charged as
California cracks down. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from
https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2020-04-04/coronavirus-violators-arrestedcriminally-charged-california-cracks-down
Wisconsin Bars Reopen After Court Ruling Praised by Trump. (2020, May 14). CNBC.
Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/05/14/wisconsin-bars-reopen-after-courtruling-praised-by-trump.html
Wolsko, C., Ariceaga, H., & Seiden, J. (2016). Red, white, and blue enough to be green: Effects
of moral framing on climate change attitudes and conservatism. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 65, 7–19.
Wulfsohn, J. A. (2020, February 25). Fox News reaches highest viewership in network’s history,
topping MSNBC, CNN in 2020. Fox News. Retrieved from
https://www.foxnews.com/media/highest-viewership-network-history-msnbc-cnn-2020
Yahoo News/YouGov. (2020, March 12). Yahoo News/YouGov: Most Americans are worried
about COVID-19—but not Republicans. Retrieved from
https://today.yougov.com/topics/health/articles-reports/2020/03/12/coronavirus-data-poll.
Zhao, C. (2020, April 26). After Trump’s disinfectant comments, calls to poison control centers
spike in New York, Michigan, Illinois and Maryland. Newsweek. Retrieved from
https://www.newsweek.com/after-trumps-disinfectant-comments-calls-poison-controlcenters-spike-new-york-michigan-1500294

43

Table 1. Selected Quotes by Supporters of President Donald Trump
Date

Source

Quote

Fox News
02-27-20

Sean Hannity

Tonight, I can report the sky is absolutely falling. We are all
doomed. The end is near. The apocalypse is imminent and you going
to all die. Or, at least, that is what the media mob would like you to
think.

02-27-20

Sean Hannity

Zero people in the United States of America have died from the
coronavirus. Zero.

02-28-20

Geraldo Rivera

The far more deadly, more lethal threat right now is not the
coronavirus. It’s the, it’s the ordinary old flu. People are right now.
Nobody has died yet in the United States as far as we know from
this disease.

03-02-20

Dr. Drew Pinsky

It’s milder than we thought. The fatality rate is going to drop.

03-03-20

Jesse Watters

You want to know how I really feel about the coronavirus, Juan. If I
get it, I’ll beat it. I AM NOT AFRAID OF THE CORONAVIRUS
and no one else should be that afraid either.

03-06-20

Dr. Marc Siegel

This virus should be compared to the flu, cuz at worst, at worst,
worst case scenario, it be the flu.

03-07-20

Jeanine Pirro

It’s a virus, like the flu. All the talk about coronavirus being so
much more deadly doesn’t reflect reality.

03-08-20

Pete Hegseth

This is one of those case where the more I learn about coronavirus,
the less concerned I am. There’s of hyperbole.

03-09-20

Lou Dobbs

The national left-wing media playing up fears of the coronavirus

03-09-20

Laura Ingraham

And the facts are actually pretty reassuring, but you’d never know it
watching all this stuff.

03-10-20

Ed Henry

When you hear the context, it’s not quite as scary.

03-10-20

Tomi Lahren

The sky is falling because we have a few dozen cases of coronavirus
on a cruise ship. I am far more concerned with stepping on a used
heroin needle than I am of getting the coronavirus. But, maybe that’s
just me.

03-11-20

Matt Schlapp

It is very, very difficult to contract this virus.

44

Table 1 cont. Selected Quotes by Supporters of President Donald Trump
Date

Source

Quote

Fox News
03-13-20

Ainsley Earhardt

It’s actually the safest time to fly. Everyone I know that’s flying
right now, terminals are pretty much dead. And then the planes,
remember back in the day when you had a seat next to you possibly
empty. You could stretch out a little more. It’s like that on every
flight now.

Sean Hannity

By the way, this program has always taken the coronavirus
seriously.

03-18-20

Other Conservative Media
02-24-20
Rush Limbaugh

Trump Administration
02-25-20
Larry Kudlow

Yeah, dead right on is the coronavirus is the common cold,
folks. The hype of this thing as a pandemic, as the
Andromeda Strain, as oh my God if you get it you’re dead.

We have contained this. We have contained this. I won’t say
airtight, but pretty close to airtight.

03-06-20

Kellyanne Conway

It is being contained. And…do you not think it’s being contained?

03-10-20

Mike Pence

In our line of work, you shake hands. I expect, uh, the President
will continue to do that. I’ll continue to do it.

Report on Matt
Gaetz

Republican Matt Gaetz mocked concerns about the spread of the
virus by wearing a gasmask on Capitol Hill.

03-11-20

Report on James
Inhofe

When a reporter in the Capitol asked Senator James Inhofe of
Oklahoma, 85, what precautions he was taking, he extended his
armed with confidence, “Wanna shake hands?”

03-15-20

Devin Nunes

One of thing you can do, if you’re healthy, ah, you and your
family, it’s a great to just go out, go to a local restaurant. Likely
you can get in easily.

Congress
03-04-20

Elected Officials
03-23-20
Tate Reeves

Mississippi’s never going to be China. Mississippi’s never going
to be North Korea.

45

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics (N = 989)
Correlations with
Dependent Variables
Variable
Dependent Variable
Defiance Intentions
Key Independent Variables
General Faith in Trump
Specific Faith in Trump
Binding Foundations
Individualizing Foundations
Low Self Control
Perceived Certainty
Personal Fear
Altruistic Fear
Libertarianism
Republican
Conservativism
Control Variables
Age
Female
White
Education
Married
Income
News awareness
*p<.05, **p<.01, ***p<.001

Percent/
Mean (SD)

Range

Scale
Alpha

Factor
Loadings

Defiance Intentions

1.88 (1.13)

1-5

.957

.881 to .921

--

2.47 (1.40)
2.29 (.99)
3.17 (.83)
3.99 (.63)
2.53 (.96)
2.81 (1.79)
2.92 (.79)
3.45 (.95)
0.34 (.38)
28.6
2.69 (1.22)

1-5
1-5
1-5
1-5
1-5
1-7
1-4
1-5
0-1
0-1
1-5

.923 to .958
.633 to .872
.634 to .818
.636 to .658
.723 to .818
-.527 to .900
.781 to .853
.583 to .704
---

.574***
.519***
.446***
-.168***
.707***
.289***
.003
-.122***
.140***
.324***
.247***

38.38 (11.42)
40.6
68.8
4.47 (1.26)
45.4
4.31 (1.51)
3.56 (.59)

19-79
0-1
0-1
1-7
0-1
1-7
1-4

46

.968
.898
.794
.527
.875
-.903
.912
.739
----------

--------

-.235***
-.187
-.209***
.277***
.258***
.015
-.083**

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics on Defiance Intentions Items (N = 989)
Strongly
Disagree

Disagree

Neither
Agree nor
Disagree

Agree

Strongly
Agree

Total
Agree

1. Even if the governor of my state orders me to stay at home, I am still
going to go out if I want to.

51.0

22.2

9.5

11.2

6.1

17.2

2. Even with the coronavirus outbreak, I intend on getting together with
friends to socialize.

56.5

19.3

8.7

10.4

5.1

15.5

3. Despite the coronavirus outbreak, if I had a chance to take a fun trip (e.g.,
spring break in Florida at the beaches), I would go in a minute.

60.7

15.7

8.2

11.7

3.7

15.4

4. If I had a birthday party or wedding scheduled, I would go ahead and hold
it, despite the coronavirus outbreak.

59.9

17.1

8.0

10.2

4.9

15.1

5. I am going to live my life as I always have and am not going to try to stay
six feet away from everyone.

56.8

19.0

7.6

10.2

6.4

16.6

6. Even if I have symptoms, I am still going to go out in public (such as to a
grocery store, work, or park).

60.6

17.0

6.0

10.0

6.5

16.5

Thinking about yourself, how much do you agree or disagree with each of the
following statements?
Defiance Intentions

Note: Some percentages may not equal to 100% due to rounding.

47

Table 4. Faith In Trump Responses (N = 989)

Strongly
Disagree

Disagree

Neither
Agree nor
Disagree

Agree

Strongly
Agree

Total
Agree

42.2

12.5

14.9

18.5

11.9

30.4

40.1

14.6

10.8

18.8

15.7

34.5

45.1
39.7
41.6

17.5
13.1
13.2

12.0
13.2
11.1

15.0
22.0
19.0

10.4
11.8
15.1

25.5
33.8
34.1

55.2

15.1

12.4

9.9

7.4

17.3

54.9

15.8

11.0

11.4

6.9

18.3

30.9

17.8

17.8

18.6

14.9

33.5

7.5

13.3

11.9

23.3

44.0

67.3

35.3

21.7

15.2

18.3

9.5

27.8

43.3

15.2

14.9

15.9

10.8

26.7

11.5

10.8

12.6

24.0

41.1

65.1

36.9
8.9

15.7
12.1

17.4
17.3

17.0
29.1

13.0
32.6

30.0
61.7

7.2

10.6

11.8

24.0

46.4

70.4

General Faith in Trump
How much you agree or disagree with each of the following:
1. I believe that President Trump will make America great again.
2. President Trump is 100% correct that we need a wall to make sure that gang members,
criminals, and rapists do not come into the U.S.
3. President Trump is the only politician who really cares about the common man.
4. President Trump knows how to protect America against threats from around the world.
5. I love President Trump’s style because he is strong and tells it like it is.
Specific Faith in Trump
There is debate over how well President Donald Trump has handled the coronavirus outbreak.
How much do you agree or disagree with each of these statements?
1. It is a good idea to follow President Trump’s advice for everyone to pack churches on
Easter Sunday, which is on April 12.
2. President Trump is correct when he says that the coronavirus is mostly a hoax used by the
Democrats to prevent his reelection.
3. According to President Trump, the coronavirus was invented by the Chinese and we have
every right to call it the “China Virus.”
4. President Trump cares more about high stock prices and big corporations making money
than he does about Americans dying from the coronavirus.*
5. As President Trump says, we need to make sure that the “cure is not worse than the
disease”—that is, we need to open up the economy soon even if this means some more
people get sick and possibly die.
6. President Obama left Trump a mess, which is why there is a shortage of protective masks
and ventilators.
7. All President Trump cares about is how the coronavirus crisis will affect his reelection
chances, not the health of people now sick with the disease.*
8. President Trump will make America healthy again.
9. President Trump’s decision to disband the country’s National Security Council’s global
health office in 2019 resulted in the U.S. being unprepared for the coronavirus.*
10. If President Trump had acted quicker, fewer people would be sick or dead from the
coronavirus.*
Note: Some percentages may not equal to 100% due to rounding; *Reverse coded for analyses

48

Table 5. Regression Models for Defiance Intentions with General Faith in Trump
Model 1
Model 2
b
SE
β
b
SE
β
Key Independent Variables
Faith in Trump × Binding
---.095 .023
.093***
Foundations
General Faith in Trump
.222
.025
.275***
.190 .026
.236***
Binding Foundations
.119
.036
.087**
.171 .038
.126***
Individualizing Foundations
-.089
.041 -.049*
-.136 .042
-.075**
Low Self Control
.538
.030
.458***
.520 .030
.443***
Perceived Certainty
.079
.014
.126***
.079 .014
.124***
Personal Fear
-.209
.038 -.145***
-.205 .037
-.143***
Altruistic Fear
-.032
.031 -.027
-.042 .031
-.036
Libertarianism
-.108
.069 -.036
-.072 .069
-.024
Republican
.001
.065
.000
-.033 .065
-.013
Conservativism
-.015
.024 -.016
-.002 .024
-.002
Control Variables
Age
-.006
.002 -.064**
-.006 .002
-.061**
Female
-.137
.045 -.060**
-.133 .045
-.058**
White
-.113
.049 -.046*
-.117 .049
-.048*
Education
.106
.019
.118***
.093 .019
.104***
Married
.178
.049
.079***
.171 .048
.075***
Income
-.054
.016 -.073**
-.051 .016
-.068**
News awareness
-.116
.039 -.061**
-.117 .038
-.061**
Constant
1.918
.262
-2.111 .264
-Adjusted R Squared
.646
.652
Note: Faith in Trump and Binding foundations are both mean centered; * p<.05, **p<.01,
***p<.001

49

Table 6. Regression Models for Defiance Intentions using Specific Faith in Trump
Model 1
Model 2
b
SE
β
b
SE
β
Key Independent Variables
Faith in Trump × Binding
---.113 .032
.075**
Foundations
Specific Faith in Trump
.261 .035
.227***
.240 .035
.210***
Binding Foundations
.135 .036
.099***
.173 .038
.128***
Individualizing Foundations -.054 .042 -.030
-.097 .044
-.053*
Low Self Control
.566 .029
.483***
.553 .029
.471***
Perceived Certainty
.081 .014
.128***
.082 .014
.130***
Personal Fear
-.186 .038 -.130***
-.187 .038
-.130***
Altruistic Fear
-.03
.032 -.028
-.043 .032
-.036
Libertarianism
-.116 .070 -.039
-.090 .070
-.030
Republican
.087 .063
.035
.053 .064
.021
Conservativism
-.015 .025 -.017
-.004 .025
-.004
Control Variables
Age
-.006 .002 -.064**
-.006 .002
-.063**
Female
-.147 .046 -.064**
-.143 .046
-.062**
White
-.108 .050 -.044*
-.110 .049
-.045*
Education
.108 .019
.121***
.101 .019
.113***
Married
.184 .049
.081***
.178 .049
.078***
Income
-.052 .016 -.069**
-.050 .016
-.066**
News awareness
-.107 .039 -.056**
-.107 .039
-.056**
Constant
1.563 .262
-1.744 .266
-Adjusted R Squared
.638
.642
Note: Faith in Trump and Binding foundations are both mean centered; * p<.05, **p<.01,
***p<.001.

50

Figure 1.

Predicted Intentions to Defy Social Distancing Directives: Interaction of Faith
in Trump with Binding Moral Foundations

NOTES: Figure shows adjusted predictions with 95% confidence intervals. ‘‘Low’’ and ‘‘High’’ binding
foundations are defined as 1 standard deviation below and above the mean. General and specific faith in Trump are
both a mean indices with values ranging from 1 to 5.

51

Appendix A. Moral Foundations: Question Wording, Factor Loadings, and Reliabilities
Within-Scale
Factor Loadings

Measure
Binding Foundations
Purity/Sanctity (α = .924)
People should not do things that are disgusting, even if no one is harmed.
Some acts are wrong simply because they are disgusting.
I would call some acts wrong on the grounds that they are unnatural.
Some acts are wrong simply because they violate the standards of purity and decency.
Authority/Respect (α = .859)
Respect for authority is something all children need to learn.
When the government makes laws, those laws should always respect the
traditions and heritage of the country.
People should never curse the founders or early heroes of their country.
People should never disrespect their bosses, teachers, or professors.
Ingroup/Loyalty (α = .721)
People should always put their group’s interests above their own personal interests.
Loyalty to one’s group is more important than one’s individual concerns.
The government should strive to improve the well-being of people in our nation,
even if it sometimes happens at the expense of people in other nations.
I would never turn a family member in for committing a crime.
Individualizing Foundations
Harm/Care (α = .639)
If I saw a mother slapping her child, I would be outraged.
It can never be right to kill a human being.
Compassion for those who are suffering is the most crucial virtue.
The government must first and foremost protect all people form harm.
Fairness/Reciprocity (α = .775)
If a friend wanted to cut in with me on a long line, I would feel uncomfortable
because it wouldn’t be fair to those behind me.
Justice, fairness, and equality are the most important requirements for a society.
When the government makes laws, the number one principal should be ensuring
that everyone is treated fairly.
People should always treat others fairly and equally.
NOTE: 1Promax-rotated.

52

Between-Scale
Factor Loadings1
.717

.013

.818

.010

.634

‒.015

.140

.636

‒.108

.658

.843
.865
.854
.866
.650
.771
.823
.807
.791
.790
.434
.457

.507
.412
.664
.622

.468
.707
.773
.729

Appendix B: Survey Items
______________________________________________________________________
Variable

Measure

Low Self-Control
Thinking about yourself, how much do you agree or disagree with each of the following
statements? (Response options: Strongly disagree, Disagree, Neither Agree nor Disagree, Agree,
Strongly Agree)
1. I often act on the spur of the moment without stopping to think.
2. I often do whatever brings me pleasure here and now, even at the cost of some
distant goal.
3. I frequently try to avoid projects that I know will be difficult.
4. I try to look out for myself first, even if it means making things difficult for other
people.
5. I lose my temper pretty easily.
6. When I’m really angry, other people better stay away from me.
Personal Fear
Thinking about the coronavirus, how worried are you about each of the following? (Response
options: Not worried at all, Not too worried, Somewhat worried, Very worried)
1. Being exposed to the virus
2. Having to quarantine after exposure
3. Becoming sick from the virus
4. Becoming seriously ill from the virus
5. Having long-term health problems due to the virus
6. Dying from the virus
Altruistic Fear
How often or rarely do you WORRY about the coronavirus making the following people SICK?
(Response options: Very often, Often, Sometimes, Rarely, Very Rarely)
1. Your family members
2. Your friends
3. Elderly people you know
4. Your neighbors
5. Doctors and nurses
6. People across America
7. People in other countries
Libertarianism
Which of these statements comes CLOSEST to your view?
A) The main reason government has become bigger over the years is because it has
gotten involved in things that people should do for themselves.
B) Government has become bigger because the problems we face have become
bigger.
53

Which of these statements comes CLOSEST to your view?
A) We need the government to handle today’s complex economic problems.
B) The free market can handle these problems without government being involved.
Which of these statements comes CLOSEST to your view?
A) There are more things that the government should be doing.
B) The less government, the better.

54

