Work and Families in Times of Crisis: The Case of Israel in the Coronavirus
Outbreak
Coronavirus and inequality brief No. 202005_02
Efrat Herzberg-Druker, Tali Kristal, and Meir Yaish
University of Haifa
Introduction
The cumulating evidence on the consequences of the economic crisis following the
coronavirus pandemic indicates that this crisis hits the hardest the most vulnerable in
society (Bol, 2020; Bernardi, 2020; Recchi et al., 2020; Kristal & Yaish, 2020). It
follows that inequality between families of different structures and with different
socioeconomic characteristics will increase as a result of this crisis. Just as important,
since this crisis hit women disproportionally (Kristal &Yaish, 2020), it is likely to
also affect inequality within the family. The shutdown of the economy, coupled with
the closure of the educational system and restrictions on movements outside the
home, resulted in increasing demand for unpaid work (care and housework) at home.
This new situation may have also contributed to affecting the gender division of
unpaid work within families. The following questions, thus, lie at the heart of this
report:
1. To what extent does the coronavirus pandemic and the economic crisis
following it affect inequality between families?
2. To what extent did the coronavirus pandemic and the economic crisis
following it affect inequality within the family? Particularly:
a. Has the prevailing gender inequality in the division of unpaid labor
decreased as fathers invest more time in housework and care due to the
rise in demand for unpaid work and the fall in paid labor outside the
household? Or,
b. Has the increase in demand for housework and care satisfied mainly by
mothers, increased the level of inequality in unpaid labor due to the
outbreak of coronavirus pandemic?
The Israeli Case
Families in Israel are strongly attached to the labor markets, regardless of the presence
of young children, and have increased their participation and hours invested in paid
employment in recent decades (Herzberg-Druker & Stier, 2019; Stier & Herzberg,
1

2013). Consequently, a large share of Israeli families are fulltime dual-earner families
(about 39% of all couple-headed households in 2008). Despite this, unpaid labor at
home is still gendered, and a large share of housework and care is under women's
responsibilities (Mandel & Birgier, 2016). This is all true in normal times. But, is it
still the case in the troubled times that follow the outbreak of the coronavirus
pandemic?
Israel reacted quickly to the spread of the virus and by the middle of March, closed its
educational system following the closure of many workplaces. At the same time,
many employees moved to remote employment from home (about 40% in our data).
Recent research in Israel shows that about 35% of those employed in the first week of
March were not employed by the end of April, most of them (30%) sent to unpaid
leave (Kristal & Yaish 2020). As most members of the family were forced to spend a
large part of their time together at home, the dynamics and behavior of the family has
had to change and adapt in many ways. This brief offers a first examination into these
new dynamics.

Empirical Strategy
Data for this study are based on the first wave of a longitudinal survey of 2,040 adult
Israeli men and women (age 18+), Jews and Arabs, who were employed or selfemployed in the first week of March, prior to the lockdown of the economy.1 The first
wave includes information on employment and job characteristics of Israeli
households in the first week of March (before the economic downturn) and in the last
week of April (after the economy was shut down, but before it was reopened). The
current analysis focuses on couples with children under 18 in this first wave. In this
brief, then, we analyze data on 940 Israeli couples with children under 18 who reside
in the same household.

1

For more information on the data see (Kristal & Yaish, 2020)

2

Inequality between Families
To what extent have families changed their employment status due to the coronavirus
outbreak?
Figure 1 shows how the economic shutdown due to the spread of coronavirus in Israel
has affected the employment status of Israeli families. We identify, on the x-axis, five
family types based on the employment status of the heads of households in March,
prior to the spread of the coronavirus in Israel: i) dual earners; ii) men single earners;
iii) women single earners; iv) men single households, and v) women single
households. The bars in these graphs indicate, for each family type, the relative share
of each employment status in April, at the peak of the coronavirus crisis in Israel.2
Thus, for example, only 58% of dual-earner families in the first week of March
remained dual-earner families by the peak of the crisis in April. Some 33% of these
families, moreover, lost one earner (21% become men-single earner families and 12%
became women-single earner families), and in 9% of the cases, both spouses lost their
employment (whether they were forced to take an unpaid leave or were laid off).
Among men single-earner families at the beginning of March, 29% lost their only
earner by the end of April. Women single-earner families were affected by the crisis
even more severely. In these families, 38% of the earners lost their employment and
subsequently their only source of income. Similarly, amid households with only a
single parent, 29% of the men and 40% of the women lost their jobs by April. Within
the Israeli family, then, women seemingly had to absorb the larger share of the shock
caused by the coronavirus pandemic. These findings add another perspective on the
precarious position of women relative to men in Israel’s economy (see, Kristal &
Yaish, 2020).
Interestingly, the economic hardship following the coronavirus crisis pushed some
12% of the women in what used to be men-single earner families in March into the
paid economy by April. The equivalent proportion for men is lower than half of this
figure, estimated in our data to be as low as 5%. This indicates that in times of crisis,
when the only earners in an Israeli family lost employment, more Israeli women than
men took responsibilities also for the families’ economic wellbeing.

2

This typology of employment status is based on how many earners contribute to the family income
from employment (for the employees) and business (for the self-employed).

3

Figure 1: Changes in family employment status due to the coronavirus crisis in Israel.
Couple and single-headed households with children under 18 (N=940)
Both employed in April

Men employed in April

Women employed in April

Not employed in April

9%

12%

29%

21%

2%

38%

59%
56%

58%

10%

Dual earner in March

29%
40%

71%
60%

5%

Men Single earner in Women single earner in Men single household
March
March
in March

Women single
household in March

Was this change in the family employment status similar across the entire income
distribution? If families, particularly dual-earner families, at the lower end of the
income distribution lost more earners in March than those at the upper end of the
income distribution, we should expect an increase in income inequality between
families.
To examine this, we record in Figure 2 changes in employment status of dual-earner
families in March due to the coronavirus crisis, by incomes quintiles. It shows that the
impact of the crisis was more severe at the lower end of the income distribution.
While in the lowest income quintile only 41% of dual-earner couples in March
maintained their employment status by April, in the highest income quintile about
76% of the families maintained their dual-earner status. Moreover, 21% of the dualearner families in March within the lowest income quintile lost their jobs or
businesses completely by April. This figure is then matched by only 2% of the dualearner families in March at the highest income quintile that lost their sources of
income by April. Families that had lower incomes before the crisis were affected the
most, suggesting that income inequality between families has increased due to the
coronavirus crisis. Importantly, Figure 2 also indicates that this increase in income
inequality is driven by the deterioration in the economic conditions of families in the

4

bottom of the earnings distribution in March—suggesting that the weak families are in
danger of becoming even weaker.
Figure 2: Changes in family employment status in April by family income quintiles in
March, dual-earner (in March) couples with children under 18 (N=940)
Dual-earner in April

Single-earner - men in April
9%

21%

12%

single-earner - women in April

6%
13%

9%
26%

No earner in April

5%
10%

2%
11%

14%

11%

72%

76%

4

5th quintile of family
income in March

25%

29%

52%

56%

2

3

41%

1st quintile of famile
income in March

Dual-earner families throughout the crisis: changes in income and employment
pattern due to coronavirus crisis
The impact of the crisis was not only manifested in layoffs and business terminations
but also in changes in working hours. To examine this, we focus next on the dual
earners in March who remained dual-earners also in April. Figure 3 reveals that
among these selected families, there was an increase of 110% in the share of families
where both spouses work part time (less than 35 hours per week), coupled with a
decrease of 45% in the share of families with two fulltime earners. Finally, the
relative share of women working full time when their spouse work only part time has
increased dramatically (by 47%) due to the coronavirus crisis. The equivalent figure
for men has barely changed in the same period (-2%). These interesting results
suggest, again, that women took more economic responsibilities within the family due
to the coronavirus crisis.

5

Figure 3: Changes in patterns of employment between March and April among dual
earner-households with children under 18 who stayed dual earners during the
coronavirus crisis (N=395)
110%

49%

-4%

-45%
Both spouses work parttime

Men work full-time;
women work part-time

Women work full-time;
men work part-time

Both spouses work fulltime

Finally, when we examine how the relative income of the two spouses has changed
due to the coronavirus crisis, our data show that families in which the men earn more
than the women is still the dominant pattern among dual-earner couples in Israel.
Nevertheless, we also find an increase of about 6% in families in which women earn
more than men.
In sum, patterns of employment and income within dual-earner couples with children
have changed as a result of the coronavirus crisis. Whether or not these changes also
impinge on the inequalities within families in the division of housework and care—
particularly as the demand for these have increased—is the focus of the next section.

Inequality within Families (dual earners throughout only)
The tradeoff between family and work is a topic fueling public and academic debates.
The consensus in this field is that although women have increased their employment
and labor market outcomes, their share of housework and care is still substantially
higher than men's (Perry‐Jenkins & Gerstel, 2020). Also Israeli women in dual-earner
families spend almost twice as much time as men to housework alone (Mandel &
Birgier, 2016). Henceforth, in the second part of this report we study the
consequences of the coronavirus pandemic for inequality within families in Israel
after the shutdown of the schools and the economy.
6

To what extent do families invest more time on housework and care due to the
coronavirus crisis?
Alongside the substantial loss of employment and consequently of income among
families, demand for unpaid work at home has increased due to school closures and
the increase in hours that all the family members spend inside their homes. Dualearner families with children are of great interest in this unique situation, because both
spouses stayed employed while demand for unpaid work at home has increased. In the
light of these changes, and also changes in the employment patterns within these
families discussed earlier, this part of the brief examines the extent to which the
gender division of unpaid work has changed in these families.
We begin by examining the level of the gender inequality in unpaid work before and
after the coronavirus crisis. Figure 4 shows, unsurprisingly, that women take the
lion’s share of housework (including cleaning, cooking, laundry and grocery
shopping) and care (only for children), before and after the coronavirus outbreak and
regardless of having young children. Thus, for example, women’s share in unpaid
work ranges from 58% in housework to 64% in child care, with no statistically
significant differences between March and April. In term of weekly hours, in March
women, on average, spent 16.6 hours on housework and 29.0 on child care. In April,
on average, the numbers are 18.7 and 34.1.
Figure 4: Share of women's unpaid labor in March and April, dual-earner households
with children under 18 (N=395)

63%

63%

63%

64%

60%
60%
59%

58%

Housework

Care

Housework

All

Care
Kids under 6

March

April

7

Figure 5 presents changes in number of hours devoted to housework and care among
dual-earner couples as a result of the coronavirus outbreak. As expected, the number
of hours the couple invested in housework has increased by about two hours due to
the coronavirus crisis. More significant, however, is the sharp increase in number of
hours devoted to care: additional 9 hours per week overall, and 13 hours per week for
families with young children.
Figure 5: Changes in number of unpaid work hours (housework and care) between
March and April by gender among dual earner households with children
(Nall=395; Nunder6=281).

Men

Women

7.7

5.2

3.8

2.1
-0.3
Housework

Care
All

5.0
2.4
Housework

Care

Children under 6

Supporting the thesis that the level of inequality in unpaid labor has increased due to
the coronavirus crisis, is the increase in hours not equally shared by both spouses—
even though both men and women remained employed in April. Thus, for example,
women have increased their housework by about two hours per week, while men have
decreased their housework load slightly. That is, not only that men did not increase
their participation in housework, but they decreased it. These differences in the
number of weekly housework hours are not surprising since the housework activities
in which men usually participate are housework activities that are related to activities
outside the home, such as grocery shopping—which increased only slightly compared
to “women’s” housework activities, such as cleaning and cooking.
Moving to care work, we see in Figure 5 an increase of about 9 hours per week, with
men’s increased hours by 3.8 and women’s by 5.2 hours. That is, women carry again
the lion’s share of the demand for care work due to the coronavirus crisis. Although
8

men have increased their care responsibilities, the gender division in unpaid work has
not become more egalitarian due to the coronavirus crisis. Moreover, it seems that the
increase in the care responsibilities by men was offset by a decrease in housework.
Finally, as the right panel in Figure 5 reveals, the change in weekly unpaid work
hours among dual-earner families with young children (6 and under) is largely similar
to the overall, but at a somewhat higher level. Thus, the total hours of care work have
increased by 12.7 hours (compared to 9 for all), but the women’s share in this increase
remained at about 60% for all and for families with young children (7.7/12.7=0.61;
5.2/9=0.58).

To what extent are employment and income characteristics of couples associated with
different levels of unpaid labor?
We next examine the extent to which the relative income of couples is related to the
different division of housework and care. Figure 6 presents changes in hours of
housework and care due to the coronavirus outbreak, this time by different
configurations of the spouses' relative income.
Figure 6: Changes in number of unpaid work hours (housework and care) between
March and April by gender and couples' relative income (N=395)
Men

Women
2.6

4.2

5.8
3.9

6.4

5.2

3.1

0.4

0.2
-2.4

-3.9
-2.4

Housework

Care

Men earned more in April (61% of
dual earner couples)

Housework

Care

Housework

Care

Spouses earned the same in April Women earned more in April (23%)
(15%)

First, we can see that the demand for unpaid care work has increased across all
configurations of spouses’ relative income. Second, demand for housework has
increased too, but only in families were women earn less than men. In these families,
women have increased their housework by about 3.9 hours—equivalent to about 91%
9

of the increase in housework (3.9/4.3=91%)—and care work by about 5.8 hours,
which equals about 65% of the increase in care work (5.8/8.9=65%).
Nonetheless, our findings leave also some room for optimism. This is mainly because
we see that among families in which men and women earn about the same, men took
a greater share of the burden of care work (6.4/9=71%). A similar pattern is found
among families in which women earn more than men, where we see that men took on
more than half of the increase in care work (5.2/9.4=55%).
As working hours of spouses within the family have changed due to the outbreak of
coronavirus (Figure 3), the next analysis examines whether this change has also
consequences for the division of unpaid work in the family. Figure 7 shows that most
of the demand for unpaid work was for caring. In this regard, we can see that in
families in which men worked full time and women worked part time only women
have increased their load. This family type, however, is the most dominant one,
accounting for about 34% of all dual-earner families, and thus the overall contribution
of men to the demand for care is less encouraging. In this family type, moreover, only
women offset the growing demand for care work and increased their load by 10.31
weekly hours. Men in these families did not increase their load—and even somewhat
decreased it (-0.11 hours).
Figure 7: Changes in number of unpaid work hours (housework and care) between
March and April by gender and couples' employment patterns (N=395)
Men
5.0

2.7

7.6

8.3

1.4
0.9

Housework

-1.2
-1.9
Care

Housework

Care

Women

10.3
0.3
3.2

6.7

-1.2

-0.1

0.2
-1.1

Housework

Care

Housework

Care

Both spouses work partMen work part-time;
Men work full-time;
Both spouses work fulltime in April (26% dual women work full-time in women work part-time in
time in April (29%)
earner couples)
April (11%)
April (34%)

In all other family types men have increased their weekly care work more than their
wives. Among families in which both spouses worked part time in April (26% of
10

dual-earner families) men have increased their weekly care work by 7.6 hours
compared to only 5 hours increased by women. A similar pattern characterizes
families in which men work part time and women work fulltime (11% of dual-earner
couples). Accordingly, men in these families have increased their weekly care hours
by 8.25 compared to only 2.73 hours by women. As these findings are encouraging
and a move towards increasing equality in the gender division of unpaid work within
the family, it is important to keep in mind that more than a third of all dual-earner
families in March and in April are families in which men worked fulltime and women
worked part time.

Conclusions
This report focuses on two aspects of inequality and families. We began by asking
about inequality between families mostly based on employment status and found that
due to the coronavirus outbreak, a substantial share of Israeli families has lost their
employment. The short term effect of the crisis affected the bottom of the income
distribution more severely than families in the upper end of the curve, as more
families that earn less to begin with (such as dual-earner families in the lowest
quintile and women single headed households), have lost some or all of their
employment, that is their incomes. Although income inequality was not measured
directly in this report, our findings suggest that it has increased due to the changes in
employment status of families.
Following the between families' inequality, our second question was about inequality
within families. We asked what happened to gender division of unpaid work among
dual-earner couples due to the coronavirus crisis. On the one hand, our findings
suggest some room for optimism since men have increased their number of care hours
(but not housework hours) in times of need as was found in two other preliminary
researches in Canada and the US (Carlson et al., 2020; Shafer et al., 2020). On the
other hand, our findings also highlight that gender division of housework is still
substantial. On average, men do not change their behavior in this aspect although
housework needs have increased. We found that when taking into account relative
incomes of spouses as well as employment patterns of couples in April, there is also
some room for optimism regarding the care responsibilities of some couples - the non11

traditional couples in terms of relative income and couples in which both spouses
work part time and couples in which men work part time and women work full time.
However, though the share of traditional couples (62% and 61% in March and April
respectively) is the common type and the share of couples in which men work full
time and women work part time increased (23% in March and 34% in April), in most
families the gender division of unpaid work is still substantial and unequal. It is
important to highlight here that we cannot examine the extent to which the decrease in
women's number of work hours is due to employers' decisions to reduce economic
activities in their work places, or if the change in their work hours was a reaction to
the growing demand for unpaid care work at home due to the closure of the
educational system.
As these words are written, Israel has managed not only to 'flatten the pandemic
curve' but to also ease most of the restrictions on the economy and schools. Therefore,
as the second wave of data collection is planned to take place in the next couple of
months we will be able to examine the extent to which changes in the behavior of men
that we have identified above are the beginning of an equalization process in the
gender division of unpaid work or whether they have only 'stepped in' temporarily to
meet the growing demand.

12

References
Bernardi, F. (2020). Pandemics...the great leveler? EUIdeas, Evidence-driven
contributions on social, political, legal, and economic issues.
https://euideas.eui.eu/2020/04/28/pandemics-the-great-leveler/.
Bol, T. (2020). Inequality in homeschooling during the Corona crisis in the
Netherlands. First results from the LISS Panel.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/hf32q
Carlson, D. L., Petts, R., & Pepin, J. R. (2020). US Couples’ Divisions of Housework
and Childcare during COVID-19 Pandemic [Preprint]. SocArXiv.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/jy8fn
Herzberg-Druker, E., & Stier, H. (2019). Family matters: The contribution of
households’ educational and employment composition to income inequality.
Social Science Research, 82, 221–239.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssresearch.2019.04.012
Kristal, T., & Yaish, M. (2020). Does the coronavirus pandemic level gender
inequality curve? (It doesn’t). Research in Social Stratification and Mobility,
100520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2020.100520
Mandel, H., & Birgier, D. P. (2016). The Gender Revolution in Israel: Progress and
Stagnation. In N. Khattab, S. Miaari, & H. Stier (Eds.), Socioeconomic
Inequality in Israel (pp. 153–184). Palgrave Macmillan US.
https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137544810_8
Perry‐Jenkins, M., & Gerstel, N. (2020). Work and Family in the Second Decade of
the 21st Century. Journal of Marriage and Family, 82(1), 420–453.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12636
Recchi, E., Ferragina, E., Helmeid, E., Pauly, S., Safi, M., Sauger, N., & Schradie. J.
(2020). The “Eye of the Hurricane” Paradox: An Unexpected and Unequal
Rise of Well-Being During the Covid-19 Lockdown in France. Research in
Social Stratification and Mobility, 100508.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2020.100508.
Shafer, K., Milkie, M., & Scheibling, C. (2020). The Division of Labour Before
&amp; During the COVID-19 Pandemic in Canada [Preprint]. SocArXiv.
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/24j87
Stier, H., & Herzberg, E. (2013). Women in the labor force: The impact of education
on employment patterns and wages. In State of the Nation Report – Society,
Economy and Policy 2013, Taub Center for Social Policy Studies in Israel
(2013) (p. 33).

13

