China Experience in Controlling COVID‐19
Shiliang SONG
Affiliations: Chief physician and professor, Department of Internal Medicine, Taicang
Hospital affiliated to Suzhou University, Suzhou, China
Correspondence: zll5404@suda.edu.cn
Word count: 2789. Character count 18314
Abstract: At present, the epidemic situation of COVID‐19 is raging rampantly in the
whole world, affecting the hearts of billions of people. In less than half a year, COVID‐
19 swept the world, seriously threatening the safety of all mankind. At the beginning,
the epidemic was most serious in China. Under the strong command of the highest
level of the Chinese government, the whole Chinese people United as one, and
achieved initial results in the struggle against covid‐19 with scientific prevention and
control. Summarizing China's experience and lessons in combating the epidemic is
undoubtedly very beneficial to the people of the world in jointly combating the impact
of the COVID‐19 epidemic. The most important experience is: strong organizational
leadership, enhanced cooperation with the WHO, the establishment of a national anti‐
epidemic headquarters, responsible for the command and control of human, financial
and material resources throughout the country, and local officials at all levels in the
front line of the epidemic. Heart to heart with the people, breathe together and share
a common destiny. Prevention is the first, prevention and treatment are combined.
The treatment emphasizes the combination of Chinese and Western medicine. The
“Four Anti and Two Balances” advocated by Academician Li Lanjuan’s team, and the
“Three Drugs and Three Formulas” recommended by Chinese medicine experts of the
National and Health Commission, played a key role in improving the success rate of
treatment. Establish fever clinics and establish square cabin hospital to eliminate
infections in hospitals, emphasizing the protection of medical staff and avoiding cross‐
infection. Control the source of infection, try to achieve "four early", early detection,
early isolation, early diagnosis and early treatment. "Four concentration", focus on
patients, experts, resources and treatment. Take all measures to cut off the spread.
Take all measures to protect susceptible people. Wearing masks, washing hands
frequently, hot bathing, individual serving, home office, going out to maintain a social
distance of more than one meter, eating nutritious foods rich in protein and vitamins,
strengthening physical exercise and improving physical fitness are all effective ways to
prevent COVID‐19.
Keywords: COVID‐19; COVID‐19 prevention; COVID‐19 treatment; Experience and
lessons learned; prevention ; treatment ; China; Mobile square cabin hospital; mask;
prevention of medical staff infection; Traditional Chinese medicine.
Background and purpose
At the beginning of the year, the COVID‐19 epidemic that raged all over the world
affected the hearts of hundreds of millions of people. Up to 8 May 2020 (the same as
below, update the latest data when the last revision), the total number of confirmed
patients in the world was 400 9911, of which 275934 died, [1] with a mortality rate of

6.88 % (this value is dynamic). 215 countries and regions were affected. [1] In the past
month, the world has seen an average of about one 80000 of new infections per day
and about 5,800 deaths per day and continued. [1] A total of 82886 patients were
diagnosed and 4633 patients died in China,[1] with a mortality rate of 5.59%. At the
beginning, the epidemic was most serious in China. Under the strong command of the
highest level of the Chinese government, the whole Chinese people United as one, and
achieved initial results in the struggle against covid‐19 with scientific prevention and
control. The number of new cases in China has been controlled below 10 per day.[2]
Summarizing China's experience and lessons in combating the epidemic is
undoubtedly very beneficial to the people of the world in jointly combating the impact
of the COVID‐19 epidemic.
Experience and lessons learned
Organization and leadership: the state establishes an anti‐epidemic headquarters, [2]
which is responsible for the general command and dispatch of human, financial and
material resources throughout the country, and holds regular press conferences to
keep the people of the whole country informed of the true situation of the epidemic.
Local officials at all levels went deep into the front line of the epidemic, connected
with the people's hearts, breathed with them and shared their destiny. The Ministry
of Health of the People's Republic of China established a think tank of senior experts
to be responsible for the revision of disease diagnosis and treatment plans and to
update them in practice in a timely manner. "COVID‐19 Diagnosis and Treatment
Program (Trial)" has been updated from the first edition to the seventh edition. [3] The
diagnosis and treatment plan includes the etiology and epidemiological characteristics
of COVID‐19, pathological changes and clinical characteristics, diagnosis and
differential diagnosis, clinical classification and early warning of critical illness,
treatment principles and discharge standards, infection prevention and control in
medical institutions, etc. [3] It gives a detailed description in each aspect, and points
out the direction for the diagnosis and treatment of medical workers across the
country. It mobilized the nation's human, material, financial and medical resources to
support the most severe epidemic in Wuhan, Hubei Province, and concentrated its
superior forces to fight the epidemic.
Controlling the source of infection: The source of infection seen so far is mainly
COVID‐19 patients. [3] People with asymptomatic infection may also become a source
of infection. [3]"Four early", early detection, early isolation, early diagnosis and early
treatment. [4] "Four concentration", focus on patients, experts, resources and
treatment.[4] Suspected cases were isolated and treated separately, with early
detection of SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleic acid, and excluded homes were isolated for 14 days.
After diagnosis, he was transferred to square cabin hospital for mildly and severely
transferred to ICU. Square Cabin Hospital: Use stadiums, conference centers,
convention centers and other large venues to transform into a temporary hospital that
can accommodate hundreds of patients. [2] The patients are admitted to mild patients
who have been diagnosed as COVID‐19 by nucleic acid detection. Its advantages are
that it can be transformed in a short time of 2 to 3 days, it has a large capacity to accept
patients, and there are medical staff for diagnosis and treatment and nursing and

health education, while at home isolation, patients do not receive medical and nursing
services, and are easily infected For family members and easy to cause community
proliferation. On February 28, 2020, Ma Xiaowei, director of the National Health and
Health Commission, said that Wuhan has built 16 square cabin hospitals, with more
than 13,000 beds actually opened, accumulating more than 12,000 patients. 1/4
patient was treated in the shelter hospital. The square cabin hospital has achieved zero
infections, zero deaths, and zero turning points, and is truly a "cabin of life". [2] Establish
a fever clinic. Establish fever clinics in counties and districts. Suspected patients were
given SARS‐CoV‐2 nucleic acid test. It was found that the patient was sent to a
designated hospital for isolation treatment. Watch out for infections by medical staff.
In the early stage of the disease, due to lack of knowledge about the disease, a large
number of patients flowed into the hospital to cause medical runs, coupled with the
shortage of protective materials, extreme fatigue of medical staff, psychological
tension and other reasons, local medical staff in Hubei Province (mainly Wuhan City)
infected COVID ‐19 more than 3000 people. [2, 5] However, since then, more than
42,000 national medical team members supporting Hubei Province (mainly Wuhan
City) have taken measures such as strict personal protection, national medical supplies
support, the combination of work and rest of medical staff, a balanced diet, adequate
sleep, and intervention by psychologists. The implementation of the method has
achieved zero infection, [2，5] P <0.001, and the two are significantly different. Facts have
proved that as long as strict isolation and disinfection are carried out and attention is
paid to protection, SARS‐COV‐2 can be prevented, and even close contact with medical
staff can prevent cross‐infection. All measures must be taken to control the initial areas
of covid‐19, such as searching for close contact, testing for SARS‐COV‐2, quarantine
treatment for positive cases, close medical observation for 14 days for negative cases
and second nucleic acid test the next day before the negative cases were released from
medical observation. And the patients have been to the relevant places, such as
airports, wharfs, shopping malls, hotels, residential areas and families and other places,
strict disinfection. Put out the spark, not let it prairie fire, we must nip the epidemic in
the bud! The treatment emphasizes the combination of Chinese and Western
medicine. The “Four Anti and Two Balances” advocated by Academician Li Lanjuan ’s
team, and the “Three Drugs and Three Formulas” recommended by Chinese medicine
experts of the National and Health Commission, played a key role in improving the
success rate of treatment. Four Anti: anti‐virus, anti‐shock, anti‐hypoxemia and
multiple organ dysfunction, anti‐secondary infection. Two Balance: maintain the acid‐
base balance of water electrolytes and maintain the micro‐ecological balance. Three
kinds of medicine: Jinhua Qinggan Granules, Lotus Qingwen Capsules, Xuebijing
Injection. Three prescriptions: Qingfei Paidu Decoction, Huashi Baidu Recipe, Xuanfei
Baidu Recipe. [3]
Cut off the transmission route：COVID‐19 through the respiratory tract droplets close
contact transmission is the main transmission route. Since SARS‐CoV‐2 can be isolated
in feces and urine, it should be noted that feces and urine cause aerosol or contact
transmission of environmental pollution. [3] COVID‐19 outbreak occurred during the
Chinese New Year, and the flow of people was huge. Due to the timely closure of the

city of Wuhan in Hubei Province, the outbreak of the outbreak was effectively blocked,
which won time for prevention and control at home and abroad. According to different
epidemic situations in different regions, a hierarchical control strategy is adopted. In
high‐risk areas with severe epidemics, the strategy of "internal non‐proliferation,
external prevention, and strict control" is implemented. [4] In the medium‐risk areas,
implement the strategy of "importing external defense, preventing internal
proliferation". Implement the strategy of "foreign defense import" in low‐risk areas. [4]
The city takes community as the unit, and the township takes the villager group as the
unit for isolation, closed management, personnel and vehicle entry and exit gate
registration, and personnel temperature measurement. If you have fever and other
discomforts, go to Fever Clinic for medical treatment Drive publicity vehicles, shuttle
through the streets and alleys, and repeatedly broadcast the prevention and treatment
of COVID‐19 and the medical treatment process, so that they are well known. Stop the
rally tour, delay the school start, stop the large banquet, stop the large‐scale cultural
sports and religious activities Close public places such as museums and large
convention centers. Community and village committees, neighborhood committees,
police, and community doctors carry out joint prevention and control.
Protection of susceptible groups: men, women and children, regardless of national
skin color ， the elderly and patients with underlying diseases are particularly
susceptible to infection and have a high mortality rate after infection, and protection
should be strengthened. Wear masks. During the COVID‐19 epidemic, people across
the country need to wear masks in public places, even in the vast rural areas on the
edge, even if there are COVID‐19 patients or asymptomatic carriers in the crowd. With
the double mask protection between people, the probability of mutual infection will
be greatly reduced. Everyone wears a mask, the prevention and treatment efficiency
is the highest, and the cost is the lowest. Countries in the world must pay great
attention to this. Another benefit of wearing a mask is that it avoids the bad habit of
scratching the mouth and nose. Masks are based on N95 or surgical masks, but
ordinary masks can also achieve effective protection, provided that all people wear
masks. The poorer regional governments organize the supply of masks and distribute
them to every household. Wash hands frequently, especially after contact with
suspicious patients. You must wash your hands before and after meals, and rinse them
with running water repeatedly. Reduce and eventually eliminate bad habits. Washing
hands frequently, hot bathing, individual serving, home office, going out to maintain a
social distance of more than one meter, eating nutritious foods rich in protein and
vitamins, don't eat wild animals, strengthening physical exercise and improving
physical fitness are all effective ways to prevent COVID‐19.
Discussion and summary
China's successful experience in controlling COVID‐19 is mainly based on the idea of a
chess game in the nationwide, strong organizational leadership, and close cooperation
with WHO. The country has established an anti‐epidemic command headquarters,
which is responsible for the overall command and dispatch of the country's human,
financial and material resources. Local officials at all levels have penetrated the
frontline of the epidemic and connected with the people, breathing together and

sharing destiny. Carry out prevention first and combine prevention with treatment.
The treatment emphasizes the combination of Chinese and Western medicine. The
“Four Anti and Two Balances” advocated by Academician Li Lanjuan ’s team, and the
“Three Drugs and Three Formulas” recommended by Chinese medicine experts of the
National and Health Commission, played a key role in improving the success rate of
treatment. Take all measures to cut off the spread. Take all measures to protect
susceptible people. Special emphasis is placed on three points: First, all measures must
be taken to control COVID‐19 initiating areas, follow close contacts, conduct SARS‐CoV‐
2 testing, positive patients should be isolated and treated, and negative patients must
be closely observed for 14 days Strictly disinfect the relevant places visited by patients,
such as airports, docks, shopping malls, hotels, residential quarters and families.
Extinguishing the fire of the stars will not let it catch fire, and the epidemic must be
wiped out in a budding state! This is of great significance to the prevention and control
of the epidemic situation in the country where COVID‐19 was first released and the
region where it was first released in the same country. Second, wearing a mask is
simple and convenient, and its prevention and treatment effectiveness is the first,
especially medical personnel should be strictly in place. In Europe and the United
States, the incidence rate is high, and the reluctance to wear a mask is the main reason.
The painful lessons must be remembered and corrected. In the European and
American countries, why the incidence rate is low, in addition to being taught by
relatives and friends in the mainland, getting used to wearing mouth is the primary
reason. Everyone wears a mask, the prevention and treatment efficiency is the highest,
and the cost is the lowest. Countries in the world must pay great attention to this.
Third, strengthen the protection of medical personnel. Medical personnel are the main
force in the fight against COVID‐19 and the main cause of cross‐infection in hospitals,
so they must be strictly protected and protected. It is necessary to provide qualified
and sufficient protective materials, abide by strict disinfection and isolation
regulations, ensure adequate rest time, maintain good physical and mental health, and
create an atmosphere of respecting doctors and doctors.
As long as people all over the world unite as one, scientific decision‐making,
prevention is the first, prevention and treatment are combined, and we will continue
to draw on and learn from the successful experience of all countries in the world,
combine our national conditions, and use the wisdom of all mankind to deal with the
common enemy SARS‐CoV‐2 and COVID‐ 19. We can definitely win this people's war
against the epidemic. Dr. Tedros Director‐General of WHO：”National unity and world
unity. We are all united and will be able to defeat COVID‐19”. [6]
Acknowledgemen
I thank Professor Xiaojian Yao , an international virologist, Professor Jin Jian, a member
of China's COVID‐19 Expert Group and Zhao Chao, chief physician, put forward some
good suggestions for this article. Dr. Xu Ning contributed to the writing of this article,
and my wife Huang fenglan, deputy director of the nurse to do a good job logistics
support work. I want to thank all the experts who fought against COVID‐19 and the
Chinese doctors and nurses, your hard work has successfully prevented the popularity

of COVID‐19 in China.

References
[1] World meter. https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/#countries
[2] The official website of National Health Commission of the People's Republic of
China， www.nhc.gov.cn.

[3] The General Office of the National Health Council of China and the Office of the
Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine. Diagnosis and treatment of COVID 19
(trial version 7), March 3, 2020, www.chinanews.com
[4] The General Office of the National Health Council of China COVID‐19 programme
for provention and control. (trial version 6) www.nhc.gov.cn.
[5]The Novel Coronavirus Pneumonia Emergency Response Epidemiology Team. The
Epidemiological Characteristics of an Outbreak of 2019 Novel Coronavirus Diseases
(COVID‐19) in China, 2020[J]. China CDC Weekly, 2020, 2(8): 113‐122.
doi: 10.46234/ccdcw2020.032
[6]Speech by the Director‐General of WHO at the media briefing of the 2019
Coronavirus Disease (COVID‐19) outbreak on May 6, 2020，www.who.int

