Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.

There’s an app for that: technological solutionism as COVID-19 policy in
the Global North
Linnet Taylor
TILT, Tilburg University

Human Challenges, Technological Responses
The COVID-19 pandemic took high-income countries entirely by surprise. Despite funding pandemic
preparedness programs in Asia for more than 20 years, donor countries had not experienced an
uncontrolled pandemic since HIV in the 1980s. When Ebola, Zika, SARS, and MERS threatened, countries
outside the immediate geographic neighborhood or income level of those diseases’ places of origin were
left largely untouched. This led many northern countries not to take seriously the emergence of the
novel coronavirus in 2019 as the existential threat it turned out to be. In contrast to the swift,
comprehensive response of South-East Asian countries, authorities in Europe and the US assumed this
coronavirus would behave like its predecessors SARS and MERS, which made their hosts seriously ill and
sent them home, reducing their ability to infect others. Instead, the new virus presented itself with a
very different epidemiology, hiding mostly unseen amongst the young and active while they infected
those around them and ravaging the elderly and sick wherever it spread.
What happened next around the world was both harrowing and illuminating. Lacking protective material
resources, human capacity for contact tracing, or understanding of the disease, policymakers in higherincome countries turned to technology for a miracle. The technology sector responded with history’s
most extensive hackathon, illuminating the mutual shaping of technology and public health policy. The
most striking feature of the technological response to the pandemic has been the degree of solutionism
(Morozov, 2013) driving it—the belief that complex problems can be solved by technological
intervention alone.

The Solutionist Approach to the Pandemic
The driving example of solutionism during the first wave of the pandemic was the claim by a group of
public health information specialists (Ferretti et al., 2020) that contact-tracing apps were the only way to
stop the disease once it had spread out of control. The idea that an app could solve the pandemic was
too attractive to ignore, and the policy take-up in higher-income countries was immediate and universal.
Existing tracking technologies were repurposed for pandemic response as vendors took the opportunity
of the newly created market to increase the visibility of their products. However, the apps developed
soon demonstrated fundamental problems: they were vulnerable to false positives, where people would
potentially receive many messages per day from their phone telling them to isolate based on contacts
that may not, in fact, have been likely to infect them. Conversely, the apps would also miss many

Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.
occasions when brief contact did in fact have a high likelihood of resulting in infection—they would be
more likely to flag a ten-minute conversation with a coronavirus sufferer where both parties were
wearing masks than an event where someone was directly sneezed on in a queue or a supermarket
aisle.
These problems are compounded by the inaccuracy of coronavirus tests, which fail to detect infection
between 20 and 60% of the time depending on the point at which the person is tested (Kucirka et al.,
2020). They are further exacerbated by the frequency of asymptomatic infection, where in up to 80% of
cases individuals themselves remain unaware they are infectious (Day, 2020). In addition to the problem
of inaccurate information, apps were not imagined as support to human contact tracers, who were
instead excluded from the picture almost entirely. Despite evidence from Asian countries that people
would only self-isolate based on governmental requests to do so, conveyed by human contact tracers
(Bloomberg, 2020), most high-income countries decided not to invest in training human contact tracers
during the first months of 2020. In the Netherlands, the main infectious disease liaison for the public
health authorities, Sjaak de Gouw, played down the value of human contact tracing, calling it pointless,
while arguing against even testing people for the disease (an essential addition to contact tracing),
saying, at the height of the first wave in April 2020: “what is the rationale behind the strategy of
extensive testing? You do not prevent infections that way” (NRC, 2020a).1
With these beliefs driving public health policy advice, it would have been wise to question the value of
an app as the main approach to combating the pandemic. For an app to receive valid information on
whether people were infected, testing would have to be both available on demand and accurate enough
that people would trust that information rather than facing continual automated demands for
quarantine. Moreover, even if an automated system functioned perfectly, the rate of asymptomatic
disease means it would be provided with inadequate data at best (Babones, 2020).
Why, then, was the focus so heavily on apps at a time when the remedy appeared to be material
resources, behavior change, and building human capacity? Stafford Beer, in his work on organizational
cybernetics (2004), advocated that, in order to analyze a technological system, we should ask what we
observe it actually doing in the world, rather than what it is intended to do. If we apply this logic to the
case of coronavirus apps in the Netherlands and other EU countries, success on several levels could be
observed during the early months of 2020. First, the app development process fulfilled a psychological
need for something constructive to do, providing both a goal and a clear deliverable for government and
the technical community at a time when efforts to combat the pandemic were failing and an economydestroying lockdown was becoming the only option. Second, the process achieved a political function by
distracting attention from governmental failures and the resulting death toll (NRC, 2020b). Third, they
fulfilled a rhetorical function by supporting the public health authorities’ narrative that testing and
human contact tracing, which were not possible given the lack of material and trained human resources,
were also not necessary (NRC, 2020a). Contact-tracing apps have not, at least so far, however, fulfilled
the need to actually trace the contacts of people infected with COVID-19. As of July 2020, no country has
been able to demonstrate that contact-tracing apps can work either in terms of adoption or effective
isolation of the infected (Bloomberg, 2020).

1

“Wat is de rationale achter de strategie van het vele testen? Besmettingen voorkom je er niet mee.”

Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.
The app phase of the pandemic response also served a market-building function by orienting at least
some of the policy response and public attention away from complex problems of technology provision
(ventilators, mask manufacturing capacity, and other material resources) toward the simpler problem of
repurposing existing population surveillance infrastructures. Along with the apps, over the first months
of the pandemic many solutionist projects were proposed including systems to detect coronavirus
infection from voices (Futurism, 2020), detecting infection clusters from sewage analysis using
technology originally developed for detecting illegal drug labs (Peccia et al., 2020), and a barrage of
biometric systems repurposed from immigration and crowd surveillance toward remote temperature
sensing (CSO Online, 2020). Some of these efforts are more scientifically credible than others, but all
have one feature in common: they replace prevention. Solutionism thrives on desperation, and the
coronavirus has, in most of the world, provided a welcoming policy environment for it.

Lessons of Solutionism
There are higher-level lessons to be drawn from these proposals for pandemic technologies, perhaps
most importantly that allowing the market to be the primary driver of technology development will
result in technology that primarily serves the market rather than the needs of the public. However, the
most relevant lessons for the ongoing effort to combat the pandemic are more immediate. In parallel
with the European and US responses to the pandemic, a different set of strategies adopted by SouthEast Asian countries exists. These, ironically, were based substantially on guidance from institutions
founded and funded in the Global North such as the WHO, philanthropies, and universities. They
involved early response, immediate travel restrictions, intensive testing and contact tracing, and
enforced quarantine where cases were found. Where these measures were taken, both infections and
deaths remained strikingly low (BBC, 2020; Science, 2020). Despite a lack of material and technological
resources, Vietnam has reported no COVID-19 deaths, and despite being both dense city-states and
international travel hubs, Hong Kong has reported just seven deaths and Singapore twenty-six
(Worldometer, 2020). Meanwhile in the Global North, the problem is already being reframed as
technology acceptance and convincing people apps will work (e.g. Metova, 2020; Stanford news, 2020)
although policy attention is, at the time of writing in summer 2020, finally reorienting toward material
and human responses to the emergency.
Perhaps the most important lesson we can take with us into the ‘new normal’ of the pandemic from
observing technological solutionism in the Global North is this: technology is important to pandemic
response, but it must support rather than lead. The practical lessons of the pandemic are ones the North
already knew, because it was busy teaching them in the South: the state of the art on how to combat a
pandemic is to test, trace and isolate, and to do this exhaustively and accurately. Yet rather than apply
thisknowledge, governments turned out to be more ready to listen to Northern innovators than to the
public health experts, often internationally funded, in Southern pandemic-affected countries. The
response shows that the North has not acquired the necessary capacity for pandemic response, namely
flexibility, a focus on the most vulnerable, and human capacity supported by the digital rather than the
other way around. Instead, we seem to have trained hard in believing our own rhetoric on technological
innovation and the power of the market as solutions to truly existential challenges.

Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.

References:
Babones, S. (2020). Countries Rolling Out Coronavirus Tracking Apps Show Why They Can’t Work.
Foreign Policy. https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/05/12/coronavirus-tracking-tracing-apps-cantwork-south-korea-singapore-australia/
BBC. (2020, May 15). How “overreaction” made Vietnam a virus success. BBC News.
https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-52628283
Beer, S. (2004). What is cybernetics? Kybernetes, 33(3/4), 9.
https://doi.org/10.1108/03684920410523742
Bloomberg. (2020). Why Coronavirus Contact-Tracing Apps Aren’t Ending the Pandemic.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2020-06-30/why-coronavirus-contact-tracing-appsaren-t-ending-the-pandemic
CSO Online. (2020, April 3). New coronavirus-era surveillance and biometric systems pose logistical,
privacy problems. CSO Online. https://www.csoonline.com/article/3535194/new-coronavirusera-surveillance-and-biometric-systems-pose-logistical-privacy-problems.html
Day, M. (2020). Covid-19: Four fifths of cases are asymptomatic, China figures indicate.
2020(369:m1375). https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.m1375
Ferretti, L., Wymant, C., Kendall, M., Zhao, L., Nurtay, A., Abeler-Dörner, L., Parker, M., Bonsall, D., &
Fraser, C. (2020). Quantifying SARS-CoV-2 transmission suggests epidemic control with digital
contact tracing. Science, 368(6491). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb6936
Futurism. (2020). New app attempts to detect signs of COVID-19 using voice analysis. Futurism.
https://futurism.com/neoscope/new-app-detects-covid19-voice
Kucirka, L. M., Lauer, S. A., Laeyendecker, O., Boon, D., & Lessler, J. (2020). Variation in False-Negative
Rate of Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction–Based SARS-CoV-2 Tests by Time
Since Exposure. Annals of Internal Medicine. https://doi.org/10.7326/M20-1495

Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.
Metova. (2020). New Survey Reveals Growing Acceptance Around COVID-19 Contact Tracing and
Exposure Notification Apps. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/new-survey-revealsgrowing-acceptance-around-covid-19-contact-tracing-and-exposure-notification-apps301083480.html
Morozov, E. (2013). To save everything, click here: The folly of technological solutionism (First edition).
PublicAffairs.
NRC. (2020a). Infectieziektebestrijder GGD is aan zet, maar die twijfelt. NRC.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2020/04/22/het-is-tijd-voor-de-klassieke-infectiebestrijders-de-ggda3997610
NRC. (2020b, June 19). Hoe Nederland de controle verloor: De corona-uitbraak van dag tot dag. NRC.
https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2020/06/19/hoe-nederland-reageerde-op-het-nieuwe-virus-uitchina-van-niks-aan-de-hand-tot-blinde-paniek-a4003075
Peccia, J., Zulli, A., Brackney, D. E., Grubaugh, N. D., Kaplan, E. H., Casanovas-Massana, A., Ko, A. I.,
Malik, A. A., Wang, D., Wang, M., Warren, J. L., Weinberger, D. M., & Omer, S. B. (2020). SARSCoV-2 RNA concentrations in primary municipal sewage sludge as a leading indicator of COVID19 outbreak dynamics [Preprint]. Epidemiology. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.05.19.20105999
Science. (2020, April 13). ‘Suppress and lift’: Hong Kong and Singapore say they have a coronavirus
strategy that works. Science | AAAS. https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/04/suppressand-lift-hong-kong-and-singapore-say-they-have-coronavirus-strategy-works
Stanford news. (2020, April 9). Stanford researchers help develop privacy-focused coronavirus alert app.
Stanford News. https://news.stanford.edu/2020/04/09/stanford-researchers-help-developprivacy-focused-coronavirus-alert-app/
Worldometer. (2020). Singapore Coronavirus: 44,122 Cases and 26 Deaths - Worldometer.
https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/singapore/

Pre-publication draft 17.7.20
forthcoming in The New Common, eds. Emile Aarts, Hein Fleuren, Margriet Sitskoorn, Ton Wilthagen.

