Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2 nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/MEC2.18

Pp.252- 258

A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic
Zeb Fatima
General Foundation Programme
Oman College of Management & Technology
Muscat, Oman
Email: fatma.gfp@omancollege.edu.om

Abstract
This research work explores the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on classrooms teaching in
school and colleges and on finding e-learning solution to ensure the continuity of the teaching
process. The physical presence of the student in the classroom has been hampered by the COVID19 pandemic. The only way in which the classes can continue is through online teaching
programmes. This research tries to examine how effective is online teaching in a higher
educational institution in Oman and worldwide. Here we will see the three dimensions of online
education, namely (a) preparation, (b) execution, and (c) verification. Verification leads to
negative and positive results. These results reflect real-life experiences and ideas shared by the
stakeholders, the instructors, and the students who participate in online classes. We will also
explain and examine various challenges and solutions involved in making this system more
effective. This study gives us an insight into the mechanism, dimensions, and strategies of Elearning.
Keywords: COVID-19, Dimensions, E-learning, Online teaching, Pandemic
Cite as: Fatima, Z. (2020). A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic.
Arab World English Journal(AWEJ). Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOLConference 2020. 252258. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/MEC2.18

252

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

Fatima

1. Introduction
The pandemic of COVID-19 has thrown the world into a period of uncertainty. It has affected
all facets of life, including the educational institutions. The fear of exposing ourselves to the virus
has made it imperative for us to maintain social distance and to wear masks all the time when we
are in a public space. Therefore, it has become virtually impossible to access public transport and
attend classroom teaching programmes without the fear of contracting the virus. This has led to
the closure of schools and colleges, leaving the teacher and the students no other option but to
continue with online classes. E-Learning is, therefore the need of the hour. Lederman (2020) justly
stated that due to the COVID-19 crisis, teachers and students both find themselves in a situation
where they felt compelled to embrace the digital academic experience as the summum bonum of
the online teaching-learning process. Some educational institutions were not well equipped or
prepared for such an emergency. The reasons must have been from the non-availability of technical
resources to untrained staff and students. Through this paper, we will get to the core of the
mechanism of the e-learning process. The initial part will indicate the various stages of online
teaching and learning.
In the second part, its positive and negative aspects are analyzed, followed by the
challenges. Data taken from stakeholders in the process of e-learning is used in this presentation.
2. Literature Review
The COVID-19 pandemic has affected education, and teacher education in particular, in various
ways. As a result of the closure of universities and schools, teachers and students had to rapidly
adapt to remote teaching. Teacher education is no exception. The need to create learning
environments for student teachers doing their teacher education preparation implied decisions,
choices and adaptations in order to meet not only the expectations of students but also the
requirements of teacher education as well as the conditions in which both universities and schools
had to operate (Flores and Gago 2020).Researchers anticipate that physical distancing and
pervasive feelings of anxiety over the COVID-19 pandemic have initiated a wide array of
challenges in education including poor academic performance (Sintema, 2020), concerns over the
physical health and well-being of students (Rundle, et al., 2020; Van Lancker & Parolin, 2020),
and negative disruptions to internal and public assessments (Burgess & Sievertsen, 2020). In the
21st century, the E-learning creates a more significant impact on all types of the student, much as
the part-time and Full-time or distance learning student in the higher education institution (Azhari
and Ming 2015). In this light, the COVID-19 pandemic has forced the universities to close faceto-face education and send the students home. This forces the universities to introduce courses
through online portals. Also, education industries are adopting the technologies available such as
digital Video conferencing platforms like Zoom, Microsoft platform, and Webex Blackboard and
Google Classroom (Larry 2020). Therefore, this will be enhancing E-learning globally (Chen
2010; Yengin et al. 2011; Larry 2020). The flexibility of E-learning is a solution for people’s
commitments to their family or work, which may increase the number of people who enroll in this
type of education. In fact, this goes beyond the learners; it gives flexibility also for the instructors.
In addition, educational institutions reimplementing E-learning technologies to improve the
communication among learners and instructors for better knowledge exchange as well as to
strengthen the learning community to accomplish personal objectives (Njenga, J.K.; Fourie,
L.C.H. 2010) identified 10 myths about e-learning in higher education, extracted from the
Arab World English Journal
253
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

Fatima

emerging educational practice, information provided by technology providers, and the academic
literature: (1) E-learning is a very powerful instrument and all educational institutions should adopt
it; (2) e-learning may replace human interaction; (3) e-learning reduces the economic costs of
education; (4) increasing the academic offer and large amounts of information are beneficial for
learning; (5) digital technologies should be the main learning means or resource in higher
education; (6) leisure (including games and entertainment) and learning are separate activities; (7)
e-learning will make university institutions more competitive; (8) defining the infrastructure
(hardware and software) in e-learning is the most difficult task; (9) e-learning will be the end of
traditional campuses; and (10) e-learning may decrease absenteeism and the dropout rates among
university students.
3. Course Plan
We have to be clear in our minds that the e-learning is not a replacement for the classroom
teaching. The E-Learning class is a virtual classroom without the physical presence of individuals
interacting at a human level. The teacher cannot walk up to the students’ desk to talk to them;
neither can the students look forward to getting together and chatting in the canteen over some
snacks. Thus, nothing can replace physical human interaction. The student and the teacher need to
feel connected. There is a need to form a different course plan for e-learning to make the virtual
class resemble the real classroom as much as possible. Examining the features and principles of
Universal Instructional Design (UID) and Universal Design for Learning (UDL), Rao and Tanners
(2011) advised instructors designing courses to consider not only the course objectives but also
how to adapt strategies and technologies for achieving the goals. Courses should be well organized
from the very start, providing the students with detailed instructions and expectations. Instructors
should anticipate areas of potential misunderstanding and dismiss unclear directives before the
beginning of the course. Misunderstandings can be minimized through a very detailed syllabus,
course calendar, useful links, and course information is chunked into digestible pieces (Thomson,
2010). For example, in a reading class, most of the learners are passive while being online. While
one student is reading a passage or answering a question, the other students do not feel connected.
Therefore, a debate on the topic of the text may draw the attention of all the students towards the
issue. 7 out of 10 students felt that a discussion on the subject matter rather than merely reading
the text during the online lecture would be better. They preferred to answer the questions on the
topic as homework. So, the plan adopted for classroom teaching may not be very useful for elearning. Executing lectures online requires a well-set technical service in every institution like
reliable and fast internet services and suitable software and hardware.
Table 1. Feedback on course plan by the stakeholders
Question

Total

Do you think that the
plan followed for the
conventional classes
suits online teaching?

10

Yes
3

No
7

4. The Three Dimensions
The three steps adopted to execute online classes are (a) systematic, (b) foolproof, and (c)
dependable. They are time savers and mostly accurate.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

254

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

Fatima

4.1 Preparation
Preparing for an online class can be a big task for those who are not so tech-savvy. But with
proper and continuous training in this field, it can be a fun-filled and enjoyable experience for the
teacher. In order to make a plan, the academic staff should be timely given a schedule at the
beginning of the semester. Then a vigorous technical training is given to the academic staff,
acquainting them with each aspect of e-learning. According to (Hodges, Moore, Lockee, Trust,
and Bond 2020), well-planned online learning experiences are meaningfully different from courses
offered online in response to a crisis or disaster. Colleges and universities working to maintain
instruction during the COVID-19 pandemic should understand those differences.
Students can use features such as voice recognition and interactive multimedia exercises
through mobile services. The data suitable for various subjects and skills is collected and saved
like videos, presentations, audio, online games, and used while the online classes are in progress.
4.2. Execution
The Execution part of online lectures and pedagogy to hold the students' interest and
communicate the subject can be challenging as it forms the primary duty or responsibility of a
lecturer. Calling out names for attendance as done in conventional classes is still the best way to
ensure the accurate number and authenticity of the learners. Explanation with the help of teaching
aids is a dire necessity for online teaching. The challenge before a lecturer is that he must adopt
various technical methods like digital texts to ensure that learning takes place and yet all this while
the students remain attentive in class. For example, the use of online learning-based games from
seat time, favoring a structure that generates flexibility, allows students to progress as they
demonstrate mastery of academic content, regardless of time, place, or pace of learning (Walberg,
& Twyman, 2013).
4.3. Verification
Assessments form another critical aspect of online teaching and learning. Instructors can
monitor the progress of the students through specialized software. They can assess the students
and put up their results online. This saves a lot of paper and reduces wastage. Though it is a big
task for the invigilators to invigilate a class of students while the exam is on as there are several
risks involved in this method:
• Integrity
• Sizeable class strength
• Technical failure
• Untimely exam completion due to technical glitch or unfamiliarity.
• Low levels of digital literacy among teachers and students.
Table 2. Feedback on the digital literacy of the stakeholders
Question
How technically sound are
you relating to virtual
classrooms?
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Total

Completely

Partially

Scarcely

15

4

11

Nil
255

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

Fatima

With such lapses, maintaining quality can be formidable for educational institutions. But
on the other hand, exam preparation is less time consuming for the teachers and more accurate.
Also, the process of grading is more reliable as it involves automation. The satisfactory level of
the students on the results was higher than the conventional way of attaining them. This becomes
clear by the low percentage of exam review forms received from the students. In the 1990s, the
first set of studies found little difference in academic achievement between people who took faceto-face, online, and hybrid courses. But this research was marred by the problem of self-selection:
Students who chose online courses were probably more comfortable in that format and tended to
perform better in it. (Zimmerman, 2020)
5. Highlights
However, the learners and teachers had their inhibitions before the commencement of online
lectures, but by adopting this method, we made sure that learning can never stop at any cost.
Overall, results from Means, Toyama, Murphy, Bakia, and Jones (2010) indicate no significant
differences in effectiveness between distance education and face-to-face education. Distance
education, when it is the only option available, can successfully replace face-to-face instruction. It
has shown many positive aspects of sharing knowledge, as acknowledged by the stakeholders. Its
felicities are innumerable:
• E-learning has proved to be a dominant risk mitigation instrument in an emergency.
• The study materials and exams are easy to review and edit.
• E-learning and teaching have proved to be more economical than the traditional way.
• It is highly systematic and organised as it involves automation.
• Teaching and learning are not confined to one place.
• It can be executed and availed 24/7.
• E-learning is technologically trendier and more useful during emergencies like COVID19.
• Assessments are less strenuous.
• The re-evaluation of the exam papers is effortless.
• It is incredibly reliable and convenient for data referencing.
6. Lowlights
While Online Teaching has witnessed many accolades, it has many shortcomings as well.
Several potential limitations are also found in online learning by the students, the instructors, and
the tenured faculty, namely the need for start-up funding, adequate time, organizational
preparedness, student readiness, different stages of team development, crisis management, faculty
learning curve, members with limited language skills, technical support, team effort, synchronousor asynchronous-classroom contexts, costs, accessibility to course materials, delayed feedback,
and evaluation and assessment (Bar-tolic-Zlomislic & Bates, 1999). Some lapses that have been
observed by the stakeholders during COVID-19 need to be examined to make this method of
learning more unabated in the future. Some of its impediments experienced by the stakeholders
during this pandemic are:
• It can be challenging for technically challenged stakeholders.
• There is a possibility of data loss due to its complete dependence on technology.
• Passive approach of the learners.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

256

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

•
•
•
•

Fatima

There are limitations on the type of questions that can be set for assessments.
The stakeholders may face difficulties due to technical snags and sluggish internet.
It has proved pricey for the unprivileged.
The debate on integrity during an assessment remains unresolved.

7. Alleviation
Some of these problems witnessed during online teaching and learning in this pandemic could
be handled promptly and efficiently. Mitigating the risk factors will ensure quality in education.
Following are a few possible recommendations:
• To provide thorough and continual technical training to the staff and students.
• To have a backup plan and an alternative ready in case of technical failure.
• To come up with suitable course content for online lectures to hold students' interest.
• To form policies and norms for online teaching and learning and linked matters.
• To generate a credible solution for maintaining integrity during exams.
Table 3. Feedback of the stakeholders on online teaching and learning during COVID -19
Question
Total Supportive Not Supportive
How supportive are you towards e-learning
during COVID-19?

10

8

2

8. Conclusion
Through this research, we have gathered that online teaching and learning has become an
inevitable part of education during an emergency in the digital world. Virtual mobility has
enhanced the mode of teaching and has made the task of sharing knowledge more credible. It has
also encouraged the teachers and the students to update and prepare themselves for the digital
society.
Top pedagogical experts endorse the idea of blended learning and virtual learning
classroom management system. By embracing this change, we have learned that e-learning is
organised, well-structured, and dependable. It is preparing us for an era of technology where
blended learning will soon replace the conventional method. Online language classes have opened
doors that allow all the students to have access to it. It has helped a lot of students to understand
the language in a better way and has aided the teachers to complete the syllabus on time. So, the
evolution of classrooms and teaching methods are moving in the direction of technology. New
technology-integrated classroom systems have become a part of language learners in the present
times.
About the author:
Mrs Zeb Fatima is a TEFL Lecturer in the General Foundation Programme Department, Oman
College of Management & Technology, Oman. She holds a Master’s Degree in English
Language and Literature from Annamalai University, India. Her research interests include
academic advising and Importance of independent learning & critical thinking for college
students in context with Oman. ORCid: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-5828-4515
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

257

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Proceedings of 2nd MEC TESOL Conference 2020
A Structural Approach to E-learning During COVID–19 Pandemic

Fatima

References
Appana, S., (2008). A Review of Benefits and Limitations of Online Learning in the Context of
the Student, the Instructor, and the Tenured Faculty. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237143888_A_Review_of_Benefits_and_Limit
ations_of_Online_Learning_in_the_Context_of_the_Student_the_Instructor_and_the_Te
nured_Faculty
Carrillo, C. & Flores, M. (2020) COVID-19 and teacher education: a literature review
of online teaching and learning practices, European Journal of Teacher
Education, 43:4, 466-487, DOI: 10.1080/02619768.2020.1821184
Alqahtani, A. & Rajkhan A. (2020). E-Learning Critical Success Factors during the COVID-19
Pandemic: A Comprehensive Analysis of E-Learning Managerial Perspectives.
Hartshorn, K. & McMurry, B., (2020). The Effects of the COVID-19 Pandemic on ESL Learners
and TESOL Practitioners in the United States. International Journal of TESOL Studies
(2020). 2 (2) 140-156 https://doi.org/10.46451/ijts.2020.09.11
Valverde-Berrocoso, J., Arroyo, M., Videla, C. & Morales-Cevallos, M., (2020). Trends in
Educational Research about e-Learning: A Systematic Literature Review (2009–2018).
Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/deref/http%3A%2F%2Fdx.doi.org%2F10.3390%2Fsu1212
5153
Gilbert, B., "Online Learning Revealing the Benefits and Challenges" (2015). Education
Masters. Paper 303.
Hodges, C., Moore, S., Lockee, B., Trust, T., & Bond, A., (2020). The Difference Between
Emergency Remote Teaching and Online Learning. Retrieved from
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-between-emergency-remoteteaching-and-online-learning
Means, B., Toyama,Y., Murphy, R., Bakia, M., & Jones, K., (2010). Evaluation of EvidenceBased Practices in Online Learning A Meta-Analysis and Review of Online Learning
Studies. Retrieved from https://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/eval/tech/evidence-base
practices/finalreport.pdf
Mishra, L., Gupta, T., & Shree, A., (2020). Online Teaching-Learning in Higher Education
during Lockdown Period of COVID-19 Pandemic, International Journal of Educational
Research Open, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijedro.2020.100012
Sun, A., & Chen, X. (2016). Online education and its effective practice: A research review.
Journal of Information Technology Education: Research, 15, 157-190. Retrieved from
http://www.informingscience.org/Publications/3502
Walberg, H. J., & Twyman, J. S. (2013). Advances in online learning. In. Murphy, M., Redding,
S., & Twyman, J. (Eds.), Handbook on innovations in education (pp. 165-178).
Philadelphia, PA: Center on Innovations in Learning, Temple University; Charlotte, NC:
Information Age Publishing.Retrieved from www.centeril.org/
Zimmerman, J., (2020). Coronavirus and the Great Online-Learning Experiment. Retrieved from
www.chronicle.com/article/coronavirus- and-the-great-online- learning-experiment/

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

258

