"x"
"1" "A Gendered Pandemic: Childcare, Homeschooling, and Parents’ Employment During COVID-19"
"2" "Richard J. Petts*"
"3" "Department of Sociology, Ball State University"
"4" "222 North Quad, Muncie IN 47306"
"5" "rjpetts@bsu.edu"
"6" "Daniel L. Carlson*"
"7" "Department of Family and Consumer Sciences, University of Utah"
"8" "Alfred Emery Building, Room 234, Salt Lake City, UT 84112"
"9" "daniel.carlson@fcs.utah.edu"
"10" "Joanna R. Pepin"
"11" "Department of Sociology, University at Buffalo, The State University of New York"
"12" "430 Park Hall, Buffalo, NY 14260"
"13" "jpepin@buffalo.edu"
"14" "*Richard J. Petts and Daniel L. Carlson should be considered joint first authors."
"15" "Running Head: Childcare, Homeschooling, and Employment"
"16" "Keywords: childcare, homeschooling, employment, division of labor, COVID19"
"17" "Manuscript published in  Gender, Work & Organization :   https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12614"
"18" "Conflict of Interest: The authors do not have any conflict of interests to declare."
"19" "Funding Information: There is no funding information to report."
"20" "Data Availability Statement: The data used for this study is not currently publicly available, but may become so at a later date."
"21" "Author Bios"
"22" "Richard J. Petts is Professor of Sociology at Ball State University. His research focuses on family inequalities, with particular emphases on father involvement and parental leave as polices and practices that can reduce gender inequality and improve family well-being. His recent research has been published in  Social Forces, Journal of Marriage and Family, Sex Roles, Journal of Social Policy, and Community, Work & Family."
"23" "Daniel L. Carlson is Associate Professor in Family and Consumer Studies at the University of Utah. He is a family sociologist who applies life course, stress process, and gender structure frameworks to understand the consequences of the Second Demographic Transition (SDT) for health disparities and social inequalities. To date, his general interest in the consequences of changing family patterns for health disparities and social inequalities has resulted in two  integrated streams of research. The first stream of research involves understanding how families have changed during the SDT and what consequences this has had for children and couples’ well-being. His second research stream explores how the SDT has exacerbated racial/ethnic and socioeconomic differences in family formation and how this is related to health disparities and inequalities. Along with Drs. Richard J. Petts and Joanna R. Pepin, he is currently conducting research investigating changes in the gendered division of labor during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"24" "Joanna R. Pepin is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Sociology at the University at Buffalo. She studies inequality related to family composition and  divisions of paid and unpaid labor . Her   research explores how historical time and place contribute to gender inequality within families and the growing divergence in outcomes among women. "
"25" "A Gendered Pandemic:"
"26" "Childcare, Homeschooling ,  and  Parents’ Employment  During COVID-19"
"27" "ABSTRACT"
"28" "The COVID-19 pandemic has  dramatically affected employment , particularly for mothers .   M any believe that  the  loss of childcare and homeschooling requirements are key  contributors to  this trend , but previous work has   been unable to test these hypotheses  due to data limitations .  This study uses  novel  data from  989  partnered, US parents   to   empirically  examine  whether the loss of childcare and  new  homeschooling  demands  are associated with  employment  outcomes  early in the  pandemic.  We also consider whether the division of  childcare  prior to the pandemic is associated with parents’  employment .   For parents with young children, the loss of full-time childcare was associated with an increased risk of unemployment for mothers but not fathers. Yet,  father involvement in childcare   substantially  buffered against negative employment outcomes for mothers of young children. For parents with school-age children,  participation in homeschooling  was  associated with  adverse  employment outcomes for mothers  but not fathers .  Overall, this study provides empirical support for the current discourse on gender differences in employment during the pandemic and also highlights the role fathers can play in buffering against reduced labor force participation among mothers."
"29" "The COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically altered life .   S hortly after the COVID-19 outbreak was declared a pandemic ,  nearly all US  states implement ed  stay-at-home orders,  clos ing  schools and childcare centers,  and suspend ing  non-essential business such as  domestic services (e.g., housekeeping) .   Some  workers were deemed essential,  whereas  others were  asked to work from home , laid off,  or furloughed. For  parents who maintained  employment , the boundaries between work and family life blurred as domestic responsibilities increased and  they  were  forced to  perform both domestic and paid labor simultaneously ( Andrew et al. ,  2020;  Guyot  &  Sawhill ,  2020 ). Unfortunately,  for  many other families , r ates of unemployment  soared  during the early months of the pandemic   (US Bureau of Labor Statistics ,  2020).   Women, and mothers in particular, have been  especially affected ;  during the early months of the pandemic  unemployment rates were higher for women than men, and mothers have been more likely to reduce their work hours than fathers  (Bureau of Labor Statistics ,  2020; Collins et al. ,  2020) ."
"30" "These  gender gaps in  employment  outcomes have led many to fear that the COVID-19 pandemic will exacerbate gender inequalities and reverse progress  toward  gender parit y  in  employment   (e.g., Alon et al. ,  2020; Collins et al. ,  2020 ). Although research clearly shows that women are more likely to experience negative labor market outcomes during the pandemic than men  (Bureau of Labor Statistics ,  2020;  Chung et al. ,  2020;  Collins et al. ,  2020 ; Landivar et al. ,  2020 ; Qian  &  Fuller ,  2020 ) , why  unemployment rates, labor force exits, and reductions in work hours have  varied by gender  has not yet been empirically tested . Scholars and journalists have hypothesized that the persistence of  conventional  gender roles combined with a dramatic increase in the amount of domestic labor that parents must perform themselves  ( due to the loss  of  childcare and  home schooling  requirements ) have resulted in mothers  reducing  – either voluntarily or involuntarily –   their labor force attachment to a much greater extent than fathers  (Collins et al. ,  2020; Miller ,  2020). However, these theories have yet to be empirically tested, due in large part to the lack of available data  containing information  on  childcare, homeschooling,  and  employment  outcomes."
"31" "This study fills this gap using data from a novel survey of US parents collected in late April 2020. The  individual-level  survey  (i.e., participants reported on both themselves and their partners)  contained questions about labor force participation, domestic supports, and parents’ division of labor both before (i.e., prior to March 11, 2020) and during the  first part of the  pandemic (i.e., in late April 2020). This unique data source allows for an empirical assessment of the association s  between  childcare, homeschooling,  and  employment  during the pandemic , testing key theories offered by previous work (e.g., Collins et al. ,  2020) . Specifically, we consider whether the loss of childcare and engagement in homeschooling are associated with mothers’ and fathers’ employment status and work hours  during the pandemic .  Because labor market outcomes are also a function of domestic responsibilities ( Hochshild  &  Machung ,  1989; Raley, Bianchi,  &  Wang ,  2012) ,  we also consider whether fathers’ share s  of childcare  are  associated with parents’ labor market outcomes.  Although most domestic supports were lost in the early months of the pandemic, greater involvement by fathers may enable mothers to maintain their labor force participation  (Norman ,  2020) ."
"32" "CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK"
"33" "Employment  Outcomes During COVID-19"
"34" "The COVID-19 pandemic has had devastating effects on the labor market , with  unemployment rates in the US jumping from 4.4% in March 2020 to 14.7% in April. Women are more likely to be employed  in low-wage and insecure jobs than men (Fuller ,  2018), and these occupations  were  disproportionately affected by the pandemic (Garfield et al. ,  2020).  Accordingly, women experienced greater increases in unemployment than men. In March 2020, unemployment rates were 4.4% for both women and men. In April, 16.2% of women were unemployed compared  with  13.5% of men. The latest statistics show that th e  gender gap has declined but  it  is still slightly higher for women ; unemployment rates in  September   were  8 . 0 % for women and  7.7 % for men  (US Bureau of Labor Statistics ,  2020) ."
"35" "In addition to rising unemployment, many workers who were able to maintain employment experienced changes in  the  number  of  hours worked.  A poll conducted in the first month of the pandemic showed that 13% of workers had their work hours reduced  because of  the pandemic (Rothwell ,  2020), and the Pew Research Center (2020) reported that 1/3 of American households included someone that had their work hours reduced because of the pandemic.  It is likely that some workers also reduced their work hours voluntarily due to care responsibilities at home.  Given that women are more likely to be employed in insecure jobs and also more likely to  be responsible  for carework ( Fuller ,  2018;  Livingston & Parker, 2019 ; Yavorsky et al. ,  2015 ), it is  probable  that women experienced greater voluntary and involuntary reductions in work hours than men."
"36" "Indeed, research  shows  that women, especially mothers with young children, have experienced greater reductions in work hours than men ,   after accounting for  background characteristics  (Collins et al. ,  2020; Landivar et al. ,  2020).  This gender disparity is even more pronounced among those who are able to work from home during the pandemic, as mothers who worked from home with young children experienced significant declines in work hours ,  whereas fathers experienced relatively little change (Collins et al. ,  2020; Landivar et al. ,  2020). Similar trends have  also  been noted outside the US (Chung et al. ,  2020)."
"37" "Childcare, Homeschooling,  and  Employment"
"38" "Although  gendered variations in occupations likely contribute to these gender disparities  in employment  (Fuller ,  2018; Qian  &  Fuller ,  2020), most  scholars  have argued that greater childcare demands stemming from the loss of domestic supports  – such as   non-parental  day care  and in-person schooling  – have  been the driving force behind  mothers’  lower employment rates and reduced work hours (Collins et al. ,  2020; Miller ,  2020).  Certainly ,  there are reasons to expect that the closure of childcare facilities and shift to virtual learning would place more burdens on mothers .  Gender is a key social structure that ha s  a pervasive influence on society  within both the public and private spheres  (Berk ,  1985; Ridgeway  &  Correll ,  2004; Risman ,  2004) . Despite shifts toward greater acceptance of egalitarianism, traditional  gender  norms  persist,  emphasizing that women should be primarily responsible for childcare and housework and  that  men should be primarily responsible for  breadwinning  (Hays ,  1996; Petts, Shafer,  &  Essig ,  2018;  Th é baud, Kornrich,  &  Ruppanner ,  2019 ; West  &  Zimmerman ,  1987). Consequently,  women  still spend approximately twice as much time doing housework and childcare per week as men  despite women’s increased labor force participation  (Bianchi et al .,  2012;  Livingston & Parker, 2019 ).  Workplace expectations such as the ideal worker norm also reinforce the gender structure  by  assum ing   that men will be more committed to the workplace  than women , resulting in motherhood penalties and fatherhood bonuses  in employment  (Acker ,  1990;  Blair-Loy ,  2003;  Davies  &  Frink ,  2014; Glauber ,  2018)."
"39" "The gendered nature of household and workplace expectations are mutually reinforcing.  According to human capital theory (Becker ,  1985) ,  responsibilities for domestic labor constrain individuals’ abilities to devote time and energy to paid labor.  Accordingly, t he lack of involvement in domestic labor enables fathers to be more  committed to the workplace, and the cultural expectations of intensive mothering create disadvantages for women in the labor market  (Benard  &  Correll ,  2010; Correll , Benard & Paik,  2007; Hays ,  1996). For example, men are more likely to work long hours than women, and women  are more likely to  reduce their work hours or even quit their job if  work interferes with their family responsibilities,  or  if  their spouse’s work hours are too long (Cha ,  2010; Cha ,  2013; Kaufman  &  Grönlund ,  2019). Consistent with intensive mothering expectations, mothers are also more likely  than fathers  to miss work when there are problems with childcare (Maume ,  2008;  Sayer ,  2005;  Stone ,  2008)."
"40" "Because of the gender structure of society, the availability of domestic supports such as daycare and in-person schooling are particularly important for mothers’ labor force participation ( Collins ,  2019;  Ruppanner ,  2020). Such supports reduce the amount of time that parents (typically mothers)  must be available to care for children, and availability of such supports is positively associated with mothers’ employment (Boeckmann, Misra,  &  Budig ,  2015; Ruppanner, Moller,  &  Sayer ,  2019). Conversely, mothers’  employment  outcomes are negatively affected when daycare options are limited or too expensive, and when in-person school days are shortened (Ruppanner et al. ,  2019) . Yet,  fathers’ labor market outcomes are relatively unaffected by domestic supports such as  daycare  (Schochet ,  2019).  As such, the loss of domestic supports has likely contributed to higher unemployment rates and reduced work hours among mothers  as compared to fathers .  Mothers may be especially likely to take on this additional childcare due to gendered expectations.  Moreover, even mothers who did not  use  daycare prior to the pandemic  may have an increased likelihood of unemployment or reduced work hours due to limited opportunities for even infrequent parenting support (e.g., doing work while one’s child is playing with a friend or while c hild  is at a n  activity center)  resulting from   social distancing and the closure of businesses (Andrew et al. ,  2020).  Indeed, some evidence suggests that mothers are three times more likely to report not working due to childcare issues during the pandemic  compared  with  fathers (Heggeness  &  Fields ,  2020). We build on this work to more specifically assess the extent to which the loss of non-parental childcare hours are associated with unemployment and reduced work hours."
"41" "In addition to increased childcare responsibilities  among   parents of pre-school aged children, the closure of schools  also  increased  time  demands  for  parents of school - aged children.  When schools stopped in-person schooling during the early months of the pandemic, parents were placed in charge of monitoring and helping their children  with  school during the day.  Consistent with human capital theory (Becker ,  1985), t his  increased labor takes time and energy away from labor market participation, and it is likely that mothers have taken on more of this work given gender disparities in child education both before and during the pandemic (Miller ,  2020; Nord  &  West ,  2001). Moreover, many parents have been dissatisfied by the content provided by schools and are creating their own educational content either in place of, or to supplement, content provided by schools (Chaker ,  2020 ; Hollingsworth ,  2020 ). Creating educational content may increase the challenge of maintaining consistent  employment  beyond simply helping children with school-created content. Taken together, we  hypothesize that:"
"42" "Hypothesis 1:  Loss of non-parental c hildcare and participation in homeschooling  (particularly when parents create content)  will be associated with negative  employment  outcomes for mothers  during the  early days  of the  pandemic ."
"43" "Hypothesis 2:  Loss of non-parental c hildcare and participation in homeschooling will be unrelated to  employment  outcomes for fathers  during the  early days  of the  pandemic ."
"44" "Parents’ Division of Childcare and  Employment"
"45" "Although the loss of domestic supports has likely made balancing work and family life more challenging for all working parents,  o ne key domestic support that may help mothers maintain their labor market participation during the pandemic is father involvement .  Fathers’ involvement in childcare   is vital for improving  employment  outcomes for mothers and for working toward greater gender equality more generally   by  r educ ing  the burdens that typically fall on mothers  ( England ,  2010; Goldscheider et al. ,  2015 ).  As such,  when  fathers take on a greater share of childcare  duties , mothers may be less likely to reduce their labor force participation during the pandemic."
"46" "E ven though they still spend less time in  childcare  than mothers , fathers’ time and share of childcare has increased in recent years  (Bianchi et al. ,  2012;  Livingston & Parker, 2019 ).  Some fathers, particularly those with salient father identities, are highly engaged parents that  prioritize family over work, and organize their working lives around their family responsibilities  (Ranson ,  2012) .  In these instances, having  a coparent who is highly engaged in childcare  is  a key domestic support that has received less attention  in understanding mothers’ employment . In fact, most studies on the association between mothers’ employment and father involvement have focused on how fathers are more involved in childcare when mothers are employed ( e.g.,  Gracia  &  Epsing-Andersen ,  2015;  Raley et al. ,  2012; Zick, Bryant,  &   Österbacka ,  2001 ) .   Although  paid work   may provide mothers with greater autonomy and greater bargaining power to negotiate more equal divisions of domestic labor with fathers (Bianchi et al. ,  2012; Gupta ,  2007), the reverse may also be true; a more egalitarian division of childcare (or  situations  where fathers do most of the work) may reduce mothers’  domestic  responsibilities  and enable them to be more engaged in paid labor. Indeed, one recent study  found  that mothers are more likely to be  employed when fathers are more involved in childcare (Norman ,  2020). Thus, we hypothesize that:"
"47" "Hypothesis 3: Fathers’ share s  of childcare prior to the pandemic will be positively associated with mothers’ employment  outcomes  during the   early days  of the  pandemic."
"48" "Although fathers’ participation in childcare may help mothers maintain their labor  market  participation during the pandemic,  from a human capital perspective,  these responsibilities may  also  be associated with a greater likelihood of unemployment or reduced work hours for fathers  (Becker ,  1985) .  The closure of schools and daycares   increased the amount of time that parents must spend on childcare tasks ,   as did   social distancing requirements (perhaps resulting in an inability for children to play with friends) ,   which  limited options for leisure and entertainment outside of the home (Andrew et al. ,  2020). Fathers who were highly engaged in childcare prior to the pandemic may spend even more time in these tasks during the pandemic .  Some fathers may choose to reduce their work hours to achieve greater work-family balance, even if this means working fewer hours (Ranson ,  2012). Other fathers  may  use  flexible workplace policies to manage the additional domestic workload  (Holmes et al. ,  2020; Petts  &  Knoester ,  2018) ,  especially because access to these policies increased for many workers during the pandemic ."
"49" "Still , fathers who request flexible work schedules or  family  leave to accommodate increased childcare needs may experience workplace penalties. Such requests violate the ideal worker norm, and men who request such accommodations are  stigmatized  as less committed workers ,  which may lead to lower wages, lower performance evaluations, and even job loss (Coltrane et al. ,  2013; Rudman  &  Mescher ,  2013; Vandello et al. ,  2013; Weisshaar ,  2018). Thus, we hypothesize:"
"50" "Hypothesis 4: Fathers’ share of childcare prior to the pandemic will be  negatively  associated with  fathers’  employment  outcomes  during the  early days  of the  pandemic."
"51" "DATA AND METHODS"
"52" "Data"
"53" "This study uses original survey data collected  from Prolific ( www.prolific.co ), an opt-in platform designed to facilitate scientific research using panel-based surveys. Prolific samples are a substantial improvement over other types of nonprobability samples (e.g., convenience and snowball sampling) ;   p rior to granting eligibility to participate on the platform, Prolific collects panelists’ demographic characteristics which decreases the likelihood that dishonest participants will be included in a sample  (Palan  &  Schitter ,  2018) . Samples from Prolific are more diverse than participants from MTurk and the data quality is comparable or better  (Peer et al. ,  2017) ."
"54" "Although Prolific panels are nonprobability samples, research using such online panels tends to be fairly representative of those with regular internet access (Tourangeau, Conrad,  &  Cooper ,  2013). Moreover, results from online panels do not differ substantially from probability-based samples once demographic variables are sufficiently accounted for  (Levay, Freese,  &  Druckman ,  2016) ,  and online panel studies produce remarkably similar patterns of statistical significance  t o studies using probability samples  (Baker et al. ,  2013; Coppock ,  2019; Jeong et al. ,  2019) . Because our research interest lies in examining the association between variables (e.g., how loss of childcare is associated with unemployment during the pandemic) ,  a panel-based survey is an appropriate data source to test our hypotheses."
"55" "We obtained a sample  in late April 2020 from Prolific  of 1,262 parents in the U S  who resided with a spouse or partner and a biological child.  Respondents reported  on both   their own  and  their partners’ employment outcomes giving us information on the labor market outcomes of 2,524 individuals in 1,262 couples.  To increase sample diversity, w e oversampled men, Black s , individuals who did not complete college, and  conservatives .  Our sample was reduced to 1,157  couples (2,314 partners)  after data quality checks (e.g., removing  respondents who did not complete most of the survey  or   w ho did not pass the attention filters). For this study, we excluded couples  containing a  partner who identified as a gender other than male or female (N = 8), those who reported being in a same-sex relationship (N = 86), and those with children over age 17 (N = 74). Among the  1,978 partners from the  989 different-sex parenting couples   who reside with a minor child, we further r estrict the sample to mothers (N = 634) and fathers (N  = 906) working for pay prior to the pandemic. After listwise deletion of a small number of cases containing missing values on our variables of interest, the final sample includes 623 mothers and 891 fathers  who were employed pre-pandemic ."
"56" "R esults are weighted using estimates from the April 2020 Current Population Survey (CPS) to be representative by gender, age, and race/ethnicity of US parents residing with a partner and child.  In comparing our sample to  other nationally representative datasets , our  full sample is similar to the CPS with respect to the percentage who are married (89% vs. 92% in CPS), average number of children (1.94 vs. 1.93), and percentage of mothers (33 vs. 31%) and fathers (10% vs. 11%) out of the labor force prior to the pandemic.   Increases in unemployment are similar to a recent CPS-based study (Collins et al. ,  2020), but the decline in work hours among parents was slightly higher in our sample (by approximately 1.5 hours per week). This may be due to our focus on co-resident parents as opposed to married parents .   The  decline in work hours in our sample is   comparable to results using a more diverse UK sample (Chung et al. ,   2020).  Compared to the General Social Survey (GSS), the percentage of individuals who identify as having conservative political ideologies in our sample are nearly identical (32% vs. 33%  in  GSS). Lastly, the percentage of individuals with household incomes under $40,000 in our sample is comparable to co-resident parents in the Survey of American Parents (18% vs. 19%).  Despite these similarities to nationally representative probability samples, college educated parents and parents with no religious affiliation are over-represented in our study."
"57" "Parental Employment"
"58" "Three variables are used to examine parents’ employment during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic.  For employment questions, s urvey respondents reported both for themselves and for their partners. Therefore, fathers’ employment indicators are derived from  fathers’ self-reports  and  mothers’  reports on their partners’ employment  (and vice versa).   First, we examine whether mothers and fathers were  not working for pay  during the pandemic (1   = yes). For those still in the labor force  during the pandemic , we examine  paid work hours per week   (ranging from  1- 60 + ) .  Finally, we assess whether mothers and fathers r educed work hours  or  left job voluntarily  (1 = yes) ."
"59" "Childcare and  Homes chooling"
"60" "The primary independent variables indicate couples’ childcare arrangements prior  to  the pandemic and their participation in homeschooling during the pandemic.   First,  hours of non-parental childcare lost  is calculated as the difference between the average number of hours of non-parental care per week before the pandemic and the average number of hours of non-parental care per week during the pandemic. Non-parental care includes use of any of the  following sources of childcare: center-based daycare, home-based daycare, in-home nanny/au pair, grandparent or other relative, and other. Childcare hours lost is an ordinal measure categorized as: child not in care prior to pandemic, 10 hours or less lost (reference),  11-20 hours lost, 21-30 hours lost, 31-40 hours lost, and 41+ hours lost."
"61" "To measure children’s homeschooling arrangements, we combine information from respondents’ answers to questions asking whether children were enrolled in school prior to the pandemic, whether they continued with school (e.g., e-learning) during the pandemic, and whether p arents were creating or finding  learning content for their children.  Children’s homeschooling arrangements during the pandemic  are categorized as: school-created content only (reference), school and parent-created conten t,  and other (i.e., out of school or homeschooled prior to the pandemic)."
"62" "We also consider parents’ division of childcare.  Respondents were asked to report on the division of childcare between themselves and their partners ( I do it all,   I do more of it,   we share it equally, my partner does more of it, my partner does it all )  before  the pandemic. Respondents report ed  on arrangements specific to their youngest child , and were asked to report on age-appropriate tasks based on whether their youngest child was younger than age 6 (e.g., physical care, putting child to bed, reading, and enforcing rules) or between the ages of 6-17 (e.g., monitoring, attending events, organizing, and helping with homework) . For our analyses, we report on  father’s share of childcare  which is a summary measure that combines information on  all tasks. Father’s share of childcare is derived by first creating gendered indicators of the division of childcare based on respondents’ reports ( 1 =mother does it all,  2 =mother does more of it,  3 =shared equally,  4 =father does more of it,  5 =father does all of it ), then by averaging respondents’ responses and creating a mean scale ranging from  1 to 5 .  Thinking about this scale in terms of the percentage of childcare performed by fathers, a n increase of one unit on the scale equates to approximately  a  20% increase in fathers’ shares of childcare  ( 1 = fathers perform 0-20% of childcare, 2 = fathers perform 20-40% of childcare, 3=fathers perform 40-60% of childcare, 4=fathers perform 60-80% of childcare, 5=fathers perform 80-100% of childcare ) ."
"63" "Control Variables"
"64" "We include several controls in our models that may confound the association between childcare/homeschooling and parents’ employment.  Descriptive statistics for these variables are presented in Table  1 .  Importantly, we control for  partner’s pre-pandemic employment status  (1 = employed) and one’s  own pre-pandemic work hours . In models assessing work hours, we control for whether the parent was an  essential worker , which is classified as being employed as a healthcare worker, first responder, grocery store/food service worker, or postal/delivery worker ,   and the extent to which parents  worked from home  during the pandemic  (worked from home exclusively, worked from home sometimes, or did not work from home/did not work at all)."
"65" "We also control for respondents’  gender  (1= female),  marital status  (1 = married),  youngest child’s age  and  number of children ,  religious affiliation ,  political party affiliation ,  race/ethnicity  and both  mother’s  and  fathers’ health, age , and  education . We control for  household income  during the pandemic (1 = less than $1,000/month to 7 = $9,000/month or more), and parents’  relative earnings  before the pandemic (father earns more, mother earns more, both parents earn relatively the same). Each model also includes a control for respondents’  traditional   gender attitudes  (α = .72) , which indicates agreement (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree, with higher values indicating traditional gender attitudes) on six statements such as “preschool children are likely to suffer if their mother is employed.”  F inally ,  we control for  the  existence and timing of stay-at-home orders . We classified state of residence as innovators (stay-at-home order implemented by March 23,  used as reference group), early adopters (stay-at-home order implemented between March 24-March 30), late adopters (stay-at-home order implemented after March 30), and resisters (no stay-at-home order issued)."
"66" "----- Insert Table 1 about here -----"
"67" "Analytic Strategy"
"68" "To examine mothers’ and fathers’ employment during the  first months of the  pandemic we first  describe general employment changes in our sample. We then consider whether childcare and homeschooling are associated with changes in employment outcomes, using logistic regression to predict parents’ labor force participation and voluntary change in employment during the  first part of the  pandemic ,  and ordinary least squares regression to predict parents’ work hours during the pandemic. For each outcome, we   estimate three models each  for mothers and fathers.  F irst, we assess the association of fathers’ share of childcare before the pandemic with parental employment outcomes for all parents.  Second , we limit analysis to parents with children under age 6 and examine how fathers’  shares of childcare  pre-pandemic and non-parental childcare hours lost during the pandemic predict parents’ employment. Third, we limit analyses to parents of school aged children (age 6-17) and examine how fathers’ pre-pandemic childcare shares and children’s homeschool arrangements during the pandemic predict  parents’ employment.  When appropriate, we used seemingly unrelated estimation to test the  equality of  coefficients for mothers and fathers (Mize, Doan,  &  Long ,  2019)."
"69" "RESULTS"
"70" "Descriptive statistics in Table  2  show substantial change in mothers’ and fathers’ employment during the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic.  We present descriptive statistics for the full sample (N = 989) to show initial employment patterns in our sample,  though distributions are nearly identical for our analytic sample of couples with at least one parent employed before the pandemic (N = 955).  Mothers’ employment rates declined 7 percentage points  from 65% to  58 %  (an 11% decrease) during the pandemic while fathers’ employment rates declined  8 percentage points  from 90% to  82 %  (a 9% decrease). Of those who left the labor force during the early days of the pandemic, 43% of mothers and 26% of fathers left voluntarily.  Among the mothers and fathers who retained employment,  m others ’  average paid work hours declined 3. 4  hours per week  and f athers ’  hours decreased an average of  3.8  hours  per week .  Approximately one-quarter of mothers and fathers reduced their paid work hours voluntarily.  Gender ed  patterns in  changes in  paid work  in our sample  are consistent with  basic descriptive statistics  reported by Landiva r and colleagues  (2020)."
"71" "----- Insert Table 2 about here -----"
"72" "Descriptive r esults  also  show variability in childcare and schooling arrangements. Prior to the pandemic ,  mothers did the majority of childcare in 51 %  of couples , and were particularly  likely to be responsible for childcare in families with pre-school aged children (not shown). Prior to the pandemic ,   young  children spent 13.5 hours per week in non-parental care , on average . During the pandemic,  almost all of this time was lost ( 12.3 hours of non-parental care lost, on average ) .  Notably , a little more than half of children spent no time in non-parental care before  the pandemic. When we restrict time in non-parental care to  parents who reported having children in non-parental care prior to the pandemic, average time in this care was 28.8 hours per week, and almost all of this time was lost during the  first part of the  pandemic (26.1 hours of non-parental care lost per week).  Regarding  homeschool arrangements,  41 %  of  parents  reported that  their school-aged  children were homeschooling during the pandemic using school created content only , a n additional 46 %  reported  using both school and parental sourced content , and  12 %  noted some other arrangement."
"73" "Table 3 presents results from logistic regression  models  predicting  paren ts’ odds of not working for pay during the  first part of the  pandemic.  Results provide support for Hypothesis 1.  Mother s   who did not have their children in care (OR   = 6.24;  p  < .01) and those who lost more than 40 hours of care (OR   = 7.6 1 ;  p  < .05) had significantly greater odds of leaving their jobs compared to those who lost less than 10 hours of care. Additionally, the odds that mothers would no longer be working for pay are 6 times greater when children’s content was created by both the parent and the school compared to just the school  (OR = 6.46 ,  p  < .0 1) .  Results in Table 3 also provide support for Hypothesis 2, as loss of non-parental care  and participation in homeschooling  are both  unrelated to fathers’ odds of unemployment .  Overall, as expected, mothers are at a greater risk of losing their job during the  early  pandemic when they lose a substantial number of non-parental care hours and when they are involved in homeschooling activity ,  whereas fathers’ employment is less affected by the loss of non-parental care."
"74" "----- Insert Table 3 about here -----"
"75" "Regarding  fathers’ share of childcare, results in Table 3 do not provide any support for Hypothesis 3;  fathers’ shares of childcare prior to the pandemic are unrelated to mothers’ odds of  not working for pay. However,  results provide support for Hypothesis 4 ;  for fathers with young children ,  greater shares of childcare prior to the pandemic result in a significant increase in the odds of not working (OR = 2. 65 ; p < .0 5 ). As shown in  Table 3,  a 20% increase in a father’s share of childcare is associated with a  165 % increase in the odds that a father employed prior to the pandemic would not be working for pay during the first month of the pandemic  (tests of equality show  a  difference between mothers and fathers;  p  < .05) ."
"76" "Table 4 presents results for parents’ paid work hours during the  first part of the  pandemic.  Findings regarding loss of non-parental childcare are similar to those from Table 3.  Consistent with Hypotheses 1 and 2, f ather’s work hours are unrelated to loss of non-parental care while mothers who did not have children in care prior to the pandemic worked fewer hours for pay (b = -3.1 4 ;  p  < .05) than those who lost 10 or fewer hours of care. We find no differences in mothers’ paid work hours among those who had children in care  prior to  the pandemic.  In contrast to Hypothesis 1 (but consistent with Hypothesis 2),  results indicate little effect of homeschooling on mothers’ or fathers’ work hours.  There is evidence that  both mothers and fathers  work more hours during the pandemic  in “other” homeschooling arrangements  (i.e., child not in school or homeschooled prior to pandemic) as compared to school-created homeschooling, but this may be due to  parents  in these situations   facing  fewer adjustments to children’s learning environments ,  which may have resulted in less pressure to reduce time in paid work."
"77" "----- Insert Table 4 about here -----"
"78" "In contrast to  results in  Table 3, results in Table 4 provide support for Hypothesis 3 and not Hypothesis 4. Specifically,  fathers’ shares of childcare  are unrelated to f athers’ paid work hours , but are positively associated with mothers’ paid work hours during the  early  pandemic for mothers of young children (tests of equality show difference between mothers and fathers;  p  <  .05) . As shown, a 20% increase in fathers’ shares of childcare are associated with 2.9 3  more hours worked ( p  < .05) for mothers of young children during the pandemic."
"79" "Table 5 shows results of logistic regression analyses  predicting  whether parents voluntarily took leave from their job or reduced work hours.  Results provide partial support for Hypotheses 1 and 2. In contrast to Hypothesis 1 (but consistent with Hypothesis 2), there is little evidence that loss of non-parental childcare is associated with voluntary reduction in paid work for either mothers or fathers. In support of Hypothesis 1, mothers had 3 times greater odds of voluntarily reducing their paid work when both the school and parents  were creating content (OR = 3.72 ,  p  < .05)   compared to situations in which children’s educational content came solely from schools.  Consistent with  Hypothesis 2,  participation in homeschooling is unrelated to fathers’ odds  of voluntarily reducing their paid work  (tests of equality show a difference between mothers and fathers;  p  < .05) ."
"80" "----- Insert Table 5 about here -----"
"81" "Consistent with Hypothesis 3, results in Table 5 also  show that father’s shares of childcare decrease the odds that mothers of young children voluntarily pulled back from the labor force during the pandemic. A 20% increase in fathers’ shares of childcare are associated with 71% lower odds of voluntary reduction in paid work for mothers of young kids (p < .05).  Results in Table 5 do not provide any support for Hypothesis 4."
"82" "DISCUSSION"
"83" "Everyone has been affected by the COVID-19 pandemic, with many people experiencing sickness and  loss  and many others coping with dramatic changes to work and family life. Many have argued that consistent with broader social structures (Risman ,  2004), the effects of the pandemic have been gendered, with women – and mothers in particular  – more  likely to bear the  burdens of the pandemic due to  their  disproportionate  carework responsibilities  (Alon et al. ,  2020; Collins et al. ,  2020; Miller ,  2020). Although there have been numerous anecdotal stories supporting this theory (e.g., Kitchner ,  2020), available data has not  yet  allowed for empirical tests of this hypothesis. Using novel data containing information on childcare, homeschooling, and parents’ employment both before and during the pandemic, this study provides evidence that largely support s  the gendered pandemic hypothesis."
"84" "We anticipated that the loss of non-parental childcare and involvement in homeschooling would be associated with more negative employment outcomes for mothers but not for fathers.  We largely find support for these expectations. For parents of young children,  results show that  the loss of full-time non-parental childcare was associated with an increased risk of job loss for  mothers.  Consistent with previous research, mothers are more likely to be employed when they have access to childcare options ( Boeckmann et al. ,  2015; Ruppanner et al. ,  2019) and are more likely to sacrifice their employment when there are childcare problems (Maume ,  2008; Stone ,  2008). Not surprisingly then, when parents went from having full-time childcare to no childcare at all  early on in  the pandemic, it was mothers who experienced a greater risk of losing their jobs whereas fathers’ employment was unaffected."
"85" "We also find that mothers were at greater risk of losing their jobs or reducing their work hours when their young children were not in non-parental childcare prior to the pandemic. Although we did not anticipate these findings, they are consistent with gendered expectations that mothers should be primarily responsible for childcare (Hays ,  1996). S upplemental analyses showed that when children were not in the care of others before the pandemic, fathers’ shares of childcare were significantly smaller ( p  < .001) than when children were in others’ care (results not shown). This indicates that more negative employment outcomes for mothers when children  were not in others’ care is driven in part by mothers’ greater responsibility for care in these instances. It is possible that these mothers  relied on  informal or infrequent forms of care  prior to the pandemic,  such as play dates with other children or attending facilities that enabled children to be occupied while mothers worked remote ly. Stay-at-home orders and  business  closure s   eliminated these options, making it more challenging for mothers without care to maintain stable employment. Overall, for  parents  with young children, the pandemic appears to have reinforced  conventional  gender norms, with limited options for childcare reducing mothers’ employment opportunities but  not impacting  fathers’ employment (Gerson ,  2010;  Schochet ,  2019)."
"86" "Results focused on parents with school-age children also support the gendered pandemic hypothesis. Specifically, participation in homeschooling was associated with an increased risk of losing a job and voluntarily leaving work (or working fewer hours) for mothers but not for fathers.  Specifically, mothers who participated in homeschooling had  three times the  probability  of  losing a job compared to mothers who only used school-created content  ( P  = .18 vs. .06) . Additionally, mothers who created homeschool content had  over twice the probability of voluntarily leaving work compared to mothers who did not create content (P = .24 vs. .11).  Mothers are more likely to be involved in children’s educational activities (Miller, 2020; Nord & West, 2001) and more likely to sacrifice their time in employment for childcare more generally (Maume, 2008; Sayer, 2005; Stone, 2008). The transition to virtual learning in the early months of the pandemic was sudden, and likely involved a learning curve for parents and children. Taking on this additional burden, as well as going above and beyond what schools provided to create educational content for children (perhaps to ensure that their children maintained a high-quality learning environment), required significant time and responsibility from mothers that increased the risk that mothers sacrificed their labor force participation to perform these duties."
"87" "While evidence shows that some mothers may voluntarily reduce their labor force participation to engage in homeschooling, supplementary analyses  revealed  that mothers’ risk of involuntary unemployment was also significantly higher when children’s educational content was created by both parents and schools (results not shown). Thus, even if mothers attempt to balance work and family during the pandemic, participation in homeschooling may signal a lack of commitment to one’s job and reinforce employers’ perceptions that mothers will prioritize childcare over work, increasing mothers’ risk of  termination or layoff  (Benard & Correll, 2010; Correll et al., 2007)."
"88" "Although loss of childcare  and homeschooling participation are  associated with a greater risk of unemployment among mothers, we also find that fathers’ participation in childcare may  have  provide d  a buffer against labor market exits for mothers  of young children  during the early months of the pandemic. When fathers are more engaged in childcare, they take some of the burdens off mothers ( England ,  2010; Goldscheider et al. ,  2015 ; Norman, 2020). In doing so, mothers may feel less pressure to reduce labor force participation during the pandemic.  Results show fairly sizeable effects. Specifically, in families where mothers do all (or almost all) of the childcare, mothers worked an average of 27 hours  per week  and had a .50 probability of voluntarily reducing their labor force participation in the early pandemic. In contrast, in families where childcare is shared relatively equally, mothers worked an average of 33 hours per week (an increase of 6 hours) and had only a .15 probability of reducing their labor force participation .   This finding suggests that encouraging greater father involvement in domestic labor is important in reducing broader gender inequalities that have been exposed by the pandemic (Alon et al., 2020; Goldscheider et al., 2015; Miller, 2020), and is consistent with recent research showing  that  fathers’ involvement in childcare is positively associated with mothers’ employment (Norman, 2020) ."
"89" "Consistent with human capital theory (Becker, 1985), we also find  that fathers’  care of young children is associated with an increased risk of fathers no longer working for pay during the pandemic. Supplemental analyses (results not shown) demonstrate that this association does not extend to involuntary employment, suggesting that the association between fathers’ participation in childcare and leaving the labor force are likely attributable to fathers’ decisions to take voluntary leave to attend to childcare responsibilities. Performing more of the childcare duties, therefore, appears to have helped facilitate mothers’ labor force participation during the early pandemic with potentially little cost to fathers. Nonetheless, prioritizing childcare may be stigmatizing if seen as violating ideal worker norms and diminish fathers’ employment prospects long-term ( Coltrane et al., 2013; Vandello et al., 2013; Weisshaar, 2018)."
"90" "Despite the strengths of this study, there are important limitations to acknowledge. First, data used for this study is not nationally representative. The data are weighted to be representative of US parents  regarding  gender, race/ethnicity, and age, and characteristics of the sample a re  similar to nationally representative estimates across  many characteristics   ( including employment ) . Nevertheless, these data underrepresent less educated and more religious parents, and future work should investigate the associations between childcare, homeschooling, and employment using nationally representative data.   Second, these data are cross-sectional. Although parents reported on employment, childcare, and schooling both before and during the pandemic, we are unable to determine exactly which changes came first.  While it would be interesting to consider whether an increase in fathers’ sharing of childcare during the pandemic helped to buffer against negative employment outcomes for mothers  (in these data, the  proportion of families where fathers equally shared childcare of young children increased by 10% during the early days of the pandemic) , division of labor measures during the early pandemic are not included due to endogeneity concerns.  For example,   observation of a  positive association between  mothers’ labor force participation  and fathers’  shares of childcare during the pandemic could  be due to recently unemployed  mothers  taking on  more domestic responsibility .  Even so, this study is uniq ue in having information on  employment and childcare/schooling both before and during the pandemic, which enables us to consider these associations , as well as  the associations of pre-pandemic domestic arrangements on labor market outcomes during the early days of the pandemic ."
"91" "Because our  framework focuses on gender  d ynamics specific to parents in different-sex couples, our study  excluded  parents in same-sex relationships  and couples consisting of a partner identifying as nonbinary or transgender (N = 8) . Supplemental analyses suggest that  same-sex  parents have also been hit hard by the pandemic; employment rates for mothers with same-sex partners  (N = 49)  fell from 70% before the pandemic to 52% during the pandemic, and employment rates for fathers with same-sex  partners   (N = 33)  fell from 86% to 75%. There is also some evidence that partners’ share of childcare may provide a buffer against negative employment outcomes for mothers in same-sex partnerships (but not for fathers). However, limited sample sizes prevent a full examination of the associations between childcare, homeschooling, and employment among parents in same-sex relationships. This is certainly an area of research for scholars to explore, as parents in same-sex relationships have been largely ignored in discussions on how parents have been affected by the pandemic."
"92" "T here may  also  be biases in parents’ recall regarding time spent in  paid work and  childcare prior to the pandemic .   Parents with adverse labor market outcomes during the  pandemic may reflect more positively  on the past. Moreover, the emotional toll of the pandemic may  cloud individuals ’  perceptions of both past and current circumstances  ( Kensinger, Gutchess, & Schacter, 2007) .   It  would  also  be helpful to have data  on  why parents experienced changes in employment. Unfortunately, such questions were not included in the survey. Moreover, there was just one question on whether parents left their job or reduced their work hours voluntarily, and it would have been useful to have more information regarding these voluntary changes.  Limited sample sizes also prevent us from examining which parent was primarily responsible for creating homeschooling content and how this may be associated with employment."
"93" "Despite these limitations,  this study compliments recent  work  highlighting  gender inequality in  employment  during  the COVID-19 pandemic (Collins et al. ,  2020; Landivar et al. ,  2020 ; Qian  &  Fuller ,  2020) by empirically demonstrating that  lack of access to  childcare   and participation in homeschooling have increased the risk of unemployment and reduced work hours among  US  mothers.   Importantly, r esults also show that the risk of negative employment outcomes for mothers is reduced when fathers perform a greater share of childcare.  Although  access to  non-parental care is important to employment for mothers of young children, encourag ing  greater father involvement   by  extending federal paid leave programs  may be  equally important in reducing gender disparities in parental employment  as the pandemic persists . For parents of school-aged children, re-opening schools  appears   vital to  reducing gender disparities . Unfortunately, the failure to curtail the pandemic during the  summer  of 2020  and provide schools the necessary resources to mitigate risks of COVID-19 transmission  led many districts to continue virtual education  in the fall  (Burbio ,  2020) .  Although gender differences in unemployment narrowed substantially by  September  2020, high levels of virtual learning in the fall of 2020   will  likely exacerbate gender  gaps  in parental employment."
"94" "REFERENCES"
"95" "Acker, J.  ( 1990 ) . Hierarchies,  j obs, and  b odies: A  t heory of  g endered  o rganizations.  Gender & Society , 4,  139-158.   https://doi.org/10.1177/089124390004002002 ."
"96" "Alon, T . ,  Doepke, M.  Olmstead-Rumsey , J. &  Michèle Tertilt , M .  ( 2020 ) . The  i mpact of COVID-19 on  g ender  e quality  ( NBER Working Paper  No.  26947 ) .  Retrieved from:  http://www.nber.org/papers/w26947 ."
"97" "Andrew, A . ,  C attan,  S., Costa Dias, M.,  Farquharson,  C.,  Kraftman , L. , Krutikova , S. , Phimister,  A., & Sevilla, A.   ( 2020 ) . How are  m others and  f athers  b alancing  w ork and  f amily  u nder  l ockdown? Institute for Fiscal Studies Briefing Note.  Retrieved from :  https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14860 ."
"98" "Baker, R ., Brick, J.M., Bates, N.A., Battaglia, M., Couper, M.P., Dever, J.A., Gile, K.J., & Tourangeau, R. ( 2013 ) . Summary  r eport of the AAPOR  t ask  f orce on  n on- p robability Sampling.  Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology , 1,  90–143.  https:// doi .org/ 10.1093/jssam/smt008."
"99" "Becker, G . S.  ( 1985 ) . Human  c apital,  e ffort, and the  s exual  d ivision of  l abor.  Journal of Labor Economics , 3,  S33-S58.   https://doi.org/10.1086/298075 ."
"100" "Benard, S . & Correll, S.J. ( 2010 ) . Normative  d iscrimination and the  m otherhood  p enalty.  Gender & Society , 24,  616-646.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243210383142 ."
"101" "Berk, S .F.   (1985) .  The  g ender  f actory: The  a pportionment of  w ork in American  h ouseholds .  New York: Plenum Press ."
"102" "Bianchi, S . M.,  Sayer, L.C., Milkie, M.A., & Robinson, J.P. ( 2012 ) . Housework: Who  d id,  d oes or  w ill  d o  i t, and  h ow  m uch  d oes  i t  m atter?  Social Forces , 91,  55–63.  https://doi.org/   10.1093/sf/sos120 ."
"103" "Blair-Loy, M.  ( 2003 ) .  Competing  d evotions: Career and  f amily among  w omen  e xecutives.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press."
"104" "Boeckmann, I . ,  Misra, J., & Budig, M.J. ( 2015 ) . Cultural and  i nstitutional  f actors  s haping  m others’  e mployment and  w orking Hours in  p ostindustrial  c ountries.  Social Forces , 93,  1301-1333.   https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sou119 ."
"105" "Burbio.  ( 2020 , September 10) . Burbio’s K-12  s chool  o pening  t racker.  Retrieved from:   https://cai.burbio.com/school-opening-tracker/ ."
"106" "C ha, Y.  ( 2010 ) . Reinforcing  s eparate  s pheres: The  e ffect of  s pousal  o verwork on  m en’s and  w omen’s  e mployment in  d ual- e arner  h ouseholds.  American Sociological Review , 75,  303-329.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122410365307 ."
"107" "Cha, Y.  ( 2013 ) . Overwork and the  p ersistence of  g ender  s egregation in  o ccupations.  Gender & Society , 27,  158-184.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243212470510."
"108" "Chaker, A .M.   ( 2020 ) . Amid  c oronavirus,  p arents ‘Pod  u p’ to  f orm  a t- h ome  s chools.”  The Wall Street Journal , July 21.  Retrieved from :  https://www.wsj.com/articles/amid-coronavirus-parents-pod-up-to-form-at-home-schools-11595323805 ."
"109" "Chung, H ., Seo, H., Forbes, S., & Birkett, H. ( 2020 ) . Working  f rom  h ome  d uring the COVID-19  l ockdown: Changing  p references and the  f uture of  w ork. University of Kent  research brief .  Retrieved from :  https://www.citywomen.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Working_from_home_COVID-19_lockdown.pdf ."
"110" "Collins, C.  ( 2019 ) .  Making  m otherhood  w ork: How  w omen  m anage  c areers and  c aregiving .  Princeton:  Princeton University Press."
"111" "Collins, C. ,  Landivar, L.C., Ruppanner, L., & Scarborough, W.J. (2020). COVID-19 and the gender gap in work hours.   Gender, Work, and Organization.   https://doi.org/10.1111/gwao.12506 ."
"112" "Coltrane, S. ,  Miller, E.C., DeHaan, T., & Stewart, L. ( 2013 ). Fathers and the flexibility stigma.   Journal of Social Issues , 69,  279-302.   https://doi.org/10.1111/josi.12015 ."
"113" "Correll, S. J.,  Benard, S., & Paik, I.   ( 2007 ). Getting a job: Is there a motherhood p enalty ?   American Journal of Sociology , 112,  1297-1339.   https://doi.org/10.1086/511799 ."
"114" "Coppock, A .   ( 2019 ) . Generalizing from  s urvey  e xperiments  c onducted on Mechanical Turk: A  r eplication  a pproach.   Political Science Research and   Methods ,  7 ,  613– 6 28.  https://doi.org/ 10.1017/psrm.2018.10."
"115" "Davies, A .R. & Frink, B.D. ( 2014 ). The origins of the ideal worker: The separation of work and home in the United States from the market revolution to 1950.   Work and Occupations , 41,  18-39.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888413515893 ."
"116" "England, P. (2010). The gender revolution: Uneven and stalled.  Gender & Society, 24,  149-166.  https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243210361475 ."
"117" "Fuller, S .  ( 2018 ). Segregation across w orkplaces  and the motherhood wage g ap : Why do mothers work in low-wage establishments?   Social Forces , 96,  1443-1476.   https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/sox087 ."
"118" "Garfield, R. ,  Rae, M., Claxton, G., & Orgera, K.   ( 2020 ). Double jeopardy: Low wage workers at risk for health and financial i mplications  of COVID-19.  Kaiser Family Foundation.  Retrieved from :  https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/issue-brief/double-jeopardy-low-wage-workers-at-risk-for-health-and-financial-implications-of-covid-19/ ."
"119" "Gerson, K.  ( 2010 ) .  The  unfinished r evolution : How a  new g eneration  is  reshaping f amily ,  w ork , and  g ender  in America . New York: Oxford University Press."
"120" "Glauber, R .  ( 2018 ). Trends in the motherhood wage penalty and fatherhood wage premium for low, middle, and high earners.   Demography , 55,  1663-1680.   https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s13524-018-0712-5."
"121" "Goldscheider, F . , Bernhardt,  E., &  Lappegård , T .  ( 2015 ). The gender revolution: A framework for understanding changing family and demographic behavior.   Population and Development Review , 41,  207-239.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1728-4457.2015.00045.x ."
"122" "Gracia, P. &  Esping-Andersen , G .  ( 2015 ). Fathers’ child care time and mothers’ paid work: A cross-national s tudy of Denmark,  Spain, and the United Kingdom.   Family Science , 6,  270-281.   https://doi.org/10.1080/19424620.2015.1082336."
"123" "Gupta, S .  ( 2007 ). Autonomy, dependence, or display? The relationship between m arried  women’s e arning s and housework.   Journal of Marriage and Family , 69,  399-417.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1741-3737.2007.00373.x ."
"124" "Guyot, K. & Sawhill, I.V.   ( 2020 ). Telecommuting will likely continue long after the pandemic.   Brookings Institute.  Retrieved  from :  https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/04/06/telecommuting-will-likely-continue-long-after-the-pandemic/ ."
"125" "Hays, S .  ( 199 6 ) .  The cultural contradictions of m otherhood .  New Haven:  Yale University Press."
"126" "Heggeness, M. L.  & Fields, J.M. ( 2020 ). Working moms bear brunt of home schooling while working during COVID-19.  U.S. Census Bureau.  Retrieved from :  https://www.census.gov/library/stories/2020/08/parents-juggle-work-and-child-care-during-pandemic.html?# ."
"127" "Hochshild, A . & Machung, A. ( 1989 ) .  The second shift: Working parents and the revolution at h ome.  New York: Penguin Books."
"128" "Hollingsworth, H.  ( 2020 ). Interest in homeschooling has ’Exploded’ amid pandemic.   Associated Press.  Retrieved from :  https://apnews.com/23033c2f23fb1708d2f5b797becb2b0f ."
"129" "Holmes, E .K. ,  Petts, R.J., Thomas, C.R., Robbins, N.L., & Henry, T. ( 2020 ). Do workplace c ha racteristics moderate the effects of attitudes on father warmth and e ngagement?”  Journal of Family Psychology .  https://doi.org/10.1037/fam0000672."
"130" "Jeong,  M., Zhang, D., Morgan, J.C., Ross, J.C., Osman, A., Boynton, M.H., Mendel, J.R., & Brewer, N.T.   ( 2019 ). Similarities and differences in tobacco control research findings from c onveni ence and probability s amples.”  Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 53,  476-4 85.  https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay059 ."
"131" "Kaufman, G. &  Grönlund , A .  ( 2019 ). Displaying parenthood, (un)doing gender: Parental leave, daycare, and working-time a d justments in Sweden and the UK.   Families Relationships and Societies.  https://doi.org/10.1332/204674319X15683716957916."
"132" "Kensinger, E.A., Garoff-Eaton, R.J., & Schacter, D.L. (2007). Effects of emotion on memory specificity in young and older adults.  Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 62 , 208-215.  https://doi.org/   10.1093/geronb/62.4.p208 ."
"133" "Kitchener, C .  ( 2020 ). ’I had to choose being a mother’: With no child care or summer camps, women are being e dge d out of the workforce.   TheLily.  Retrieved from :  https://www.thelily.com/i-had-to-choose-being-a-mother-with-no-child-care-or-summer-camps-women-are-being-edged-out-of-the-workforce/ ."
"134" "Landivar, L .C., Ruppanner, L., Scarborough, W.J., & Collins, C. ( 2020 ). Early signs indicate that COVID-19 is exacerbating gender inequality in the labor f orce.”  Socius.  https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023120947997."
"135" "Levay, K. E.,  Freese, J. ,  & Druckman, J.N. ( 2016 ). The demographic and political composition of Mechanical Turk samples.   SAGE Open , 6, 1 -17 .  https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244016636433 ."
"136" "Livingston, G. &  Parker, K . 2019. 8 facts about American dads.  Pew Research Center . Retrieved from:  https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/06/12/fathers-day-facts/ ."
"137" "Maume, D. J.  ( 2008 ). Gender differences in providing urgent childcare among dual-earner parents.   Social Forces , 87,  273-297.   https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.0.0101 ."
"138" "Mervosh, S. ,  Lu, D., & Swales, V. (2020). See which states and cities have told residents to stay at home .  The New York Times . Retrieved May 31, 2020  from:   https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html ."
"139" "Miller, C .C.   ( 2020 ) .  Nearly half of men say they do most of the home schooling; 3 percent of women agree.   The New York Times .  Retrieved from:   https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/06/upshot/pandemic-chores-homeschooling-gender.html ."
"140" "Mize, T. D.,  Doan, L., & Long, J.S. ( 2019 ). A general framework for comparing predictions and m arginal  effects across models.   Sociological Methodology , 49,  152-189.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0081175019852763 ."
"141" "Nord, C .W. & West, J. (2001). Fathers’ and mothers’ involvement in their children’s schools by family type and resident status.  National Center for Education Statistics.  Retrieved from:   https://nces.ed.gov/pubs2001/2001032.pdf ."
"142" "Norman, H .  ( 2020 ). Does paternal involvement in childcare influence mothers’ employment trajectories during the early stages of parenthood in the UK?   Sociology , 54,  329-345.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038519870720 ."
"143" "Palan, S. & Schitter, C.   ( 2018 ) . “Prolific. Ac—A subject pool for online e xperiments.”  Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance , 17,  22–27.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004."
"144" "Peer, E .,  Brandimarte , L. , Samat,  S., &  Acquisti , A .  ( 2017 ). Beyond the turk: Alternative platforms for crowdsourcing behavioral research.   Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 70,  153-163.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2017.01.006."
"145" "Petts, R. J.,  & Knoester, C. ( 2018 ). Paternity leave-taking and father engagement.   Journal of Marriage and Family , 80,  1144– 11 62.   https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12494 ."
"146" "Petts, R. J.,  Shafer, K.M., & Essig, L .  ( 2018 ). Does adherence to masculine norms shape f a thering behavior?   Journal of Marriage and Family , 80,  704-720.   https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12476 ."
"147" "Pew Research Center. 2020. About half of lower-income Americans report household job or wage loss due to COVID-19.   Retrieved from :  https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2020/04/PSDT_04.21.20_covidfinance_FULL.REPORT.pdf ."
"148" "Oian, Y. & Fuller, S. ( 2020 ). COVID-19 and the gender employment g ap amon g parents of young children.   Canadian Public Policy.  https://doi.org/10.3138/cpp.2020-077."
"149" "Raley, S. ,  Bianchi, S.M., & Wang, W .  ( 2012 ). When do fathers care? Mothers’ economic contribution and fathers’ involvement in child care.   American Journal of Sociology , 117,  1422-1459.  https://doi.org./ 10.1086/663354 ."
"150" "Ranson, G .  ( 2012 ). Men, paid employment and family r esponsibilities : Conceptualizing the ‘Working father.’   Gender, Work and Organization , 19,  741-761.   https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0432.2011.00549.x ."
"151" "Ridgeway, C . L.  & Correll, S.J. ( 2004 ) . Unpacking the  g ender  s ystem: A  t heoretical  p erspective on  g ender  b eliefs and  s ocial  r elations.  Gender & Society , 18,  510–31.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243204265269 ."
"152" "Risman, B . J.  ( 2004 ) . Gender as a  s ocial  s tructure: Theory  w restling with  a ctivism.  Gender & Society , 18,  429-450.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243204265349 ."
"153" "Rothwell, J.  ( 2020 ) . Official  j obless  f igures  w ill  m iss the  e conomic  p ain of the  p andemic. Brookings Institute.  Retrieved from: :  https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/04/03/official-jobless-figures-will-miss-the-economic-pain-of-the-pandemic/"
"154" "Rudman, L . A.  & Mescher, K. ( 2013 ) . Penalizing  m en  w ho  r equest a  f amily  l eave: Is  f lexibility  s tigma a  f emininity  s tigma?  Journal of Social Issues , 69,  322-340.   https://doi.org/10.1111/josi.12017 ."
"155" "Ruppanner, L.  ( 2020 ) .  Motherlands: How States Push Mothers Out of Employment.  Philadelphia: Temple University Press."
"156" "Ruppanner, L . ,  Moller, S., & Sayer, L.C. ( 2019 ) . Expensive  c hildcare and  s hort  s chool  d ays = Lower  m aternal  e mployment and  m ore  t ime in  c hildcare? Evidence from the American Time Use Survey.”  Socius.  https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023119860277 ."
"157" "Sayer, L . C.  ( 2005 ) . Gender,  t ime and  i nequality: Trends in  w omen’s and  m en’s  p aid  w ork,  u npaid  w ork, and  f ree  t ime.  Social Forces , 84,  285-303.   https://doi.org/10.1353/sof.2005.0126 ."
"158" "Schochet, L.  (2019).  The  c hild  c are  c risis is  k eeping  w omen  o ut of the  w orkforce. Center for American Progress.  Retrieved from: :   https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/early-childhood/reports/2019/03/28/467488/child-care-crisis-keeping-women-workforce/ ."
"159" "Stone, P.  ( 2008 ) .  Opting  o ut?: Why  w omen  r eally  q uit  c areers and  h ead  h ome .  Berkeley:  University of California Press."
"160" "Thébaud, S . ,  Kornrick, S. &  Ruppanner , L .  ( 2019 ) . Good  h ousekeeping,  g reat  e xpectations:  g ender and  h ousework  n orms.  Sociological Methods & Research   https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124119852395 ."
"161" "Tourangeau, R . ,  Conrad, F.G., & Couper, M.P. ( 2013 ) .   The  s cience  of  w eb  s urveys .  Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"162" "U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.  ( 2020 ) . A-10.  U nemployment  r ates by  a ge,  s ex, and  m arital  s tatus,  s easonally  a djusted.  Retrieved from:   https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cpseea10.htm ."
"163" "Vandello, J . A., Hettinger , V.E. ,  Bosson, J.K, &  Siddiqi , J .  ( 2013 ) . When  e qual  i sn’t  r eally  e qual: The  m asculine  d ilemma of  s eeking  w ork  f lexibility.  Journal of Social Issues , 69,  303-321.   https://doi.org/10.1111/josi.12016 ."
"164" "Weisshaar, K.  ( 2018 ) . From  o pt  o ut to  b locked  o ut: The  c hallenges for  l abor  m arket  r e-entry after  f amily- r elated  e mployment  l apses.  American Sociological Review , 83,  34-60.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122417752355 ."
"165" "West ,  C . & Zimmerman, D.H. ( 1987 ) . Doing  g ender.  Gender & Society , 1,  125– 1 51.   https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243287001002002 ."
"166" "Yavorsky, J . E.,  Kamp Dush, C.M., & Schoppe-Sullivan, S.J. ( 2015 ) . The  p roduction of  i nequality: The  g ender  d ivision of  l abor  a cross the  t ransition to  p arenthood.  Journal of Marriage and Family , 77,  662– 6 79.   https://doi.org/ 10.1111/jomf.12189."
"167" "Zick, C . D.,  Bryant, W.K. ,  &  Österbacka , E.   ( 2001 ) . Mothers’  e mployment,  p arental  i nvolvement, and the  i mplications for  i ntermediate  c hild  o utcomes.  Social Science Research , 30,  25-49.   https://doi.org/10.1006/ssre.2000.0685."
"168" "Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for  S tatistical  C ontrols (N  = 989) "
"169" "Mean /Prop."
"170" "SD"
"171" "State stay-at-home order"
"172" "Innovator"
"173" ".38"
"174" "-"
"175" "Early adopter"
"176" ".25"
"177" "-"
"178" "Late adopter"
"179" ".32"
"180" "-"
"181" "Resister"
"182" ".04"
"183" "-"
"184" "Gender (woman = 1)"
"185" ".49"
"186" "-"
"187" "Married"
"188" ".88"
"189" "-"
"190" "Age of youngest child"
"191" "7.42"
"192" "7.20"
"193" "Number of children"
"194" "1.77"
"195" "1.16"
"196" "Religious affiliation of primary respondent"
"197" "Catholic"
"198" ".22"
"199" "-"
"200" "Protestant"
"201" ".24"
"202" "-"
"203" "Agnostic"
"204" ".14"
"205" "-"
"206" "None"
"207" ".23"
"208" "Other"
"209" ".18"
"210" "-"
"211" "Political Party Affiliation"
"212" "Republican"
"213" ".27"
"214" "-"
"215" "Democrat"
"216" ".43"
"217" "-"
"218" "Independent"
"219" ".24"
"220" "-"
"221" "Other"
"222" ".06"
"223" "-"
"224" "Race/Ethnicity of primary respondent"
"225" "-"
"226" "White"
"227" ".57"
"228" "-"
"229" "Black"
"230" ".10"
"231" "-"
"232" "Latinx"
"233" ".19"
"234" "-"
"235" "Asian/Other"
"236" ".13"
"237" "-"
"238" "Mother in excellent/good health"
"239" ".57"
"240" "-"
"241" "Father’s in excellent/good health"
"242" ".59"
"243" "-"
"244" "Mother’s Age"
"245" "30.22"
"246" "17.17"
"247" "Father’s Age"
"248" "33.95"
"249" "19.24"
"250" "Mother’s Education"
"251" "HS or less"
"252" ".10"
"253" "-"
"254" "Some college"
"255" ".50"
"256" "-"
"257" "Bachelor’s degree"
"258" ".28"
"259" "-"
"260" "Advanced degree"
"261" ".13"
"262" "-"
"263" "Father’s Education"
"264" "HS or less"
"265" ".12"
"266" "-"
"267" "Some college"
"268" ".49"
"269" "-"
"270" "Bachelor’s degree"
"271" ".32"
"272" "-"
"273" "Advanced degree"
"274" ".07"
"275" "-"
"276" "Household income"
"277" "4.99"
"278" "2.22"
"279" "Relative earnings"
"280" "Father earns more"
"281" ".64"
"282" "-"
"283" "Earning shared equally"
"284" ".09"
"285" "-"
"286" "Mother earns more"
"287" ".27"
"288" "-"
"289" "Respondents’ gender ideology"
"290" "1.96"
"291" "0.91"
"292" "Work from home before pandemic"
"293" "Mother works from home exclusively"
"294" ".11"
"295" "-"
"296" "Mother works from home sometimes"
"297" ".15"
"298" "-"
"299" "Mother does not work from home"
"300" ".74"
"301" "-"
"302" "Father works from home exclusively"
"303" ".06"
"304" "-"
"305" "Father works from home sometimes"
"306" ".23"
"307" "-"
"308" "Father does not work from home"
"309" ".70"
"310" "-"
"311" "Mother is essential worker"
"312" ".13"
"313" "-"
"314" "Father is essential worker"
"315" ".14"
"316" "-"
"317" "Table  2: Descriptive Statistics for Employment, Childcare, and S chooling (N  = 989)"
"318" "Before COVID19"
"319" "During COVID19"
"320" "Mean or Proportion"
"321" "SD"
"322" "Mean or Proportion"
"323" "SD"
"324" "Employment"
"325" "Mother working for pay"
"326" ".65"
"327" "-"
"328" ".58"
"329" "-"
"330" "Mother paid work hours per week"
"331" "35. 44"
"332" "14. 17"
"333" "3 2 . 06"
"334" "1 6 . 66"
"335" "Mother left job/reduced hours voluntarily"
"336" ".19"
"337" "-"
"338" "Proportion not working who left voluntarily"
"339" ".43"
"340" "-"
"341" "Proportion with reduced hours who reduced hours voluntarily"
"342" ".28"
"343" "-"
"344" "Father working for pay"
"345" ".90"
"346" "-"
"347" ".82"
"348" "-"
"349" "Father paid work hours per week"
"350" "4 2 . 95"
"351" "1 1 . 45"
"352" "3 9 . 17"
"353" "1 2 . 84"
"354" "Father left job/reduced hours voluntarily"
"355" ".13"
"356" "-"
"357" "Proportion not working who left voluntarily"
"358" ".26"
"359" "-"
"360" "Proportion with reduced hours who reduced hours voluntarily"
"361" ".23"
"362" "-"
"363" "Division of childcare"
"364" "Mother does majority"
"365" ".51"
"366" "-"
"367" "Shared equally"
"368" ".44"
"369" "-"
"370" "Father does majority"
"371" ".05"
"372" "-"
"373" "Non-parental childcare hours lost"
"374" "12.26"
"375" "21.76"
"376" "Child not in care prior to pandemic"
"377" ".53"
"378" "10 hours or less per week"
"379" ".09"
"380" "11-20 hours per week"
"381" ".10"
"382" "21-30 hours per week"
"383" ".10"
"384" "31-40 hours per week"
"385" ".13"
"386" "41+ hours per week"
"387" ".05"
"388" "Homeschooling"
"389" "School & parent created content"
"390" ".46"
"391" "-"
"392" "School created content only"
"393" ".41"
"394" "-"
"395" "Other"
"396" ".13"
"397" "-"
"398" "Table 3:  Logistic Regression Results Predicting  Not Working for Pay  During Pandemic"
"399" "MOTHERS"
"400" "FATHERS"
"401" "Parents with children under age 18"
"402" "Parents with children under age 6"
"403" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"404" "Parents with children under age 18"
"405" "Parents with children under age 6"
"406" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"407" "(N = 623)"
"408" "(N = 341)"
"409" "(N = 282)"
"410" "(N = 891)"
"411" "(N = 509)"
"412" "(N = 382)"
"413" "OR"
"414" "(se)"
"415" "OR"
"416" "(se)"
"417" "OR"
"418" "(se)"
"419" "OR"
"420" "(se)"
"421" "OR"
"422" "(se)"
"423" "OR"
"424" "(se)"
"425" "Father ’ s share of childcare  pre- pandemic  (range from 1=mother does all to 5=father does all)"
"426" ". 92"
"427" "(.3 5 )"
"428" ".48"
"429" "(.28)"
"430" "1.22"
"431" "(.81 )"
"432" "1.2 5"
"433" "(.30)"
"434" "2. 65 *"
"435" "(1.0 4 )"
"436" ".76"
"437" "(.35 )"
"438" "Non-parental childcare hours lost (ref = 10 hours or less)"
"439" "Child not in care"
"440" "---"
"441" "6.24**"
"442" "(4.15)"
"443" "---"
"444" "---"
"445" ".9 7"
"446" "(.6 2 )"
"447" "---"
"448" "11-20 hours"
"449" "---"
"450" "2.28"
"451" "(2.08)"
"452" "---"
"453" "---"
"454" "1. 08"
"455" "(. 85 )"
"456" "---"
"457" "21-30 hours"
"458" "---"
"459" "2.81"
"460" "(2.49)"
"461" "---"
"462" "---"
"463" ".74"
"464" "(.55)"
"465" "---"
"466" "30-40 hours"
"467" "---"
"468" "1.88"
"469" "(1.61)"
"470" "---"
"471" "---"
"472" ". 80"
"473" "(.7 2 )"
"474" "---"
"475" "41+ hours"
"476" "---"
"477" "7.6 1 *"
"478" "(7.41)"
"479" "---"
"480" "---"
"481" ".1 0"
"482" "(.1 2 )"
"483" "---"
"484" "Homeschooling during pandemic (ref = School created content only)"
"485" "Parent & school"
"486" "---"
"487" "---"
"488" "6.46**"
"489" "(3.50 )"
"490" "---"
"491" "---"
"492" "2.37"
"493" "(1.09 )"
"494" "Other"
"495" "---"
"496" "---"
"497" "2.0 2"
"498" "(1. 78 )"
"499" "---"
"500" "---"
"501" "1.28"
"502" "(1.23 )"
"503" "*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001;  M odels include  all  statistical controls  described in the data and methods section.  Analysis limited to mothers and fathers working for pay prior to beginning of pandemic ."
"504" "Table 4:  OLS Regression Results Predicting  Paid Work Hours During Pandemic"
"505" "MOTHERS"
"506" "FATHERS"
"507" "Parents with children under age 18"
"508" "Parents with children under age 6"
"509" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"510" "Parents with children under age 18"
"511" "Parents with children under age 6"
"512" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"513" "(N = 507)"
"514" "(N = 269)"
"515" "(N = 238)"
"516" "(N = 789)"
"517" "(N = 452)"
"518" "(N = 338)"
"519" "B"
"520" "(se)"
"521" "B"
"522" "(se)"
"523" "B"
"524" "(se)"
"525" "B"
"526" "(se)"
"527" "B"
"528" "(se)"
"529" "B"
"530" "(se)"
"531" "Father ’ s share of childcare  pre- pandemic  (range from 1=mother does all to 5=father does all)"
"532" "1.1 0"
"533" "(1.0 5 )"
"534" "2.9 3 *"
"535" "(1.43)"
"536" "-. 37"
"537" "(1. 58 )"
"538" "-. 45"
"539" "(. 79 )"
"540" "- 1 . 06"
"541" "( 1 . 0 0)"
"542" ". 85"
"543" "(1.0 3 )"
"544" "Non-parental childcare hours lost (ref = 10 hours or less)"
"545" "Child not in care"
"546" "---"
"547" "-3.1 4 *"
"548" "(1.50)"
"549" "---"
"550" "---"
"551" ". 83"
"552" "(1.4 5 )"
"553" "---"
"554" "11-20 hours"
"555" "---"
"556" "1.49"
"557" "(1.84)"
"558" "---"
"559" "---"
"560" ". 78"
"561" "(2.0 3 )"
"562" "---"
"563" "21-30 hours"
"564" "---"
"565" "-2.11"
"566" "(2.13)"
"567" "---"
"568" "---"
"569" "- 1 . 03"
"570" "(1.9 4 )"
"571" "---"
"572" "30-40 hours"
"573" "---"
"574" "-.20"
"575" "(1.7 0 )"
"576" "---"
"577" "---"
"578" "-. 19"
"579" "(1. 69 )"
"580" "---"
"581" "41+ hours"
"582" "---"
"583" "1.22"
"584" "(1.83)"
"585" "---"
"586" "---"
"587" "-. 47"
"588" "(1. 88 )"
"589" "---"
"590" "Homeschooling during pandemic (ref = School created content only)"
"591" "Parent & school"
"592" "---"
"593" "---"
"594" "2. 71"
"595" "(1.46 )"
"596" "---"
"597" "---"
"598" ".10"
"599" "(1.1 0 )"
"600" "Other"
"601" "---"
"602" "---"
"603" "8 .75 **"
"604" "(2.8 3 )"
"605" "---"
"606" "---"
"607" "4 . 79 **"
"608" "(1. 66 )"
"609" "*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001;  M odels include  all  statistical controls  described in the data and methods section.  Analysis limited to mothers and fathers who were working for pay both before and during pandemic ."
"610" "Table 5:  Logistic Regression Results Predicting  Left Job/Reduced Hours Voluntarily"
"611" "MOTHERS"
"612" "FATHERS"
"613" "Parents with children under age 18"
"614" "Parents with children under age 6"
"615" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"616" "Parents with children under age 18"
"617" "Parents with children under age 6"
"618" "Parents with children age 6-17"
"619" "(N = 623)"
"620" "(N = 341)"
"621" "(N = 282)"
"622" "(N =891)"
"623" "(N = 509)"
"624" "(N = 382)"
"625" "OR"
"626" "(se)"
"627" "OR"
"628" "(se)"
"629" "OR"
"630" "(se)"
"631" "OR"
"632" "(se)"
"633" "OR"
"634" "(se)"
"635" "OR"
"636" "(se)"
"637" "Father ’ s share of childcare  pre- pandemic  (range from 1=mother does all to 5=father does all)"
"638" "1.20"
"639" "(.3 3 )"
"640" ".29*"
"641" "(.14)"
"642" "2 . 87"
"643" "(.77 )"
"644" "1.1 4"
"645" "(.31)"
"646" ". 78"
"647" "(.31)"
"648" "1.61"
"649" "(.62 )"
"650" "Non-parental childcare hours lost (ref = 10 hours or less)"
"651" "Child not in care"
"652" "---"
"653" ".66"
"654" "(.33)"
"655" "---"
"656" "---"
"657" "2. 69"
"658" "(1.8 2 )"
"659" "---"
"660" "11-20 hours"
"661" "---"
"662" ".26"
"663" "(.19)"
"664" "---"
"665" "---"
"666" "3.4 2"
"667" "(3. 18 )"
"668" "---"
"669" "21-30 hours"
"670" "---"
"671" ".47"
"672" "(.35)"
"673" "---"
"674" "---"
"675" "4.0 6"
"676" "(3.5 3 )"
"677" "---"
"678" "31-40 hours"
"679" "---"
"680" ".33"
"681" "(.19)"
"682" "---"
"683" "---"
"684" "3.6 9"
"685" "(2.9 9 )"
"686" "---"
"687" "41+ hours"
"688" "---"
"689" ".31"
"690" "(.24)"
"691" "---"
"692" "---"
"693" ".24"
"694" "(.31)"
"695" "---"
"696" "Homeschooling during pandemic (ref = School created content only)"
"697" "Parent & school"
"698" "---"
"699" "---"
"700" "3.72 *"
"701" "(2.04 )"
"702" "---"
"703" "---"
"704" "1.06"
"705" "(.52 )"
"706" "Other"
"707" "---"
"708" "---"
"709" "3.93"
"710" "(2.85 )"
"711" "---"
"712" "---"
"713" "1. 20"
"714" "(1. 13 )"
"715" "*p < .05; **p < .01; ***p < .001;  M odels include  all  statistical controls  described in the data and methods section.  Analysis limited to mothers and fathers working for pay prior to beginning of pandemic ."
