"x"
"1" "Of denial and data: Deaths due to India’s COVID-19 lockdown"
"2" "Aman,  Thejesh  GN,  Krushna Ranaware, Kanika Sharma"
"3" "Abstract"
"4" "On March 23, 2020, the Indian government announced a national lockdown, barely giving a four-notice to a country of 1.3 billion people. What unfolded next was a humanitarian crisis, including deaths caused by the lockdown. The Indian government has been in denial about these deaths and the data on them. In this article, we describe the motivation, process, and details of our attempt to gather data on the human costs of the lockdown. Using media reports, we recorded a total of 989 deaths under 11 categories from March-July 2020. These deaths highlight the devasting consequences of a harsh and sudden lockdown on the vulnerable sections. They also underscore the need for strong social security efforts to reduce the aftereffects of the lockdown and the pandemic."
"5" "Keywords"
"6" "L ockdown ; D eaths ; D enial ;   D ata ; M edia ; COVID-19"
"7" "Author information"
"8" "Aman is an Assistant Professor of Legal Practice at the Jindal Global School of Law.  Thejesh  GN is a Public Interest Technologist. Krushna Ranaware is a PhD student (Social Science) at Syracuse University. Kanika Sharma is a PhD student (Sociology) at Emory University  ( kanika.sharma@emory.edu ).  We are grateful to Jean  Drèze ,  Reetika   Khera , and Aashish Gupta for helpful comments. All errors are our own."
"9" "March 2021 marks one year since India’s COVID-19 lockdown was first imposed.   On March  23 rd , 2020, the Indian government announced a national lockdown, although some states had started restricting economic activities and movement   earlier. A country of 1.3 billion people was given a four-hour notice to brace itself for a complete lockdown. What unfolded afterward  was a humanitarian crisis that lasted many months, and whose effects continue to reverberate.  One of  the   clearest costs  of this severe crisis were the deaths caused by the lockdown."
"10" "As soon as the country-wide lockdown began, reports of deaths due to exhaustion from walking and road accidents began to appear in the media. These were soon joined by reports of deaths from denial or lack of medical care and suicides due to fear, restrictions, and alcohol withdrawal. As the lockdown continued, reports of deaths caused by financial distress and starvation increased. In May (the second month of the lockdown), reports of deaths from economic hardship and unemployment spiked, and by June, reports of deaths in  Shramik   special trains (started to ferry stranded workers and others)  and quarantine centers  (set up to support the migrants)   started growing. Together, these trends highlight that as the duration of the lockdown increased, the crisis it caused expanded and intensified."
"11" "The immediate effects of the lockdown exposed the extreme fragility of the lives that bore the unequal burden of deaths and distress.  The restrictions on movement, stalling of public services, and inadequate social protection during the lockdown disproportionately affected workers in the informal sector, the poor, the elderly, and many others in the vulnerable sections of society.  For instance, a s of mid-April, of the about 11,000 workers who had made distress calls to the Stranded Workers Action Network (SWAN), 50 %  had rations left for less than  one  day while 44 %  had no money or rations left (SWAN 2020). It was under these conditions that workers and other vulnerable sections were forced to make difficult journeys back home or endure the crisis brought by the sudden lockdown and lack of support."
"12" "Despite copious evidence  of the crisis , the Indian government, judiciary and law officers, ministers, and elite sections of the society have been in denial about  it . In May, the railway minister  said : “ we have gone through the entire three months without a single person starving. ” When questioned about migrant workers’ deaths in the Parliament in September 2020, the labor ministry responded:  “no such data is available.”    The unavailability of this data, however, was by design. Given that the Indian state had employed at least 64 technology tools for testing, screening, and mapping the virus, the choice not to also gather data on deaths or disruption caused by the lockdown could not have been  because of the lack of capacity  (de Souza 2020) .   That the government did not ant icipate  the crisis that would result from the sudden lockdown is a  manifestation of its lack of concern for a vast section of the population. These people are  not  on their radar , their deaths don’t matter and therefore don’t need to be counted."
"13" "Anticipating that the government would not maintain an officia l  acco unt of the negative impacts of the lockdown , we began recording data soon after the lockdown was  imposed,  and deaths started getting reported .  T he primary aim of this exercise  was not to capture these deaths  as  mere  statistic s . Instead, we wanted to  highlight that  the  harsh and sudden  lockdown had devastating consequences for the most vulnerable and was even a kind of 'death sentence' for some of them .  Using media reports from March to July 2020, we found nearly a thousand deaths that were directly attributable to the lockdown. A large proportion of these deaths were  among migrant  workers, but they were not the only victims.   Even though COVID-19 did not discriminate, vulnerable sections have had to pay the heavy price of the lockdown in India. In this article, we call attention to that price through data on deaths due to the lockdown."
"14" "This article is organized as follows. First, we describe our method of tracking cases and categorizing them. Then, we present the results of data analysis and some cases in detail. We move on to discuss some limitations of our study. We conclude with a discussion of the necessity of social security efforts to reduce the impact of the   aftereffects  of the  lockdown  and the pandemic."
"15" "Tracking lockdown deaths"
"16" "We gathered data by tracking news reports on lockdown related deaths. To track cases systematically, we conducted keyword searches between March and July 2020 with combinations of words such as “lockdown”, “death”, “India”, “COVID-19”, and categories discussed below. We were also alerted to cases by a network of researchers, activists, and friends. Finally, we tracked social media accounts, specifically Twitter, of individuals who were reporting such cases. We primarily tracked cases in English and Hindi news media, but were also notified of cases in regional media (Kannada, Marathi, Gujarati, Tamil, Bengali, Odia, Telugu, and Malayalam)."
"17" "Once our search flagged a potential lockdown death, one of us checked it in-depth for details, duplications, and inconsistencies. To avoid poorly sourced information, we proceeded with only those cases that had a news link, report, or a newspaper cutting. Cases that were reported only on social media without a news source were excluded. Furthermore, for news reports that had aggregations (deaths added up together), we verified available details of each case (place of the incident, name, cause of death, occupation, and residence) to check whether the death had been  previously recorded in our database. We tried to locate a report that had the individual incident using descriptions of location. If that was not possible, we ensured that we added every available identity detail of that death. For example, if a report said 18 migrants died in a particular area, instead of putting 18 directly in our database, we counted  (as far as possible)  each incident individually, drawing on separate news reports and  particulars  of each case.   While we recorded all particulars regarding an incident, we initially chose not to present identifying details in public domain. Our reasons were guided by concerns of privacy or harassment of the families. Later, however, in the interests of making the database more user-friendly and easily verifiable, we also provided particulars like name, occupation, and residence in the public domain."
"18" "Once a case was verified, it was entered on a shared google spreadsheet for consultative decision making around categorization of cause of death. We identified and recorded cases under 11 categories: starvation and financial distress; exhaustion; road and train accidents;  Shramik  trains ;  suicides due to fear of infection, loneliness and quarantine; denial of timely medical care; quarantine centers; alcohol withdrawal; police brutality; non-communal crimes; and unclassified. Our categories emerged progressively as different causes of death came to light. For instance, we added categories of  Shramik  train deaths and quarantine center deaths towards the end period of our tracking after seeing the rise in these deaths."
"19" "Our classification of deaths as lockdown deaths and the categorization were guided by several markers. We classified a death as a lockdown death if the overarching cause was the lockdown, its restrictions, or the lack of necessary support during the lockdown. For example, deaths due to exhaustion or accidents during migration (among workers forced to walk hundreds of kilometers to get home because of lack of earnings in the city), deaths from lack of timely medical care (say, because no transport was available to a health facility), and deaths due to police brutality (e.g., while enforcing movement restrictions) could be directly attributed to the lockdown. Deaths due to financial distress and starvation, as well as deaths in  Shramik  trains and quarantine centers, were indicative of the state’s failure to provide the necessary support during the lockdown. Additionally, suicides from fear of infection or stigma, suicides due to lack of freedom of movement or the inability to go home, and deaths and suicides from alcohol-withdrawal  reflected the stress and despair that were induced by the lockdown and the disease but were not adequately managed. Finally, a few deaths that were strongly linked to the lockdown but lacked adequate  details, or  had multiple causes of deaths related to lockdown, were put in the “unclassified”  category. We recorded a total of 989 deaths until July 22, 2020. Figure 1 gives a breakdown of the number of deaths by category. The highest number of deaths  reported and tracked were in  Uttar Pradesh (207), followed by Maharashtra (110) and Madhya Pradesh (71)."
"20" "Deaths due to the lockdown"
"21" "Deaths from financial distress  and   starvation"
"22" "F inancial distress  and starvation  were recorded as the leading causes of  death and  continued to grow till we stopped tracking in July (Figure 2). This category included a combination of deaths due to lack of finances and food, and suicides due to loss of livelihood or unemployment. The lockdown initially resulted in job loss and unpaid salaries for those in the informal and salaried sectors, but as it continued, those with businesses incurred losses while some farmers were unable to sell their crops. Inability to repay loans and piling debt also exacerbated financial distress in many  reported  cases. There were  also  few  reported  instances where entire families including children died due to lockdown-related financial precarity."
"23" "For numerous poor and working-class families, the lockdown led to a loss of food security.  O ne  such family was that of  11-year old Rahul  Musahar , who died from starvation after spending 4 days without food in  Bhojpur , Bihar (Ray 2020). He used to work as a ragpicker while his father worked as a porter. Both were unable to find work during the lockdown and had no money to buy rations. The family did not have a ration card either. Rahul, who was already sick, starved to death. There were also at least 5 cases of homeless and destitute individuals dying due to starvation. Noticeably, in reported cases of deaths by starvation, local administrations would attempt to deny or dismiss any claims of hunger. For instance, no autopsy was undertaken by the administration after Rahul’s death despite it being a standard procedure for unnatural deaths. In   some  cases that we classify as starvation, the  government  attempt ed  to pass  them  off as being related to an illness. This is hardly an acceptable excuse because healthcare as much as food security is a responsibility of the state . Moreover, in most cases, the help from the administration reached these families only after a death was reported in the media."
"24" "Figure 1: Number of deaths, by category"
"25" "Deaths due to traveling and exhaustion"
"26" "The second leading cause of reported deaths (209) was road and train accidents. A substantial portion of these deaths occurred when migrant workers were returning to their hometowns. These deaths contributed to 21 %  of the total deaths recorded (Figure 1). This category does not include deaths on  Shramik  trains, recorded as a separate category (96 deaths)."
"27" "While one could  potentially  say that the  overall road accidents must have declined during the lockdown  b ut the deaths due accidents  we  captured happened because people were forced to make unsafe journeys, such as sleeping on railway tracks or walking on highways, due to the lockdown.   Within the first few weeks of the announcement of the lockdown, the number of deaths in this category grew sharply. Having no safety nets in cities and no time to plan any travel, many workers were forced to make their way back to their native towns and villages by whatever means they had. This often meant traveling by foot or in overcrowded vehicles, hitchhiking, and traveling  under unsafe conditions that they may have otherwise avoided. Some workers walked and slept along railway tracks as the movement of passenger trains had stopped, while others feared getting caught by police for violating lockdown curfews. One of the most tragic cases was the death of 16 migrant workers who were run over by a goods train when they were sleeping near railway tracks in Aurangabad, Maharashtra (Mohammed 2020). May was the deadliest month in terms of accidents where almost 156 migrant workers died in a span of three weeks (Figure 2)."
"28" "May was also the deadliest month in terms of deaths that happened on  Shramik  special trains, that were started by the Indian Railways on May 1 to ferry stranded workers, students and others to their home states .  A total of 96 individuals died on  Shramik  trains. The Railway Protection Force (RPF) recorded 80 deaths  (Anisha Dutta ,  2020) , while the rest were reported in individual news reports. It was reported that these  Shramik  trains would often not run as per schedule, had long delays, and had no working fans or basic arrangements like water .  Those traveling on these trains were left to fend for themselves not only to arrange food and water but also for medical emergencies. Most of the deaths on these trains were due to hunger, exhaustion, dehydration, and medical complications. Among them were 5 children, the youngest of whom was just 18 days old who died because of heat while traveling from Kerala to West Bengal with her parents  ( Saha  2020) .  Quite like the categories above, as per the State, many such deaths were a could be explained as a consequence of  pre-existing  health conditions."
"29" "Exhaustion from walking or cycling home ,  or from waiting in lines to collect rations, withdraw money, buy tickets for travel, or sell agricultural produce was another cause of lockdown deaths that led to the loss of 47 lives (Figure 1). Most of these deaths occurred in the first two months of the lockdown. Many of them made these journeys without any food or money and no assistance from the host or home state governments along the way. At least 2 pregnant women died due to exhaustion from walking. In UP’s  Badaun , 35-year old Shameem  Bano  died after waiting in line to collect ration under the hot sun for two days in a row (Mishra 2020). Her husband, who was a migrant worker in Delhi was stuck there, leaving Shameem  Bano  to fend for herself and her children without any money, bank account, or ration card."
"30" "Despair, fear, and deaths"
"31" "The third-largest cause of reported deaths during lockdown was deaths by suicides due to fear: of infection, loneliness, lack of freedom of movement, and the inability to go home. A  combination of the absence of relief and awareness measures coupled with a lack of emotional and mental health support are reflected in each of the 140 deaths. Soon after the lockdown was announced, we observed that people died by suicide that could have been triggered by stigma and anxiety around contracting COVID-19 and passing it to others. There were also cases where migrant workers were harassed by other residents after returning home or stopped from entering the village which led to further stigmatization."
"32" "As the lockdown progressed, reasons stated in reports on deaths by suicide mentioned mental fatigue and exhaustion from the lockdown and quarantining. This was further intensified by the lack of support systems for migrant workers who were prevented from traveling to see their families. The extension of the lockdown on multiple occasions exacerbated feelings of despair and hopelessness, especially among those who were unable to go home. There were reports of deaths by suicide after couples were stranded in different locations and partners were unable to see each other, or those whose marriage plans were postponed or whose alliances were broken due to the lockdown. There were also at least 3 cases where individuals who were stuck in toxic family situations and were unable to escape due to travel restrictions during the lockdown died by suicide. Like the pattern observed in deaths due to starvation and financial distress, the number of deaths by suicides due to fear continued to grow as the nature of lockdown changed over time and people continued to lose their safety nets and livelihood s ."
"33" "Figure 2: Timeline of number of deaths, by category"
"34" "At least fifty people died due to alcohol withdrawal-related symptoms, the majority being deaths by suicide. Unable to purchase alcohol due to the lockdown is likely to have led to the onset of withdrawal symptoms among some individuals who did not have access to support systems that would have enabled them to cope with this condition. Some deaths were due to individuals consuming sanitizer or other non-consumable alcohol products out of frustration of inability to buy liquor. Most reports of these deaths are from the first 4 weeks after the announcement of the lockdown."
"35" "Deaths by lack of care"
"36" "Seventy-nine people were reported to have died due to denial of timely medical care. Among them were 10 children and 9 pregnant women. Due to lockdown travel restrictions and curfews, there were reports of movement restrictions on ambulances and vehicles carrying the sick. In four cases in the early phases of the lockdown, ambulances and other vehicles carrying people seeking medical care were turned around at state borders that led to the deaths of the patients inside. Among them was 70-year old  Pathuhni  who needed to go to Mangalore to receive treatment for a kidney ailment. The ambulance carrying her was stopped at the Kerala-Karnataka border and  not allowed to proceed (J A 2020). There were also reports of unresponsive ambulance hotlines, or ambulances being unavailable to transport critically ill individuals, leading to deaths. In some instances, old people in need of medical care died as families were unable to reach them in time due to travel and quarantine restrictions. Most deaths in this category, however, were due to patients being turned away at hospitals. Among them was 30-year-old Neelam From Ghaziabad who was 8 months pregnant and had developed breathlessness due to rising blood pressure but was turned away by eight hospitals in a span of 12 hours in Noida. One of the reasons for this denial of care identified in news reports was that she lived in a COVID-19 containment zone (Bhatnagar 2020). She died in an ambulance. There were also cases where critically ill patients died after they were not admitted by hospitals unless they produced COVID-19 test reports. This category also included the deaths of at least six Bhopal gas tragedy survivors who were denied medical care or given delayed medical care (Anup Dutta 2020)."
"37" "Around forty-nine people died at state-run quarantine centers. Most of these were deaths due to suicides, followed by deaths due to denial of timely medical care  and  lack of proper living conditions. People arriving at quarantine centers were often troubled by the stigma associated with the pandemic as well as issues like loss of livelihoods. There were at least 5 children who died at quarantine centers,   due to lack of decent living conditions as well as lack of medical attention."
"38" "Limitations"
"39" "The method of collecting data from media reports has  some  limitations .  Not all cases get reported or are characterized correctly in the media . W e might have missed cases, especially those in regional news media.  W e also chose not to add instances that appeared only on social media and were not picked up by the news media.  Similarly, we were unable to categorize some cases because of a lack of adequate details , although  several of them made it to our “unclassified”  category .  Additionally, we struggled  with recording farmer suicides and deaths due to tuberculosis. In these cases, it was impossible to note how these existing concerns may have been amplified by the lockdown, and  thus  these were excluded.  Therefore, the cases that we were able to track and present here are likely a gross under-representation of the actual number of  deaths due to lockdown ."
"40" "How can we be sure that these deaths can be classified as related to the lockdown? It is not our argument that each  case  recorded is accurate and the cause of the deaths  has  been established  in  the  reports beyond a reasonable doubt.  But s ince the beginning of the project, we have made the database and the c ategorization  public so that anyone interested in these numbers can judge for themselves. That said ,   we hoped to draw as accurate a picture as possible , and  we believe that these deaths reflect  the scale of the crisis rather than quantifying it."
"41" "A nother   c oncern is how little the database  can  capture  the  intersections of  socioeconomic vulnerabilities  of the victims, such as their gender and caste indicators. In this regard,  we were limited by the lack of sensitive and accurate reporting. For example, reports about  women  mentioned them  only  as  wives , and  very few reports  mentioned  caste. Therefore, even though it is reasonable to assume that disadvantaged groups have been disproportionately impacted by the lockdown, this data does not adequately capture that reality. Future efforts must ensure better reporting and gathering of these crucial indicators."
"42" "Conclusion"
"43" "The Indian state’s denial of the crisis and lack of will to collect data on deaths were deeply influenced by the socio - economic identities of those who died. These victims--migrant workers, rural and urban poor, and vulnerable sections--are easy to ignore and  invisibilise  in the numbers and narratives.  If they wer e  acknowledged at all , they  were largely  considered “collateral damage” , while the  better-off sections of Indian society were largely insulated from the worst impacts of the lockdown . That the Indian state was able to deny these deaths despite the media and citizens’ attention to the migrant  workers’  crisis reveals an attitude that treated these lives as dispensable."
"44" "To challenge this denial, apathy, and omission of the lives lost, it became  even more  important to record and disseminate the data on lockdown deaths. We realize that  counting  deaths  is  one  of  many ways to measure  human costs, so these data on deaths should be seen in conjunction with other efforts that have highlighted the consequences of India’s lockdown."
"45" "Devastating consequences of the lockdown, including these deaths, underscore how central the social security and essential public services are for a large population of India. Without these, as it happened during the lockdown, their lives hang by a thread. Given this reality, ramping up  and sustaining  food and work security in rural and urban areas is an urgent need. Expanding the public distribution system  and  community kitchens ,  initiation of public employment in urban areas ( Drèze  2020),   ensuring work and timely payments under the NREGA ,  and a  widespread public  health education outreach ( Khera  2020)  will go a long way in providing some relief from the   aftereffects   of the lockdown and the pandemic."
"46" "(Our full database is available at:  https://thejeshgn.com/projects/covid19-india/non-virus-deaths  and can be cited as  “ Aman, Kanika Sharma, Krushna R, &  Thejesh  GN. (2020). India Non Virus Deaths During lockdown (Version 20200704) [Data set].  Zenodo .  http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4527829 ” .  We   would   like to acknowledge and thank  similar data collection  efforts  particularly  by Rachel Chitra, “The Impact of Covid-19 Policies in India” Blog, Pooja  Priyamvada ,  and  Dr. P. K. Tyagi. We also thank  Roadscholarz   for the guidance  and Aryan Goyal for  assistance in this work . )"
"47" "References"
"48" "Banerjee, Asik. 2020. “Financial Crisis Made Worse by Lockdown Killed Brothers, 4 Kids.”  Ahmedabad Mirror , June 22."
"49" "Bhatnagar, Amil. 2020. “Noida: Pregnant Woman Dies, Family Says Turned Away by 8 Hospitals in 12 Hours.”  The Indian Express , June 7."
"50" "de Souza, Siddharth Peter. 2020. “ Invisibilising  Migrant Distress in Times of COVID-19.” Retrieved January 22, 2021 (http://globaldatajustice.org/covid-19/data-silences-invisibility)."
"51" "American Psychiatric Association. 2013. “Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (DSM-5®)”. American Psychiatric Pub."
"52" "Drèze , Jean. 2020. “An Indian Duet For Urban Jobs.”  BloombergQuint . Retrieved January 26, 2021 (https://www.bloombergquint.com/opinion/an-indian-duet-for-urban-jobs)."
"53" "Dutta, Anisha. 2020. “Railway Protection Force Reports 80 Deaths on  Shramik  Trains.”  Hindustan Times , May 1."
"54" "Dutta, Anup. 2020. “MP’s Flip-Flop on Bhopal Gas Hospital Reflects Its Flailing Fight against COVID-19.”  The Caravan . Retrieved January 26, 2021 (https://caravanmagazine.in/health/mp-flip-flop-bhopal-gas-hospital-reflects-flailing-fight-against-covid-19)."
"55" "J A,  Naina . 2020. “70-Year-Old Woman Dies after Karnataka Police Denies Entry to Ambulance Carrying Her.”  Deccan Herald . Retrieved January 26, 2021 ( https://www.deccanherald.com/state/70-year-old-woman-dies-after-karnataka-police-denies-entry-to-ambulance-carrying-her-818869.html )."
"56" "Khera ,  Reetika . 2020. “Covid-19: What Can Be Done Immediately to Help Vulnerable Population.”  Ideas For India . Retrieved January 30, 2021 (http://www.ideasforindia.in/topics/poverty-inequality/covid-19-what-can-be-done-immediately-to-help-vulnerable-population.html)."
"57" "Mishra,  Sameeramtyaj . 2020. “ बदायूं :  लगातार   दूसरे   दिन   राशन   की   लाइन   में   लगी   महिला   की   मौत .”  BBC News  हिंदी . Retrieved January 26, 2021 (https://www.bbc.com/hindi/india-52338267)."
"58" "Mohammed,  Akhef . 2020. “Maharashtra: Train Runs over Migrant Workers in Aurangabad, 16 Dead - Times of India.”  The Times of India , May 8."
"59" "Ray, Umesh Kumar. 2020. “COVID-19 Lockdown: 8 Year Old Dies of Hunger as Family Struggles to Make Ends Meet.”  The Wire . Retrieved January 26, 2021 (https://thewire.in/rights/bihar-starvation-deaths-lockdown)."
"60" "Saha , Tamal. 2020. “18 Day Old New Born Dies on Board  Shramik  Train, Bengal Migrant Alleges Apathy from Railways.”  TIMES NOW . Retrieved January 26, 2021 ( https://www.timesnownews.com/mirror-now/in-focus/article/18-day-old-new-born-dies-on-board-shramik-train-bengal-migrant-alleges-apathy-from-railways/604576 )."
"61" "Schuckit, Marc A. 2014. “Recognition and Management of Withdrawal Delirium (Delirium Tremens).”  New England Journal of Medicine  371(22):2109–13."
"62" "SWAN. 2020. 21 Days and Counting: COVID-19 Lockdown, Migrant Workers, and the Inadequacy of Welfare Measures in India. Available at:  http://strandedworkers.in/mdocuments-library/  (last accessed 24 th  January)."
