Ria Lusiandari, Moses Glorino Rumambo Pandin
Universitas Airlangga
Jl. Dharmawangsa Dalam, Airlangga, Kec. Gubeng, Kota Surabaya, Jawa Timur 60286
ria.lusiandari-2020@fib.unair.ac.id moses.glorino@fib.unair.ac.id
Book Review
DATANGNYA PAGEBLUK: COVID-19, FLU BURUNG DAN WABAH KAPITALISME
(Arrival of Pagebluk: Covid-19, Avian Flu and the Plague of Capitalism)
Mike Davis; Yogyakarta; 2021; 978-623-96204-2-4; 199

The book was written to provide information about the plague that is now attacking the
world. From a historical point of view author connects the afflictions of the past and the curses
that strike the world today. From the Spanish flu, bird flu to Covid-19 can kill at least 40 million
people until now is still growing. Through this historical approach, the information submitted can
be used as the latest reference about Covid-19 or previous outbreaks, as an analysis so that they
can survive in the pandemic.
The book is intended for anyone who is really interested in the latest issue that is shaking
the world. Because this book not only contains the Covid-19 outbreak, but also contains histories
of previous outbreaks and is related to today's situation. The author writes from the health or
medical side, historically, anthropology to philosophy critically. So it is clear that the book will
be very suitable for those who like to think critically, those who want to study the latest
information about the outbreak, they are beginners of biotechnology research and everything that
is related to the Covid-19 outbreak research and previously without an age benchmark this book
will match those who are interested in this issue.
The book, at least it provides new information regarding research on the Covid-19 virus.
Especially the conditions in America before and during Covid-19, in fact, almost all chapters must
describe the requirements and policies of the American government both in the Covid-19
pandemic or previous pandemics. The author provides many information and data from research
by experts on outbreaks and pandemics that may still be unknown in developing countries.
The author explains about the pandemics that have shocked the world until the pandemic
that we are facing today. By reviewing, it is hoped that many people, especially the younger
generation, will find out about the conditions we face today. By reviewing it, you can also describe
the book's contents a little to be more interested in this book. Because the content conveyed is in
accordance with the current state of the world, this review can be used as the latest analysis and
study about outbreaks and pandemics in several decades.
The world currently still at war with the Covid-19 virus pandemic has made Mike Davis's
book Datangnya Pagebluk really meet readers' needs. In conditions that require staying at home,
reading can be an option to fill boredom. Especially the discussion contains information and
pandemic data from scientists, especially in America. At these times, we have to know what
people worldwide are facing, so we need information about the problems being fought. Therefore,
the book really fulfills today's human needs.
The Covid-19 pandemic has made the world closed, in this period of course we have to
know what is being faced. Mike Davis provides a short description of the war facing the world
today. Mike Davis includes information and explanations about the state of the world by using
research data as a reference. However, because this book is a translated book published for the
first time in 2020, while research on the Covid-19 virus must have progressed as evidenced by the
discovery of a vaccine. Even so, not everyone knows about studies about this virus. "It took 8
million years for the human genome to evolve by 1%. Many animal RNA viruses can grow over
1% in just a matter of days. " Where this is one of the results of research from the journal The
England Journal of Medicine in 2020.
From Mike Davis's point of view, the information conveyed will certainly have an impact
on the reader. This book raises a global issue, so that readers will at least get a new idea of the
Covid-19 virus and the current pandemic. Moreover, here Mike Davis uses relevant and up-to-

date data from well-known research and journals. So that readers will come back to think and
speculate about the coronavirus outbreak.
Works written by Mike Davis, it is explained that the corona virus is a very fast-spreading
virus, signaling a perfect epidemiological storm. It is a hazardous virus that has an unusual leap
beyond species boundaries. From what the author has conveyed through the discussion, more or
less will definitely have an influence where readers can be more careful and maintain cleanliness
and comply with health protocols. Because the virus here cannot be seen but the spread is speedy
and dangerous. In several other explanations, Mike presented information about China, a region
with wet markets and sells wild meat. From this, readers will be able to learn from their mistakes,
that strange foods are not always healthy, especially foods made from wild animal meat that
humans do not commonly consume.
Mike Davis writes his views not just speculates and then writes them down. Because what
Mike explains is really supported by evidence and clear data sources. Mike Davis includes the
source's name in his book, be it a journal or an article. Mike's writing uses footnotes,, so obviously
Mike Davis is not talking nonsense but is backed up by evidence from previous studies. One of
them was when Mike explained that in the slums and suburbs of Africa it could reverse the pattern
of coronavirus infection. Among domestic animals, researchers found two distinct routes, the oral
facial which attacks the stomach and digestive tissues and the respiratory tract which attacks the
lungs. This explanation is Mike Davis' explanation which is supported by clear evidence or
sources, the explanation comes from the Journal of Medical Virology with the title Fecal
Transmission in COVID-19: A Potential Shedding Route in 2020.
The book by Mike Davis is a book that is completely powered by data. Sourced from
various literature, Mike has processed it into a very informative article. Therefore, this book can
be said to be quite convincing for the reader. Mike makes readers think and think back to the
plague that the world is facing. Mike packaged his explanation well so that readers will be sure of
his writing that connects the coronavirus outbreak or Covid-19 with previous outbreaks, including
connecting conditions and government policies, especially in America.
Mike Davis wrote this book with great confidence. The initial section displayed a table of
contents and terms that will explain the book's explanation. In the first part, Mike wrote an
introduction with 5 sub-chapters that described a little about Covid-19, the previous outbreak and
conditions in America such as tranquil roads and everything was closed. Then, fill in 10 sections
and a conclusion chapter. Here Mike Davis collects data to support his speculation. The plague
we face today and the outbreaks occurred in the past seem to form a pattern. Here the writer makes
the reader think critically to help solve this. What's wrong with the world system? So that this
outbreak can occur and seems to form a pattern. Mike Davis re-analyzes the plague with scientific
research then connects it with the political, economic or system applied in a capitalist government
so that this pandemic can spread so quickly and widely.
In terms of writing a book is a pretty good book. the writing style is well packaged and
seems structured. The author wrote it as a concept, where when discussing this, which sources are
supporting then continued with other discussions that are still in touch. Mike Davis' statements
are under fairly structured discussion and with supporting data. The things Mike is questioning
can be more easily explored because of the structured writing.
In the case of studies, the writer's facts or ideas seem to be wide open. Where Mike Davis
provides his point of view and is reinforced with data. From all this it is clear that Mike Davis is
not ignoring facts, ideas or cases. So that readers will come to think hard to deepen their writing
for consideration. His statement will make the reader reconsider.
The strength of this book is in its writing, where the author really explores the problem or
issue raised. Because it is not only about the Covid-19 pandemic but also explanations and
information from the pandemic which has also shocked the world. Every data used is even the
latest data with the footnote system, so when reading a presented data, the reader can immediately
know where the data was taken from, whose work, and what year. Because Mike's work is an
analysis of medical or health matters, before starting to read, there are several sheets at the
beginning that explain each abbreviation or designation for a disease such as SARS (Severe Acute
Respiratory Syndrome), which is severe acute respiratory syndrome.

The weakness of this work lies in the language, because this book is a translated book, it
is a little difficult to explore this book. Especially the use of biological terms such as H1N1 which
is the name for virus influenza A causes swine flu. Readers who are not familiar with these terms
will find it difficult to think critically when reading. Mike Davis's work also barely presents data
in the form of tables, in the sense that his work actually contains Mike Davis' writings and points
of view which are supported by data from various references. So that readers who are accustomed
and easier to understand an article by looking at the table will have a little difficulty.
The book of ''Datangnya Pagebluk: Covid-19, Flu Burung dan Wabah Kapitalisme'' is
quite an informative book, including books that require critical thinking when readers. However,
the use of viral terms should be reduced because when you are seriously reading and then there
are terms that even though there is already a description on the start page you might forget and
have to look first. Therefore, a focused reader can start to get a little confused, especially for
people who are not familiar with the term.
Ria Lusiandari & Moses Glorino Rumambo Pandin
Universitas Airlangga

REFERENCE
Davis, Mike. 2021. Datangnya Pagebluk: Covid-19, Flu Burung dan Wabah Kapitalisme. 1 ed.
Yogyakarta: Independen.

AUTHOR:
Mike Davis is a historian, activist, writer and urban theorist. This California, American-born
author has written many books, most of which tend to address social or political issues. In one of
them, entitled Planet of Slums, Mike Davis raises the problem of poverty. The author was born in
1946 and studied at the Getty Research Institute but did not complete his PhD education with a
major in history at the University of California. Davis also won the MacArthur Fellowship and
the Lennan Literary Award. In addition to the book Datangnya Pagebluk, his works include The
Monster at Our Door (2005), Dead Cities (2002), Magical Urbanism (2000), The Monster Enters
(2020) and so on.

