PREPRINT – REVISED
Ethical Guidelines for Deliberately Infecting Volunteers with COVID-19
Adair Richards
University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4 7AL UK
Adair.Richards@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Global fatalities related to COVID-19 are expected to be high in 2020-21. Developing and
delivering a vaccine may be the most likely way to end the pandemic. If it were possible to
shorten this development time by weeks or months, this may have a significant effect on
reducing deaths. Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials could take less long to conduct if they used
human challenge methods – that is, deliberately infecting participants with COVID-19
following inoculation.
This article analyses arguments for and against such methods and provides suggested broad
guidelines for regulators, researchers and ethics committees when considering these
matters. It concludes that it may be possible to maintain current ethical standards yet still
permit human challenge trials in a context where delay is critical. The implications are that
regulators and researchers need to work together now to design robust but short trials and
streamline ethics approvals processes so that they are in place when applications for trials
are made.

Introduction
The speed of threat that COVID-19 poses to global health is unprecedented in recent times.
Current precise estimates for global fatalities in 2020-21, both directly related to COVID-19
and those related to societies’ mitigation measures, are likely to be inaccurate but the
number will be inevitably be high – particularly if there are a large number of infections in
the developing world where availability and standards of healthcare are limited.1 The three
potential medium-term endings of the pandemic are; firstly the possibility of a period during
which the basic reproduction number of the virus R0 is below 1 simultaneously across the
world eradicating the disease; secondly, widespread infection leading eventually to herdimmunity; and thirdly, the development and deployment of an effective vaccine or
treatment. The chances of the first option occurring are unlikely given the degree of
sustained international co-operation required, the second option will result in a very large
number of deaths, and a response to the third option may be that vaccines are easier and
more desirable to develop than effective treatments.
Although there is no guarantee that researchers can develop an effective vaccine in time to
usefully bring the pandemic to an end, COVID-19 vaccine research is currently proceeding at
a relatively fast rate.2 However in the case of the current pandemic, time is crucial, and a

1

PREPRINT – REVISED
delay even of weeks or months may result in a very large number of deaths that could
potentially have been prevented.
The Phase 2 and Phase 3 human trials of vaccine candidates may be the longest in time
segments of vaccine development and delivery. Methods that can significantly shorten
these phases can be considered desirable or even necessary if it is ethical to do so. The
primary methodology which could shorten these phases currently identified could be by
using human challenge experiments – i.e. deliberately infecting volunteers with COVID-19
after giving them the vaccine candidates. These experiments carry with them the obvious
risk that some of those volunteers may develop serious illness or die as a result of the
experiment.3
Moments of crisis are rarely good moments to develop ethics. They carry with them the
possibility of self-interested bias due to the threat to everyone’s health and welfare, and the
speed at which decisions have to be made affords little opportunity for reflection. However,
delay for sober contemplation and slow ethical guideline developments will, in this instance,
come at significant human cost. As such, it is now incumbent on regulators, researchers and
ethicists to work together quickly to consider whether or not it is ethically acceptable to
conduct human challenge experiments with COVID-19, and if so then how best to do it.
Whilst there are currently no vaccine candidates ready for late stage human trials, this is
exactly the time to develop these ethical protocols such that clear methodologies can be
developed and potential participants recruited to avoid future delay. Not to consider these
issues now, would be a dereliction of our moral responsibility to society.
This paper seeks to outline considerations for regulators, law makers, ethics committees
and researchers when considering human challenge experiments with COVID-19.
Arguments against human challenge experiments
(i)
There is a significant risk of serious harm and death to participants
Even if participants are recruited from relatively low-risk demographics, and quality
medical care provided, it is likely given the numbers of participants needed for these
studies, that some of them will become seriously ill and there is a non-negligible
possibility that some of them will die. As well as the direct effects of COVID-19, there are
the possibilities of adverse reactions to the vaccine candidates, and also a possibility
that the vaccine may result in making an individual’s response to COVID-19 more severe.
It could be argued that conducting these experiments knowing these risks does not
adequately respect a person’s right to life and the sanctity of human life itself.
(ii)
The experiments may not result in a useable vaccine
Whilst it is almost certain that some of the participants will experience harm during the
experiments, it is far from certain that the research will yield a viable vaccine. As with all
research, the results are unknown before the research is conducted and many medicine
candidates do not successfully pass Phase 2 and Phase 3 testing.4
(iii)

It may be impossible for an individual to truly give free and informed consent

2

PREPRINT – REVISED
A potential participant may experience psychological pressure as a result of their own
fear or desire to make a social contribution, real or perceived pressure from friends, or
a potential societal pressure to speed up vaccine development. It could be argued that
this pressure may be to such an extent that it would preclude the possibility of an
individual voluntarily giving their consent.
(iv)

Conducting these experiments may damage the reputation of research and
researchers more generally
History has many examples, particularly from the twentieth century, of human
experiments that were conducted in ways that are currently regarded as seriously
unethical.5 It is possible that society, either now or in the future, may reflect negatively
on any human challenge experiments conducted that have a significant human cost. This
may lead to a long-lasting diminishing of public trust and confidence in research and
researchers.
(v)
These experiments may be the start of a slippery slope
Even in recent history, such as with the Zika virus, proposals for human challenge
experiments have not been considered ethical.6 If we allow such experiments now, it
could make it easier in future situations with a less substantial risk to society to
authorise potentially unethical experiments.
Counterarguments and Potential Mitigation Strategies
A utilitarian perspective would regard the potential benefits to large numbers of people
from a quicker-developed vaccine to outweigh the likely harms caused to a smaller number
of people.7
A Kantian perspective may regard vaccine challenge studies as violating the second
formulation of the categorical imperative as it would involve using the humanity of a
participant merely as a means to an end.8 However it could be argued that this takes
insufficient account of a participants’ ability to voluntarily consent to use their humanity in a
sacrificial self-determinative way. Indeed as Wertheimer argues, “one’s choices may have
moral value only if they are made autonomously, and so if we want people’s lives to have
positive moral value, we need to provide the space for them to make choices for
themselves.”9 Elsewhere,10 he expands on the idea that it may be morally praiseworthy for a
person to participate in a study where the expected personal risks outweigh the expected
personal benefits because of the anticipated benefits to others, and rejects the argument
that such studies amount to a form of social conscripting and that slower scientific progress
is always a morally necessary price to pay.
A virtue ethics approach whilst valuing the intent to do good, would become more complex
when faced with the issue of whether conducting experiments with a non-negligible risk of
serious harm or death to individuals denigrates the value of an individual, and harms
humanity through the consequent moral failing. The philosophical objections raised by the
intrinsic value of a human argument could potentially be mitigated by ensuring that consent

3

PREPRINT – REVISED
was truly obtained voluntarily, after appropriate disclosures by researchers, and by
individuals with the capacity to so consent.
(i)
Addressing the risk of harm to participants
As society we already permit individuals the freedom to make choices that pose significant
risks to their health, for example smoking or riding a motorbike. We also permit them to
voluntarily engage in occupations that carry with them a non-negligible risk of serious harm
or death, such as astronauts or soldiers. It is not uncommon for a society to ask soldiers to
go to war where there is significant likelihood of serious injury or death, and the outcome of
their work is uncertain. Indeed, there have been many medical trials in recent years that
have resulted in some harm to participants,11 albeit the risks were generally smaller than
they likely would be in a COVID-19 human challenge study.
(ii)
Addressing the potential of no useable vaccine
Whilst it is true that any particular vaccine candidate studies may result in no viable vaccine,
there is also a significant chance that it will result in one and consequently likely result in
saving a very large number of lives.
(iii)
Addressing the validity of consent
It is impossible for any human to be totally devoid of the effects of individual, interpersonal
and societal pressures, both conscious and sub-conscious, when considering the
voluntariness of any consent. It could be argued that it actually withdraws from a person’s
humanity and autonomy to deny them the opportunity to offer their consent to partake in
research that could result in such a potentially large societal benefit. Whilst part of the roles
of societies and the law may be to protect people from themselves, their roles are also to
permit conditions where a person can freely live and express their autonomy. The negative
effects of COVID-19 are widely understood by likely participants, at least in broad terms,
due to the media they are likely to have already consumed. Research, particularly on any
long-term effects of COVID-19 is necessarily at an early stage and so for a participant to be
fully informed, can reasonably be interpreted as being made aware, in terms that they
understand, of the currently-understood risks and benefits at the point of making a consent
decision.
(iv)
Addressing reputational risk
It is always possible that future humanity will look back on a decision to proceed with an
experiment and reflect negatively on it. It is also possible that future humanity could reflect
negatively on a decision to not conduct such experiments, or to not put sufficient efforts
into assessing the possibilities of such experiments. Public confidence in researchers and the
research process could be undermined if experiments with such great potential benefits
were not undertaken, and ethics approvals processes not adapted to be conducted at great
speed whilst remaining robust.
(v)
Addressing the slippery slope
Slippery slope arguments in general have been extensively considered12 and when applied
in this context they rely on an assumption that it would be a change in ethical standards to
permit COVID-19 human challenge experiments in the current context. It could however be
argued that to allow such experiments would not be changing our ethical standards, merely

4

PREPRINT – REVISED
applying them to this new context. There are key differences in the contexts of, for example,
Zika research and COVID-19 – particularly in the gravity of threat they pose to society. Shah
et al.’s key question when ethically assessing proposed human challenge studies remains
the same,6 namely “are the risks reasonable, minimized, and justified by the potential social
value of the trial?” – it may be that the answer to this question is different in this case.
The ‘reasonableness’ of a risk and the ‘potential social value’ of a study are ordinary English
words and will require interpretation by those in authority.
Guidance for Regulators, Researchers and Ethics Committees
Below is a non-exhaustive list of considerations when designing and assessing the ethical
implications of human challenge COVID-19 studies.
Has reasonable care been taken to maximise the potential benefits of the proposed study
and minimise the risks of harm to participants?
A pragmatic approach needs to be taken when interpreting ‘reasonable care’. Given the
short timescales involved and the effect of delay it is likely that this should be interpreted as
‘good enough care’ rather than ‘ideal care’. Very sensible proposals have already been
brought forward by Eyal et al.13 on how to do this (e.g. using participants with a high
baseline risk of natural infection, sequential administration of vaccine candidates to small
groups) and it is hoped that other researchers will build on these proposals in the near
future – for example ensuring, if possible, guaranteed availability of ventilators for
participants should they become necessary.
Is the informed consent process sufficiently robust?
Potential participants will need to be informed using the most up-to-date medical
information, and in terms that they understand, of the known likely risks and benefits of
participating. They should be afforded an appropriate reflection period before consenting,
such as 3 days. They should be given the right to withdraw from the research at any point
up until the end of the study and still be guaranteed the best available medical care. If
relevant new information on risks and benefits are discovered during a trial, participants
should be informed so that consent can continue to be considered on an ongoing basis.
Any financial payment made to individuals must be only of a moderate nature, this is to
guard against the possibility of undue financial inducement. However, it would be
appropriate to promise to pay for treatment relating to any consequent medical
complications and to promise to pay an appropriate level of compensation in the event of
severe adverse health outcome or participant death. The participants must be of sufficient
consistent cognitive capacity and not be suffering from a mental health condition that
would be likely to affect their capacity – it may be that in many cases a suitable
psychological assessment of potential participants may need to be performed.
What do we need to do now to amend our processes to speed up the consideration and
approval processes for proposed COVID-19 vaccine candidate Phase 2 and Phase 3 trials?
Countries where vaccine trials are likely to take place need to act now to streamline their
legal and regulatory experimental approval processes – such that they retain their rigor, but
can deliver decisions, advice and approval in a very short time frame. It is possible that if

5

PREPRINT – REVISED
work commences immediately to do this, that such processes can be in place by the time
they will be needed in the coming months to assess proposed trials.
Conclusion
Despite these extreme circumstances, robust ethical assessments of potential research
experiments remain vital and our standards of ethics should not change. This article instead
argues that current processes of assessment need to be streamlined and significantly
speeded up, and that it is in fact ethical to permit fully-informed volunteers, who have the
capacity to consent and do voluntarily consent, to participate in human challenge COVID-19
studies. A major factor in this, is the very significant cost of delay of vaccine development
and the potential vast benefits to humanity of an effective vaccine.
References
(1) Gilbert M, Pullano G, Pinotti F, et al. Preparedness and vulnerability of African
countries against importations of COVID-19: a modelling study. The Lancet. 2020
Mar 14;395(10227):871-7.
(2) World Health Organization. Draft landscape of COVID-19 candidate vaccines – 4 April
2020. Available from https://www.who.int/blueprint/priority-diseases/keyaction/Novel-Coronavirus_Landscape_nCoV-4april2020.pdf?ua=1 Accessed on 6
April 2020
(3) Miller FG, Grady C. The ethical challenge of infection-inducing challenge
experiments. Clinical Infectious Diseases. 2001 Oct 1;33(7):1028-33.
(4) Hay M, Thomas DW, Craighead JL, Economides C, Rosenthal J. Clinical development
success rates for investigational drugs. Nature biotechnology. 2014 Jan;32(1):40-51.
(5) Siebre, JE, Tolich MB. Planning ethically responsible research. Sage Publications;
2012 Dec 26.
(6) Shah, SK, Kimmelman J, Lyerly AD, et al. Ethical considerations for Zika virus human
challenge trials. National Institutes of Health, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases: Seattle, WA, USA. 2017 Feb.
(7) Bentham J. An introduction to the principles of morals and legislation. Kitchener:
Batoche Books; 1999.
(8) Schönecker D, Wood AQ. Immanuel Kant’s Groundwork for the Metaphysics of
Morals. Harvard University Press; 2015 Jan 5.
(9) Wertheimer A. Liberty, Coercion, and the Limits of the State. In: Editor Simon, RL.
The Blackwell Guide to Social and Political Philosophy. Oxford: Blackwell; 2002. p.55

6

PREPRINT – REVISED
(10)
Wertheimer A. Rethinking the Ethics of Clinical Research: Widening the Lens.
Oxford: OUP; 2010.
(11)
Sengupta A. Fatal trials: clinical trials are killing people. Indian J Med Ethics.
2009 Jul;6(3):118-9.
(12)
Jefferson, A. Slippery slope arguments. Philosophy compass. 2014
Oct;9(10):672-80.
(13)
Eyal, N, Lipsitch, M, Smith, PG. Human challenge studies to accelerate
coronavirus vaccine licensure. J. Infect. Dis. 31st March 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1093/infdis/jiaa152

7

