Initial Observations of Psychological and
Behavioral Effects of COVID-19 in the United
States, Using Google Trends Data
Daniel Goldman
March 2020

1

Introduction

It can be difficult to study changes in psychology and behavior, for a large group
of people, that might occur over short periods of time. Surveys can be helpful,
but they can also be expensive and time consuming, especially if a large sample
is preferred or required. Additionally, while the surveys may be able to capture
monthly, or even weekly changes in states, it can be difficult to capture daily
changes and identify trends that require a finer resolution than weekly data.
It would be useful to be able to investigate how peoples’ lives have changed
on a day to day basis. However, doing so requires access to high resolution data.
Luckily, sociology, public health, and other areas of population study have new
tools available, thanks to operations like Google, and specifically publicly accessible search trend information. While not a direct measure of either psychology
or behavior, it offers inter and even intraday data on the terms for which people
are searching.
The various shelter-in-place orders, and other changes to daily activities,
associated with the recent COVID-19 outbreak in the United States has likely
had a significant impact on the United States population, with changes to their
daily lives. Not only is COVID-19 likely affecting stress levels, it is also definitely
affecting peoples’ routines. Google Trends data should be able to give us insight
into general patterns of psychological states and behaviors, as well as specific
effects resulting from COVID-19.

2

Psychological Effects

Google Trends is a powerful tool for population level psychological analysis. We
can’t easily poll a large portion of the population, day after day, and see how
they are feeling. But we can look at search habits. The tool has been used in
quite a bit of research. Both Nuti et al. 2014 and Seung-Pyo et al. 2018 analyze
a number of studies that utilize Google Trends data[3, 2].

1

The former study looked at 70 studies conducted between 2009 and 2013
and suggested a seven fold increase during that time period. Of those studies,
24% covered topics of mental health and substance use. The latter analyzes 657
research papers. The research suggests that reliance on Google Trends increased
substantially in the 10 years leading up to the study and that in recent years,
trend data is used in combination with other big data sources.
Public health science is always difficult, because it involves so many different
people, and the collection of significant amounts of data as a result. For epidemiology, we can often engage in broad surveillance, or at least rely on hospital test
results. Analyzing group psychology can be a little more complicated, especially
if we’re trying to identify trends in psychological states, over short periods of
time. This study utilizes Google Trends data to identify changing mental states
and patterns of behavior associated with the COVID-19 outbreak. Search terms
analyzed include anxiety, depression, therapy, suicide, and boredom.

2.1

Seasonality of Stress Related Searches

One of the first observations when looking at the trends data is an apparent
seasonality to search trends related to stress, such as anxiety and depression.
This seasonality appears to have a length of roughly seven days, with peaks
during the middle of the week and lows during the weekends. Trends data from
September 1, 2019 through February 29, 2020 was used for the initial analysis.
This time period gives a large sample of data, within a time period leading up
to, but not including the time when social distancing guidelines were in effect.
Four search terms were chosen: anxiety, depression, therapy, and suicide.
To test for actual seasonality, vs subjectively identified seasonality a simple
autocorrelation analysis was conducted. Analysis was conducted visually, using the plot acf function in version 0.11.1 of the Python module, statsmodels.
As expected, significant autocorrelation was found around a time shift of seven
days, for the terms anxiety, depression, and therapy. However no such autocorrelation was found for suicide. This autocorrelation may be indicative increased
stress during the workweek and greater time available to engage in stress reducing activities during the weekend. This analysis is not the first to identify
a seven day seasonality to certain search terms. The seven day seasonality of
searches for depression was identified as far back as 2008[1].

Figure 1: Autocorrelation Function for ”Anxiety”

2

2.2

Changing Stress Related Searches

The abrupt change in lifestyle caused by lockdowns across the United States
has given us an interesting opportunity to investigate how search trends can
change over short periods of time. All across the country, restaurants and bars
are closing, or only offering takeout and delivery options, while a large number
of people are being temporarily laid off. And the associated seven day cycle
does appear to cease around the middle of March.
However, visual analysis again can be subjective. Change point detection
is a statistically robust method for identifying changes in time series. In this
case, binary segmentation analysis using version 1.0.3 of the ruptures Python
package was selected. The normal model was chosen with four break points. For
brevity, only the trends data for anxiety was analyzed in this way. Based on the
analysis, there is a clear long term channel, along with break points identified
on January 13, March 13, March 18, and March 23.
This change in search activity acts as a partial test for the cause of the
seasonality in the data. This shift in trend makes sense. The stress from work
is no longer present, but there are fewer stress reducing activities available as
well. This lack of available activities would reasonably cause an increase in
boredom.

2.3

Boredom

To test whether there was a change in searches for boredom, trends data for
”boredom” was collected on April 3, and included the data from January 3,
2020 through April 1, 2020. Visually, the change in the rate of searching for
”boredom” was obvious. Searches fluctuated over time, but roughly stayed
within a channel. There was a stark increase around March 14. Between that
date and March 20, searches for the term increased at a roughly linear rate,
before stabilizing, resulting in a new channel that was roughly twice the level of
the old channel. Again, change point analysis was conducted. The break points
detected were on January 8, March 13, March 18, and March 23, which largely
coincides with visual analysis. Moreover, three break points coincide with the
change point analysis conducted on anxiety data.

Figure 2: Change Point Analysis for Boredom

3

3

Changes in Food Related Activities

Aside from changes in stress related search terms, it seemed reasonable that the
change in work schedule and partial closing of restaurants would have an impact
on food related searches. For constancy, the same time period was used for an
initial analysis of trends as well as the secondary analysis for changes in trends.
The search terms selected were cooking, baking, sourdough, and restaurant. All
search terms are general, except for ”sourdough.” The sourdough search term
was included for two reasons. For transparency, the author is likely somewhat
biased regarding the topic, because of their interest in the baking sourdough
bread. However, sourdough can be made without the need for commercial yeast.
The lockdowns across the country, and the fear associated with the COVID-19
epidemic, have reduced access to a variety of ingredients, including yeast, and
many individuals might be concerned that they will not be able to have access
to yeast when they want to bake.

3.1

Seasonality

As was the case with stress related terms, there does appear to be a seasonality
with food related terms, though the seasonality for cooking and baking do not
appear to be as pronounced. The seasonality for restaurant searches is however
striking, with negative correlation between weekdays and weekends, and high
positive correlation for the seven day shift.
There also appeared to be some delay between searches for cooking and
searches for restaurants. To test this visual analysis, and assuming that the
relationship between the two were not linear, the Spearman’s Rank correlation
coefficient was calculated using Scipy package version 1.4.1, with positive and
negative lags. As expected, the coefficient was much higher, and the p-value
much lower, when the restaurant data was shifted one day forward. However,
when doing the same analysis comparing cooking and baking and baking and
restaurant searchers, zero lag gave the largest correlation and smallest p-value.
For some reason, people appear to search for restaurants, before they search
cooking. There relationship between searches for baking and searches for restaurants is less clear.
correlation

p-value

Cooking (No-Shift)

0.552

7.02x10−16

Cooking (Shifted)

0.637

3.85x10−22

Baking/Cooking (No-Shift)

0.826

1.28x10−46

Baking/Cooking (Shifted)

0.393

3.97x10−08

Baking (No-Shift)

0.511

1.77x10−13

Baking (Shifted)

0.492

1.66x10−12

4

4

Shifting Behaviors

Not surprisingly, there appears to be a significant falloff in searches for restaurants, and an increase in searches for cooking. Visually, the shift appears more
pronounced in restaurant searches, likely because of all the restaurant closures.
Meanwhile, people can still order takeout from places they already know about.
Once again the same change point analysis technique was used to justify the
visual analysis. Cooking was selected as the search term to analyze, in this
instance. A primary channel was again found, with break points on January
28, March 18, March 23, and March 28. In this case, two break points are in
common with the other analyses.

5

Discussion

Numerous changes in trends have been identified in this paper, and apparent
points of change have been identified. In general, that March 18 and March
23 were common break points found in the analysis of different search trends
is important. It helps justify the COVID-19 outbreak as a common thread.
However, the identification of March 18 as an apparent break point does not
mean that changes in psychology and behavior initiated on these dates.
Regarding the change in time series data identified when analyzing boredom,
I expect that a new channel will indeed become apparent once the final data
is analyzed. I also expect levels of stress to continue to increase before the
lockdowns end, especially if they are extended past the April 30 goal.
Because this paper was written before the end of the lockdown, more data
will become available over time, and further research can be conducted. In
time, we will be able to use the full time period associated with the COVID-19
lockdown, in order to get a better picture of how the epidemic has impacted
search trends, and we can further investigate the changes to peoples’ lives caused
by this unusual situation. While select terms were chosen for this study, Google
Trends can offer insights into other changes in psychology associated with the
COVID-19 outbreak, and further research should be done on these topics.
Meanwhile, the trend analysis for baseline data gives insight into seasonal
trends for a variety of psychological states and various activities. The apparent
increase in stress related searches during the middle of the week, and the potential relationship to actual increases in stress during that time period, should
give the mental health and public health communities cause to research how we
can reduce midweek stress. Moreover, the high granularity of this data may be
useful in identifying whether such efforts are effective.

References
[1]

Peter J. Ellery et al. “Understanding internet health search patterns: An
early exploration into the usefulness of Google Trends”. In: Journal of Com-

5

munication in Healthcare 1.4 (Oct. 2008), pp. 441–456. doi: 10.1179/cih.
2008.1.4.441. url: https://doi.org/10.1179/cih.2008.1.4.441.
[2]

Seung-Pyo Jun, Hyoung Sun Yoo, and San Choi. “Ten years of research
change using Google Trends: From the perspective of big data utilizations and applications”. In: Technological Forecasting and Social Change
130 (May 2018), pp. 69–87. doi: 10 . 1016 / j . techfore . 2017 . 11 . 009.
url: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2017.11.009.

[3]

Sudhakar V. Nuti et al. “The Use of Google Trends in Health Care Research: A Systematic Review”. In: PLoS ONE 9.10 (Oct. 2014). Ed. by
Martin Voracek, e109583. doi: 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0109583. url:
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0109583.

6

