Fear, Partisanship and the Spread of COVID-19 in the United
States
Robert Kubinec3,*

Luiz Max Carvalho1

Luca Messerschmidt2

Joan Barceló3

Matthew Sean Cottrell6

Cindy Cheng2
Derek Duba5

January 25, 2021

Abstract
In this paper we argue that the sociopolitical context of the COVID-19 pandemic is as important
for understanding the spread of the disease as more conventional factors like social distancing policies
and the capacity of the health care system. To do so, we analyze COVID-19 case and test data from
the fifty United States during the first seven months on the pandemic. We also devise a Bayesian
modeling approach for semi-parametric identification of the infection rate that permits us to undertake
more sophisticated covariate adjustment than previous studies, incorporating mediation analysis to better
understand why and how sociopolitical, economic and demographic factors affected different channels of
transmission. Our results show that partisan identity is a powerful predictor of the spread of the disease
by increasing dangerous mobility patterns and reducing people’s fear of the pandemic. WORD COUNT:
15,0761
1

School of Applied Mathematics, Getúlio Vargas Foundation, Brazil

2

Hochschule für Politik at the Technical University of Munich (TUM) and the TUM School of Governance,

Munich, Germany
3

Social Science Division, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates

4

Department of Political Science, University of Southern California

5

School of Politics and Global Studies, Arizona State University

6

University of California Riverside

1 To reproduce the model and to access the underlying Stan code, please see our Github page. This paper is part of the
CoronaNet project collecting data on government responses to the COVID-19 pandemic. For helpful comments we thank
participants of the 2020 Polnet/Politics and Computational Social Science Conference. We thank James Bisbee and Rex
Douglass for helpful comments. We acknowledge funding from New York University Abu Dhabi and the Technical University
of Munich. We thank Tesea Conte, Muhannad AlRamlawi, Shiva Teerdhala, and Luke Burkholder for invaluable research
assistance in evaluating state-level COVID-19 policies.

1

*

Correspondence: Robert Kubinec <rmk7@nyu.edu>

2

In the United States and in other politically polarized countries, a profound disagreement over how to respond
to the COVID-19 pandemic has undermined efforts to control the disease. However, while we have increasing
evidence about the relationship between partisan identities and individual beliefs about COVID-19 (Fan,
Orhun, and Turjeman 2020; G. Grossman et al. 2020), data about partisan identity, along with other social
and economic covariates, are rarely included in efforts to model and predict the spread of the disease in
the population (Seth Flaxman 2020; Sharma et al. 2020a; Haug et al. 2020). In this paper we argue that
including social, economic and especially political covariates is necessary to obtain a full understanding of
the complex patterns of human behavior undergirding the spread of the pandemic.
To expand the scope of modeling contextual factors related to the pandemic, we employ in this paper a
Bayesian model that is able to account for biases in COVID-19 testing data yet still enables us to explore
in much more detail how the political, social and economic context of COVID-19 influenced the spread of
the disease during the first half of 2020. To do so we employ a rich set of adjustment covariates, including
voting behavior, public health capacity, socio-economic insecurity, policy responses to the pandemic, and
demographic factors. To learn more about how these factors relate to the spread of the disease, we employ
mediation analysis to see how much of these associations can be explained by changes in daily state-level
polling about concern over COVID-19 and daily Google mobility data. To make the model identifiable,
we calibrate our model estimates of the number of infected with state-level serology surveys from the U.S.
Center for Disease Control (CDC).
By examining a richer array of covariates and relationships among covariates, we are able to show not only
which factors most strongly correlate with rising or falling infections, but also whether these associations
are driven by changes in mobility, personal beliefs or other mechanisms. For this reason, even when we
cannot make exclusive claims of causal identification, we can still learn about how the associations between
covariates and the disease did or did not align with our increasing knowledge about how COVID-19 beliefs
translate into human behavior.
We show with this model that even when estimated jointly with other covariates, political partisanship in
the United States has a very strong association with the spread of the pandemic. A 1-SD increase in a
state’s 2016 vote share for Donald Trump is associated with a cumulative increase of 0.5% to 0.7% of a
state’s population infected by SARS-CoV-2 mediated by decreasing people’s concern over the pandemic. A
1-SD increase in a state’s vote share for U.S. President Donald Trump is also associated with a 0.3% to 0.5%
increase in a state’s infections mediated by increased mobility. We show that offsetting these increases in
infections from mobility associated with partisanship would require at least 15 additional days of a state-wide
stay-at-home order.
3

We also find evidence that political activity on the left is positively associated with the spread of the disease,
with states that saw a 1-SD increase in social justice protests following the death of George Floyd witnessing
an increase in infections as high as 0.4% over time. On the other hand, we do not find that the protests
reduced people’s fears of the disease or changed mobility patterns, suggesting that the spread of the disease
happened solely through increased personal contact at the protests and subsequent chains of transmission.
Our model’s estimates also shed light on more conventional factors to control the pandemic, especially social
distancing policies. We show that the effect of state-level NPIs targeted at the epidemic varies significantly
over the time and exhibits trade-offs in terms of reducing mobility. While stay-at-home orders and business restrictions reduced infections by reducing workplace mobility, they also are associated with increased
infections in residential places as more people stayed home. These results demonstrate the difficulty in determining the precise effects of policy changes as they are mediated through individual mobility and beliefs
about the seriousness of the disease.

1

Human Behavior and the COVID-19 Pandemic

A vast and expanding literature documents connections between many political, economic and social factors
with human behavior related to the COVID-19 pandemic. While existing studies have shown these associations primarily through surveys and other individual-level analyses, it is difficult to test whether these factors
jointly have an effect on COVID-19 infections. The reason for this difficulty is due to how these variables
affect human behavior in general equilibrium. For example, non-pharmaceutical interventions (NPIs) like
stay-at-home orders have been associated with reduced infections, but stay-at-home orders were also implemented in a rapidly changing environment as public health policies, new suppression practices like masking
and the health of the economy varied. People have faced myriad influences on their choices during the pandemic, and even if we have a strong reason to believe that a certain factor should influence their behavior,
estimating that effect when many other contravening and contrasting factors were at play is challenging.
At the same time, estimating these general equilibrium effects even within the limitations of available data is
very important to learn what factors are associated with the spread of COVID-19 in realistic conditions. For
example, some argued that masking would lead to increased infections because it would reduce concern over
the risk of infection (Abaluck et al. 2020). Evaluating this hypothesis ultimately requires general equilibrium
analysis as it involves competing influences on human behavior. In other words, is the moral hazard of being
falsely protected a greater threat than the positive benefits of reducing infections via masking? Being able to
sort, rank and understand socio-economic, political and healthcare-related factors behind the disease’s spread
4

is crucial to better understand why and how COVID-19 overwhelmed countries’ disease control systems.
We can summarize the problem of modeling COVID-19 to two main challenges. The first is the challenge
of modeling the spread of the disease given the limitations of testing and reported deaths, which could
obfuscate the effect of any covariates with data reporting issues. Second, employing observational data
requires nuanced comparisons to be made. To learn the effect of a stay-at-home order, for instance, we
would want to compare two regions with similar demographic, social and political characteristics as these
could be also influencing human behavior, masking the effect of the stay-at-home order. For example, regions
with less political partisanship may be more likely to take prudent behaviors to mitigate COVID-19 and also
may be more likely to see stay-at-home orders implemented.
In addition, learning about the nature of factors that influenced the pandemic is limited by our knowledge
of how different mechanisms contribute to changes in human behavior. We have learned since the outbreak
of the pandemic that mobility and personal willingness to follow social distancing and mask-wearing requirements are important intermediate mechanisms that can explain whether these individuals become infected
(Bonaccorsi et al. 2020a; Fan, Orhun, and Turjeman 2020; Abaluck et al. 2020; Gao, Rao, Kang, and Kruse
2020). As such, it would be very helpful to know whether covariates of interest influence infections through
these known pathways or through some other pathway, especially as some mechanisms like mobility are more
amenable to policy intervention than others, such as personal beliefs about the disease.
In this paper, we seek to address these questions by collecting a rich set of important covariates, implementing
models to adjust for bias in COVID-19 data and employ mediation analysis to understand the pathways
that covariates affect the spread of the pandemic. We believe that doing so contributes to our emerging
understanding of the factors that contributed to the spread of the pandemic, especially with respect to
factors that we believe tend to be ignored in epidemiological modeling of COVID-19. We argue that political
partisanship can be equally as important to the spread of the pandemic as more conventional factors like
the implementation of social-distancing measures.
A literature already exists documenting the role of political identity in individual views towards COVID-19,
particularly in the United States, but it has largely remained separate from modeling studies of the spread
of the pandemic. Political scientists have focused on partisanship due to the way that the pandemic has
been politicized along long-lasting cleavages in U.S. politics. The partisan divide in American politics has
become a serious concern in political science and the broader community as identities have hardened in a
process ongoing since the 1990s or even earlier (Alesina and Rosenthal 1995; K. T. Poole and Rosenthal
2007; K. Poole and Rosenthal 1997; M. Grossman and Hopkins 2016; Iyengar and Westwood 2015). The
powerful effect of partisanship on American politics has grown even stronger since the polarizing presidency
5

of Donald J. Trump and the hardening of racial identities in the United States (Horowitz, Brown, and
Cox 2019). More recently, political scientists have investigated to what extent partisanship has inhibited
preventive measures against the COVID-19 pandemic as President Trump has argued against public health
policies like face masks. Research has already shown that Republicans are less likely than Democrats to
practice public health behaviors like hand washing (Gadarian, Goodman, and Pepinsky 2020), to practice
social distancing (Andersen 2020; Alcott et al. 2020; Painter and Qiu 2020), and to comply with policies
targeted against COVID-19 (Fan, Orhun, and Turjeman 2020; G. Grossman et al. 2020).
While partisanship in favor of President Trump and the Republican party has received the most attention,
other types of political mobilization have also come under scrutiny. Of particular note were the protest
movements against police brutality that spread across the United States in the summer and fall of 2020. Existing research suggests the protests have not had an adverse effect on COVID-19 infections (Dave, Friedson,
Matsuzawa, Sabia, and Safford 2020), though it is again limited by the observational bias we describe later.
As such, it is clear that political motivations on both the left and the right have at times led to reduced
compliance with COVID-19 precautions, though it is not clear how severe these factors are, especially when
compared to other covariates known to affect COVID-19.
The most important of these, which we also study in this article, are the role of government policies to prevent
close personal interaction, which are often classified under the umbrella of non-pharmaceutical interventions
(NPIs). Some of the most sophisticated of these studies, which employ state-of-the-art epidemiological
models of COVID-19, have examined how country-level differences in the implementation of stay-at-home
orders and business closures affected the spread of the pandemic in the critical early period (Seth Flaxman
2020; Sharma et al. 2020a; Haug et al. 2020). While these studies have emphasized the difficult inference
issues involved with modeling COVID-19 data, they have largely avoided adjusting NPI estimates with
sociopolitical covariates like partisanship, making an implicit assumption that the effect of NPI estimates is
independent of these types of human behaviors and identities. For this reason, while these studies help us
know much more precisely how NPIs affected the spread of the pandemic through exact measures like the
reproduction number, they are more limited in making stronger claims of identification of the NPIs and even
through what channels NPIs affect human behavior (Sharma et al. 2020b).
Studies of NPIs and other factors arising in the social sciences, on the other hand, tend to address sociopolitical issues more directly, though they also generally opt for simpler models such as event studies that
are easier to estimate with richer covariate sets (Allcott et al. 2020; Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, and Sabia
2020). These studies sometimes also employ cell phone mobility data as a proxy for infections with the
assumption that reduced mobility will reduce human contact and consequently the spread of COVID-19.
6

These studies contain more realism in terms of the factors that could explain COVID-19 at the expense of
the more sophisticated methods for modeling the spread of the disease. However, even these studies do not
normally include relatively novel factors such as partisanship, and do not generally examine the mediation
pathways through which policies and demographics may influence behavior. Furthermore, it is difficult to
assess whether the more conventional models employed are able to appropriately address the limitations of
COVID-19 data.
Our aim in this paper is to include variables of interest to both the epidemiological and social-scientific
literatures, with a particular emphasis on decomposing the channels through which covariates influence
human behavior. By doing so, we hope to point out what are in fact the most important factors in the
myriad of possible influences on human behavior. One of our central arguments in doing so is that we cannot
afford to ignore unconventional factors like partisanship even in models that focus solely on the spread of
the disease.
Our argument about the importance of partisanship as a covariate can be expressed with the following two
hypotheses:

H1: Higher levels of partisanship as measured by President Trump’s 2016 vote share, Trump
daily approval ratings and participation in racial justice protests are associated with increased
COVID-19 infections even when accounting for government policies and demographic factors.

H2: Increased partisanship in favor of President Trump is associated with increased COVID-19
infections by reducing fears of the severity of the disease and by encouraging risky patterns of
mobility.

In the next section, we discuss our statistical method for testing these hypotheses and estimating the effect
of NPIs and other factors.

2

Methods

Existing models that address these questions generally fall into one of two categories. In the first, models by
social scientists investigate how social, economic and political variables affect and are affected by the spread of
COVID-19. These models generally attempt to avoid data measurement errors through implementing existing
methods, such as time-to-event models and difference-in-difference estimation (Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa,
and Sabia 2020; Courtemanche et al. 2020; Dave, Friedson, Matsuzawa, Sabia, and Safford 2020; Abouk and
7

Heydari 2021). In a different vein, a growing literature examines the role of NPIs, or government policies
attempting to control the pandemic. These studies tend to use more complicated epidemiological models,
known as compartmental models, that are more suited to the complexity of the data, but also tend to have
much less sophistication in terms of the range of covariates employed for adjustment (Seth Flaxman 2020;
Neil M Ferguson 2020; Haug et al. 2020; Brauner et al. 2020). The more robust modeling of the disease
comes at the cost of being able to employ more extensive and more nuanced covariate adjustment, such as
the mediation analysis we employ in this paper.
Our approach has a similar aim to the epidemiological models in that it is designed explicitly to model disease
dynamics as opposed to re-purposing an existing method which may or may not have valid assumptions for
studying pandemics. At the same time, our model can be thought of as a simplification of the compartmental
models employed by epidemiologists to study disease, and in particular SARS-CoV2 (Peak et al. 2020; Riou
et al. 2020; Robert Verity 2020; Perkins et al. 2020; Jose Lourenco 2020; Ruiyun Li 2020; Neil M Ferguson
2020; Carleton and Meng 2020; Sajadi et al. 2020; Dudel et al. 2020; Tasnim, Hossain, and Mazumder
2020; Seth Flaxman 2020; Brzezinski et al. 2020). These models suppose different classes (compartments)
of individuals in the population, denoted S for susceptible, I for infectious, and R for removed (other
compartments may be added, such as E for exposed). The model is usually written in the form of a system
of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and assumes a fixed population size, as seems reasonable during
a relatively quick epidemic. The number of infected individuals can then be obtained from the solution
of the ODE system for the I compartment. These models guide our understanding of the disease and its
progression, and have made warnings about the disease’s spread that are proving true on a daily basis.
At the same time, these models often struggle to provide straightforward estimates when employing empirical
data. This difficulty exists because compartmental models are only identified with a substantial amount of
data, such as knowing the exact age mortality distribution of the disease and the time between infection
onset and death or recovery. COVID-19 data, unfortunately, has serious flaws that are increasingly wellknown, including limited testing and under-reporting of hospitalizations and deaths (Larremore et al. 2020;
Sánchez-Romero et al. 2021). When such data is unavailable, modelers can compensate by simulating
plausible random values or using informative prior distributions, but this makes the model estimates tied to
the particular set of values used (Grinsztajn et al. 2021). As a result, the challenges in the estimation of
compartmental models with empirical data restrict the ability to employ more rigorous forms of covariate
adjustment.
By contrast, this paper endeavors to estimate a much simpler quantity than the entire evolution of the
outbreak. By so doing, we are able to employ more rigorous empirical modeling of covariates while also
8

making fewer assumptions about the nature of the underlying infection process and directly incorporate
available empirical estimates of infection. We believe that many researchers and the general public often
only want to learn about what has already happened, or the empirical infection rate (also called the attack
rate in the epidemiological literature). For a number of time points t ∈ T since the outbreak’s start and
states c ∈ C, we aim to identify the following quantity:


ft

Ict
Sct + Rct



Assuming a fixed population size, this quantity is simply the marginal rate of infections in the population up
to the present. The function ft determines the historical time trend of the rate of infection (which is assumed
to be same across countries/regions) in the population up to time T , the present. Because the denominator
is shifting over time due to disease progression dynamics, this model is only useful for retrospection, i.e.,
to examine factors that may be influencing the empirical time trend ft . As Sct and Rct are exogenous to
the model, it cannot predict future prevalence of the disease given that it does not determine these crucial
factors.
However, we do not have estimates of the actual infected rate Ict , only positive COVID-19 cases act and
numbers of COVID-19 tests qct due to the aforementioned measurement issues. Given this limitation, the
aim of the model is to backwards infer the infection rate Ict as a latent process given observed test and
counts. Modeling the latent process is necessary to avoid bias in using only observed case counts as a proxy
for Ict . The reason for this is shown in Figure 1 in which a covariate Xct , such as a stay-at-home order,
is hypothesized to affect the infection rate Ict . Unfortunately, increasing infection rates can cause both
increasing numbers of observed counts act and tests qct . As more people are infected, more tests are likely
to be done, which will increase the number of cases independently of the infection rate. As a result, due to
the back-door path from the infection rate Ict to case counts act via the number of tests qct , it is impossible
to infer the effect of Xct on Ict from the observed data alone without modeling the latent infection rate.
Given this overview of the intuition behind our approach, we turn to a more formal definition. Our observed
outcomes are the cumulative total of tests and cases reported on a given day t in a given state c. We
assume that the unobserved state-specific cumulative infection rate Ict can be modeled as a time-varying
Beta-distributed random variable with a mean parameter µ ∈ (0, 1) and shape parameter φ > 0 . We also
assume that the over-time change in the disease can be modeled as a 3-order polynomial time trend that
is a function of the number of post-outbreak time periods TO < T , where an outbreak begins at the first
reported case in a given area.

9

Figure 1: Directed Acyclic Graph Showing Confounding of Covariate Xct on Observed Tests qct and Cases
act Due to Unobserved Infection Rate Ict

act
Xct

Ict
qct

Figure shows the relationship between a covariate Xct representing a policy or social factor influencing the infection rate Ict .
Because the infection rate Ict influences both the number of reported tests qct and reported cases act , any regression of a
covariate Xct on the reported data will be biased.

It is important to note that the reason we employ a cubic function is based on theoretical considerations. In
our model, the polynomial represents the rate of infection increase in the absence of any other covariates,
or equivalently the counterfactual rate of infections. We know from the SIR/SEIR simulations that, in the
absence of any countervailing measures, epidemics occur in ever-increasing waves until the herd immunity
threshold is reached, although the curve is unlikely to be symmetric as a simpler quadratic function would
require. As such, we employ this function because it represents a credible baseline for what the epidemic
would do if no other factors impeded its spread. We further allow the polynomial trends to vary by states
hierarchically, i.e., the information about the trends is partially pooled across states. The partial pooling is
necessary to allow for state-level heterogeneity in the exact progress of the disease, which we note is further
modeled by including data on when cases first were reported in each state. We believe this counterfactual infection function is considerably flexible while also motivated by our understanding of how epidemics
progress.
We define the conditional distribution of the unobserved infection rate Ict as:

Pr(Ict | t = T ) ∼ Beta(µφ, (1 − µ)φ)
µ =g −1 (α1 + βO1

C TX
−14
X

(1)
act +

(2)

c=1 t=1

βI1 to + βI2 t2o + βI3 t3o + βC Xct )

(3)

This parameterization of the Beta distribution in terms of µ and φ follows from the Beta regression literature
(Ferrari and Cribari-Neto 2004) so that we can model the expected value E[Ict ] directly via µ. As such, we
use g −1 (·), the inverse logit function, to scale the linear model in µ to the (0, 1) interval. For the parameters,
PC Pt−14
βO1 c=1 t=1 act are the sum of observed cases in the country with a 14-day lag, which represents the
10

possibility of cross-border spread in infections. The three βIi are polynomial coefficients of the number of
post-outbreak time periods to .
The parameter vector βC represents the effect of independent covariate matrix Xct on the latent infection
rate. These are our main variables of interest, and have effects in addition to the polynomial time trends.
Finally, the parameter φ becomes a dispersion parameter governing the variability of latent infection rate.
Because we do not have measures of Ict , we need to used the observed data, tests qct and cases act , to infer
Ict . First, we propose that the number of infections will almost certainly increase the number of tests as
states try to stop the disease’s spread via surveillance. Second, we can assume that a rising infection rate
is associated with a higher ratio of positive results (reported cases) conditional on the number of tests, that
is, COVID-19 is causing positive test results. We model both of these observed indicators, tests and cases,
jointly to simultaneously adjust for the infection rate’s influence on both factors. It is this joint modeling
that permits us to directly incorporate testing bias. In fact, our model learns about the infection rate from
the level of tests rather than trying to discard this information.
To model the number of tests, we assume that each state has an unobserved level of testing capacity, which
increases at a non-linear rate during the course of the epidemic. We employ a quadratic function of testing
capacity to express the concept of diminishing marginal returns. States were able to ramp up testing once
PCR tests were approved by the FDA, but faced constraints due to shortages of supplies, personnel and
labs. The cumulative number of observed tests qct for a given time point t and state c and as a fraction of
the states’ population, cp , then has a binomial distribution:

qct ∼ Binomial(cp , g −1 (α2 + βb Ict + βcq1 Lt + βcq2 L2t )).

(4)

The parameters βcq1 and βcq2 represent the quadratic increase in testing capacity that varies by state c.
We similarly allow for partial pooling of these coefficients as testing capacity will show a limited level of
variability across states. The parameter βb then represents the independent contribution of the level of
infections Ict on the total number of requests demanded marginal of testing capacity. The intercept α2
indicates how many tests would be performed in a state with an infection rate of zero and at time t = 0,
and as such is likely to be very low.
The binomial model for the number of observed tests qct provides some information about Ict , but not enough
for useful estimates. We can learn much more about Ict by also modeling the number of observed cases act
as another binomial random variable expressed as a proportion of the state population, cp :

11

act ∼ Binomial(cp , g −1 (α3 + βa Ict )),

(5)

where g −1 (·) is again the inverse logit function, α3 is an intercept that indicates how many cases would test
positive with an infection rate of zero (approximately equal to the false positive rate of the test), and βa is
a parameter that determines how hard it is to find the infected people and test them as opposed to people
who are not actually infected. The multiplication of this parameter and the infection rate determines the
cumulative number of cases, act , as a proportion of the state population, cp .
To summarize the model, infection rates determine how many tests a state is likely to undertake and also
the number of positive tests they receive as cases. This simultaneous adjustment helps takes care of misinterpreting the observed data by not taking into account varying testing rates, which has made it hard to
generalize findings concerning the disease and also led some policy makers to claim that rising case rates are
solely due to increasing numbers of tests. It also allows us to learn the likely location of the infection rate
conditional on what we observe in terms of tests and cases.
Because sampling from a model with a hierarchical Beta parameter can be difficult, we simplify the likelihood
by combining the beta distribution and the binomial counts into a beta-binomial model for tests:

qct ∼ Beta-Binomial(cp , µq φq , (1 − µq )φq )

(6)

µq = g −1 (α2 + βb Ict + βcq1 Lt + βcq2 L2t )

(7)

act ∼ Beta-Binomial(qct , µa φa , (1 − µa )φa )

(8)

µa = g −1 (α3 + βa Ict ).

(9)

and cases:

where Ict is now equal to the linear model vector µ shown in (3) and mapped to (0, 1) via the inverse logit
function.

12

2.1

Identifiability

This model contains an unobserved latent process Ict , and as such the model as presented is not identified
from the data alone without further information. For example, the parameters that control the influence of
the infection rate on tests and cases could increase and the latent infection rate could decrease without the
probability of the observed data changing.
There two further steps taken to identify this model which we believe represent very limited additional
assumptions, especially compared to existing modeling approaches. First, we must require that Ict is a
non-decreasing quantity. The number of infected people cannot decrease in an epidemic, but the model as
expressed does not require that to be true.2 We can eliminate that possibility from the model by imposing
an ordered constraint on Ict :

Ict =




I

if t = 1

ct

(10)



Ict−1 + eIct

if 1 < t < T

This transformation forces Ict to be no less than Ict−1 . At the same time, we do not need to impose any
constraints on the covariates themselves, allowing us to sample those in an unconstrained space before we
transform Ict .
However, we also need some information about the empirical scale of testing bias to produce identified
estimates of Ict . We could do so by adding a prior to the model about the plausible range of total infections
to reported cases, though we prefer to use information that is more precise. The Centers for Disease
Control’s serology surveys conducted during the pandemic represent an empirical way of relating Ict to
plausible estimates of infections at varying time points. By including this information, we also implicitly
account for many of the variables explicitly parameterized in compartmental models such as reporting delays.
Because we have an estimate of the number infected at time t that is independent of reported cases and tests,
the model will find the parameter estimates that are most likely given the observed differences between the
surveys and the reported data.
Though these surveys are opt-in samples, they were adjusted using post-stratification to match population
totals, providing a reasonably accurate assessment of the state of infection for a given state (Havers and
Krapiunaya 2020). The surveys we employ are listed in Table 1. In cases where only a portion of the state
was sampled, we project the infection rate to the entire state by assuming that the cases/infected ratio
2 Note that we are not assuming that people cannot be re-infected, but rather that people cannot become uninfected after
contracting the disease.

13

(i.e. the observation bias) is constant within the state at that time point.
Table 1: Geographic Serological Surveys from the Centers for Disease Control
State

% Infected

Connecticut
Connecticut
Connecticut
Connecticut
Louisiana

4.9%
5.2%
6.3%
5.2%
5.8%

Louisiana
Minnesota
Minnesota
Minnesota
Missouri

N

Date Started

Date Ended

1431
1800
1798
1802
1184

2020-04-26
2020-05-21
2020-06-15
2020-07-03
2020-04-01

2020-05-03
2020-05-26
2020-06-17
2020-07-06
2020-04-08

6.7%
2.4%
2.2%
4.3%
2.6%

770
860
1323
1667
1882

2020-04-22
2020-04-30
2020-05-25
2020-06-15
2020-04-20

2020-04-27
2020-05-12
2020-06-06
2020-06-27
2020-04-26

Missouri
Missouri
Missouri
New York
New York

2.8%
0.8%
1.4%
3.69%
13.2%

1831
1850
1914
2482
1618

2020-05-25
2020-06-15
2020-07-05
2020-03-23
2020-04-06

2020-05-30
2020-06-20
2020-07-09
2020-04-01
2020-04-16

New York
New York
New York
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania

16.49%
14.44%
13.12%
1.98%
2.48%

1116
1581
1602
824
1743

2020-04-27
2020-06-15
2020-07-07
2020-04-13
2020-05-26

2020-05-06
2020-06-21
2020-07-11
2020-04-25
2020-05-30

Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania
Florida
Florida
Florida

2.64%
3.55%
0.75%
1.3%
2.12%

1694
1751
1742
1280
1790

2020-06-14
2020-07-06
2020-04-06
2020-04-20
2020-05-19

2020-06-20
2020-07-11
2020-04-10
2020-04-27
2020-05-27

California
California
Utah
Utah
Utah

0.96%
0.94%
2.2%
1.1%
1.5%

1224
1539
1132
1940
1976

2020-04-23
2020-05-19
2020-04-20
2020-05-25
2020-06-15

2020-04-27
2020-05-27
2020-05-03
2020-06-05
2020-06-27

Washington
Washington
Washington
Washington

0.67%
2.18%
2.19%
1.77%

3264
1719
1803
1797

2020-03-23
2020-04-27
2020-06-15
2020-07-06

2020-04-01
2020-05-11
2020-06-20
2020-07-07

Because we model the infection rate as a cumulative count, it is straightforward to include this information
in the model. For a given state c and time point t for which we have survey information, we model the
P
N
as a proportion of the total subjects in each serology survey Sct
with the Binomial
count of infected Sct

distribution:

N
Sct ∼ Binomial(Sct
, g −1 (Ict ))

14

(11)

It is important that the serology surveys enter the model in this fashion so that we can model the survey
count stochastically. This is necessary to propagate uncertainty in the sample size through to our estimates
of Ict . This uncertainty matters as well because the serology surveys exhibit random noise and do not always
increase over time, as can be seen in Table 1. By modeling the relationship as a probabilistic one, we are
making the weaker assumption that the infected rate is probably close to the serology estimate, but the two
do not need to be the identical. The combined posterior estimates for Ict will then be weighted with the
case and test likelihoods to produce the most credible estimate of Ict .
As we show in the supplemental information with simulations, no other identification restrictions are necessary to estimate the model beyond weakly informative priors assigned to parameters.
These are:

βa ∼ Normal(30, 10),

(12)

βqci ∼ Normal(µqi , σqi ),

(13)

σqi ∼ Exponential(1),

(14)

µqi ∼ Normal(0, 20),

(15)

βC ∼ Normal(0, 5),

(16)

βIi ∼ Normal(µIi , σIi ),

(17)

µIi ∼ Normal(0, 10),

(18)

σIi ∼ Exponential(1),

(19)

α1 ∼ Normal(0, 10),

(20)

α2 ∼ Normal(0, 10),

(21)

α3 ∼ Normal(0, 10)

(22)

where the normal distribution is parameterized in terms of mean and standard deviation.
The priors to note are the hierarchical regularizing prior put on the varying testing adjustment parameters
βqci and varying polynomial trends βIi with shared means and standard deviations. This partial pooling
permits a reasonable degree of heterogeneity in the parameters while still constraining overall dispersion.
Relatively informative priors are put on the hierarchical variance parameters σqi and σIi to suggest that
while state heterogeneity does exist, we do still expect the states’ estimates to be within a given range.

15

We note that a crucial advantage of this framework is providing a way to measured the count of infected
adjusting for known biases in the number of tests. By comparing numbers of tests per capita and growth
rates in cases across regions, the model is able to backwards infer a likely number of infected individuals
in a given area. As such it exploits both within-area and between-area variance to adjust for the biases of
imperfect testing. The wide variety of covariates we add to the model, which we describe in the next section,
provide the mechanism through which the model can infer test/case relationships even in states which have
not had a CDC serology survey.
0
We also extend this model in order to analyze the mediation of a subset of covariates Xct
by adding mediators

Mct for mobility and Fct for fear of the disease to the causal diagram, as in Figure 2. Figure 2 has several
paths due to the fact that the influence of covariates Xct affects the two mediators differently. Given that
0
beliefs and preferences precede actions, the covariates Xct
first influence Ict along the ae and abd path through

perceptions of how dangerous the disease is. These beliefs both affect the chance of an individual getting
infected and thus Ict directly on the path ae, such as by causing an individual to adopt social distancing
behaviors, and also on an indirect path abd by which an increase in a people’s fear of the disease reduces
mobility as people prefer to stay home.
In addition to pathways through the fear mediator Fct , a covariate could influence infections along the
pathway through mobility ed without increasing or decreasing fear. This situation could arise if government
policies forced people to stay at home against their will and despite their unconcern about the disease.
Finally, a covariate could have an unmediated direct effect g on the infection rate. The total effect of a
covariate Xct on the spread of the disease is then the sum of all the paths, abd + af + ed + g. To calculate
the indirect effects and direct effects given the use of the inverse logit function g −1 (·), we employ the chain
rule as in Winship and Mare (1983) to calculate the marginal effect of covariates with respect to different
pathways to Ict .
Adding the mediators to the model is relatively simple as they do not have link functions and can be included
as Normal distributions (i.e., OLS regression) as in Yuan and MacKinnon (2009). It should be noted that
there are in fact five mobility covariates as explained in the following section, and so we explicitly model the
covariance in mobility via a multivariate Normal distribution with a covariance matrix parameter Σm .
To add our mediation covariates Mct and Fct , which we describe in more detail in the next section, we
multiply the following likelihoods with the joint posterior:

16

Figure 2: Directed Acyclic Graph for Latent Infection Rate with Mediators
b

Fct

Mct

a

d
e

Xct

f
g

act

Ict
qct

This figure adds mediators Mct (mobility data) and Fct (fear of COVID-19) that mediate the relationship between state-level
0 and the latent infection rate I . Because beliefs precede actions, F
covariates Xct
ct
ct is causally prior to Mct and can affect
infections both via reducing mobility (path abd) and directly apart from mobility (path ae), such as by encouraging individuals
to remain socially distant.

0
Mct ∼ M V N (αm + βm Xct
, Σm )
0
Fct ∼ N (αf + βf Xct
, σf )

(23)
(24)

We also include all of Mct and Fct as linear predictors in (3).
We fit this model using Markov Chain Monte Carlo in the Stan software package (Carpenter et al. 2017).
We run the sampler for 1000 iterations with 500 warmup iterations and two chains to test for convergence.

3

Data

The only data required to fit the model, in addition to the covariates of interest and serology surveys, are
observed cases and tests for COVID-19 by day. In this section, we fit the model to numbers of COVID-19
case counts on US states and territories provided by The New York Times. By doing so, we can use the
differences in trajectories across states to help identify the effect of state-level covariates on the infection
rate. We supplement these observed case counts with testing data by day from the COVID-19 Tracking
Project. As there are discrepancies where the reported number of cases or tests decreases for a given day,
we impute these cases and tests through linear interpolation as the number is likely an under/over count of
neighboring days. We then take the 7-day rolling average of both series to account for reporting fluctuations
and weekly reporting effects.
To analyze the effect of suppression policies, we use data on counts of social distancing policies, restrictions on
mass gatherings, restrictions on businesses, mandatory mask orders, restrictions on government services, and
17

stay-at-home orders from the CoronaNet Government Response dataset (Cheng et al. 2020). For each type of
policy, we include a variable representing the count of policies in that category effective for a particular day.
For each update to an existing policy, we code it as +1 if the update increases the scope of the policy or -1 if
it decreases the scope of the policy (down to a minimum of 0). While this is a simplification of the underlying
data, we are still able to capture relative complexity over time without having to make judgments about
stringency or other qualitative criteria. We then interact these policy counts with a linear trend to examine
time-varying policy effects. We separately include policies designed to increase health resources like personal
protective equipment (PPE) and also policies requiring mask use as we do not examine time-varying effects
of these covariates. The use of a variety of policy types is important as the adoption of policies is correlated
and so including only stay-at-home orders could mask other distinct policies that were implemented at the
same time.
The policy data is plotted by state in Figure 3. As can be seen, there is a rise in policies after the pandemic
begins in the middle of March, though the number of policies varies across categories. The count of policies
is an admittedly imperfect measure though it communicates more information about policy activity than
a simple binary coding. Generally speaking, states imposed many more policies designed to increase their
access to PPE for health staff than they were willing to take on lockdowns, social distancing, and restrictions
on businesses and government services. This difference likely has to do with the increased cost and salience
of these policies vis-a-vis relatively less politically difficult options like gathering more masks and face shields
for health care workers (Cheng et al. 2020).
To better understand over-time factors that may also affect COVID-19, we include polling data from Civiqs
and YouGov at the state level. From Civiqs we include state-level polling averages by day for the percentage of
respondents favoring Trump, percentage reporting the economy is “very good,” and the percentage reporting
that they are “extremely concerned” about the coronavirus. From YouGov we use a poll from May 8th
reporting average number of respondents who said they used masks by U.S. state. As this poll does not vary
over time, we set the mask prevalence at one-half the minimum value of the poll prior to the WHO’s revision
of guidance concerning wearing masks on April 3rd, and equal to the poll’s values thereafter. As described in
the previous section, the poll asking respondents whether they are “extremely concerned” about COVID-19
represents our fear mediator, and is also included as a separate outcome with other covariates as predictors.
To better understand the mediating effects of suppression policies, we include Google mobility data3 for
retail, residential, parks, workplaces, transit and retail establishments. These estimates are by day and
aggregated to the state level. They are measured in terms of an index that is initialized with a value of
3 See

https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/

18

Figure 3: Count of Policies in Effect by Day and by State from the CoronaNet Dataset
100 at the index start on February 15th, 2020. To test for mediation, we include these as predictors of
the infection rate, and separately fit a likelihood with each mobility covariate as an outcome and the other
covariates as predictors.
We note that it is important to measure mediation for mobility because mobility is hypothesized to affect
the spread of COVID-19 (Gao, Rao, Kang, and Kruse 2020). As such, measuring the simultaneous effect
on mobility for covariates in our model is important as the covariates could be affecting mobility, which
subsequently affects COVID-19 spread. Ignoring this association would result in post-treatment bias that
deflates the effect of predictors in the model, though our main interest in including these variables is because
this mediation is substantively interesting to decompose.
To measure protest activity, we include a covariate reflecting the proportion of a state’s population engaged
in social justice protests following the death of George Floyd on May 25, 2020. This data is drawn from
publicly available information about the number and size of protests from three online sources: Wikipedia
protest data, the Count Love protest web-crawling web site,4 and list of protests compiled by Ipsos.5 For
protests present in only one of the three sources, we used information on both size and location. If a protest
4 https://countlove.org/
5 See

https://www.ipsos.com/en-us/knowledge/society/Protests-in-the-wake-of-George-Floyd-killing-touch-all-50-states

19

was present in three sources, we averaged reported protest size. If the sources had contradictory information
about the type of protest, we had research assistants re-code the protest using secondary sources. For protests
for which size was not available, we imputed missing data using random forest algorithms (Stekhoven and
Bühlmann 2012).
All time-varying covariates–polling, protests, policies and mobility data–are lagged by 14 days to account
for the likely delay in events showing up in reported cases. This 14-day lag comes from the epidemiology
literature (Seth Flaxman 2020) and is meant to take into the account the amount of time required for people
to be infected, be tested and then have the test results reflected in case counts.
We further add in non-varying state-level data on Donald Trump’s vote share for the 2016 election from
the MIT Election Lab, a 2019 estimate of state GDP from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the 2018
percentage of foreign born residents, population under 18 years of age and population density from the U.S.
Census Bureau, 2019 state-level average data on air pollution,6 cardiovascular deaths per capita, percentage
of residents under age 18, number of dedicated health care providers, public health funding, and smoking
rates provided by the United Health Foundation (“America’s Health Rankings 2019 Report” 2019). All
variables are standardized to permit comparability.
We employ state-level data rather than country-level data because our aim is to have a rich adjustment set of
covariates. While some of our data is available as well at the country level, crucial covariates such as polling
about fears of COVID-19 and the state of the economy are only available at the state level. We believe that
obtaining quality estimates of these crucial variables is more important than the statistical power we would
obtain from dis-aggregation.
This is particularly true because in general we cannot make claims of causal identification as we can with
our claims of statistical identification of the latent infection rate. COVID-19 is not a very likely candidate
for meeting any kind of assumption about ignorable selection into treatment; it is a disease that is indirectly
caused by human behavior. Our identification strategy primarily relies on including as many relevant adjustment variables as is prudent to isolate factors which are likely to or known to have an effect on COVID-19
spread and could be confounding variables.
In addition, even when we cannot ensure causal identification, we can still learn important aspects of the
underlying relationships by partitioning the variance via mediation analysis. Doing so allows us to isolate
the part of the association which we have a strong theoretical reason to believe is causally related to the
spread of COVID-19, such as via influencing people’s fears over the severity of the virus in their area. While
6 Defined as average exposure of the general public to particulate matter of 2.5 microns or less (PM
2.5 ) measured in micrograms per cubic meter (3-year estimate).

20

using observational data necessarily means there are inferential concerns we cannot rule out, we can still
learn substantially from variables that we have a strong prior reason to believe are related to the outcome.

4

Results

We first examine model performance to see how well the model is able to reproduce the observed data. While
this kind of predictive validity is only partially useful given that we are interested in a latent quantity, it is
still helpful to know whether the model is able to reproduce the empirical distribution. If the model could
not fit the observed data very well, then we might be suspicious about whether we are informing our latent
estimate correctly. To do so we estimate the posterior predictive distribution, i.e., we draw from the posterior
distribution using the empirical data.
The results of drawing from posterior values for the beta-binomial distribution of cases and tests are shown
relative to the original observed values in Figure 4 for five states. The plots show that although there is
noise in the predictions (represented by the black shaded region), the model is generally able to capture the
empirical values (represented by a red line) with relatively little uncertainty for confirmed cases. However,
the relationship is more stochastic for test counts. While the model predicts that tests rise over time, it
also allows for the possibility that test counts could have been higher or lower. This difference in predictive
performance flows from the model as there are other factors which may impact testing whereas the latent
trait is most directly related to confirmed case counts. Given that our intention is in bias adjustment rather
than predicting test counts, the noise in the relationship for that part of the model is acceptable. To the
extent that a relationship exists between tests and the infection rate, it will still be accounted for in the
posterior estimates.
Given this check on the model’s fidelity to the data, we can then report the model’s estimates of infected
counts for the U.S. population as a whole in Figure 5. Panel A in this plot shows the cumulative total both
for reported cases (thin black line) and for the model’s estimate of total infected (blue line). The interval in
this plot, as with all figures presented, are the 5% and 95% quantiles of the empirical posterior distribution.
As can be seen, the model estimates that there are approximately 3-4 times as many infected people in the
United States as reported cases, with the total cumulative number of infected persons reaching 15 million
with around 500,000 infected as of mid-July. Early expert estimates are shown as black points in panel
A, revealing that even epidemiologists largely under-estimated the spread of the disease in its early stages,
largely due to limitations in testing and case reporting.
We compare these estimates with a popular COVID-19 forecaster employing SEIR models from Gu (2020) by
21

Figure 4: Predictive Validity of Model Vis-a-vis Observed Cases and Tests

22

plotting their estimates as a yellow ribbon on the plot. As can be seen, the trajectories are similar although
they diverge slightly at the end of the series in mid-July. This is likely due to the fact that our model is not
designed to predict into the future, and so it does not pick up as strongly on the increase in cases in the
last week of July. However, on the whole it would seem that our estimate of infected individuals is on the
conservative end compared to other approaches–in other words, while we do not know for certain what the
true number is, we are unlikely to be under-estimating the total. Again, as our aim here is interpretation and
inference rather than forecasting, we believe the conservative nature of our model is a benefit. The estimates
of covariate associations we present later in this paper could be slightly too low, but they are unlikely to be
too large given what we can model. Furthermore, our intervals are far more precise than other approaches,
which is likely because we employ extensive covariate adjustment to better infer human behavior during the
course of the pandemic.
Panel B in the plot shows our estimates of infected individuals, excepts that it adjusts the cumulative number
with a 19-day lag to account for the approximate time that recovery from COVID-19 requires (deaths are
first subtracted). This plot displays an imperfect but useful formulation of the likely number of people
infected at any given time point. As of July 14, it would appear that there were approximately 500 thousand
infected individuals in the United States, while the number peaked at about four million in late April.7
By comparison, Figure 6 shows the cumulative totals of estimated infections by state. Plot A in this figure
has the count of infections by state, while plot B shows the percentage of the population infected by state.
Both the overall S-shape of the epidemic can be seen along with the substantial heterogeneity in infections,
with early infected states like New York and New Jersey still in the top quartile of states with infections
even though they successfully reduced the rate of disease spread.
In addition to the estimation of the cumulative count of infected individuals, the model provides further
useful information by parameterizing the relationship between the unobserved infection rate and the number
of tests conducted in a given state. These individual parameters are shown in Figure 7. The scale of the y
axis shows the number of people that a state was able to test relative to each person infected. The plot shows
that some states have been able to test far more people than have been infected (New York, New Jersey),
while other states like Pennsylvania and Oregon have tested barely twice as many as those who have been
infected. The fact that new outbreaks have been seen in Texas and Arizona suggests that this shortfall in
testing likely disguised early outbreaks that could have been detected otherwise.
In addition, we know from Figure 7 that because New York and New Jersey are quite high in the test/case
7 While it is interesting to note that the model shows fewer infected people than observed cases for this plot at the end, this
difference is merely an artifact of the 19-day lag. It is difficult to put a precise number on the presently infected as states do
not always report how many recover from COVID-19.

23

Figure 5: Total Cumulative and Present COVID-19 Infections in the United States

24

Figure 6: Average Cumulative Count of Infected People by U.S. State as of July 14th

25

distribution, having tested around four individuals per infected person, the high infection rates in Figure 6
for these states are not an artifact of more rigorous testing. The model is successfully able to separate the
bias of increased testing from the actual level of new infections.

Figure 7: Measuring States’ Testing Rates Relative to Infection Rates
We would note that this information is also helpful to policy makers and others trying to make sense of
observed case counts given the limitation in testing thus far. Our estimates help take into account these
known biases and adjust them based on differences between states and within states in terms of disease
trajectories. We believe this model can be used to help understand disease trends and factors associated
with it even in the relatively data-poor environment many countries find themselves in. Unlike SEIR/SIR
approaches, we do not employ information about hospitalization and death reporting delays, the infectionage distribution, or initial seeds. While these other outcomes can provide additional information about the
progress and severity of the disease, they also considerably complicate inference.

26

To calculate the effect of covariates on the infection rate, we report here average cumulative marginal effects
by state, i.e., by how much a given covariate increased the proportion infected for a one-unit increase in the
covariate over time. We report cumulative marginal effects rather than the sample average marginal effect
because the outcome monotonically increases, and so the marginal effect at any one point in time is not as
meaningful a statistic. The way to interpret the coefficients presented is how a 1-unit (1-SD) change would
affect the infection rate if that increase were sustained for an average state’s entire time series (March to
July).
We first show the association of mobility types with the infection rate. In Figure 8 we show the marginal
effect of a 1-SD increase in different types of Google mobility on the infection rate expressed as a fraction of a
state’s population. In line with the growing research on cellphone mobility and the epidemic, there are strong
positive effects of some types of mobility on the spread of the disease, especially residential, workplace, and
retail mobility. Movement in parks, on the other hand, is negatively associated with COVID-19 occurrence.
While these results are somewhat surprising given that both residential and workplace mobility are very
large, other results confirm with prior suspicions that outdoor activities like attending parks are relatively
low-risk for COVID exposure. In fact, increased mobility in parks is associated with reduced infections,
probably because it substitutes for more high-risk types of mobility.

Figure 8: Effect of Google Mobility Data on COVID-19 Spread

27

To interpret these coefficients correctly, it is important to take into account the multivariate normal distribution that was used to model each of these mobility measures as one joint distribution. The residual
correlations for the mobility measures model are shown in Figure 9. These correlations are intuitive, with
transit positively correlated with other mobility measures except residential (people tend to be at home if
they are not in transit). What is quite important is that workplace and residential mobility are strongly
inversely correlated at -0.88; in other words, people tend to be at home if they are not working and vice
versa. As a result, the effect of residential and workplace mobility on COVID-19 is complicated due to
this displacement effect. The fact that residential mobility is positively associated with infections once this
displacement effect is taken into account accords with the modeling literature that warned that stay-athome orders would paradoxically increase infections in the home as people were kept in close quarters with
each other (Neil M Ferguson 2020). We believe these strong correlations provide compelling evidence for
employing the multivariate normal distribution in our model so that we do not assume these measures are
conditionally independent. At the same time, it does render the interpretation of mediation effects somewhat
more complicated as the model is explicitly taking into account that changes in one type of mobility are
likely to displace or effect other types of mobility.

Figure 9: Estimated Correlation of Mobility Measures
We next turn to an analysis of the rest of the covariates used to predict the latent infection rate. Figure 10

28

shows the marginal effect of all other covariates in the model on the latent infection rate expressed as average
cumulative marginal effects. The estimates are further broken out in terms of mediation. The mobility effect
is equivalent to the ed path in Figure 2, i.e., it is the path from the covariates to mobility that does not
go through increased fear of COVID-19 measured by daily polls. The fear of COVID-19 pathway, on the
other hand, is equivalent to the abd + ae paths, or the sum of the path from fear through mobility and the
path from fear to infections apart from mobility. In other words, a covariate’s effect mediated by increased
fear of COVID-19 can both immediately impact the outcome by heightening sensitivity to the severity of
the pandemic and affect the outcome by reducing an individual’s willingness to engage in dangerous types
of mobility. The direct effects, which represent the unexplained effect of covariates independent of either
concern over COVID-19 or changes in mobility, are then equivalent to the g path in Figure 2, and the total
effects are the sum of all paths. The direct and indirect effects are disaggregated in panel A while the total
effects are shown in panel B.
The use of mediation analysis shows substantial heterogeneity in the types of associations and whether
direct and indirect effects tend to complement or substitute each other. First, it is important to note that
the single strongest associations in panel B come from the YouGov mask-wearing poll, the Civiqs concern
over coronavirus poll and the economy poll, and the percent of a state’s residents that are foreign-born. As
these are cumulative average marginal effects, that number reflects what an average state might experience;
the effect could well be larger for states with higher infection rates than average. On the other hand, as
these effects are cumulative, they reflect a state that experienced a sustained increase in the covariates and
so it might overstate the effects somewhat.
In terms of total effects in panel B, the factors that are most strongly associated with reducing infections
include concern over COVID-19, wearing masks, concern over the state of the economy, higher per capita
income and higher population density. Conversely, a higher percentage of foreign-born, more social justice
protests, PPE policies and greater concentrations of P M2.5 are associated with more infections. Some of these
associations would correspond to what is known about the virus, such as mask-wearing reducing infections
while large gatherings like protests increasing infections.
Mediation analysis is helpful at understanding what may be driving these associations. We can learn more
about the meaning of the results when we can identify effects through pathways which we have a theoretical
reason to believe matter for fighting the epidemic: individual concern over COVID-19 and individual mobility.
For example, while the association with percent foreign-born is quite strong, we know that the bulk of this
association arose through an unspecified mechanism. Indirectly, the percentage foreign born is associated
with reduced COVID-19 spread via the fear pathway. Instead, it is most likely the case that the percentage
29

Figure 10: Marginal Effects of Covariates on Latent Infection Rates for U.S. States
30

of foreign born is a proxy for international travel which led to initial outbreaks. This proxy was the reason
the covariate was introduced into the model as it is difficult to otherwise capture travel patterns that may
have introduced the virus earlier.
In contrast to other research, we find that social justice protests are positively associated with COVID-19
spread, though the effect is of medium size. Furthermore, as we report cumulative marginal effects, it is
unlikely that states experienced protests every day in the sample, suggesting that the reported effect is more
of an upper bound for what most states experienced. We do not find much evidence, as Dave, Friedson,
Matsuzawa, Sabia, and Safford (2020) suggest, that the positive effect of the protests was offset by reduced
mobility by non-protesters as the indirect effects are almost zero. On the other hand, the effect of the
protests could have been much worse if it had decreased people’s fears of the virus or induced risky travel
patterns. In this case, the direct effect is relatively easy to surmise: close contact through the protests which
spread infections. It is important to note as well that this effect exists even controlling for both Trump vote
share and Trump approval rating, so it is not simply a proxy for state-level partisanship.
There are other interesting associations in Figure 8. States with more people with cardiovascular issues
tended to see more infections due to risky mobility patterns but fewer infections due to increased concern
over COVID-19. States with more public health spending tended to have a strongly negative direct effect on
the spread of infections, as we might expect given that public health practices can help spread information
about the virus, but this association was partially offset by reduced concern over the pandemic and riskier
travel patterns. Similarly, the number of health providers has a strong negative association with the virus
that is entirely offset by reduced concern over the pandemic. Both of these covariates have as a consequence
very small total effects, suggesting that the different pathways are obscuring the complex ways with which
state health care resources affected the course of the pandemic.
The economy poll is another interesting case as on the whole it is strongly negatively associated with
infections. As the percentage of people who believed the economy was in a good state rose, infections tended
to decrease. Furthermore, this effect is primarily a direct effect, though there is some association with
reduced infections via mobility. This result is theoretically interesting as trade-offs over the economy were
often framed as a willingness to combat the epidemic versus the economic consequences of social distancing
(Bonaccorsi et al. 2020b). The empirical analysis shows that this trade-off may exist and that fears over
an economic downturn increased infections, though not by changing mobility patterns or concern over the
severity of the disease. We might speculate that this association results from increased willingness to comply
with economically costly social distancing behaviors when the economy is believed to be on sound footing,
though without further analysis we cannot say for sure.
31

What is clear is that the strongest time-varying factors present in the model concern individual behavior
more than policies or state preparedness. Considering that the percentage of foreign residents (i.e., exposure
to international travel) and per capita income were determined long before COVID-19 arrived, the most
important manipulable factors are those involving beliefs, such as in the strength of the economy and the
relative threat of COVID-19, along with personal behaviors like mask-wearing.
It is also interesting to note contrasting direct and indirect effects in panel A of Figure 10. The large effect
from the COVID poll primarily comes from mobility data; people who are more concerned about COVID
are less likely to frequent places where they could contract the disease. The mask poll is associated with
repressing COVID through mobility, fear of COVID-19, and as a direct effect (presumably reduced spread
through airways). The fact that all of these associations align suggests that the idea that masks would
encourage risky behavior is in fact untrue (Abaluck et al. 2020). Finally, states with a larger proportion of
smokers do tend to see more infections on a direct pathway, presumably by increasing people’s risk to severe
disease, but this effect is largely offset by increased fear in these states of the disease. This fascinating result
shows how competing direct and indirect effects can mask an important empirical association we would
expect given prior knowledge.
We next turn to the prominence of partisanship variables in explaining the spread of the disease, which
we did not include in the previous figures as we interacted Trump vote share and within-state changes in
approval polls in our model. Instead, we explore this interaction graphically in Figure 11. In this figure,
the effect of Trump 2016 vote share is plotted conditional on the relative level of daily Trump approval
polling on the x axis. The effects are shown aggregated in panels A and B and disaggregated across mobility
types in panel C. Panel A shows that in general, the effect of partisanship for Trump has both direct and
indirect effects, with the direct effect highly conditional on the above/below polling average of approval for
Trump in a given state (which has a maximum swing of about +/- 4 pp). When Trump approval rose,
states with high Trump vote share witnessed fewer infections later on. These high conditional associations
are likely due to the rally-around-the-flag effect in which Trump’s approval rating spiked when the epidemic
first appeared in March and April, leading to an association between high approval levels and low infection
counts in conservative areas of the country.
However, it is important to note opposite effects through the mediated pathways. Panels B and C in Figure
11 shows that Trump vote share mediated through mobility and fear is strongly positive in terms of infection
counts. While the effects are not as large as the direct effects, they are still substantial. Trump vote
share’s effect on COVID-19 mediated through these important channels shows that pro-Trump states tend
to implement social-distancing behaviors at lower rates, as previous research has shown, with consequent
32

relative increases in infections. Furthermore, these associations are relatively constant given Trump approval
polls, although there is a more stronger association for combined Trump approval polling and Trump vote
share in dampening fears over COVID-19; i.e., in states that voted the most for Trump, when Trump approval
reached it highest point then fear of COVID-19 declined the most (and infections consequently increased).
On the whole, this finding points to very strong associations between partisanship and the spread of the
COVID-19, comparable or greater than the demographic and socio-economic factors in the model. States
with higher Trump vote shares have seen significantly fewer infections via unexplained pathways, but very
importantly, this decrease did not come through reduced mobility nor increased concern over COVID-19.
The direct relationship is likely an artifact of the pattern of the early spread of the virus. After all, it is
well-known that the early states that were infected with COVID tended to vote against Trump, although
partisanship is not why they were more vulnerable to COVID initially. We believe that pro-Trump states
received fortuitous outcomes by happening to not be on major travel routes from early COVID-19 hot spots;
rising Trump approval in these states occurred as pro-Trump residents believed their president’s dismissal of
the virus’ threat. In other words, the unexplained direct effect justified the relative inattention to important
behaviors that could prevent infection. Given the increase in COVID-19 infections in the last two months
in heavily Republican states, it would seem that this tendency would lead pro-Trump states to suffer in the
long run as behavior caught up with initial conditions.
Finally, we can also use estimates of cell phone mobility on COVID-19 to understand how NPIs have had
mediated effects on the disease through increasing or decreasing mobility. Figure 12 shows the disaggregated
mediation effects for two types of policies, restrictions on businesses and stay-at-home orders. The plots reveal
how indirect mediation effects change substantially over time. Panel A shows that business restrictions had
a powerful suppressive effect on workplace mobility and to a lesser extent retail establishments during the
early part of the epidemic, though that association weakened over time. By contrast, panel B indicates that
stay-at-home orders have had more durable effects on mobility that have suppressed the disease, particularly
in retail establishments, workplaces and transit. Furthermore, these effects seem to be increasing rather
than decreasing over time. On the other hand, stay-at-home orders seem to be increasing disease infections
via increasing residential mobility, trade-offs that were noted in some early epidemiological modeling of
COVID-19 (Seth Flaxman 2020).
To compare the effect of NPIs to that of partisanship we can consider a policy of a given length of implementation. Both business restrictions and stay-at-home orders reduced infections primarily via reducing
retail mobility and workplace mobility, with stay-at-home orders with associations twice as high per day
compared to business restrictions. For stay-at-home orders, a policy implementation of 30 days would equal
33

Figure 11: Marginal Effects of Trump Vote Share in 2016 Conditional on State Approval Polls

34

Figure 12: Mediated Effects of Lockdowns on Google Mobility Data

35

a reduction in infections via workplaces of approximately 1.5%, while a business restriction policy would
reduce infections via workplace mobility by approximately 0.6%. As such, while stay-at-home orders did
have large associations with subsequent spread of the virus, the effect magnitudes are comparable to the
associations with Trump approval and Trump vote share. If we consider that Trump vote share increased
infections by between 0.3% and 0.5% via mobility, we can further estimate that an additional stay-at-home
order of at least 15 days duration would need to be imposed to compensate for the increased infections. This
stay-at-home order would need to be even longer if we take into account offsetting increases in infections due
to increased residential mobility.

5

Conclusion

Our results show that sociopolitical covariates like partisanship are equally as important predictors of the
disease’s spread as are NPIs designed to counter the pandemic. These results suggest that future research
take into account these covariates even if they are not traditionally included in epidemiological studies. The
politicization of the pandemic undermined measures to combat and led to reduced concern over the virus
in the United States, with serious consequences for individuals’ exposure to SARS-CoV-2. We find that
politicization on the right end of the political spectrum has the strongest association with increased spread
of COVID-19, although left-leaning political activity aimed at ending policy brutality via protests is also
associated with increased spread, though at a lower scale.
The model employed in this article was devised to permit the statistical identification of suppression measures
and social, political and economic factors on the spread of COVID-19. It is not intended to be a replacement
or alternative to the disease forecasting literature. If anything, this modeling exercise shows why structural
epidemiological models are so important: without them it is impossible to project the total number of infected
people on a given day. This model’s simplicity and ability to use empirical data are its main features, and
the hope is that it can be used and extended by researchers looking at government policies and other tertiary
factors on the spread of the disease. At the very least, the model provides realistic uncertainty intervals
taking into account very real biases in the observed data.

Bibliography
Abaluck, Jason, Judith A. Chevalier, Nicholas A. Christakis, Howard Paul Forman, Edward H. Kaplan,
Albert Ko, and Sten H. Vermund. 2020. “The Case for Universal Cloth Mask Adoption and Policies to
36

Increase Supply of Medical Masks for Health Workers.” SSRN.
Abouk, Rahi, and Babak Heydari. 2021. “The Immediate Effect of COVID-19 Policies on Social-Distancing
Behavior in the United States.” Public Health Reports, January, 0033354920976575. https://doi.org/10.
1177/0033354920976575.
Alcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob Conway, Matthew Gentzkow, Michael Thaler, and David Yang. 2020.
“Polarization and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing During the Coronavirus Pandemic.” Journal of Public Economics.
Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal. 1995. Partisan Politics, Divided Government and the Economy.
Cambridge University Press.
Allcott, Hunt, Levi Boxell, Jacob C. Conway, Billy A. Ferguson, Matthew Gentzkow, and Benny Goldman.
2020. “What Explains Temporal and Geographic Variation in the Early US Coronavirus Pandemic?”
https://doi.org/10.3386/w27965.
“America’s Health Rankings 2019 Report.”

2019.

United Health Foundation.

https://www.

americashealthrankings.org/learn/reports/2019-annual-report.
Andersen, Martin. 2020. “Early Evidence on Social Distancing in Response to COVID-19 in the United
States.” SSRN.
Bonaccorsi, Giovanni, Francesco Pierri, Matteo Cinelli, Andrea Flori, Alessandro Galeazzi, Francesco Porcelli, Ana Lucia Schmidt, et al. 2020a. “Economic and Social Consequences of Human Mobility Restrictions Under COVID-19.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 (27): 15530–35.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2007658117.
———, et al. 2020b. “Economic and Social Consequences of Human Mobility Restrictions Under COVID19.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 (27): 15530–35. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
2007658117.
Brauner, Jan M., Sören Mindermann, Mrinank Sharma, David Johnston, John Salvatier, Tomáš Gavenčiak,
Anna B. Stephenson, et al. 2020. “Inferring the Effectiveness of Government Interventions Against
COVID-19.” Science, December. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abd9338.
Brzezinski, Adam, Guido Deiana, Valentin Kecht, and David Van Dijcke. 2020. “The COVID-19 Pandemic:
Government Versus Community Action Across the United States.” CEPR Press, no. 7: 115–47.
Carleton, Tamma, and Kyle C. Meng. 2020. “Causal Empirical Estimates Suggest COVID-19 Transmission
Rates Are Highly Seasonal.” Working Paper. https://t.co/69vR0LUGsT?amp=1.
37

Carpenter, Bob, Andrew Gelman, Matthew D. Hoffman, Daniel Lee, Ben Goodrich, Michael Betancourt,
Marcus Brubaker, Jiqiang Guo, Peter Li, and Allen Riddell. 2017. “Stan: A Probabilistic Programming
Language.” Journal of Statistical Software 76 (1).
Cheng, Cindy, Joan Barcelo, Allison Spencer Hartnett, Robert Kubinec, and Luca Messerschmidt. 2020.
“COVID-19 Government Response Event Dataset (CoronaNet v.1.0).”

Nature Human Behavior.

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0909-7.
Courtemanche, Charles, Joseph Garuccio, Anh Le, Joshua Pinkston, and Aaron Yelowitz. 2020. “Strong
Social Distancing Measures in the United States Reduced the COVID-19 Growth Rate.” Health Affairs
39 (7): 1237–46. https://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2020.00608.
Dave, Dhaval M., Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, and Joseph J. Sabia. 2020. “When Do Shelterin-Place Orders Fight COVID-19 Best? Policy Heterogeneity Across States and Adoption Time.” https:
//doi.org/10.3386/w27091.
Dave, Dhaval M., Andrew I. Friedson, Kyutaro Matsuzawa, Joseph J. Sabia, and Samuel Safford. 2020.
“Black Lives Matter Protests, Social Distancing, and COVID-19.” NBER.
Dudel, Christian, Tim Riffe, Enrique Acosta, Alyson A. van Raalte, and Mikko Myrskyla. 2020. “Monitoring
Trends and Differences in COVID-19 Case Fatality Rates Using Decomposition Methods: Contributions
of Age Structure and Age-Specific Fatality.” Working Paper. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/j4a3d.
Fan, Ying, A. Yesim Orhun, and Dana Turjeman. 2020. “Heterogeneous Actions, Beliefs, Constraints and
Risk Tolerance During the COVID-19 Pandemic.” NBER.
Ferrari, Silvia, and Francisco Cribari-Neto. 2004. “Beta Regression for Modelling Rates and Proportions.”
Journal of Applied Statistics 31 (7): 799–815.
Gadarian, Shana Kushner, Sara Wallace Goodman, and Thomas B. Pepinsky. 2020. “Partisanship, Health
Behavior and Policy Attitudes in the Early Stages of the COVID-19 Pandemic.” SSRN.
Gao, Song, Jinmeng Rao, Yuhao Kang, and Yunlei Liang andJake Kruse. 2020. “Mapping County-Level
Mobility Pattern Changes in the United States in Response to COVID-19.” SIGSPATIAL Special 12 (1):
16–26.
Gao, Song, Jinmeng Rao, Yuhao Kang, and Yunlei Liang andJake Kruse. 2020. “Mapping County-Level
Mobility Pattern Changes in the United States in Response to COVID-19.” SIGSPATIAL Special 12 (1):
16–26.

38

Grinsztajn, Léo, Elizaveta Semenova, Charles C. Margossian, and Julien Riou. 2021. “Bayesian Workflow
for Disease Transmission Modeling in Stan.” arXiv:2006.02985 [q-Bio, Stat], February. http://arxiv.org/
abs/2006.02985.
Grossman, Guy, Soojong Kim, Jonah M. Rexer, and Harsha Thirumurthy. 2020. “Political Partisanship
Influences Behavioral Responses to Governors’ Recommendations for COVID-19 Prevention in the United
States.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2007835117.
Grossman, Matt, and David J. Hopkins. 2016. Assymetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group
Interest Democrats. Oxford University Press.
Gu, Youyang. 2020. Covid19-Projections.com. https://covid19-projections.com/about/#about-the-model.
Haug, Nils, Lukas Geyrhofer, Alessandro Londei, Elma Dervic, Amélie Desvars-Larrive, Vittorio Loreto,
Beate Pinior, Stefan Thurner, and Peter Klimek. 2020. “Ranking the Effectiveness of Worldwide COVID19 Government Interventions.” Nature Human Behaviour 4 (12): 1303–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41562-020-01009-0.
Havers, C.; Lim, F. P.; Reed, and I Krapiunaya. 2020. “Seroprevalence of Antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 in 10
Sites in the United States.” JAMA Internal Medicine.
Horowitz, Juliana Menasce, Anna Brown, and Kiana Cox. 2019. “Race in America 2019.” Pew Forum.
Iyengar, Shanto, and Sean J. Westwood. 2015. “Fear and Loathing Across Party Lines: New Evidence on
Group Polarization.” American Journal of Political Science 59 (3): 690–707.
Jose Lourenco, Mahan Ghafari, Robert Paton. 2020. “Fundamental Principles of Epidemic Spread Highlight the Immediate Need for Large-Scale Serological Surveys to Assess the Stage of the SARS-CoV-2
Epidemic.” medRxiv. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.24.20042291.
Larremore, Daniel B., Bailey K. Fosdick, Kate M. Bubar, Sam Zhang, Stephen M. Kissler, C. Jessica
E. Metcalf, Caroline O. Buckee, and Yonatan H. Grad. 2020. “Estimating SARS-CoV-2 Seroprevalence and Epidemiological Parameters with Uncertainty from Serological Surveys.”

medRxiv, June,

2020.04.15.20067066. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.15.20067066.
Neil M Ferguson, Gemma Nedjati-Gilani, Daniel Laydon.

2020.

“Impact of Non-Pharmaceutical In-

terventions (NPIs) to Reduce Covid19 Mortality and Healthcare Demand.”
London Working Paper.

Imperial College of

https://www.imperial.ac.uk/media/imperial-college/medicine/sph/ide/gida-

fellowships/Imperial-College-COVID19-NPI-modelling-16-03-2020.pdf.

39

Painter, Marcus, and Tian Qiu. 2020. “Political Beliefs Affect Compliance with COVID-19 Social Distancing
Orders.” SSRN.
Peak, Corey M., Rebecca Kahn, Yonatan H. Grad, Lauren M. Childs, Ruoran Li, Marc Lipsitch, and Caroline
O. Buckee. 2020. “Modeling the Comparative Impact of Individual Quarantine Vs. Active Monitoring
of Contacts for the Mitigation of COVID-19.” medRxiv. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.
03.05.20031088.
Perkins, T. Alex, Sean M. Cavany, Sean M. Moore, Rachel J. Oidtman, Anita Lerch, and Marya Poterek.
2020. “Estimating Unobserved SARS-CoV-2 Infections in the United States.” Working Paper. http:
//perkinslab.weebly.com/uploads/2/5/6/2/25629832/perkins_etal_sarscov2.pdf.
Poole, Keith T., and Howard L. Rosenthal. 2007. Ideology & Congress. Transaction Publishers.
Poole, Keith, and Howard L. Rosenthal. 1997. Congress: A Political-Economic History of Roll Call Voting.
Riou, Julien, Anthony Hauser, Michel J. Counotte, and Christian L. Althaus. 2020. “Adjusted Age-Specific
Case Fatality Ratio During the COVID-19 Epidemic in Hubei, China, January and February 2020.”
medRxiv. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.20031104.
Robert Verity, Ilaria Dorigatti, Lucy C Okell. 2020. “Estimates of the Severity of COVID-19 Disease.”
medRxiv. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.09.20033357.
Ruiyun Li, Bin Chen, Sen Pei. 2020. “Substantial Undocumented Infection Facilitates the Rapid Dissemination of Novel Coronavirus (SARS-CoV2).” Science. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abb3221.
Sajadi, Mohammad M., Parham Habibzadeh, Augustin Vintzileos, Shervin Shokouhi, Fernando MirallesWilhelm, and Anthony Amoroso. 2020. “Temperature, Humidity and Latitude Analysis to Predict Potential Spread and Seasonality for COVID-19.” SSRN. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_
id=3550308.
Sánchez-Romero, Miguel, Vanessa di Lego, Alexia Prskawetz, and Bernardo L. Queiroz. 2021. “An Indirect
Method to Monitor the Fraction of People Ever Infected with COVID-19: An Application to the United
States.” PLOS ONE 16 (1): e0245845. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0245845.
Seth Flaxman, Axel Gandy, Swapnil Mishra. 2020. “Estimating the Number of Infections and the Impact
of Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions on COVID-19 in 11 European Countries.” Working Paper. https:
//www.imperial.ac.uk/mrc-global-infectious-disease-analysis/covid-19/report-13-europe-npi-impact/.
Sharma, Mrinank, Sören Mindermann, Jan Markus Brauner, Gavin Leech, Anna B. Stephenson, Tomáš
Gavenčiak, Jan Kulveit, Yee Whye Teh, Leonid Chindelevitch, and Yarin Gal. 2020a. “How Robust Are
40

the Estimated Effects of Nonpharmaceutical Interventions Against COVID-19?” arXiv:2007.13454 [Cs,
q-Bio, Stat], December. http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.13454.
———. 2020b. “How Robust Are the Estimated Effects of Nonpharmaceutical Interventions Against
COVID-19?” arXiv:2007.13454 [Cs, q-Bio, Stat], December. http://arxiv.org/abs/2007.13454.
Stekhoven, Daniel J., and Peter Bühlmann. 2012. “MissForest-Non-Parametric Missing Value Imputation
for Mixed-Type Data.” Bioinformatics 28 (1): 112–18.
Tasnim, Samia, Md Mahbub Hossain, and Hoimonty Mazumder. 2020. “Impact of Rumors or Misinformation
on Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) in Social Media.” SocArchiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uf3zn.
Winship, Christopher, and Robert D. Mare. 1983. “Structural Equations and Path Analysis for Discrete
Data.” The American Journal of Sociology 89 (1): 54–110.
Yuan, Ying, and David P. MacKinnon. 2009. “Bayesian Mediation Analysis.” Psychological Methods 14
(December): 301–22. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016972.

41

