Changes in Parents’ Domestic Labor During the COVID-19 Pandemic
Daniel L. Carlson, PhD1
University of Utah
Richard Petts, PhD
Ball State University
Joanna R. Pepin, PhD
University of Texas – Austin

1

Daniel L. Carlson, Department of Family and Consumer Studies, University of Utah, 225 S 1400 E, 228
Alfred Emery Building, Salt Lake City UT 84112, Daniel.carlson@fcs.utah.edu

ABSTRACT
Stay-at-home orders and the removal of care and domestic supports brought about by the
COVID-19 pandemic substantially disrupted parents’ work and family lives. This study
leverages this exogenous event to test key theoretical explanations of couples’ divisions of
domestic labor. Using novel data from 1,025 partnered, different-sex US parents, our analysis
shows an overall increase in domestic responsibilities for mothers, who were already doing most
of the household labor, as well as an increase in fathers’ contributions. Driven by increases in
fathers’ time spent on housework and childcare, we find that both mothers and fathers report a
general shift toward more egalitarian divisions of household labor. Consistent with a time
availability perspective, the findings indicate the relevance of increased time at home —due to
unemployment, reduced work hours, and telecommuting— as a fundamental factor underlying
change in parents’ division of domestic responsibilities.

INTRODUCTION
On March 11th, 2020 the World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 outbreak a
global pandemic. Due to state stay-at-home orders, the pandemic has profoundly transformed the
lives of nearly every American household. Rates of unemployment during the early months of
the pandemic were higher than any time since the Great Depression (US Bureau of Labor
Statistics 2020). For those able to retain employment, telecommuting became common, altering
the nature of work (Guyot and Sawhill 2020). The closings of schools, childcare centers, and
businesses providing domestic services removed important supports for parents’ labor force
participation. Additionally, women were more likely than men to be laid off or to reduce work
hours during the pandemic (Bureau of Labor Statistics 2020; Collins et al. 2020), raising
concerns about increased gender inequalities in domestic and paid labor, setting back decades of
progress. Though gender gaps in paid labor grew during the early months of the pandemic, it
remains unclear how the pandemic impacted parents’ divisions of domestic labor at home.
The goal of this study is to leverage the natural experiment of the COVID-19 pandemic
to test theoretical explanations of the influence of work conditions on inequality within families.
Observational studies clearly demonstrate that women spend more time in domestic labor than
men. Yet, selection processes related to endogeneity and selection bias impede our understanding
of how factors like time availability, work-family supports, relative earnings, and gender affect
household divisions of labor. The pandemic provides methodological advantages to gaining
empirical insights on the gendered division of labor. The numerous changes thrust on families in
an effort to mitigate the pandemic facilitated an exogenous event that can be leveraged to test
fundamental theories (e.g., relative resources, time availability, gender perspective) and answer

key questions about men’s and women’s domestic labor (e.g., do men perform more domestic
labor when workplace barriers are removed?).
Application of these theories to the social and economic conditions of the COVID-19
pandemic suggest dual possibilities regarding changes in men’s and women’s time in, and
division of, domestic labor. On one hand, the pandemic has the potential to exacerbate gender
inequalities by thrusting additional domestic responsibility on mothers already disproportionately
bearing domestic burdens, even for dual-earning couples (Berk 1985; Blair and Lichter 1991;
Pew 2015; Yavorsky, Kamp-Dush, and Schoppe-Sullivan 2015). If mothers continue to perform
most domestic duties, declines in labor force participation and the closure of schools and
daycares, along with children engaging in remote learning, likely increased domestic burdens for
mothers.
On the other hand, the pandemic may provide an opportunity for fathers to act on their
stated desires to be more engaged at home (Dermott 2008; Miller 2010). Parents’ division of
domestic labor may have become more equal if fathers’ increases in housework and childcare
outpaced new responsibilities for mothers. The pandemic removed workplace barriers (e.g., lack
of paid leave, inability to telecommute) often cited as key impediments to fathers’ domestic
involvement (Boston College Center for Work and Family 2019; Lenhart, Swenson, and Schulte
2019). Nonetheless, it is an open empirical question whether fathers increased their time in
housework and childcare and whether such increases offset increases in mothers’ domestic labor.
Relying on novel survey data collected in April 2020 from 1,025 US parents in differentsex relationships, we assessed shifts in parents’ divisions of domestic labor and time spent doing
domestic work since the beginning of the pandemic. We then examined how these changes are
associated with parents’ work and family arrangements during the pandemic and the use/loss of

work-family supports. In doing so, this study empirically assesses how couples’ divisions of
labor changed due to the exogenous shock of the pandemic, and tests key theories of gender
inequality at home.
BACKGROUND
Exacerbating Gender Inequality during the COVID-19 Pandemic
Gender is the primary determinant of who does the domestic labor among different-sex
couples (Berk 1985; Ferree 1990). According to a gender structure perspective (Risman 1999;
Ridgeway and Correll 2004), gender organizes our social lives by controlling access to resources
and opportunities, while shaping cultural interpretations of our behavior. Hegemonic cultural
ideals regarding appropriate gender behavior constitute an important part of the gender structure
(Goffman 2009 [1963]; Thébaud, Kornrich, and Ruppanner 2019; West and Zimmerman 1987).
Following gender conventions, couples may therefore conclude that additional housework and
childcare stemming from the pandemic will be shouldered by women. Even when couples are
disinclined to gender their division of domestic labor, they often still rely on hegemonic gender
conventions when situations are unclear or equality is difficult to achieve (Gerson 2010; Blaisure
and Allen 1995). The anomic and intractable conditions of the pandemic, therefore, may
encourage different-sex partners to adhere to gender norms during uncertain times.
Gender norms may intersect with the economic conditions of the pandemic to also
reinforce women’s responsibility for domestic labor. According to the time availability and
relative resources hypotheses (Stafford, Backman, and Dibona 1977; Blood and Wolfe 1960),
domestic labor is performed by the partner with the most available time and lowest relative
earnings. Women are more likely to be unemployed or working part-time than men, and this
trend appears to be exacerbated during the pandemic, as unemployment rates for women jumped

from 4.4% in March 2020 to 16.5% in April (US Bureau of Labor Statistics 2020). Employed
women, especially those with young children, have reduced their time at work during the
pandemic (Collins, Landívar, Ruppanner, and Scarborough 2020). Women are also working
from home more often during the pandemic, which increases available time to complete
domestic work (Sawhill and Guyot 2020). With more time availability and fewer relative
resources compared to male partners, women may experience a disproportionate increase in time
spent in domestic labor relative to men during the pandemic.
Employment and paid work hours fell for men as well during the early months of the
pandemic, but not as much as for women (Collins et al. 2020; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
2020). Though this suggests an increase in time availability and a potential decrease in relative
resources, such changes in men’s economic circumstances may not portend greater domestic
contributions as unemployed men, and men who earn less than their partners spend less time on
housework, on average, than their partners (Gough and Killewald 2011; Rao 2020). This is often
explained as the result of gender display (Brines 1994; Bittman et al. 2000) or gender deviance
neutralization (Greenstein 2000) processes where unemployed and financially dependent men
assert their masculinity by refusing housework, and/or women retain responsibility for
housework to reduce the gender deviance of their breadwinner status. Decreases in men’s
employment and relative earnings during the COVID-19 pandemic may therefore also result in
increased domestic work for women.
Even if both partners maintain pre-pandemic levels of employment, women may be more
likely to increase their time in housework and childcare and do a larger share during the
pandemic. Autonomy theory (Gupta 2007) suggests that women’s time in domestic labor is a
function of their own paid earnings. Earnings enable some women to pay for market substitutes

for domestic work, leading to reduced time in domestic work for themselves and more equal
divisions in their partnership (Bianchi et al. 2012). Without the option to outsource domestic
labor, employed women may see their time and share of domestic work increase. The loss of
options to outsource domestic labor may also negatively affect their earnings during the
pandemic, which may in turn thrust even more domestic responsibilities on women given their
weakened bargaining position relative to their partners (Blair-Loy 2009; Carlson and Lynch
2017; Stone 2008).
Reducing Gender Inequality during the COVID-19 Pandemic
There are reasons to expect that fathers may increase their time in domestic work during
the COVID-19 pandemic, leading to more equal sharing of domestic labor. One of the primary
reasons to expect more domestic participation on the part of fathers is the appeal of conventional,
man-as-earner/woman-as-homemaker family arrangements has decreased over the decades
(Scarborough, Sin, and Risman 2019). The gender ideology hypothesis (Stafford, Backman, and
Dibona 1977) indicates that housework performance is driven by one’s beliefs about domestic
roles. Although support for gender equality in the public sphere is more widespread than support
for egalitarianism in the private sphere (Pepin and Cotter 2018), approximately 70 percent of
men and 77 percent of women in the 2018 General Social Survey disagreed with the separate
spheres notion that it is better for men to work and women to tend to the home (NORC 2019).
Different-sex couples struggle to achieve egalitarian domestic arrangements, often
attributed to the persistence of structural barriers, such as a lack of family-friendly workplace
policies (Pedulla and Thébaud 2015) and to an ideal worker culture of universal availability that
pushes men out of the home and women into it (Collins 2019). Many fathers express desires to
be more engaged parents and partners, but that lack of support from their workplaces as well as a

lack of policies that enable them to be more engaged are key barriers to being more involved at
home (Boston College Center for Work and Family 2019; Lenhart, Swenson, and Schulte 2019).
The COVID-19 pandemic may potentially lift some of these barriers due to workplace
and public policies that have increased job flexibility as well as access to paid leave. Although
job flexibility has been associated with women’s but not men’s time in domestic labor (Noonan,
Estes, and Glass 2007; Silver and Goldscheider 1994), more recent research indicates that fathers
who telecommute from home, even if only occasionally, do more childcare than fathers who do
not work from home (Carlson et al. 2020; Holmes et al. 2020; Lyttleton, Zang, and Musick
2020). A recent study by Carlson and colleagues (2020) also shows that fathers who work from
home spend more time in housework if their partners are employed full-time. Taking longer
family leave is also associated with greater father involvement in childcare and housework (Petts
and Knoester 2018; Bünning 2015). Passed in late March, the Families First Coronavirus
Response Act (FFCRA) provides employees of covered employers (i.e., public and private
employers with fewer than 500 employees) with up to two weeks emergency paid sick leave and
up to 10 weeks of emergency paid family and medical leave (U.S. Department of Labor
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/pandemic/ffcra-employee-paid-leave). Notably, workers can
use this policy to take paid leave to care for a child whose school or childcare center has closed
due to the pandemic. As such, increased work-family supports for fathers may increase their time
in, and shares of, domestic labor.
More egalitarian divisions of domestic labor may stem not only from fathers doing more,
but also from a reduction in mothers’ time in tasks. Some time demands have most certainly
decreased since the pandemic, such as shuttling children to and from schools, events, and
practices. These tasks are significant contributors to parents’ time commitments and their

reduction is likely to suppress mothers’ time in domestic labor, as they are typically components
of intensive mothering (Hays 1998). Reductions in mothers’ time due to the elimination of these
tasks, regardless of whether fathers change their behavior, may also contribute to a more
egalitarian division of domestic labor during the pandemic.
Hypotheses
Theory and past research suggest several competing hypotheses regarding changes in
men’s and women’s domestic labor during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Changes to Fathers’ and Mothers’ Time in, and Division of, Domestic Labor
Hypothesis 1a: Mothers will do more domestic labor during the COVID-19 pandemic
and the division of domestic labor will become more unequal
Hypothesis 1b: The division of domestic labor will become more equal during the
pandemic as fathers increase their time in domestic labor
Paid Work and Parents’ Domestic Labor
Hypothesis 2a: Reduced work hours, job loss, and working at home will be associated
with more domestic labor among mothers and fathers during the COVID-19
pandemic
Hypothesis 2b: Reduced work hours and job loss among fathers will be associated with
decreases in fathers’ domestic labor and increases in mothers’ domestic labor
during the pandemic
Relative Earnings and Parents’ Domestic Labor
Hypothesis 3a: Lower earnings relative to one’s partner during the pandemic will be
associated with increases in one’s domestic labor

Hypothesis 3b: Fathers’ lower relative earnings compared with mothers during the
pandemic will be associated with decreases in fathers’ domestic labor and
increases in mothers’ domestic labor
Domestic Supports and Parents’ Domestic Labor
Hypothesis 4: The loss of domestic supports, such as childcare and schools, will be
associated with increases in domestic labor among mothers during the pandemic
The COVID-19 Pandemic as a Natural Experiment
Testing theoretical explanations for the gendered division of domestic labor is difficult
given the paucity of couple-level data on domestic labor and issues of selection inherent in
observational data. There is persistent ambiguity in the literature explaining couples’ divisions of
labor, perhaps due to unverified assumptions about causal associations (for review see Geist and
Ruppanner 2018). Random assignment of couples to various labor arrangements is generally not
feasible in social research. As such, researchers must contend with the possibility that selection
processes contaminate associations between the division of domestic labor and its covariates.
Endogeneity and unobserved variable bias are especially problematic. Research highlights
bidirectional associations between men’s and women’s time in domestic labor and paid work,
earnings, and gender ideology (Carlson and Lynch 2013; 2017; Cunningham 2008).
While some of these issues can be addressed by using instrumental variable models, good
instruments are difficult to identify and poor instruments will actually contribute to biased
estimates (Bollen 2012). Selection bias also impedes tests of explanatory hypotheses about
partners’ performance, and divisions of, domestic labor, leading to biased estimates. Not only are
unobserved confounders an issue, but due to the absence of work-family policies in the US,

systematic selection bias in access to work-family benefits obstructs our understanding of how
supports like childcare and job flexibility affect partners’ domestic labor.
Due to shut-down measures designed to curtail the spread of COVID-19, the pandemic
constitutes an exogenous shock to couples’ paid work arrangements and work-family supports,
via the closure of schools, shuttering of businesses, increased telecommuting, and elimination of
market substitutes for housework. The near universal disruption, and the changes they introduce
to couples’ paid work and work-family supports enables a pseudo-experimental test of key
theories by reducing concerns about temporal ordering and selection bias. This study follows the
approach of other scholars leveraging period effects at a population level— such as hurricanes,
earthquakes, and terrorist attacks— which have been used to understand behaviors and attitudes
such as criminal behavior, birth outcomes, and racism (Behrman and Weitzman 2016; Kirk
2012; Lauderdale 2006; Legewie 2013, 2016; Torche 2011). The natural experiment study
design addresses the ambiguities of selection processes that generally muddle interpretations of
couples’ division of domestic labor and their covariates.
DATA AND METHODS
Data
Data for this study comes from an original sample obtained from Prolific
(www.prolific.co), an opt-in platform designed to facilitate panel-based surveys. Prolific was
intentionally built for scientific research and its samples are a substantial improvement over
other types of nonprobability samples (e.g., convenience and snowball sampling). Prolific elicits
panelists’ demographic characteristics prior to granting eligibility to participate on the platform,
decreasing contamination of sample selection stemming from dishonest participants (Palan and

Schitter 2018). Samples from Prolific are more diverse than participants from MTurk and the
data quality is comparable, and in some ways preferable (Peer et al. 2017).
Although Prolific panels are not comprised of a probability sample that would be
necessary for making inferences about prevalence of behaviors in the population, non-probability
samples find remarkably similar patterns of statistical significance in both experiments and
observational studies (Baker et al. 2013; Coppock 2019; Jeong et al. 2019). Additionally, data
obtained from panel-based samples tend to be fairly representative of those with regular internet
access (Tourangeau, Conrad, and Cooper 2013), and results do not differ substantially from
probability-based samples once demographic variables are sufficiently accounted for (Levay,
Freese, and Druckman 2016).
The intent of our study is to leverage the natural experiment of the pandemic to test
theory, rather than generalize our findings and make inferences about the prevalence of any
specific phenomenon. That is, we are less interested in identifying specific percentages of the
population that experience some outcome (e.g., the exact percentage of couples who equally
share housework) than we are in understanding whether the changed work environment due to
the pandemic is associated with general shifts in couples’ behavior. Thus, panel-based surveys
are an appropriate data source for modeling relationships, as we do in this study, and concerns
about external validity largely can be addressed through means other than reliance on
probability-based samples (Lucas 2003).
We obtained a sample of 1,262 respondents from Prolific that was restricted to parents in
the United States who resided with a spouse or partner and a biological child. Data collection
took place in late April 2020, approximately one month after the World Health Organization
declared the COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic. We oversampled men, Black people, individuals

who did not complete college, and people who identify as conservative to increase the diversity
of our sample. After employing data quality checks to identify respondents who did not complete
most of the survey, respondents who did not pass the attention filters, and respondents with
multiple submissions, our sample was reduced to 1,157 respondents (i.e., 9% of initial
respondents were removed due to data quality issues). For this study, we excluded respondents
who identified as a gender other than male or female (N = 8) and respondents who reported
being in a same-sex relationship (N = 86).1 After these restrictions, our analytic sample consisted
of 1,060 respondents. Listwise deletion of the small amount of missing values in our data results
in a final sample size of 1,025 parents who reside with a spouse/partner and child.
To account for demographic variation potentially biasing our sample, all results are
weighted using estimates from the April 2020 Current Population Survey (CPS) to be
representative of American parents who reside with a partner and child based on parent’s gender,
age, and race/ethnicity. We also compared our sample with other data sources to assess sample
representativeness. Using the CPS, our sample is comparable with national estimates for
different-sex couples with children at home in terms of the percentage who are married (89% vs.
92% in CPS), the average number of children (1.94 vs. 1.93), and the percentage of mothers (33
vs. 31%) and fathers (10% vs. 11%) out of the labor force prior to the pandemic.2 The percentage
of individuals who identify as having conservative political ideologies is also comparable with
national estimates in the GSS (32% vs. 33%), and the percentage of individuals with household
incomes under $40,000 in our sample is comparable to co-resident parents in the Survey of

1

Parents in same-sex relationships were not included in this study because our focus is on gender differences, and
use of variables that account for gendered variations do not operate in the same way for same-sex couples.
Supplementary analyses that included same-sex couples found no significant difference in the trends reported here
between same-sex couples and different-sex couples (i.e., the coefficient for same-sex vs. different-sex parent was
not statistically significant).
2
Estimates for prior to pandemic come from February 2020 CPS. Estimates from March 2020 CPS were identical.

American Parents (18% vs. 19%).3 Even so, it is important to note that college educated parents
and parents with no religious affiliation are over-represented in this sample.
We also compared key variables in our sample to equivalent items in national surveys.
Descriptive statistics show our panelists were slightly less likely to report equal sharing of
childcare tasks than in the Survey of American Parents respondents (Pew 2015). Consequently,
any increases in equal sharing among our panelists are likely to be a conservative estimate of the
prevalence of equal partnerships. The decline in work hours among parents was higher in our
sample than in a recent CPS-based study (Collins et al. 2020), but this may be due to our focus
on co-resident parents as opposed to married parents. Indeed, decline in work hours in our
sample is comparable with recent results using a more diverse UK sample (Chung et al. 2020).
Division of Domestic Labor
Respondents were asked to report on the division of domestic labor between themselves
and their partners (options of 0=I do it all, 1=I do more of it, 2=we share it equally, 3=my
partner does more of it, 4=my partner does it all) both before and during the pandemic.
Additionally, respondents also reported on how their time, and their partners’ time, in domestic
tasks changed since the start of the pandemic (options of -2=doing much less, -1= doing
somewhat less, 0=no change, 1=doing somewhat more, 2=doing much more). For housework,
respondents reported on the following tasks: preparing and cooking meals, laundry, shopping for
groceries and other household needs, washing dishes, and house cleaning. For childcare,
respondents were asked to report on behavior specific to their youngest child. For parents of
younger children (younger than age 6), respondents reported on the following tasks: physical
care (e.g., bathing, feeding, dressing), talking/listening to child, looking after child, putting child

3

The percentage of individuals reporting six-figure incomes is also comparable (35% in both samples).

to bed, reading, playing, organizing, and enforcing rules. Parents of older children (ages 6-17),
reported on: talking/listening to child, monitoring, attending events, reading, playing, organizing,
enforcing rules, picking up/dropping off, and helping with homework.
For our analyses, we report on summary measures of housework and childcare that
combine information on all these tasks. Respondents reported on both their own behavior and
their partner’s behavior. To construct measures for parents’ divisions of housework and
childcare, we first create gendered indicators of the relative division of housework and childcare
based on respondents’ reports (i.e., 0=mother does it all, 1=mother does more of it, 2=shared
equally, 3=father does more of it, 4=father does all of it). We then create mean scales ranging
from 0 to 4 to indicate the division of labor both before and during the pandemic, and produce
categories for mother does majority, shared equally, or father does majority.4 Second, we utilize
information on how time spent in domestic labor has changed to create summary measures for
mean change in housework and childcare, Scores on individual tasks are averaged to create a
mean score ranging from -2 (doing much less) to 2 (doing much more), with 0 equaling no
change. Estimates for fathers’ change in domestic labor come from averaging both fathers’
reports and mothers’ reports of their partner, and mothers’ change in domestic labor come from
averaging both mothers’ reports and fathers’ reports of their partner. This provides a
conservative estimate by avoiding biases that may exist when relying on only one parent’s
reports (Kamo 2000; Lee and Waite 2005). From the mean change score, three dummy variables
are created: father/mother doing more (mean score of 0.5 or higher), father/mother no change
(mean score between -0.5 and 0.5), father/mother doing less (mean score of -0.5 or lower).
Predictors of Parents’ Domestic Labor

4

Shared equally is defined as each parent contributes 40-60% of the housework and childcare (corresponding to a
scale score of between 1.6 and 2.4 out of 4).

We include several variables as primary predictors of parents’ domestic labor during the
pandemic. Parents’ employment status during the pandemic is classified into one of six
categories: both parents work full-time (used as reference group), father works full-time and
mother works part-time, father works part-time and mother is employed (either full- or parttime), father is a single earner, mother is a single earner, or both parents are unemployed. We
also include measures to indicate whether parents experienced job loss due to the pandemic
(father only, mother only, both parents, neither parent) and whether either parent is an essential
worker, which is classified as a parent employed as a healthcare worker, first responder, grocery
store/food service worker, or postal/delivery worker. Household income during the pandemic
ranges from 1 = less than $1,000/month to 7 = $9,000/month or more. We also include measures
to indicate parents’ relative earnings during the pandemic, based on respondents’ reports of
relative earnings (father earns more, mother earns more, both parents earn relatively the same).
Finally, we also account for respondents’ traditional gender attitudes (α = .72), which indicates
agreement on six statements such as “preschool children are likely to suffer if their mother is
employed” and “if a husband and wife both work full-time, they should share household tasks
equally.” Responses are coded such that higher values indicate more traditional gender attitudes.
Several variables assess parents’ use of work-family supports and support services.
Respondents reported on whether they and their partners reduced work hours/left job voluntarily
(father only, mother only, both parents, neither parent) or worked from home (worked from home
exclusively, worked from home sometimes, or did not work from home/did not work at all)
during the pandemic. To indicate loss of support services during the pandemic we include
measures for childcare hours before the pandemic (0 hours, 1-20 hours, 21+ hours) and whether
parents were creating e-learning content for their children (1=yes) during the pandemic.

Sociodemographic Controls
Numerous factors may be implicated in the associations among parents’ work
characteristics, access to and use of work-family supports, and change in parents’ domestic labor
during the pandemic. We incorporate a range of sociodemographic factors which are used as
statistical controls in multivariate models. Descriptive statistics for these variables are presented
in Table 1. First, at the macro-level, how families respond to the pandemic is likely shaped by
the existence and timing of stay-at-home orders. We classified state of residence as innovators
(stay-at-home order implemented by March 23,5 used as reference group), early adopters (stayat-home order implemented between March 24-March 30), late adopters (stay-at-home order
implemented after March 30), and resisters (no stay-at-home order issued). Within families,
parental age (Gull and Geist 2020; Sanchez 1994), own and partners’ health (ranging from
1=fair/poor to 4=excellent; Ross and Bird 1994), religious affiliation (Gull and Geist 2020),
whether partners are married or cohabiting (Gull and Geist 2020; Kamo and Cohen 1998),
child characteristics like youngest child’s age and number of children (Kamo and Cohen 1998;
Sanchez 1994), race/ethnicity (Maxwell and Solomon 2020; Pepin, Sayer, and Casper 2018; US
Bureau of Labor Statistics 2020), and education (Davis and Greenstein 2004; Galinsky, Sakai,
and Wigton 2011; Lachance-Grzela and Bouchard 2010) also likely shape parents’ employment,
earnings, work-family benefits, and changes in paid and unpaid labor.
----- Insert Table 1 about here ----Analytic Strategy
We first consider how parents’ work and family lives have changed since the beginning
of the COVID-19 pandemic. To do this, we provide a descriptive overview of how parents’ time

5

California was the first state to implement a stay-at-home order, and 8 additional states followed suit in the days
after (Mervosh et al. 2020).

in, and division of, work and domestic labor has changed since the beginning of the pandemic
(Table 2 and Figure 1). We then descriptively examine how changes in parents’ time spent in
domestic labor are associated with the division of household labor since the beginning of the
pandemic (Figure 2). After illustrating these key trends, we analyze how work-family
arrangements and work-family supports are associated with changes in parents’ time spent in
housework and childcare to better understand why these changes have occurred. For this
analysis, we use multinomial logistic regression models to predict changes in mothers’ and
fathers’ domestic labor, using separate models for mothers and fathers (Tables 3 and 4).6
RESULTS
Parents’ Labor Arrangements and Work-Family Supports during COVID-19 Pandemic
Summary statistics for parents’ divisions of domestic labor, work conditions, and workfamily support both before and during the COVID-19 pandemic are presented in Table 2.
Consistent with Hypothesis 1b, changes in the division of housework and childcare since
COVID-19 restrictions were implemented show increases in equal sharing of domestic labor.
The percentage of couples who share housework relatively equally increased from 26% before
the pandemic to 42% during the pandemic (p < .001). Similarly, the percentage of couples who
share childcare relatively equally increased from 45% before the pandemic to 56% during the
pandemic (p < 001). Although fathers are more likely to report sharing housework and childcare
relatively equally than women at both time points, these trends persist even when focusing only
on mothers’ reports. According to mothers, the percentage of couples who share domestic labor
relatively equally increased from 15% to 29% for housework (p < .001) and from 29% to 39%

6

We do not use a continuous measure of change in time spent in domestic labor, because this approach assumes all
changes are equivalent (e.g., changing from doing somewhat more to doing much more is equivalent to changing
from doing somewhat less to no change). Analyses suggest there are different processes distinguishing between
those who are doing more (vs. no change) and those who are doing less (vs. no change).

for childcare (p = .001). Additionally, these shifts do not appear to be due to selection; increases
in reports of equal shares of housework and childcare during the pandemic are observed across a
wide range of sociodemographic characteristics (see Figure A1 in appendix). Concomitant with
increases in sharing of domestic work, the proportion of parents reporting conventional divisions
of housework and childcare decreased significantly. The proportion of parents reporting
conventional divisions of housework decreased 17 percentage points from 64% to 47% while the
proportion reporting conventional divisions of childcare decreased 14% percentage points from
50% to 36% (p < .001).
Similar trends persist when focusing solely on mothers’ reports; the proportion of
mothers reporting conventional divisions of housework decreased 15 percentage points (from
82% to 67%; p < .001) and the proportion reporting conventional divisions of childcare
decreased 12 percentage points (from 69% to 57%; p < .001). Overall, consistent with
Hypothesis 1b, although variation exists in the proportion of couples sharing domestic labor
relatively equally, there is consensus that more couples are sharing housework and childcare
relatively equally during the pandemic than before the pandemic.
----- Insert Table 2 about here ----Although the division of domestic work became more equal during the pandemic,
parents’ divisions of paid labor became less equal. During the pandemic the percentage of
parents who both worked full-time fell from 35% to 21% (p < .001). Though father single-earner
arrangements grew in frequency during the pandemic, so did arrangements where fathers worked
less than full-time (i.e., mother single-earner; father part-time). Though paid work became less
egalitarian, earnings became somewhat more equal during the pandemic. Fathers were most

likely to be the sole or primary earners in families during the pandemic (58%), but these
arrangements made up a smaller share than before the pandemic (63%, p < .001).
Unemployment and work flexibility increased during the pandemic and this resulted in a
substantial increase in the number of both mothers and fathers at home. In 7% of families, both
parents were unemployed during the pandemic, a small 3 percentage point increase from before
the pandemic began (p < .05). Nonetheless, 17% of households experienced job loss for at least
one parent since the beginning of the pandemic, and 22% of families had at least one parent
reduce their paid work hours or leave their job voluntarily. Moreover, 41% of fathers and 35% of
mothers were working from home exclusively during the pandemic compared to before the
pandemic where only 9% of fathers and 12% of mothers worked from home exclusively.
Results from Table 2 show that time demands for childcare and schooling increased
during the pandemic as well. On average, young children spent 13 hours a week in daycare prior
to the pandemic and just over 1 hour per day in care during the pandemic, which is due to a
drastic decline in the number of children attending care. The closure of schools also resulted in
additional domestic work, as 48% of these parents were creating online educational content
during the pandemic.
Pandemic Changes in Divisions of Housework and Childcare
Since an equal division of household labor can be the product of women doing less, men
doing more, or both, we examined change in men’s and women’s time in domestic tasks (Figure
1) and how change in time allocation was associated with the division of labor during the
COVID-19 pandemic (Figure 2). Figure 1 indicates that significantly more fathers (34%; p < .05)
increased their time in housework since the pandemic began than mothers (25%). The
statistically significant gender differences do not hold up when focusing only on mothers’

reports, but mothers still report that a sizeable number of fathers are spending more time in
housework (26%). Conversely, nearly twice as many mothers (17%; p < .05) were doing less
housework compared with fathers (9%), and this difference persists when restricted to only
mothers’ reports (although not statistically significant; 14% vs. 11%). Patterns for time in
childcare are similar and statistically significant, though fewer mothers report doing less
childcare (13%).
----- Insert Figure 1 about here ----Figure 2 shows how the division of domestic labor during the pandemic varies by
changes in mothers and fathers time in domestic tasks. Consistent with Hypothesis 1b, these
results indicate that increases in egalitarian divisions of domestic labor are associated largely
with fathers doing more household labor, but also with mothers doing less. In partial support of
Hypothesis 1a, evidence also suggests, however, that domestic burdens increased for mothers
who were already doing the majority of tasks.
----- Insert Figure 2 about here ----Parents were significantly more likely to report sharing domestic labor equally when they
reported fathers doing more. 53% of those who reported fathers doing more were sharing
housework equally compared to 7% who reported fathers doing less. For childcare, 65% of those
reporting fathers doing more were sharing responsibilities equally compared to 30% who
reported fathers doing less. Although only a handful of fathers were doing less domestic labor
during the pandemic, most were in couples where mothers did the majority of domestic work.
The association between more domestic work among fathers and sharing housework and
childcare during the pandemic also persists in multivariate models (see Table A1 in appendix).

Among mothers, more than 70% who reported doing more housework since the
pandemic began were primarily responsible for housework during the pandemic. Moreover,
among mothers doing less, just one-quarter were doing the majority of housework themselves
while nearly half were sharing housework equally with their partner. Supplemental analyses (see
Tables A2 and A3 of online Appendix) demonstrate that among mothers doing more housework,
most were responsible for the majority of housework before the pandemic. Moreover, only 7.5%
of mothers doing the majority of housework during the pandemic were sharing tasks equally with
their partners pre-pandemic. The patterns in childcare in Figure 2 among mothers are similar but
less pronounced. 43% of mothers doing more childcare were responsible for most of it during the
pandemic compared to less than one-quarter of mothers whose childcare time decreased. Change
in mothers’ time in childcare is unassociated with sharing childcare equally during the pandemic,
though parents were more likely to report fathers doing the majority of both childcare and
housework when mothers were doing less during the pandemic than before.
Predicting Change in Parents’ Performance of Housework and Childcare
Next, we turn to our results from multinomial logistic regression models analyzing the
degree to which parental characteristics are associated with changes in time spent in housework
and childcare during the pandemic. Results are shown in Tables 3 and 4, disaggregated by
parents’ gender. Though fathers were most likely to reduce their time in housework if they had
been primarily responsible for it prior to the pandemic, they were most likely to increase their
housework performance if their partner was doing most of the housework pre-pandemic (rrr =
1.88; p < .05).. Consistent with Hypothesis 2b and a gender display/gender deviance
neutralization perspective, however, fathers did less housework when they or both partners
reduced their hours at work or left their jobs. Contrary to expectations based on theory, fathers

were 3.5 times more likely to do more housework relative to no change if mothers lost their job
during the pandemic. The likelihood of doing more (compared to no change) was also greater
when fathers out-earned their partner. Nevertheless, the findings are generally congruent with a
relative resources perspective for fathers. In support of Hypotheses 3a, we find that compared to
no change in housework performance, fathers were doing less housework during the pandemic
when they were the primary earner (rrr = 4.20; p < .05) and more housework when their female
partner was the primary earner (rrr = 2.93; p < .01).
Several factors were associated with less housework among mothers. Mothers were most
likely to reduce their time in housework if they shouldered the majority of housework
responsibilities pre-pandemic (rrr = 1.89, p < .05). In contrast to Hypotheses 2a and 2b and a
gender perspective which suggests that mothers should be responsible for domestic labor,
mothers reduced their housework if at least one partner lost a job during the pandemic. Indeed,
mothers were nearly 5 times more likely to reduce time in housework if both partners lost a job
compared with neither partner losing a job. Yet, consistent with Hypothesis 2b, compared to no
change in housework, mothers were less likely to reduce their time in housework if fathers were
working from home occasionally (rrr = 0.34; p < .05).
Results from Table 3 also show that increases in mothers’ housework performance during
the pandemic are associated with decreases in paid work outside the home and earnings,
providing support for Hypothesis 2a and 3a. Mothers were 3.6 times more likely to be doing
more housework when fathers were the sole earners in families. They were nearly twice as likely
to increase their housework if they had reduced hours in paid work or left their job and 2.5 times
as likely if they were working from home exclusively. Consistent with Hypothesis 4, evidence
shows that mothers were also more likely to increase their time in housework in families

responsible for creating online educational content for their children (rrr = 1.66; p < .05), and
supplemental analyses show that mothers appear to be primarily responsible for creating online
educational content for children during the pandemic (results not shown).
----- Insert Table 3 about here ----Results in Table 4 focus on change in time spent in childcare. Results provide
strong support for Hypothesis 2a, showing that parents’ time at home during the pandemic is a
primary predictor of changes in childcare performance. Increases in time at home are associated
with more childcare time for both mothers and fathers. Fathers were less likely to perform
childcare during the pandemic when at least one parent was an essential worker. However,
fathers’ time in childcare increased when they reduced their hours/left their jobs (rrr = 2.12, p <
.05). Reduction in fathers’ paid work hours (rrr = 3.36, p < .05) are also associated with a greater
likelihood that mothers reduced childcare time during the pandemic Telecommuting was also
associated with change in parents’ childcare performance. Fathers who worked from home
exclusively (rrr = 2.37, p < .01) were doing more childcare during the pandemic. When mothers
worked from home exclusively, fathers were more likely to do less childcare (rrr = 3.65, p <
.05). Moreover, working at home exclusively (rrr = 2.94, p < .01) or occasionally (rrr = 3.71, p
< .05) was associated with increases in childcare among mothers. The findings regarding
childcare and changes in men’s and women’s paid work support a time availability perspective
(Hypothesis 2a) even in cases of men’s unemployment. Fathers performed more childcare when
they lost jobs (rrr = 3.41, p < .001) during the pandemic. Moreover, fathers’ job loss (rrr = 3.28,
p < .01) was also associated with less childcare time among mothers during the pandemic.
----- Insert Table 4 about here -----

Family finances during the pandemic were also associated with changes in childcare,
providing evidence for Hypothesis 3a. During the pandemic, men increased their childcare time
when mothers were the primary earners (rrr = 2.62, p < .05). Conversely, mothers decreased
their childcare time when the mother was the sole earner. Lastly, in line with Hypothesis 4, the
loss of childcare and schools is also related to more time caring for children. Fathers were more
likely to increase childcare (rrr = 2.22, p < .01), and mothers less likely to decrease childcare
(rrr = 0.45, p < .05), if families were creating e-learning content. Mothers were 2.5 times (p <
.01) more likely to increase their performance of childcare if children spent 21 or more hours in
the care of others prior to the pandemic than if children did not spend time in the care of others.
DISCUSSION
The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted life for nearly all Americans. For parents,
challenges managing domestic responsibilities in light of job loss, telecommuting, and the
closure of childcare centers and schools has raised concerns among some that 60 years of
progress toward gender equality may be erased. Yet, with more men likely to be home, the
pandemic may also lead to more equal sharing of domestic labor among different-sex parents.
The aim of this study was to use the pandemic as a natural experiment to test key theories of
gender inequality and investigate changes in US parents’ time, and division of, domestic labor
during the pandemic. We find evidence that the pandemic is associated with both reduced and
exacerbated gender inequalities at home. Results showed that, on average, the divisions of
domestic labor have become more equal, and this trend persists across a wide range of
sociodemographic characteristics and is also similar when focusing solely on mothers’ reports
(mothers report similar magnitudes of change as reported here, with approximately a 10-15%
shift from traditional divisions of domestic labor to more equal divisions of domestic labor). The

shift in greater sharing of domestic labor is largely associated with increases in fathers’ time in
domestic tasks, although decreases in mothers’ domestic responsibilities are also associated with
more equal sharing. Still, we find that mothers persistently perform more housework and at least
as much (if not more) childcare than fathers. Additionally, mothers’ burdens have increased in
families where they were doing most of domestic labor both before and during the pandemic.
Results of this study provide mixed evidence to support theoretical perspectives on the
gendered division of labor in families. Consistent with a time availability and relative resources
perspective, parents did more domestic labor during the pandemic when they spent more time at
home and when they earned less than their partner. Time at home as indicated by employment
status, job loss, and telecommuting were associated with increases in parents’ performance of
domestic labor during the pandemic, especially childcare. Increases in men’s domestic duties and
the growth of egalitarian sharing, therefore, appear to be the result of the substantial number of
fathers at home during the pandemic – 57% of fathers were either unemployed, had reduced
work hours, left jobs, or worked from home exclusively.
Change in both mothers’ and fathers’ domestic duties was also associated with their
relative earnings. When fathers were the sole or primary earners, they did less housework, and
mothers did more, during the pandemic. In contrast, when mothers were the sole or primary
earners – which was the case in nearly 30% of families - the likelihood that they would be doing
less childcare increased substantially, while the likelihood that men would do more housework
and childcare increased. Importantly, the proportion of mothers earning more than their partners
did not change as the pandemic unfolded. It appears perhaps that mothers were able to leverage
their bargaining position to extract greater domestic participation from their partners as domestic
demands increased during the pandemic.

Although many findings regarding changes in fathers’ domestic performance are
consistent with a time availability and relative resources perspective, some changes in fathers’
and mothers’ domestic labor support a gender perspective. First, though time at home is
positively associated with changes in father’s time in childcare, results showed that fathers who
reduced their work hours were doing less housework during the pandemic. Second, the results
showed that mothers bore the brunt of homeschooling needs and reduction in childcare supports.
Consistent with a gender perspective, as well as autonomy theory, in families that sent children
to daycare more than 20 hours per week before the pandemic, mothers, but not fathers, increased
their childcare duties during the pandemic. Among the 48% of homeschooling families that
created educational content, mothers increased their time in housework and were less likely to
decrease time in childcare. Homeschooling, nonetheless, was also associated with increases in
fathers’ childcare performance, suggesting that hegemonic gender norms did not fully dictate
who responded to increased demand for domestic labor.
Several other findings run counter to expectations based on theory. For example, fathers
increased their housework performance, and mothers decreased their own, when mothers
reported losing a job during the pandemic.7 Relatedly, men who are primary earners were more
likely to increase their housework performance than those sharing earning responsibilities with
their partners. This last finding, however, may be a function of the fact that conventional couples
were more poised to see an increase in fathers’ housework performance than those that were
already egalitarian. Why men increased their housework following their partners’ job loss is a
question that requires further exploration beyond the scope of this study. Nonetheless, these

7

These findings persist in models restricted to mothers’ reports only.

findings are central to understanding how growing gender inequalities in paid work during the
pandemic have not necessarily resulted in growing inequalities in domestic labor.
Findings that more time at home for men during the pandemic is associated with more
childcare responsibilities and a more egalitarian sharing of childcare tasks is consistent with
recent research on paternity leave and job flexibility (Bünning 2015; Carlson, Petts, and Pepin
2020; Holmes et al. 2020; Lyttleton, Zang, and Musick 2020; Petts and Knoester 2018).
Importantly, results from this study suggest that the association between time at home and
increased time in, and sharing of, domestic labor is not due solely to involved fathers choosing to
be home, as the pandemic thrust many fathers into the home via job loss or stay-at-home orders.
Despite what theories of gender display or gender deviance neutralization might predict (Bittman
et al. 2000; Brines 1994; Greenstein 2000), these findings show that when circumstances
dictated, fathers embraced domestic responsibilities regardless of their predispositions (Risman
1987). Indeed, aside from predicting a decrease in childcare time among mothers, gender
ideologies were not predictive of changes in parents’ domestic labor and these shifts were not
solely based on fathers’ own (mis)perceptions of how their involvement in domestic labor
increased. As Knoester and colleagues (2007) have argued, the exposure of fathers to domestic
responsibilities alters fathers’ perspectives regarding their family roles and leads them to reevaluate their values and priorities. This suggests that changes in fathers’ performance of
domestic labor may persist long after the pandemic.
Though a new normal of more egalitarian sharing appears possible in the post-pandemic
world, there are also signs that domestic gender inequalities remain firmly entrenched. Despite
the influx of men at home, half of families reported women doing the majority of housework
during the pandemic, and more than one-third reported women doing the majority of childcare.

And, most parents report no overall change in time spent in domestic labor during the pandemic,
suggesting that gender disparities that existed prior to the pandemic likely persist for many
couples. This suggests that policies that allow men to be at home more (e.g., job flexibility) are
insufficient to fully alleviate gender inequality in domestic labor, and that decreased employment
and wage inequalities will likely also be required (Rao 2020).
This study contributes to our understanding of family life during the COVID-19
pandemic. Though like all studies, it is not without limitations. First, although results are
weighted by gender, race/ethnicity, and age to be representative of US parents, and numerous
additional demographics match estimates from other representative data sources, the sample is
skewed toward more educated and less religious parents. The results may therefore not be
generalizable to less educated and more religious parents in the US. Nevertheless, we find little
evidence that the division of domestic labor or changes in parents’ time in tasks during the
pandemic varies by education or religious affiliation, suggesting that the results from
multivariate models are unlikely biased. In fact, we find consistency in these trends across
numerous demographic characteristics (Figure A1 in appendix). Moreover, our findings
regarding trends in the division of domestic labor are similar to those found in one national U.S.
survey8 as well as surveys from Canada and the UK (Chung et al. 2020; Miller 2020; Shafer et
al. 2020), increasing confidence in our results.
Second, time use estimates from survey questionnaires are subject to recall and social
desirability bias, leading to inaccuracies. This study employed stylized questions to help reduce
this bias but items like this can lead to less precise measurement of parents’ time in tasks (Folbre
2020). We are therefore unable to estimate changes in minutes per day or hours per week in

8

This survey only contains information on the division of domestic labor during the pandemic. Our study is unique
in its ability to assess how the division of domestic labor changed from before the pandemic to during the pandemic.

mothers and fathers’ time in housework and childcare during the pandemic or changes in the
proportionate shares of domestic tasks. Despite the unavailability of time diary data, parents’
perceptions of domestic (in)equalities are associated with relationship quality (Carlson, Hanson,
and Fitzroy 2016; Carlson, Miller, and Rudd 2020; Carlson, Miller, and Sassler 2018; Schieman,
Ruppanner, and Milkie 2018). Importantly, our findings show a greater share of parents –
including mothers specifically – perceive the division of labor to be more equal than prior to the
pandemic. In future analyses, we plan to evaluate whether perceptions of increased sharing are
associated with increased perceptions of fairness and relationship satisfaction.
It should be noted that we also cannot definitively establish temporal order in postpandemic changes. Although one key advantage of our study is that it includes measures on
domestic and paid labor from both before and during the pandemic, we still are not able to assess
precisely which changes came first. Changes in responsibilities for domestic tasks could in some
instances predicate change in parents’ paid work. Increases in childcare responsibilities due to
school/daycare closure could plausibly lead to job loss or a reduction in work hours. We also are
unable to account for the potential association between paid leave-taking and parents’ division of
labor, as this information is unavailable in the data. Yet, despite these limitations, this study
contains important information that is unavailable in other nationally representative datasets. For
example, the CPS does not contain information on housework, and the American Time Use
Survey does not allow for analyses on the division of domestic labor due to lack of data on
partners’ behavior. Thus, this novel dataset provides important information about how the
pandemic may contribute to shifts in couples’ divisions of labor.
The COVID-19 pandemic has obliterated the invisible line separating work and family,
and with so many already overwhelmed by the weight of work and family demands before the

pandemic, has placed even more burden at their feet. As is often the case in times of crisis, a
substantial number of couples have responded to the pandemic by banding together and sharing
the domestic load. As the pandemic continues, the story of how families cope may change,
however. Additionally, what the domestic division of labor will look like after the pandemic has
ended remains a mystery. What is clear, nonetheless, is that despite evidence that the pandemic is
exacerbating gender inequality, there is also a sign of hope for gender equality at home by
exposing fathers to that which may have been previously invisible, potentially altering the
gendered division of labor.

REFERENCES
Baker, Reg et al. 2013. “Summary Report of the AAPOR Task Force on Non-Probability Sampling.”
Journal of Survey Statistics and Methodology 1:90–143. doi: 10.1093/jssam/smt008.
Behrman, Julia Andrea and Abigail Weitzman. 2016. “Effects of the 2010 Haiti Earthquake on
Women’s Reproductive Health.” Studies in Family Planning 47:3–17. doi: 10.1111/j.17284465.2016.00045.x.
Berk, S. F. 2012. The Gender Factory: The Apportionment of Work in American Households.
Springer Science & Business Media.
Bianchi, S. M., L. C. Sayer, M. A. Milkie, and J. P. Robinson. 2012. “Housework: Who Did, Does or
Will Do It, and How Much Does It Matter?” Social Forces 91(1):55–63.
Bianchi, Suzanne M., Melissa A. Milkie, Liana C. Sayer, and John P. Robinson. 2000. “Is Anyone
Doing the Housework? Trends in the Gender Division of Household Labor.” Social Forces
79(1):191–228.
Bittman, Michael, Paula England, Liana Sayer, Nancy Folbre, and George Matheson. 2003. “When
Does Gender Trump Money? Bargaining and Time in Household Work.” American Journal of
Sociology 109(1):186–214.
Blair, Sampson Lee, and Daniel T. Lichter. 1991. “Measuring the Division of Household Labor:
Gender Segregation of Housework Among American Couples.” Journal of Family Issues
12(1):91–113.
Blair-Loy, Mary. 2009. Competing Devotions: Career and Family Among Women Executives.
Harvard University Press.
Blaisure, Karen R., and Katherine R. Allen. 1995. “Feminists and the Ideology and Practice of Marital
Equality.” Journal of Marriage and Family 57(1):5–19.
Blood Jr., Robert O., and Donald M. Wolfe. 1960. Husbands and Wives: The Dynamics of Family
Living. Oxford, England: Free Press Glencoe.
Boston College Center for Work and Family. 2019. “Expanded Paid Parental Leave: Measuring the
Impact of Leave on Work & Family.” Available at:
https://www.bc.edu/content/dam/files/centers/cwf/research/publications/researchreports/Expande
d%20Paid%20Parental%20Leave-%20Study%20Findings%20FINAL%2010-31-19.pdf.
Brines, Julie. 1994. “Economic Dependency, Gender, and the Division of Labor at Home.” American
Journal of Sociology 100(3):652–88.
Bünning, Mareike. 2015. “What Happens after the ‘Daddy Months’? Fathers’ Involvement in Paid
Work, Childcare, and Housework after Taking Parental Leave in Germany.” European
Sociological Review 31(6):738–48.
Carlson, Daniel L., Amanda J. Miller, and Stephanie Rudd 2020. “Division of Housework,
Communication, and Couples’ Relationship Satisfaction.” Socius.
Carlson, Daniel L., Amanda J. Miller, and Sharon Sassler. 2018. “Stalled for Whom?: Change in the
Division of Particular Housework Tasks and Their Consequences for Mid- to Low Income
Couples.” Socius 4: 1-17.

Carlson, Daniel L., and Jamie L. Lynch. 2013. “Housework: Cause and Consequence of Gender
Ideology. Social Science Research 42: 1505 - 1518.
-----------------------------------------------. 2017. “Purchases, Penalties, and Power: The Relationship
Between Earnings and Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 79(1):199–224.
Carlson, Daniel L., Sarah Hanson, and Andrea Fitzroy. 2016. “The Division of Childcare, Sexual
Intimacy, and Relationship Quality in Couples.” Gender & Society 30(3): 442-466.
Carlson, Daniel L., Richard Petts, and Joanna Pepin. 2020. “Flexplace Work and Partnered Fathers’
Time in Housework and Childcare.”
Cohen, Philip N. 1998. “Replacing Housework in the Service Economy: Gender, Class, and RaceEthnicity in Service Spending.” Gender & Society 12(2):219–31.
Collins, Caitlyn. 2019. Making Motherhood Work: How Women Manage Careers and Caregiving.
Princeton University Press.
Collins, Caitlyn, Liana Christin Landívar, Leah Ruppanner, and William J. Scarborough. 2020.
“COVID-19 and the Gender Gap in Work Hours.” Gender, Work, and Organization.
Coppock, Alexander. 2019. “Generalizing from Survey Experiments Conducted on Mechanical Turk:
A Replication Approach.” Political Science Research and Methods 7:613–28. doi:
10.1017/psrm.2018.10.
Cunningham, Mick. 2008. “Influences of Gender Ideology And Housework Allocation On Women’s
Employment Over The Life Course.” Social Science Research 37(1): 254–267.
Davis, Shannon N., and Theodore N. Greenstein. 2004. “Cross-National Variations in the Division of
Household Labor.” Journal of Marriage and Family 66(5):1260–71.
Dermott, Esther. 2008. Intimate Fatherhood: A Sociological Analysis. London: Routledge.
Ferree, Myra Marx. 1990. “Beyond Separate Spheres: Feminism and Family Research.” Journal of
Marriage and Family 52(4):866–84.
Folbre, Nancy. 2020. “Responsibility Time – Care Talk.” Care Talk: Feminism & Political Economy.
Retrieved June 30, 2020 (https://blogs.umass.edu/folbre/2020/05/27/responsibility-time/).
Galinsky, Ellen, Kelly Sakai, and Tyler Wigton. 2011. “Workplace Flexibility: From Research to
Action.” The Future of Children 21(2):141–61.
Geist, Claudia., and Leah Ruppanner. 2018. “Mission Impossible? New Housework Theories for
Changing Families.” Journal of Family Theory & Review 10(1): 242-262.
Gerson, Kathleen. 2010. The Unfinished Revolution: How a New Generation is Reshaping Family,
Work, and Gender in America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goffman, Erving. 2009. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. Simon and Schuster.
Gough, Margaret, and Alexandra Killewald. 2011. “Unemployment in Families: The Case of
Housework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 73(5):1085–1100.
Greenstein, Theodore N. 2000. “Economic Dependence, Gender, and the Division of Labor in the
Home: A Replication and Extension.” Journal of Marriage and Family 62(2):322–35.

Gull, Bethany, and Claudia Geist. 2020. “Godly Husbands and Housework: A Global Examination of
the Association between Religion and Men’s Housework Participation.” Social Compass.
Gupta, Sanjiv. 2007. “Autonomy, Dependence, or Display? The Relationship Between Married
Hays, Sharon. 1998. The Cultural Contradictions of Motherhood. Yale University Press.
Holmes, Erin Kramer, Richard J. Petts, Clare R. Thomas, Nathan L. Robbins, and Tom Henry. 2020.
“Do Workplace Characteristics Moderate the Effects of Attitudes on Father Warmth and
Engagement?” Journal of Family Psychology
Jeong, Michelle et al. 2019. “Similarities and Differences in Tobacco Control Research Findings From
Convenience and Probability Samples.” Annals of Behavioral Medicine 53:476–85. doi:
10.1093/abm/kay059.
Kamo, Yoshinori, and Ellen L. Cohen. 1998. “Division of Household Work Between Partners: A
Comparison of Black and White Couples.” Journal of Comparative Family Studies 29(1):131–
45.
Killewald, Alexandra. 2011. “Opting Out and Buying Out: Wives’ Earnings and Housework Time.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 73(2):459–71.
Kirk, David S. 2012. “Residential Change as a Turning Point in the Life Course of Crime: Desistance
or Temporary Cessation?*.” Criminology 50:329–58. doi: 10.1111/j.1745-9125.2011.00262.x.
Knoester, Chris, Richard J. Petts, and David J. Eggebeen. 2007. "Commitments to Fathering and The
Well‐Being and Social Participation of New, Disadvantaged Fathers." Journal of Marriage and
Family 69(4): 991-1004.
Lachance-Grzela, Mylène, and Geneviève Bouchard. 2010. “Why Do Women Do the Lion’s Share of
Housework? A Decade of Research.” Sex Roles 63(11):767–80.
Lauderdale, Diane S. 2006. “Birth Outcomes for Arabic-Named Women in California before and after
September 11.” Demography 43:185–201. doi: 10.1353/dem.2006.0008.
Legewie, Joscha. 2013. “Terrorist Events and Attitudes toward Immigrants: A Natural Experiment.”
American Journal of Sociology 118:1199–1245. doi: 10.1086/669605.
----------------------. 2016. “Racial Profiling and Use of Force in Police Stops: How Local Events
Trigger Periods of Increased Discrimination.” American Journal of Sociology 122:379–424. doi:
10.1086/687518.
Lenhart, Amanda, Haley Swenson, and Brigid Schulte. 2019. “Lifting the Barriers to Paid Family and
Medical Leave for Men in the United States.” Available at: newamerica.org/better-lifelab/reports/lifting-barriers-paid-family-and-medical-leave-men-united-states/.
Levay, Kevin E., Jeremy Freese, and James N. Druckman. 2016. “The Demographic and Political
Composition of Mechanical Turk Samples.” SAGE Open 6:2158244016636433. doi:
10.1177/2158244016636433.
Lucas, Jeffrey W. 2003. “Theory-Testing, Generalization, and the Problem of External Validity.”
Sociological Theory 21:236–53. doi: 10.1111/1467-9558.00187.
Lyttelton, Thomas, Emma Zang, and Kelly Musick. 2020. "Gender Differences in Telecommuting
and Implications for Inequality at Home and Work." Available at SSRN 3645561.

Maxwell, Connor, and Danyelle Solomon. 2020. “The Economic Fallout of the Coronavirus for
People of Color.” Center for American Progress. Retrieved May 29, 2020
(https://www.americanprogress.org/issues/race/news/2020/04/14/483125/economic-falloutcoronavirus-people-color/).
Mervosh, Sarah, Denise Lu, and Vanessa Swales. 2020. “See Which States and Cities Have Told
Residents to Stay at Home”. The New York Times (April 20). Retrieved May 31, 2020
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2020/us/coronavirus-stay-at-home-order.html.

Miller, Tina. 2010. Making Sense of Fatherhood: Gender, Caring and Work. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Mize, Trenton D., Long Doan, and J. Scott Long. 2019. “A General Framework for Comparing
Predictions and Marginal Effects across Models.” Sociological Methodology 49:152-189.
Noonan, Mary C., Sarah Beth Estes, and Jennifer L. Glass. 2007. “Do Workplace Flexibility Policies
Influence Time Spent in Domestic Labor?” Journal of Family Issues 28(2):263–88.
NORC. 2019. General Social Survey 2018. GSS Data Explorer. https://gssdataexplorer.norc.org/
Palan, Stefan and Christian Schitter. 2018. “Prolific.Ac—A Subject Pool for Online Experiments.”
Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 17:22–27. doi: 10.1016/j.jbef.2017.12.004.
Pew Research. 2015. “The Rise in Dual Income Households.” Pew Research Center. Washington DC.
Retrieved May 29, 2020 (https://www.pewresearch.org/ft_dual-income-households-1960-20122/).
Pedulla, David S., and Sarah Thébaud. 2015. “Can We Finish the Revolution? Gender, Work-Family
Ideals, and Institutional Constraint.” American Sociological Review 80(1):116–39.
Peer, Eyal, Laura Brandimarte, Sonam Samat, and Alessandro Acquisti. 2017. “Beyond the Turk:
Alternative Platforms for Crowdsourcing Behavioral Research.” Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology 70:153-163.
Pepin, Joanna R., and David A. Cotter. 2018. “Separating Spheres? Diverging Trends in Youth’s
Gender Attitudes About Work and Family.” Journal of Marriage and Family 80(1):7–24.
Pepin, Joanna R., Liana C. Sayer, and Lynne M. Casper. 2018. “Marital Status and Mothers’ Time
Use: Childcare, Housework, Leisure, and Sleep.” Demography 55(1):107–33.
Petts, Richard J., and Chris Knoester. 2018. “Paternity Leave-Taking and Father Engagement.”
Journal of Marriage and Family 80(5):1144–62.
Rao, Aliya Hamid. 2020. Crunch Time: How Married Couples Confront Unemployment. Univ of
California Press.
Ridgeway, Cecilia L., and Shelley J. Correll. 2004. “Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical
Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations.” Gender & Society 18(4):510–31.
Risman, Barbara J. 1987. "Intimate Relationships from a Microstructural Perspective: Men Who
Mother." Gender & Society 1(1): 6-32.
----------------------. 1999. Gender Vertigo: American Families in Transition. Yale University Press.

Ross, Catherine E., and Chloe E. Bird. 1994. “Sex Stratification and Health Lifestyle: Consequences
for Men’s and Women’s Perceived Health.” Journal of Health and Social Behavior 35(2):161–
78.
Sanchez, Laura. 1994. “Gender, Labor Allocations, and the Psychology of Entitlement within the
Home.” Social Forces 73(2):533–53.
Sawhill, Katherine Guyot and Isabel V. 2020. “Telecommuting Will Likely Continue Long after the
Pandemic.” Brookings. Retrieved May 29, 2020 (https://www.brookings.edu/blog/upfront/2020/04/06/telecommuting-will-likely-continue-long-after-the-pandemic/).
Scarborough, William J., Ray Sin, and Barbara Risman. 2019. “Attitudes and the Stalled Gender
Revolution: Egalitarianism, Traditionalism, and Ambivalence from 1977 through 2016.” Gender
& Society 33(2):173–200.
Schieman, Scott, Leah Ruppanner, and Melissa A. Milkie. 2018. “Who Helps with Homework?
Parenting Inequality and Relationship Quality Among Employed Mothers and Fathers.” Journal
of Family and Economic Issues 39(1):49–65.
Silver, Hilary, and Frances Goldscheider. 1993. “Flexible Work and Housework: Work and Family
Constraints on Women’s Domestic Labor Gender.” Social Forces 72(4):1103–20.
Stafford, Rebecca, Elaine Backman, and Pamela Dibona. 1977. “The Division of Labor among
Cohabiting and Married Couples.” Journal of Marriage and Family 39(1):43–57.
Stone, Pamela. 2008. Opting Out?: Why Women Really Quit Careers and Head Home. University of
California Press.
Thébaud, Sarah, Sabino Kornrich, and Leah Ruppanner. 2019. “Good Housekeeping, Great
Expectations: Gender and Housework Norms.” Sociological Methods & Research
0049124119852395.
Torche, Florencia. 2011. “The Effect of Maternal Stress on Birth Outcomes: Exploiting a Natural
Experiment.” Demography 48:1473–91. doi: 10.1007/s13524-011-0054-z.
Tourangeau, R., Conrad, F., & Couper, M. (2013). The Science of Web Surveys. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020. “A-10. Unemployment Rates by Age, Sex, and Marital Status,
Seasonally Adjusted.” Retrieved May 29, 2020a
(https://www.bls.gov/web/empsit/cpseea10.htm).
West, Candace, and Don H. Zimmerman. 1987. “Doing Gender.” Gender & Society 1(2):125–51.
Worldometers.info “United States Coronavirus” Retrieved June 29, 2020f
(https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/us/).
Yavorsky, Jill E., Claire M. Kamp Dush, and Sarah J. Schoppe‐Sullivan. 2015. “The Production of
Inequality: The Gender Division of Labor Across thwille Transition to Parenthood.” Journal of
Marriage and Family 77(3):662–79.

Table 1. Sociodemographic Characteristics of Sample (N = 1,025)
Mean or
Proportion
Gender (woman = 1)
Age
Race/Ethnicity
White
Black
Latinx
Asian/Other
Education
HS or less
Some college
Bachelor’s degree
Advanced degree
Married
Age of youngest child
Number of children
Health
Health of partner
Religious affiliation
Catholic
Evangelical Protestant
Mainline Protestant
None/agnostic
Other
State stay-at-home order
Innovator
Early adopter
Late adopter
Resister

SD

Min

Max

.49
43.85

10.98

0
19

1
73

.59
.09
.21
.11

-

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

.08
.28
.40
.24
.89
9.63
1.94
2.58
2.64

6.79
0.92
0.85
0.87

0
0
0
0
0
1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1
22
4
4
4

.21
.18
.14
.37
.10

-

0
0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1
1

.38
.26
.33
.03

-

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Table 2. Mean Changes in Division of Domestic Labor and Predictors
Before COVID19
Mean or
SD
Proportion

During COVID19
Mean or
SD
Proportion

Difference

Division of housework
-0.17***
Mother does majority
.64
.47
0.16***
Shared equally
.27
.42
0.01
Father does majority
.10
.11
Division of childcare
-0.14***
Mother does majority
.50
.36
-0.11***
Shared equally
.45
.56
0.03***
Father does majority
.05
.09
Employment
-0.14***
Both work FT
.35
.21
-0.04*
Father FT, Mother PT
.18
.14
0.05**
Father PT, Mother FT/PT
.07
.12
0.06**
Father single earner
.29
.35
0.05***
Mother single earner
.06
.11
0.03*
Both unemployed
.04
.07
-0.35***
Household income
4.86
1.61
4.51
1.77
Job loss
Father only lost job
.08
Mother only lot job
.07
Both lost job
.02
Neither lost job
.83
Relative earnings
-0.06***
Father earns more
.63
.58
0.04*
Earning shared equally
.08
.13
0.01
Mother earns more
.28
.29
Reduced hours/left job
Father only reduced hours/left job
.09
Mother only reduced hours/left job
.09
Both reduced hours/left job
.04
Neither reduced hours/left job
.78
Working from home
0.32***
Father works from home exclusively
.09
.41
-0.10***
Father works from home sometimes
.22
.12
-0.22***
Father does not work from home
.69
.47
0.22***
Mother works from home exclusively
.12
.35
-0.08***
Mother works from home sometimes
.14
.06
-0.14***
Mother does not work from home
.73
.59
12.37***
Childcare hoursa
13.58
16.74
1.21
0.28
0.44***
0 hours spent in childcare
.52
.96
-0.15***
1-20 hours spent in childcare
.16
.01
-0.29***
21+ hours spent in childcare
.32
.03
Creates E-learning contenta
.48
Parent/partner is essential worker
.28
Traditional gender attitudes
1.97
0.64
aMean/proportion is restricted to age appropriate cases; younger than 6 for childcare (N = 535) and ages 6-17 for
e-learning (N = 421). In multivariate analyses, parents with children outside of these ranges are coded as 0 for these variables.
Some data is missing in the before column because this information is either not available (e.g., gender attitudes), or does
not apply (e.g., job loss, reduced hours)

Table 3. Multinomial Logistic Regression Results Predicting Change in Time Spent in Housework, by Parent Gender (N = 1,025)
Fathers
Variable

Gender (female=1)
Division of housework before pandemic
She did majority
He did majority
Employment during pandemic
Father FT, Mother PT
Father PT, Mother FT/PT
Father single earner
Mother single earner
Both unemployed
Job loss
Father only lost job
Mother only lost job
Both lost job
Parent/partner is essential worker
Household income during pandemic
Relative earnings during pandemic
Father earns more
Mother earns more
Traditional gender attitudes
Reduced hours/left job
Father only reduced hours/left job
Mother only reduced hours/ left job
Both reduced hours / left job
Working from home during pandemic
Father works from home exclusively
Father works from home sometimes
Mother works from home
exclusively
Mother works from home
sometimes
Childcare hours before pandemic
1-20 hours
21+ hours
Creates E-learning content

Doing Less
SE b
rrr

Mothers
Doing More
SE b
rrr

Doing Less
SE b
rrr

Doing More
SE b
rrr

1.16

0.46

0.46***

0.11

0.90

0.27

1.38

0.39

1.18
4.60**

0.49
2.67

1.88*
1.68

0.47
0.62

1.89*
1.59

0.60
0.74

1.22
1.57

0.33
0.66

0.69
1.21
4.15
1.03
1.10

0.49
1.00
3.32
0.83
1.15

0.92
1.90
0.91
1.57
1.62

0.31
0.78
0.35
0.69
0.90

0.73
2.18
0.84
1.22
1.50

0.32
1.21
0.41
0.66
0.95

1.29
1.38
3.60**
0.57
2.53

0.43
0.67
1.61
0.32
1.54

2.62
1.83
0.73
1.75
1.01

1.43
0.96
0.86
0.73
0.11

1.61
3.54***
2.00
1.34
0.96

0.62
1.20
1.23
0.35
0.07

2.53*
2.66*
4.90*
1.65
1.17

1.11
1.14
3.43
0.52
0.11

1.11
1.07
2.24
0.81
0.97

0.46
0.42
1.44
0.24
0.08

4.20*
1.60
1.39

2.80
1.17
0.38

3.10**
2.93**
1.06

1.21
1.20
0.16

1.33
1.62
1.06

0.56
0.76
0.19

1.53
1.44
0.88

0.57
0.59
0.15

3.27*
1.25
11.23**

1.63
0.63
10.12

2.01
1.01
1.79

0.74
0.33
1.13

2.05
0.94
2.13

0.87
0.41
1.24

1.19
1.95*
2.90

0.44
0.60
1.89

1.05
0.43
1.49

0.51
0.24
0.90

1.41
0.87
1.19

0.40
0.33
0.38

0.91
0.34*
0.85

0.32
0.18
0.32

0.62
0.65
2.39*

0.17
0.22
0.92

0.87

0.90

0.81

0.40

0.81

0.46

2.32

1.17

0.89
0.71
1.49
0.52
1.37
0.68
1.05
0.41
0.80
0.41
0.99
0.30
0.90
0.37
1.59
0.47
1.09
0.50
1.10
0.26
1.55
0.44
1.66*
0.41
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001; Comparison group is no change. All control variables are included in models but not shown here to conserve space.

Table 4. Multinomial Logistic Regression Results Predicting Change in Time Spent in Childcare, by Parent Gender (N = 956)
Fathers
Variable

Gender (female=1)
Division of childcare before pandemic
She did majority
He did majority
Employment during pandemic
Father FT, Mother PT
Father PT, Mother FT/PT
Father single earner
Mother single earner
Both unemployed
Job loss
Father only lost job
Mother only lost job
Both lost job
Parent/partner is essential worker
Household income during pandemic
Relative earnings during pandemic
Father earns more
Mother earns more
Traditional gender attitudes
Reduced hours/left job
Father only reduced hours/left job
Mother only reduced hours/ left job
Both reduced hours / left job
Working from home during pandemic
Father works from home exclusively
Father works from home sometimes
Mother works from home
exclusively
Mother works from home
sometimes
Childcare hours before pandemic
1-20 hours
21+ hours
Creates E-learning content

Doing Less
SE b
rrr

Mothers
Doing More
SE b
rrr

Doing Less
SE b
rrr

Doing More
SE b
rrr

2.59*

1.05

0.51***

0.13

2.48*

0.91

1.55

0.42

1.10
2.23

0.51
1.31

1.62
0.87

0.41
0.35

1.65
1.92

0.65
1.11

0.79
1.36

0.21
0.51

0.65
0.95
2.36
0.55
0.98

0.39
0.72
1.66
0.43
0.91

1.51
1.14
1.17
1.50
1.69

0.53
0.51
0.47
0.69
0.98

0.67
1.00
1.21
5.53**
1.26

0.37
0.73
0.73
3.66
1.09

1.19
0.99
2.72
1.75
2.10

0.40
0.48
1.41
0.86
1.43

1.12
1.20
1.95
2.50*
1.08

1.02
0.70
2.88
1.07
0.16

3.41***
0.84
3.56
0.99
0.94

1.28
0.33
2.66
0.27
0.07

3.28**
2.01
2.27
1.74
1.28*

1.42
1.15
1.90
0.69
0.13

0.58
1.21
2.17
1.16
0.94

0.28
0.40
1.59
0.33
0.07

1.02
1.91
1.20

0.59
1.20
0.35

1.56
2.62*
1.05

0.55
0.98
0.15

0.56
1.02
1.90**

0.25
0.50
0.44

1.29
1.76
1.19

0.49
0.72
0.19

1.08
1.33
2.37

0.66
0.79
2.70

2.12*
0.93
1.13

0.79
0.32
0.60

3.36*
0.96
2.82

1.65
0.53
1.98

1.75
0.93
1.00

0.64
0.28
0.59

0.44
0.55
3.65*

0.21
0.29
2.29

2.37**
0.96
1.10

0.69
0.37
0.37

1.98
1.33
0.70

0.81
0.64
0.34

1.09
0.69
2.94**

0.31
0.24
1.23

1.08

1.15

1.95

0.90

1.38

0.86

3.71*

1.96

0.68
0.57
1.70
0.61
0.88
0.56
1.39
0.53
0.52
0.27
1.29
0.38
1.86
0.89
2.48**
0.73
0.42
0.19
2.22**
0.58
0.45*
0.16
1.38
0.36
*p < .05. **p < .01. ***p < .001; Comparison group is shared equally. All control variables are included in models but not shown here to conserve space.

