Title: COVID-19 and suicide of an army soldier in India: perspectives on
psychosocial epidemiology of suicidal behavior
Authors, affiliations, and emails:
Md Mahbub Hossain, MBBS, MPH, Department of Health Promotion and
Community Health Sciences, Texas A&M School of Public Health, TX 77843, USA.
Email: mhossain@tamu.edu
Samia Tasmin MBBS, Department of Health Promotion and Community Health
Sciences, Texas A&M School of Public Health, TX 77843, USA. Email:
tasnim@tamu.edu
Abida Sultana, MBBS, Gazi Medical College, Khulna 09000, Bangladesh. Email:
a.sultana21@outlook.com
E. Lisako J. McKyer, PhD, MPH, Department of Health Promotion and Community
Health Sciences, Texas A&M School of Public Health, TX 77843, USA. Email:
lisako.mckyer@tamu.edu
Ping Ma, PhD, Department of Health Promotion and Community Health Sciences,
Texas A&M School of Public Health, TX 77843, USA. Email: pma@tamu.edu

Corresponding author:
Md Mahbub Hossain MBBS, MPH, Department of Health Promotion and
Community Health Sciences, Texas A&M School of Public Health, TX 77843, USA.
Email: mhossain@tamu.edu

Conflict of interest: We declare no conflict of interest.
Funding: No funding was received at any stage of preparing this manuscript.
Acknowledgment: None.
Authors contributions: MMH and ST conceptualized this correspondence. MMH, ST
and AS conducted the literature review. MMH, ST and ELJM evaluated and extracted
data from the selected literature. MMH wrote the first manuscript and PM critically
edited the same. All the authors contributed in revising and finalizing the submitted
version of the manuscript.

COVID-19 and suicide of an army soldier in India: perspectives on
psychosocial epidemiology of suicidal behavior

The novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic is critically impacting health and
wellbeing around the world. In addition to physical health problems, COVID-19 is
increasingly reported to be associated with mental health problems across populations
(González-Sanguino et al., 2020). Evidence from the current pandemic and earlier
infectious disease outbreaks suggests that several psychosocial factors, including fear
and susceptibility of infection, stigma, lack of awareness, pre-existing health problems,
and poor social support affect the mental health status among the vulnerable individuals
and populations (González-Sanguino et al., 2020; Hossain et al., 2020c). Moreover,
social determinants of mental health are disproportionately distributed across
populations, which also affect coping with adverse psychosocial conditions. During
COVID-19 pandemic, many psychological challenges are aggravating globally, including
suicidal behavior. In this correspondence, we discuss a case of suicide of an army soldier
in India and the psychosocial epidemiology of suicidal behavior in the context of
COVID-19.
The army soldier who committed suicide was a 31-years-old native of Maharashtra state
of India serving under the Indian Army (Hindustan Times, 2020). His family was living
in Alwar of Rajasthan state. Earlier, he was diagnosed with lung cancer earlier and had
been receiving treatment in the Research and Referral (RR) hospital in Delhi. On May 5,
he was transferred to Naraina Hospital in West Delhi after testing positive for COVID19. Later the same day, he hanged himself from a tree in this hospital area.

This case provides several insights on the psychosocial epidemiology of suicidal
behavior amid COVID-19, which may inform future research and interventions for
preventing suicidal behavior in similar individuals. First, the fear of COVID-19 may
induce psychosocial distress aggravating suicidal behavior, which is observed in earlier
cases of suicide amid COVID-19 (Hossain et al., 2020a). This may be one of the leading
factors associated with the given case as well. Second, mental health problems are highly
prevalent in the Indian population (Hossain et al., 2020b). Therefore, any such
problems may have compounding psychological effects during COVID-19 that may
influence suicidal behavior. Third, people with pre-existing physical or mental health
problems are more vulnerable to psychosocial stressors during infectious outbreaks
(Hossain et al., 2020c). The army soldier was diagnosed with lung cancer earlier, which
itself might have contributed to psychological distress. Taken together with the added
distress due to COVID-19 diagnosis, his mental health condition had deteriorated,
which could have triggered suicidal behavior. Lastly, individuals staying away from
family and working in stressful settings like armed forces may have a higher
psychosocial burden yet poor social support, which makes them further vulnerable to
mental health problems, as seen in this case.
These insights inform the urgent need to include psychosocial support in COVID-19
prevention and care services, especially among vulnerable populations who are
suspected or diagnosed with COVID-19, people with pre-existing conditions, and those
who have poor psychosocial support (Gunnell et al., 2020). Furthermore, future
research and development of preventive strategies should address psychosocial
determinants and behavioral dynamics in the context of COVID-19. As the number of

COVID-19 cases continues to increase globally, it is essential to acknowledge the
psychosocial epidemiological challenges associated with suicidal behavior and
strengthen comprehensive mental health care during this pandemic.

References
González-Sanguino, C., Ausín, B., ÁngelCastellanos, M., Saiz, J., López-Gómez, A.,
Ugidos, C., Muñoz, M., 2020. Mental Health Consequences during the Initial Stage
of the 2020 Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19) in Spain. Brain. Behav. Immun.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbi.2020.05.040
Gunnell, D., Appleby, L., Arensman, E., Hawton, K., John, A., Kapur, N., Khan, M.,
O’Connor, R.C., Pirkis, J., Caine, E.D., Chan, L.F., Chang, S. Sen, Chen, Y.Y.,
Christensen, H., Dandona, R., Eddleston, M., Erlangsen, A., Harkavy-Friedman, J.,
Kirtley, O.J., Knipe, D., Konradsen, F., Liu, S., McManus, S., Mehlum, L., Miller,
M., Moran, P., Morrissey, J., Moutier, C., Niederkrotenthaler, T., Nordentoft, M.,
O’Neill, S., Page, A., Phillips, M.R., Platt, S., Pompili, M., Qin, P., Rezaeian, M.,
Silverman, M., Sinyor, M., Stack, S., Townsend, E., Turecki, G., Vijayakumar, L.,
Yip, P.S., 2020. Suicide risk and prevention during the COVID-19 pandemic. The
Lancet Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(20)30171-1
Hindustan Times, 2020. Army man who tested positive for Covid-19 commits suicide at
Base Hospital - delhi news - Hindustan Times [WWW Document]. URL
https://www.hindustantimes.com/cities/army-man-who-tested-positive-for-covidcommits-suicide-at-base-hospital/story-5cVqqwyBDlUUC2I8y4aCGP.html

(accessed 5.14.20).
Hossain, M.M., Purohit, N., Sharma, R., Bhattacharya, S., McKyer, E.L.J., Ma, P.,
2020a. Suicide of a farmer amid COVID-19 in India: Perspectives on social
determinants of suicidal behavior and prevention strategies [WWW Document].
SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/ekam3
Hossain, M.M., Purohit, N., Sultana, A., Ma, P., McKyer, E.L.J., Ahmed, H.U., 2020b.
Prevalence of mental disorders in South Asia: An umbrella review of systematic
reviews and meta-analyses. Asian J. Psychiatr. 51, 102041.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2020.102041
Hossain, M.M., Sultana, A., Purohit, N., 2020c. Mental Health Outcomes of Quarantine
and Isolation for Infection Prevention: A Systematic Umbrella Review of the Global
Evidence. SSRN Electron. J. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3561265

