Countries Embracing Maternal Employment Have
Opened Schools Sooner after COVID-19 Lockdowns
Ansgar Hudde1*, Natalie Nitsche2*†
1

Institute of Sociology and Social Psychology, University of Cologne, Germany.
Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research, Rostock, Germany.
† Both authors contributed equally and are listed in alphabetic order
* Corresponding authors: Ansgar Hudde, Natalie Nitsche
2

Email: nitsche@demogr.mpg.de, hudde@wiso.uni-koeln.de
Keywords
COVID-19, containment measures, gender ideology, school closures, gender ideology bias

Abstract
Covid-19 pandemic related school closures have affected the majority of the
world’s students and remain a contentious issue. Using data from the UNESCO
school data base, the ISSP 2012, and country-level panel regressions, we
leverage simultaneous school closures during first-wave Covid-19 lockdowns
to estimate the effect of gender ideology on school reopening schedules. We
show that societal gender ideology likely has influenced school reopening
policies: Societies with more supportive attitudes toward maternal employment
have reopened schools significantly sooner, and at higher intensities, than
societies with less supportive attitudes toward maternal employment, relative
to other reopening measures, and net of infection rates. Our findings suggest a
causal effect of gender ideological beliefs on pandemic-related school-closure
policies. We test and exclude a variety of potential confounders such as a
country’s maternal employment rate, GDP, social spending, and cultural values
toward children. We argue that school closures may be perceived as less
problematic in countries where more people support the ideal of a stay-at-home
mom. Gender attitudes may thus represent a set of ideas that affect policymakers’ decision-making via a potential gender ideology bias. However, the
specific underlying mechanisms via which the gender ideology effect operates
at the policy-maker level remain untested for in our study, and should be
investigated by future research.
1

Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, a large array of virus transmission control
measures has been implemented. Among them have been school closures of an
unprecedented scope. In April 2020, almost 90% of the world’s enrolled students were
affected. Pandemic control measures have unintended, often detrimental, side effects
(Polyakova et al. 2020). These are particularly severe in the case of school closures because
they lead to a variety of adversarial consequences such as socially stratified learning losses
(Jæger and Blaabæk 2020), deteriorating mental health among children and parents
(Russell et al. 2020; Golberstein, Wen, and Miller 2020; Calarco et al. 2020), and increases
in child maltreatment (Humphreys, Myint, and Zeanah 2020). They also generate a
disproportionally high burden for mothers who largely compensate for closed schools. This
leads to, for instance, increases in job losses, reductions in paid employment and work
hours, and steep increases in time spent with domestic work (Collins et al. 2021; Qian and
Fuller 2020; Dias, Chance, and Buchanan 2020; Ma, Sun, and Xue 2020; Del Boca et al.,
n.d.). School closures thus not only lead to educational, developmental and social losses
for children, but they also imply soaring gender inequalities in the domestic sphere and the
labor market. Examining the factors that affect the duration and intensity of school
closures, net of Covid-19 activity, is therefore of great importance.
While school closures were a near universal occurrence during first-wave lockdowns,
subsequent school re-opening pace, relative to other societal reopenings, has varied widely.
Similarly, second and third Covid-19 waves in the fall and winter months of 2020 and early
2021 have triggered school closures in some but not other countries and regions. Thus,
broad variation in type and usage of pandemic response measures across, and even within,
2

societies is presenting itself, in particular regarding the schools (Blum and Dobrotić 2020;
McGowan 2020). A year into the Covid-19 pandemic, the scientific evidence on the role
of schools and the effect of school closures for the spread of SARS-Covid-19 remains
mixed and inconclusive (Walsh et al. 2021). Given this lack of clear scientific
epidemiological guidance on best Covid-19 pandemic-practices for schools, other factors,
such as economic, political or socio-cultural considerations are likely influencing how the
relevant political actors have handled schools during the pandemic, and may be important
drivers of the observed national and regional differences in school related pandemic
policies. However, to date little is known on whether, and, if so, which, socio-cultural
aspects produce these differences in the Covid-19 response to school operations. Our study
addresses this question. We suggest that gender ideological beliefs serve as an important
ideational component which affects policies regulating school operations during the
pandemic, and investigate whether societal attitudes toward maternal employment have
contributed to country-level variation in school reopening pace and intensity after firstwave Covid-19 lockdowns.
Our study leverages the exogenous shock of the first Coivd-19 wave and the ensuing school
closures in March 2020, when schools were shuttered almost simultaneously across most
nations in the world, to estimate the effect of societal level gender ideology on countries’
school reopening schedules. We find that countries with more supportive attitudes toward
maternal employment have reopened schools sooner and at greater intensities, relative to
other societal reopenings. These findings suggest that the composition of countries’
specific mixes of policies aimed at curbing the SARS-CoV-2 virus spread are partly guided
by a societies attitudes toward maternal employment. We test and exclude a variety of
3

potential confounders such as a country’s maternal employment rate, GDP, social
spending, and cultural values toward children. While the specific underlying mechanisms
via which the gender ideology effect operates remain untested for in our study, we theorize,
as outlined above, that they operate at the individual level, and may be rooted in policymakers perceptions regarding the costs and benefits of school closures as a function of their
gender attitudes. We borrow from the literature which theorizes the role of ideas on
policymaking, lean on the concept of ‘ideas as heuristics’ in influencing policymaking
(Swinkels 2020), and call this potential cognitive bias in policy decision-making gender
ideology bias.
School closures mean that children need to be educated and cared for at home. It is well
documented that women carry out the majority of domestic and care work in families
around the globe (Bianchi et al. 2012; Van der Lippe et al. 2011; Treas and Tai 2016;
OECD 2018). The potential implications of the pandemic control measures for women and
growing gender inequality were widely discussed in the media in March and April 2020
(UNESCO 2021b). It may be assumed that decision-makers were aware that mothers would
bear the main responsibility for compensating for closed schools. Thus, we hypothesize
that decision-makers’ gender attitudes represent a set of ideas that may have affected their
school-related pandemic responses, as these attitudes – perhaps unwittingly – were and are
shaping their cost-benefit assessments of closing or opening schools.

4

Background
The role of ideas in policy-making
Scholars studying policymaking increasingly emphasize the importance of ideas, e.g.
norms, beliefs, ideologies, attitudes, or cognitive heuristics and biases for policy decisionmaking (Jacobsen 1995; Schafer and Walker 2006; Campbell 2002; Esping-Andersen
1999). Theorizing on the importance of the role of ideas for policymaking gained
momentum in the early 1990s (Goldstein and Keohane, 1993; Jacobsen), and is
experiencing a renewed upsurge, coined an ‘ideational turn’, in current policy scholarship
(Swinkels 2020). Yet, conceptualizing and measuring ideas has proved challenging, as has
assessing their precise pathways of influence on policymaking. Moreover, ideas, social
policies, and social outcomes are likely intertwined, affect each other probably only
partially, and in feedback loops (Yee 1996). This further complicates assessments of the
effect of relevant ideas on policy or other social outcomes (Campbell 2002; Sjöberg 2004;
Tjernström and Tietenberg 2008; Gangl and Ziefle 2015).
Despite these difficulties, ideas have evolved as a central explanatory concept for
explaining policymaking, in particular with regards to policymaking processes and changes
in policies (Swinkels 2020). For ease of conceptualization, Swinkels (2020) suggests to
classify ideas as explanatory forces for policymaking around three central analytical lines:
ideas as heuristics, ideas as strategic tools, and ideas as institutional frameworks. We lean
on the concept of ideas operating as heuristics, also termed ‘cognitive paradigms’
(Campbell 2002), which posits that that human decision-making in general and
policymaking specifically is guided by subjective beliefs, and is subject to a variety of
5

biases (Kahneman 2011). Particularly in situations in which people face acute time
pressure, limited information, and complex situations or choices, their decisions can be
guided by and based on such cognitive heuristics, biases, and information unrelated to the
issue at hand (Tversky and Kahneman 1974; Songer and Lindquist 1996; Stepanikova
2012; Lau and Redlawsk 2001). We argue that cognitive heuristics and subjective beliefs
may have served as particularly relevant decision-making tools during the first Covid-19
wave, which has been an unprecedented moment of complex decision-making under
pressure, and time sensitivity, worldwide. In addition, the role of decision-makers is
increasingly recognized as salient for policymaking (Morin and Paquin 2018).
Governmental decision-making on the Covid-19 response in general and during first wave
lockdowns in particular was dominated by expert-task forces and the executive (Rajan et
al. 2020; Griglio 2020). In other words, decision-making on school operations was made
by few selected individuals, while the influence of political discourses and parliaments was
low in the Covid-19 pandemic-response policy decision-making process on schools. In
addition, firm scientific information on transmission of SARS-Covid-19 in school settings
was scant at that time. This situational set-up implies favorable conditions for ideas as
heuristics to carry significant weight in the policy decision-making process during first
wave Covid-19 lockdowns.
Gender ideology as ideas that affect school-related Covid-19 response policymaking
Ideas as heuristics or cognitive paradigms originate from ‘microfoundations’, i.e.
policymakers cognition (Swinkels 2020, 288), or their ‘taken-for-granted worldviews’
(Campbell 2002, 22). We hypothesize that policymakers’ own ideas on gendered societal
6

roles, or their perceptions of their societies’ ideas on such gendered roles, represent a
crucial set of ideas that has served as heuristics in the Covid-19 response decision-making
process on school operations.
In sociological scholarship there is broad agreement that gender ideology among
individuals and on the societal level – sometimes also referred to as gender attitudes,
values, norms, or culture – is closely linked to and likely influences behavior and decisionmaking, in particular behavior that produces gendered outcomes (Davis and Greenstein
2009; Pessin 2018; Collins et al. 2021; Scarborough, Sin, and Risman 2019). On the level
of individuals, significant relationships between gender ideology and a variety of gendered
individual- and couple-level outcomes have been documented in a large number of
countries (Carlson and Lynch 2013; Carriero and Todesco 2018; Cunningham 2005;
Kaufman 2000; Khoudja and Fleischmann 2018; J. Kim and Luke 2020; Davis and
Greenstein 2004; 2020; Hudde and Engelhardt 2020; Nitsche and Grunow 2018; 2016;
Thébaud, Kornrich, and Ruppanner 2019; Davis and Greenstein 2009). On the macro level,
research has found correlations between gender ideology and a variety of social outcomes,
such as fertility, motherhood-earnings penalties, mothers’ employment participation and
working hours, and the gendered division of housework (Arpino, Esping-Andersen, and
Pessin 2015; Boeckmann, Misra, and Budig 2015; Budig, Misra, and Boeckmann 2012;
Fuwa 2004; Treas and Tai 2016; Van der Lippe and Van Dijk 2002; Hudde 2018). While
studies that have assessed the influence of gender ideology or ideas on gendered social
roles on social policies are scarce, there is evidence that values, ideology, and attitudes
affect policy-making in other societal domains (Guth et al. 1995; Segal and Cover 1989;
Facchini and Mayda 2008; Mooney and Lee 2000). We therefore hypothesize that gender
7

ideology serves as a meaningful source of ideas to have affected Covid-19 response related
policymaking on schools, because closed schools have immediate, deep and long-lasting
unequal effects on men and women, in particular on fathers and mothers.
Gender ideologies incorporate a variety of shared cultural beliefs about both the gendered
traits and the social responsibilities of men and women (Ridgeway and Correll 2004;
Charles and Grusky 2005). Generally speaking, gender essentialist beliefs support the idea
of “separate gender spheres,” also called “traditionalism,” in which women’s
responsibilities are seen as centered on the family and private realm, and men’s
responsibilities are seen as centered on the labor market. This traditionalism stands in
opposition to “gender egalitarianism,” or the idea of “joint spheres,” in which women and
men are seen as equally adapted to and responsible for performing tasks in the family or
private realm on the one hand, and the labor market or public realm on the other (Davis
and Greenstein 2004; 2009). Recent scholarship has demonstrated that individuals’ gender
ideological thinking is complex, and goes beyond a simple dichotomization of “egalitarian
versus essentialist” ideologies (Knight and Brinton 2017; Scarborough, Sin, and Risman
2019; Hudde 2018). Rather, a variety of gender ideological constructs with mixed elements
of egalitarian and essentialist ideas seem to exist co-exist in, for instance, the ideals of
“intensive parenting” or “egalitarianism with essentialist elements” (Grunow, Begall, and
Buchler 2018). This makes it necessary to conceptualize and measure gender ideology
specific to certain relevant tasks, such as gendered ideals of childrearing, or beliefs about
the labor market involvement of mothers. Maternal employment is among the social
outcomes most heavily affected by Covid-19 school closures (Heggeness 2020; Collins et
al. 2021; Carson, Ruppanner, and Ratcliff 2020; Del Boca et al., n.d.). We therefore chose
8

attitudes regarding maternal employment as the relevant measure for gender ideology for
our study and hypothesize that gender ideological beliefs about maternal employment
likely played a central role in social policy decision-making regarding pandemic-related
school measures.
Our unit of analysis are countries, and we cannot directly observe decision-making
processes among individuals or groups of policymakers. Thus, our analyses rest on the
assumption that societal level measures of the population’s gender ideology capture well
the average attitudes of the relevant actors in political power (or at least the ideation they
adjust their decision-making to), who gave recommendations for and made decisions on
school reopening schedules during and after first wave Covid-19 lockdowns. Specifically,
we suggest that policy-makers who embrace gender essentialist values, which include the
ideal of a stay-at-home mother, likely perceived the costs of school closures as lower: i.e.,
they may assume that mothers and children are well-served when caretaking occurs in the
home rather than in schools, or that mothers’ contributions to the labor market are less
valuable. In sum, we suggest that decision-makers who embrace gender egalitarian
attitudes, including the idea that mothers should have equal opportunities to gainful
employment and own career development, likely perceived the overall cost of school
closures as higher, whereas those with gender essentialist ideals perceived them as lower.
We term this gender attitudinal bias, which is potentially operating in pandemic school
closure and reopening decision-making, gender ideology bias.

9

Method and Data
Analytic Strategy
To analyze how attitudes toward maternal employment have affected school reopening
schedules, we leverage the random shock of the first Covid-19 wave and the ensuing school
closures, which were employed by most countries around the globe in March 2020,
regardless of their gender ideology. We estimate the time to school reopening from the day
of maximum lockdown in each country. We conceptualize the day of maximum lockdown
as the day when the maximum amount of time was spent in residential areas, measured by
Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports, for each country (Google LLC 2020).
Average maximum time in residential areas, and subsequent declines therein, do not differ
between the two attitudinal country groups (see Figure 1). Also, schools were shuttered in
all but four countries, and school attendance is compulsory in all countries (UNESCO
Institute for Statistics 2020), which means all countries had equal incentives to reopen
schools. This strategy ensures that all countries had the same reopening conditions, in other
words, their expected outcome in terms of school opening timing and intensity is the same,
i.e. exchangeable (Hernán and Robins 2020). Hence, differences in reopening timing and
intensity – relative to other societal reopenings – are rooted in deliberate prioritization.
We use descriptive statistics and panel regression models to estimate the causal effect
of gender ideology, measured as attitudes toward maternal employment, on the time to
school-reopenings and intensity thereof. The assumption on which our identification
strategy of the causal effect of gender ideology rests is that no other factors, which are
correlated with gender ideology but omitted from the analysis, drive the effect (omitted10

variable bias). We have conducted an extensive set of robustness checks to challenge this
assumption (described below). Gender ideology was measured before the pandemic
started. It reflects often deeply engrained beliefs, which within societies tend to change
only slowly and incrementally (Sullivan, Gershuny, and Robinson 2018; Knight and
Brinton 2017). The pandemic shock was unexpected and hit countries irresectable of their
gender ideology, therefore our estimate of gender ideology on school reopening schedules
is not contaminated by self-selection into the external pandemic shock, i.e. by reverse
causality (Engel 2016). As argued, decision-making is particularly affected by heuristics
and biases under acute time pressure and limited information. We therefore analyze the
time between each country’s maximum lockdown (April 3, on average) and the beginning
of the summer break or any other academic break that is at least four weeks long. Our
approach has limitations, which lie in the lack of individual level data from policymakers
to test the suggested causal mechanism, and the observational nature of the data; despite
the random shock, treatment was not randomized, thus, we cannot exclude the existence of
unmeasured confounders, despite the extensive set of robustness checks we conducted.
Limitations and threats to the causal inference of this study are discussed in greater detail
in the discussion section.

Data
School opening status. Information on school closure status is from the UNESCO
database “global monitoring of school closures caused by COVID-19” (UNESCO, 2020).
This database contains day- and country-specific information on the status of school
11

closure in 210 countries. For most countries, data availability starts in mid-to-late March
and for all countries, data availability for school status starts before the date of maximum
lockdown (see below). School status in the database is available in four categories: (1) most
or all schools closed due to COVID-19; (2) most schools closed due to an academic break;
(3) partly open; and (4) fully or almost fully open. The ‘partly open’ group includes cases
where schools are “open/closed in certain regions only; and/or (b) open/closed for some
grade levels/age groups only; and/or (c) open but with reduced in-person class time,
combined with distance learning (hybrid approach)” (UNESCO 2021a). For our main
analyses, academic breaks are coded as missing; as a robustness check, breaks are coded
as closed. We show descriptive results for the remaining three categories and regression
analysis for the distinction between completely closed on the one hand, and at least partly
opened on the other hand. Regression analyses for the distinction between completely or
partly closed on the one hand, and completely opened on the other hand are shown in the
supplementary material. At the peak of the first wave in late March and early April 2020,
schools were shuttered in more than 95% of all countries worldwide and 31 of the 35
sample countries.
Attitudes towards maternal employment. Information on attitudes toward maternal
employment is from the Changing Gender Roles IV-module of the 2012 International
Social Programme (ISSP) 2012 (ISSP Research Group, 2016). This dataset is best suited
for our research purposes because it contains several relevant items, and it covers a large
number of countries. We run iterated principal factor analysis over a battery of items that
deal with women’s – and particularly mothers’ – roles in the labor market and the home.
They include items on the perceived effects of maternal employment on children and
12

families, ideas about what women want, and questions about who should earn the money
in a family. Overall, they measure the ideological dimension of “maternal employment”
well. Cronbach’s alpha for the eight items is 0.77 which supports that these four items
capture one latent, underlying factor and that it makes sense to condense the items into one
single variable. Table 1 shows the summary statistics for the single items and the factor
variable, including the question wording and their factor loading. All items are (re)coded
such that higher numerical values represent attitudes more supportive of maternal
employment. For ease of descriptive analysis, we split the countries into two country
groups: those with more supportive attitudes toward maternal employment (“more
egalitarian”, N=18), and those with less supportive attitudes toward maternal employment
(“less egalitarian”, N=17).
Table 1. Summary table for attitudes toward maternal employment (ISSP micro-level data of respondents
from the 35 sample countries). n = 37,610.

Factor: attitudes towards maternal employment
Items used to compute the factor:
Warm relation: A working mother can establish just as warm and
secure a relationship with her children as a mother who does not
work. a
Child suffers: A pre-school child is likely to suffer if his or her
mother works. b
Family suffers: All in all, family life suffers when the woman has a
full-time job. b
Want home: A job is all right, but what most women really want is a
home and children. b
Housewife: Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for
pay. b
Men money: A man’s job is to earn money; a woman’s job is to look
after the home and family. b
Work school: Do you think that women should work outside the
home under the following circumstances? After the youngest child
starts school. c
Work U6: Do you think that women should work outside the home
under the following circumstances? When there is a child under

13

histogram

factor
loading

mean

sd

0.00

0.90

range
-2.35;
1.94

3.74

1.17

1;5

0.42

2.92

1.24

1;5

0.69

2.98

1.26

1;5

0.69

2.89

1.23

1;5

0.60

2.87

1.20

1;5

0.43

3.25

1.31

1;5

0.68

0.89

0.31

0;1

0.37

0.67

0.47

0;1

0.51

school age. c
Notes: Weights are applied. Factor loading refers to iterated principal factor analysis.
Answer categories for the items:
a
: 1 = strongly disagree; 5 = strongly agree
b
: 1 = strongly agree; 5 = strongly disagree
c
: 0 = stay at home; 1 = work part-time or work full-time

Mobility data as a proxy for lockdown intensity. Aggregate data on the change in
time spent in residential areas, compared to a pre-COVID-19 reference period, comes from
the Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports (Google LLC 2020). This mobility
information serves as a control measure for a country’s general position on the lockdownopen continuum. Any effective lockdown measure will reduce people’s mobility and
increase their time spent at home and is an indication of the general degree of closure or
opening of a society. We assume that the less time people spent in residential areas, the
greater the degree of societal and institutional openings in this society. Google Mobility
Reports are available for 134 countries. The moment of “maximum lockdown” refers to
the day when the time spent in residential areas was highest in each country, which
occurred, on average, on April 3 (in 30 of the 35 sample countries, the date of maximum
lockdown falls into the 15-day period between March 25th and April 9th).
Infection cases. Information on daily new infection cases is provided by Our World
in Data (OWID) (Roser et al. 2020). OWID draws these data from the European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC).

Sample Selection
Sample countries. The selection of countries in our core analytic sample is mainly
determined by the availability of ISSP data on gender ideology. ISSP covers 41 countries
14

across the world. Of these, Spain is excluded from the analyses because of measurement
inconsistency: in Spain, a four-point scale was used for the first six items displayed in Table
1, instead of the five-point scale that was used in the other countries. For two countries,
China and Iceland, Google Mobility Reports are not available. For Taiwan, information on
school openings is not available. Google Mobility Reports indicate that the countries
generally follow the pattern of a clear lockdown peak, followed by a gradual opening. Our
analyses are based on such a pattern: we focus on the timing between the maximum level
of national lockdown (of the first major lockdown wave) and the subsequent opening of
schools. Two countries diverge substantially from this pattern and are therefore excluded
from the sample: Japan and Chile. Japan experienced a first, shorter lockdown phase,
followed by a second, longer lockdown phase. The maximum lockdown that is observed
in the data in early May is already part of the second lockdown wave. Chile was in an
intense and still slightly intensifying lockdown for at least half a year, and the maximum
lockdown was reached much later in the other countries, at the end of June. This leaves 35
countries from all continents for the main analyses. However, in the additional robustness
checks, 69 countries are included in at least one of the regression models, see the
supplementary material for details.
Sample period. Our sample period for the regression analyses covers the time from
the maximum lockdown to the first academic break that is at least four weeks long (i.e. the
summer holiday and the end of the academic year in most countries in the northern
hemisphere). In most countries, the summer holiday begins on July 1st (21 out of the 35
sample countries). The first countries to start the summer holiday are the Philippines (May
1st) and Finland (May 15th). The last countries to start the summer holiday are Belgium,
15

Austria, and Mexico (July 11th and August 1st). Five countries do not have a longer holiday
during the period of observation (Argentina, Australia, India, South Africa, and South
Korea). To keep the sample coherent, we cut these observations off at August 1st, the date
when all other countries’ holidays have started. On average, that period between maximum
lockdown and the last sample day is 89 days.

Method
We present results from descriptive analyses in Figures 1, 2a, and 2b. Figure 2c shows
predicted values from a panel regression linear probability model (LPM). We choose linear
probability models over non-linear ones, e.g. probit or logit, because linear models are
generally more robust and flexible; at least if – as in our case – the sample size is
sufficiently large (Battey, Cox, and Jackson 2019). Further, linear models are easy to
interpret and allow for insightful visual representations of the results, see e.g. the
comparison of model-based predictions and observed opening rates in Figure 2C (Hellevik
2009; Mood 2010). We run a panel regression model (daily observations nested in
countries) with random effects (random intercept) at the country level. The dependent
variable is binary and captures whether schools are fully closed or at least partly open. The
predictor of interest is time-constant gender ideology. we are interested in understanding
how ideology is associated with changes in school closures as time passes, therefore
ideology is interacted with time since maximum lockdown and the square-term of time
since maximum lockdown. The models control for Google Mobility data as a proxy
measure for a country’s general position on the lockdown-open continuum, and for daily
16

SARS-CoV-2 infection rates, to further ensure differences in school reopening schedules
by gender ideology are not driven by a differential burden of SARS-CoV-2 activity. The
lockdown-measure enters as linear and square-term; infection cases as linear and logged
term.
Because of the interaction terms, the estimated coefficients are rather difficult to
interpret from regression tables. Therefore, we plot predicted probabilities of open schools
by time and countries’ gender ideology, and compare them to the descriptive patterns
(Figure 2C). Note that the displayed predictions are based on the day-specific average
values of mobility and infection cases. As an example, the points for day 40 after the
maximum lockdown are not predicted for the grand average value of mobility and infection
cases, but for the average mobility and infections data on day 40 over all countries. The
displayed prediction curves are predicted for the average attitude score of the less
egalitarian country group (value of the attitude variable = -0.34; displayed in orange) and
for the average attitude score of the more egalitarian country group (value of the attitude
variable = 0.36; purple). The full regression table can be found in the supplementary
material, together with numerous robustness checks.

Results
Impact of Gender Attitudes on School Reopening Timing and Intensity
The lines in figures 1 and 2a show changes in mobility relative to the maximum lockdown,
defined as the day of most time spent in residential areas, across the 35 countries (lines are
17

smoothed). Broadly, all countries follow a similar shape: a sharp increase in time spent at
home, followed by a moderate decrease. Throughout all figures, purple denotes countries
with more supportive attitudes toward maternal employment; orange denotes countries
with less supportive attitudes toward maternal employment. Figures 1 and 2A show that
the average mobility patterns did not differ between the more egalitarian and the less
egalitarian country groups. However, the average school reopening timing varied
substantially: school reopenings occurred much sooner after maximum lockdown in the
more egalitarian country group. In Figure 1, dots on the single-country mobility lines
indicate the day of school reopening in each of the countries. Country lines without a dot
had not yet reopened schools at the last day of observation. For countries that never fully
closed schools, the dot is at day zero. There are clearly more purple dots, and they are
located closer in time to the maximum lockdown. On average, schools reopened 28 days
sooner in the more egalitarian group, and at 14% above the average time spent in residential
areas, compared with at 8% in the less egalitarian group. In other words, reopening the
schools was given a higher priority than other societal reopenings in the more egalitarian
countries.

18

Egalitarian
less more

+40%
Avg. by country-group
Single country
Schools open partly

+20%

Schools open fully

Average at school opening

Time spent in residental areas

+30%

←

+10%

←

±0%

Average at school opening
↓
↓
-40

-20

60
40
20
0
Days since maximum lockdown

80

100

Figure 1. General mobility levels and school openings in single countries and country groups.

Figure 2A indicates that 40 days after the maximum lockdown, about half of the more
egalitarian countries, but only about one-quarter of the less egalitarian countries, had
reopened schools, at least in some regions or for some grades. The intensity of school
openings also varied by gender ideology: 80 days after lockdown, schools were fully
reopened in about 45% of the more egalitarian countries, but in less than 10% of the less
egalitarian societies (Figure 2A).
Figure 2B shows a scatterplot of school reopening timing and the factor value (continuous
measure) for ideology on maternal employment for all countries. A significant linear trend
is present: a more egalitarian ideology correlates with faster school reopenings (r = -.42).
A number of countries had not yet reopened schools before the first day of summer break,
and most of these countries are in the less egalitarian group. Some of the countries with
schools that were still closed at the last observation are in the Americas, where the
lockdowns started sooner relative to the SARS-CoV-2 infection peak. Therefore, further
testing of whether the association between gender ideology and school reopenings holds
19

when controlling for infectious activity is necessary.
Figure 2C shows model-based predicted values of school openings by ideological group,
net of country-specific SARS-CoV-2 infection rates and residential mobility levels (dashed
lines with confidence interval bands). The figure shows that the model-based predictions
generally correspond well to the observed opening rates (solid lines). During the two weeks
immediately after the maximum lockdown, schools were closed in most countries, and
predicted school closure probabilities did not vary significantly between the two groups.
Thereafter, school reopenings occurred significantly faster in the egalitarian country group,
particularly between 20-70 days after maximum lockdowns, which confirms that the
descriptive pattern holds.

20

A

Less egalitarian

More egalitarian

+25%

0%
Schools
fully open
20%

↑
Time in
residential
areas

Schools
partly open

+15%

40%

+10%

60%

+5%

80%

±0%

Share of schools open

Time spent in residental areas

+20%

100%
-20

0

20

40

60

80

-20

0

20

40

60

80

Days before / after maximum lockdown

C

B
AR

r = -.42 *

Schools still
← completely closed
MXIN
↓

0%

BG
VE

90

HU
KR

CAIE
SK
ZA

60

GB
TR

LV

Schools at least partly open

School opening: Days after max. lockdown

120

LT
PLCZ
AT

30

CH
PT HR
IL

PH

SI
BE
NL
FR

FI

NO

DE

20%

40%

Model-based
prediction,
with control
variables
↓

60%

80%

DK

↑
Observed
opening rate

Schools never fully

RU ← closed →

0
-.5

US AU

0
.5
Attitudes supporting maternal employment

SE

100%
1

0

20

40
60
Days since maximum lockdown

Figure 2. Panel A: trajectories concerning general mobility and school openings in countries that are less,
and countries that are more supportive towards maternal employment. Panel B: Bivariate association
between the maximum lockdown and the school opening in the country against the continuous ideologymeasure. Panel C: Actual school opening trajectories of less and more egalitarian countries compared to
model-based predictions (panel regression model that predicts school openings based on gender ideology,
interacted with days since maximum lockdown, controlling for general mobility levels and for infection
cases).

Robustness Checks and Further Analyses
We conducted several robustness checks (details in supplementary material). First, in order
to test the robustness of our attitudinal measure, we replicated our main model using the
21

80

single attitudinal items from the ISSP 2012 instead of the factor variable, which yields
robust results (ncountries =35).
Second, we utilized an alternative source of attitudinal data, the European/World Value
Surveys (EVS/WVS, Wave 2017-2020), to replicate a subset of the analysis in a larger
sample of countries (ncountries=61). EVS/WVS cover more countries but have fewer suitable
attitudinal items. However, there is one item that is included in both, the ISSP and the latest
wave of WVS/EVS. The regression model with this item and the larger sample of countries
confirms our main result.
Third, we apply a different modelling strategy and study school openings using survival
analysis. These analyses test whether gender ideology affects the school opening rate
(hazard rate). However, using survival analysis, we can only study countries that were
closed at the date of maximum lockdown (which is the case for 31 out of the 35 countries
in our main sample). Results are robust for this alternative modeling strategy, i.e. the effect
of gender ideology is highly significant and a one-point increase in the standardized
attitudes measure reduces the predicted time to school opening by around a third.
Fourth, we tested for alternative explanations related to countries’ resources and readiness
to ‘pandemic-proof’ schools, to organize digital distance learning, to respond to a health
emergency, and to the countries’ age structure. We controlled for a country’s GDP, social
spending measured as share of GDP spent on social expenditures, degree of digitalization
measured with the Digital Adoption Index by the World Bank, and health system capacity
measured with the Global Health Security Index (GHS) by the Johns Hopkins Center for
Health Security, the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) and the Economist Intelligence Unit
22

(EIU) (separate models). We used a measure for the median population age to control for
age structure, because countries with older populations are more vulnerable to severe
SARS-CoV-2 cases. Our findings are robust to controlling for either of these factors.
Fifth, we examined the timing of school holidays and an alternative coding of academic
breaks. We control for the time between maximum lockdown and the beginning of an
academic break (summer holiday in the Northern Hemisphere) because e.g. countries with
earlier summer break may have opened schools sooner, to provide students with at least
some time in school before the start of summer break. Further, we test coding summer
breaks as ‘closed’ instead of cutting the observations off, because countries may have
deliberately delayed school holidays due to the pandemic situation. The main effect
remains robust in these models.
Sixth, we examined weather ‘lived’ gender roles, measured as maternal employment rates,
affected school reopening schedules, rather than ideal gender roles. Policy-makers in the
less egalitarian countries may have perceived school closures as less costly, because of
lower maternal employment rates in these societies – which might be an accurate
assessment, if only direct, economic costs are taken into account. Yet, while the groups of
countries differ in maternal employment rates of very young children (under school age),
average employment rates of mothers of school aged children aged 6-14 are very similar
(74% in less compared to 77% in more egalitarian countries). Controlling for the
employment rate of mothers with school-aged children does not change our findings. This
supports the idea that decision-making was in fact driven by bias, and not by an accurate
economic assessment.
23

We also test, seventh, for alternative cultural-attitudinal explanations. Gender ideology
may be correlated with attitudes toward children, for instance child-rearing values, or with
a society’s attitudes toward social norm adherence. Recent research demonstrates that
nations which are culturally “tight”, i.e. they show strict control of and abidance to social
norms, had significantly fewer Covid-19 cases and deaths (Gelfand et al. 2021). Thus, if
gender ideology is correlated with conformity-values or cultural “tightness”, the effect of
gender ideology on school closure policies may be spurious. We therefore control for two
indices that capture these dimensions, child-rearing values (Tillman 2013) and cultural
“tightness”(Eriksson et al. 2021) and our main finding stays robust, further underscoring
an effect of gender ideology on school closure durations that is independent of other
cultural framings.
Finally, we conducted a placebo test, and estimated the effect of gender ideology on the
reopening pace of other containment measures, using the Oxford covid-19 government
response tracker. We compute an index of all government containment responses, except
for closure of educational facilities. Attitudes toward maternal employment do not predict
the liftings of the other containment measures. This further underscores that gender
ideology bias is relevant for school-related pandemic policies, which have far-reaching
gendered implications, but not for other containment measures, which’s consequences are
less gendered.

24

Discussion and Conclusions
Across the world, school closures have become a commonly used, yet highly debated
Covid-19 pandemic containment measure. A year into the pandemic, it is well documented
that school closures lead to an earthshattering array of adversarial consequences for
children, adolescents, and families, and that they exacerbate social and gender inequalities.
At the same time, conclusive scientific evidence on a societies’ overall development of
SARS-CoV-2 transmission rates in the case of open versus closed schools, isolated from
other measures, is still lacking, as are clear-cut criteria for whether and when schools shall
be shuttered to slow transmissions (Heavey et al. 2020; S. Kim et al. 2020; Stein-Zamir et
al. 2020; Li et al. 2020; Macartney et al. 2020; Abdollahi et al. 2020; Behörde für Schule
und Berufsbildung 2020; Lee and Raszka 2020; Ehrhardt et al. 2020; Auger et al. 2020;
Walsh et al. 2021). Also, little is known on whether school closures may be effective in
slowing transmissions, if at all, because they restrict children’s or because they decrease
parents’ mobility. Unfortunately, such evidence is not easy to come by and will likely
remain amiss for a while. It requires tracing transmission-chains in schools, families and
communities, differentiated by adults and children, children’s ages, and hygiene- and
distancing measures practiced inside and outside of schools. It also requires a deeper
understanding of children’s and parents’ whereabouts, caregiver-arrangements and social
contacts when schools are shuttered, in particular in case of extended school closures when
(working-) parents may have exhausted time, financial and emotional resources for homebased care and schooling. Stagnation or even increases in SARS-CoV-2 transmissions in
the public and private realm may well result when kids are moved from controlled school
25

settings to potentially less well-supervised and less-regulated private settings, because they
will likely continue to have social contacts, including increased contacts with the elderly
(Brooks et al. 2020). Indeed, a tracing study from Austria demonstrates that around 90
percent of transmission clusters occurred in households and private or health-related social
settings, while only about 2.5% occurred in school settings, during the first half of
November 2020 when schools were fully open (AGES - Österreichische Agentur für
Gesundheit und Ernährungssicherheit GmbH 2020). While evidence on SARS-CoV-2
transmissions in schools is rapidly emerging, studies on changes in family- and
community-based SARS-CoV-2 transmission rates as a consequence of shuttered schools
are largely lacking, and with them clear guidance for policy-makers on school related
decision-making for pandemic containment. To complicate the picture, the debate on
whether evidence from in-school transmission studies shall be evaluated in terms of their
absolute numbers, or relative to rates of virus spread in the surrounding communities, and
how much school-based SARS-CoV-2 transmission justifies shuttering schools in the face
of the many negative mental health, educational, and social consequences, is nowhere near
settled (Oster 2020).
In the absence of such clear epidemiological guidance, policy-makers’ decision-making on
how to handle schools in the pandemic is left to their own judgement. Indeed, emerging
research suggest that policy-makers have largely relied on ideational factors for making
decisions related to the handling of schools in the pandemic. For instance, leaders across
Europe may have been guided by their political goal-priority mixes such as by work-family
focused versus education focused versus social inequality-prevention focused pandemic
containment strategies (Blum and Dobrotić 2020). Also, partisanship and the strength of
26

teachers’ unions have likely driven school reopening decisions across US school districts
in the Fall of 2020, while SARS-CoV-2 infection rates have not (Hartney and Finger 2020).
Our study demonstrates that societal gender attitudes are another important ideational
aspect which has impacted school reopening pace and intensity after first wave Covid-19
lockdowns around the world. We find strong and robust evidence for an effect of gender
attitudes on school reopening policies in the early phase of the pandemic, an effect that we
term gender ideology bias. Hence, our findings contribute both to the literature on the
relevance of ideas in policy-making, and the literature on gender ideology as a driver of
social outcomes. During first wave lockdowns, the gendered consequences of the school
closures were not yet systematically documented. Yet, early predictions of growing gender
inequality triggered by the pandemic voiced during first lockdowns indeed turned out as
correct. Today, studies show that fathers have shared the increased domestic and childcare
work during lockdowns, yet, substantial gender imbalances in work divisions at the
expense of mothers have remained or widened, and led to even larger gender gaps in
domestic and care work in terms of absolute contributions in many societies (Götzinger et
al. 2020; Farré et al. 2020; Yildirim and Eslen‐Ziya 2020; Hank and Steinbach 2020; Craig
and Churchill 2021; Del Boca et al., n.d.; Hipp and Bünning 2020; Meraviglia and Dudka
2021; Shafer, Milkie, and Scheibling 2020; Fodor et al. 2020). Also, mothers have
disproportionally lost or reduced employment compared with fathers (Alon et al. 2020). In
other words, gender ideology bias and other biases leading to extended school closures
have profound social and gendered consequences.
Our study has limitations. First, we assume that our measures for average societal gender
27

attitudes represent well the attitudes of policy-decision makers, or at least the ideation they
adjust their decision-making to. However, in this study, we are not able to trace this gender
ideology bias at the individual level. Second, we exclude an array of plausible alternative
explanations and factors which may mediate the effect of ideology on school reopening
schedules. However, in the absence of randomized treatments, our observational study
estimates the effect of gender ideology on school reopening by using causal inference
methods, and thus rests on the assumption that no omitted-variable bias is present. In other
words, we cannot be absolutely certain that other unobserved factors, which are caused by
or strongly correlated with gender ideology themselves, may drive our findings and pose a
threat to causal inference. For instance, while we can exclude that the gender ideology
effect is driven by child-rearing values or rule adherence norms, we cannot exclude that
there may be other cultural factors, which may ultimately drive both, gender ideology and
the prioritization of school reopenings. Third, we show the relevance of gender ideology
and the likely existence of a gender ideology bias for policy-decision making regarding
schools during a pandemic, yet, our findings are not necessarily extendable to nonpandemic times, which allow for more time for and less pressure in decision-making.
Finally, political leaders from different countries may have communicated with and
influenced each other during first lockdowns, which might imply that our study does not
meet the ‘stable unit treatment value assumption’ of causal inference, which implies that
there is no interference between units, i.e. they react independently from one another
(Rubin 1980; Gangl 2010).
To close, our study suggests that gender ideation plays an important role for school closure
policy-decision making in the Covid-19 pandemic. Much is at stake for societies’ futures
28

when the well-being, mental health, educational prospects of children, as well as gender
and social inequality are compromised due to shuttered schools. Despite their limitations,
our results therefore offer an important self-reflection tool for those in decision-making
positions, urging them to consider their potentially hidden gender role ideation and
assumptions on mothers’ roles before making far-reaching decisions on school closures.
Our findings also imply that countries with unequal gender role ideals more readily
implement pandemic containment measures that compromise gender equality, which likely
implies steeper losses in women’s empowerment in societies that where less gender equal
to begin with.

29

References
Abdollahi, Elaheh, Margaret Haworth-Brockman, Yoav Keynan, Joanne M Langley, and
Seyed M Moghadas. 2020. “Simulating the Effect of School Closure during
COVID-19 Outbreaks in Ontario, Canada.” BMC Medicine 18 (1): 1–8.
AGES - Österreichische Agentur für Gesundheit und Ernährungssicherheit GmbH. 2020.
“Epidemiologische Abklärung Covid 19.”
https://www.ages.at/themen/krankheitserreger/coronavirus/epidemiologischeabklaerung-covid-19/#.
Alon, Titan, Matthias Doepke, Jane Olmstead-Rumsey, and Michèle Tertilt. 2020. “This
Time It’s Different: The Role of Women’s Employment in a Pandemic Recession.”
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Arpino, Bruno, Gøsta Esping-Andersen, and Léa Pessin. 2015. “How Do Changes in
Gender Role Attitudes towards Female Employment Influence Fertility? A MacroLevel Analysis.” European Sociological Review 31 (3): 370–82.
Auger, Katherine A, Samir S Shah, Troy Richardson, David Hartley, Matthew Hall,
Amanda Warniment, Kristen Timmons, Dianna Bosse, Sarah A Ferris, and Patrick
W Brady. 2020. “Association between Statewide School Closure and COVID-19
Incidence and Mortality in the US.” Jama 324 (9): 859–70.
Battey, Heather S, David R Cox, and Michelle V Jackson. 2019. “On the Linear in
Probability Model for Binary Data.” Royal Society Open Science 6 (5): 190067.
Behörde für Schule und Berufsbildung. 2020. “Hamburgs Schülerinnen Und Schüler
Infizierten Sich Außerhalb Der Schule Offensichtlich Vier Mal so Häufig Wie in
Der Schule.” https://www.hamburg.de/coronavirus/14644922/2020-11-19-bsbcoronadaten-schulen/.
Bianchi, Suzanne M, Liana C Sayer, Melissa A Milkie, and John P Robinson. 2012.
“Housework: Who Did, Does or Will Do It, and How Much Does It Matter?” Social
Forces 91 (1): 55–63.
Blum, Sonja, and Ivana Dobrotić. 2020. “Childcare-Policy Responses in the COVID-19
Pandemic: Unpacking Cross-Country Variation.” European Societies, 1–19.
Boca, Daniela Del, Noemi Oggero, Paola Profeta, and Mariacristina Rossi. n.d.
“Women’s Work, Housework and Childcare, before and during COVID-19.” 13409.
IZA Discussion Paper. https://ssrn.com/abstract=3636638.
Boeckmann, Irene, Joya Misra, and Michelle J Budig. 2015. “Cultural and Institutional
Factors Shaping Mothers’ Employment and Working Hours in Postindustrial
Countries.” Social Forces 93 (4): 1301–33.
Brooks, Samantha K, Louise E Smith, Rebecca K Webster, Dale Weston, Lisa
Woodland, Ian Hall, and G James Rubin. 2020. “The Impact of Unplanned School
Closure on Children’s Social Contact: Rapid Evidence Review.” Eurosurveillance
25 (13): 2000188.
30

Budig, Michelle J, Joya Misra, and Irene Boeckmann. 2012. “The Motherhood Penalty in
Cross-National Perspective: The Importance of Work–Family Policies and Cultural
Attitudes.” Social Politics 19 (2): 163–93.
Calarco, Jessica McCrory, Elizabeth Anderson, Emily Meanwell, and Amelia Knopf.
2020. “‘Let’s Not Pretend It’s Fun’: How COVID-19-Related School and Childcare
Closures Are Damaging Mothers’ Well-Being.”
Campbell, John L. 2002. “Ideas, Politics, and Public Policy.” Annual Review of Sociology
28 (1): 21–38.
Carlson, Daniel L, and Jamie L Lynch. 2013. “Housework: Cause and Consequence of
Gender Ideology?” Social Science Research 42 (6): 1505–18.
Carriero, Renzo, and Lorenzo Todesco. 2018. “Housework Division and Gender
Ideology: When Do Attitudes Really Matter?” Demographic Research 39: 1039–64.
Carson, Andrea, Leah Ruppanner, and Shaun Ratcliff. 2020. “The Worsening of
Australian Women’s Experiences under COVID-19: A Crisis for Victoria’s Future.”
Charles, Maria, and David B Grusky. 2005. Occupational Ghettos: The Worldwide
Segregation of Women and Men. Vol. 200. Stanford University Press Stanford, CA.
Collins, Caitlyn, Liana Christin Landivar, Leah Ruppanner, and William J Scarborough.
2021. “COVID‐19 and the Gender Gap in Work Hours.” Gender, Work &
Organization 28 (S1): 101–12.
Craig, Lyn, and Brendan Churchill. 2021. “Dual‐earner Parent Couples’ Work and Care
during COVID‐19.” Gender, Work & Organization 28 (S1): 66–79.
Cunningham, Mick. 2005. “Gender in Cohabitation and Marriage the Influence of Gender
Ideology on Housework Allocation over the Life Course.” Journal of Family Issues
26 (8): 1037–61.
Davis, Shannon N., and Theodore N. Greenstein. 2004. “Interactive Effects of Gender
Ideology and Age at First Marriage on Women’s Marital Disruption.” Journal of
Family Issues 25 (5): 658–82. https://doi.org/10.1177/0192513X03257795.
———. 2009. “Gender Ideology: Components, Predictors, and Consequences.” Annual
Review of Sociology 35 (1): 87–105. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-soc-070308115920.
———. 2020. “Households and Work in Their Economic Contexts: State-Level
Variations in Gendered Housework Performance before, during, and after the Great
Recession.” Journal of Occupational Science 27 (3): 390–404.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14427591.2020.1741430.
Dias, Felipe A, Joseph Chance, and Arianna Buchanan. 2020. “The Motherhood Penalty
and the Fatherhood Premium in Employment during Covid-19: Evidence from the
United States.” Research in Social Stratification and Mobility 69: 100542.
Ehrhardt, J, A Ekinci, H Krehl, M Meincke, I Finci, J Klein, B Geisel, C WagnerWiening, M Eichner, and S O Brockmann. 2020. “Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in
31

Children Aged 0 to 19 Years in Childcare Facilities and Schools after Their
Reopening in May 2020, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.” Eurosurveillance 25 (36):
2001587.
Engel, Christoph. 2016. “A Random Shock Is Not Random Assignment.” Economics
Letters 145: 45–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econlet.2016.05.022.
Eriksson, K., P. Strimling, M. Gelfand, J. Wu, J. Abernathy, C. S. Akotia, A. R.
Dorrough, A. Glöckner, and P. A. M. Van Lange. 2021. “Perceptions of the
Appropriate Response to Norm Violation in 57 Societies.” Nature Communications
12 (1481).
Esping-Andersen, Gosta. 1999. Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economies. OUP
Oxford.
Facchini, Giovanni, and Anna Maria Mayda. 2008. “From Individual Attitudes towards
Migrants to Migration Policy Outcomes: Theory and Evidence.” Economic Policy
23 (56): 652–713.
Farré, Lídia, Yarine Fawaz, Libertad González, and Jennifer Graves. 2020. “How the
COVID-19 Lockdown Affected Gender Inequality in Paid and Unpaid Work in
Spain.”
Fodor, Éva, Anikó Gregor, Júlia Koltai, and Eszter Kováts. 2020. “The Impact of
COVID-19 on the Gender Division of Childcare Work in Hungary.” European
Societies 23 (Sup1): S95–110.
Fuwa, Makiko. 2004. “Macro-Level Gender Inequality and the Division of Household
Labor in 22 Countries.” American Sociological Review 69: 751–67.
https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240406900601.
Gangl, Markus. 2010. “Causal Inference in Sociological Research.” Annual Review of
Sociology 36: 21–47. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.012809.102702.
Gangl, Markus, and Andrea Ziefle. 2015. “The Making of a Good Woman: Extended
Parental Leave Entitlements and Mothers’ Work Commitment in Germany.”
American Journal of Sociology 121 (2): 511–63.
Gelfand, Michele J, Joshua Conrad Jackson, Xinyue Pan, Dana Nau, Dylan Pieper,
Emmy Denison, Munqith Dagher, Paul A M Van Lange, Chi-Yue Chiu, and Mo
Wang. 2021. “The Relationship between Cultural Tightness-Looseness and COVID19 Cases and Deaths: A Global Analysis.” Lancet Planetary Health 5196 (20): 1–
10. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30301-6.
Golberstein, Ezra, Hefei Wen, and Benjamin F Miller. 2020. “Coronavirus Disease 2019
(COVID-19) and Mental Health for Children and Adolescents.” JAMA Pediatrics
174 (9): 819–20.
Google LLC. 2020. “Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports.” 2020.
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/.
Götzinger, Florian, Begoña Santiago-García, Antoni Noguera-Julián, Miguel Lanaspa,
32

Laura Lancella, Francesca I Calò Carducci, Natalia Gabrovska, et al. 2020.
“COVID-19 in Children and Adolescents in Europe: A Multinational, Multicentre
Cohort Study.” The Lancet Child and Adolescent Health 4642 (20): 1–9.
https://doi.org/10.1016/s2352-4642(20)30177-2.
Griglio, Elena. 2020. “Parliamentary Oversight under the Covid-19 Emergency: Striving
against Executive Dominance.” The Theory and Practice of Legislation 8 (1–2): 49–
70. https://doi.org/10.1080/20508840.2020.1789935.
Grunow, Daniela, Katia Begall, and Sandra Buchler. 2018. “Gender Ideologies in
Europe: A Multidimensional Framework.” Journal of Marriage and Family 80 (1):
42–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12453.
Guth, James L, John C Green, Lyman A Kellstedt, and Corwin E Smidt. 1995. “Faith and
the Environment: Religious Beliefs and Attitudes on Environmental Policy.”
American Journal of Political Science 39 (2): 364–82.
Hank, Karsten, and Anja Steinbach. 2020. “The Virus Changed Everything, Didn’t It?
Couples’ Division of Housework and Childcare before and during the Corona
Crisis.” Journal of Family Research.
Hartney, Michael T, and Leslie K Finger. 2020. “Politics, Markets, and Pandemics:
Public Education’s Response to COVID-19.”
Heavey, Laura, Geraldine Casey, Ciara Kelly, David Kelly, and Geraldine McDarby.
2020. “No Evidence of Secondary Transmission of COVID-19 from Children
Attending School in Ireland, 2020.” Eurosurveillance 25 (21): 2000903.
Heggeness, Misty L. 2020. “Estimating the Immediate Impact of the COVID-19 Shock
on Parental Attachment to the Labor Market and the Double Bind of Mothers.”
Review of Economics of the Household 18 (4): 1053–78.
Hellevik, Ottar. 2009. “Linear versus Logistic Regression When the Dependent Variable
Is a Dichotomy.” Quality & Quantity 43 (1): 59–74.
Hernán, Miguel A, and James M Robins. 2020. “Causal Inference: What If.” Boca Raton:
Chapman & Hill/CRC 2020.
Hipp, Lena, and Mareike Bünning. 2020. “Parenthood as a Driver of Increased Gender
Inequality during COVID-19? Exploratory Evidence from Germany.” European
Societies 23 (Sup1): S658-673.
Hudde, Ansgar. 2018. “Societal Agreement on Gender Role Attitudes and Childlessness
in 38 Countries.” European Journal of Population 34 (5): 745–767.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10680-017-9459-8.
Hudde, Ansgar, and Henriette Engelhardt. 2020. “Intra-Couple (Dis)Similarity in Gender
Role Attitudes and the Transition to Parenthood in Germany.” European
Sociological Review 36 (6): 852–67. https://doi.org/10.1093/esr/jcaa024.
Humphreys, Kathryn L., Myo Thwin Myint, and Charles H. Zeanah. 2020. “Increased
Risk for Family Violence during the COVID-19 Pandemic.” Pediatrics 164 (1):
33

e20200982. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2020-0982.
Jacobsen, John Kurt. 1995. “Much Ado about Ideas: The Cognitive Factor in Economic
Policy.” World Politics 47 (2): 283–310.
Jæger, Mads Meier, and Ea Hoppe Blaabæk. 2020. “Inequality in Learning Opportunities
during COVID-19: Evidence from Library Takeout.” Research in Social
Stratification and Mobility 68 (August): 100524.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rssm.2020.100524.
Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Edited by Allen Lane. New York,
NY, US.
Kaufman, Gayle. 2000. “Do Gender Role Attitudes Matter? Family Formation and
Dissolution among Traditional and Egalitarian Men and Women.” Journal of Family
Issues 21 (1): 128–44. https://doi.org/10.1177/019251300021001006.
Khoudja, Yassine, and Fenella Fleischmann. 2018. “Gender Ideology and Women’s
Labor Market Transitions Within Couples in the Netherlands.” Journal of Marriage
and Family 80 (5): 1087–1106.
Kim, Joeun, and Nancy Luke. 2020. “Men’s Economic Dependency, Gender Ideology,
and Stress at Midlife.” Journal of Marriage and Family 82 (3): 1026–40.
Kim, Soyoung, Yae-Jean Kim, Kyong Ran Peck, and Eunok Jung. 2020. “School
Opening Delay Effect on Transmission Dynamics of Coronavirus Disease 2019 in
Korea: Based on Mathematical Modeling and Simulation Study.” Journal of Korean
Medical Science 35 (13): e143.
Knight, Carly R., and Mary C. Brinton. 2017. “One Egalitarianism or Several? Two
Decades of Gender-Role Attitude Change in Europe.” American Journal of
Sociology 122 (5): 1485–1532. https://doi.org/10.1086/689814.
Lau, Richard R, and David P Redlawsk. 2001. “Advantages and Disadvantages of
Cognitive Heuristics in Political Decision Making.” American Journal of Political
Science 45 (4): 951–71.
Lee, Benjamin, and William V Raszka. 2020. “COVID-19 Transmission and Children:
The Child Is Not to Blame.” Pediatrics 146 (2): e2020004879.
Li, Xue, Wei Xu, Marshall Dozier, Yazhou He, Amir Kirolos, and Evropi Theodoratou.
2020. “The Role of Children in Transmission of SARS-CoV-2: A Rapid Review.”
Journal of Global Health 10 (1): 011101.
Lippe, Tanja Van der, and Liset Van Dijk. 2002. “Comparative Research on Women’s
Employment.” Annual Review of Sociology 28 (1): 221–41.
Lippe, Tanja Van der, Judith De Ruijter, Esther De Ruijter, and Werner Raub. 2011.
“Persistent Inequalities in Time Use between Men and Women: A Detailed Look at
the Influence of Economic Circumstances, Policies, and Culture.” European
Sociological Review 27 (2): 164–79.
Ma, Sen, Zhengyun Sun, and Hao Xue. 2020. “Childcare Needs and Parents’ Labor
34

Supply: Evidence from the COVID-19 Lockdown.” Available at SSRN 3630842.
Macartney, Kristine, Helen E Quinn, Alexis J Pillsbury, Archana Koirala, Lucy Deng,
Noni Winkler, Anthea L Katelaris, Matthew V N O’Sullivan, Craig Dalton, and
Nicholas Wood. 2020. “Transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in Australian Educational
Settings: A Prospective Cohort Study.” The Lancet Child and Adolescent Health 4
(11): 807–16.
McGowan, Michael. 2020. “Packed Crowds and Euphoric Leaders: Australia Revels in
Covid-Free Days.” The Guardian, November 15, 2020.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2020/nov/15/packed-crowds-and-euphoricleaders-australia-revels-in-covid-free-days.
Meraviglia, Cinzia, and Aurore Dudka. 2021. “The Gendered Division of Unpaid Labor
during the Covid-19 Crisis: Did Anything Change? Evidence from Italy.”
International Journal of Sociology 51 (1): 64–75.
Mood, Carina. 2010. “Logistic Regression: Why We Cannot Do What We Think We Can
Do, and What We Can Do about It.” European Sociological Review 26 (1): 67–82.
Mooney, Christopher Z, and Mei‐Hsien Lee. 2000. “The Influence of Values on
Consensus and Contentious Morality Policy: US Death Penalty Reform, 1956–82.”
Journal of Politics 62 (1): 223–39.
Morin, Jean-Frédéric, and Jonathan Paquin. 2018. “Do Decision-Makers Matter?” In
Foreign Policy Analysis, 69–100. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-61003-0_3.
Nitsche, Natalie, and Daniela Grunow. 2016. “Housework over the Course of
Relationships: Gender Ideology, Resources, and the Division of Housework from a
Growth Curve Perspective.” Advances in Life Course Research 29: 80–94.
———. 2018. “Do Economic Resources Play a Role in Bargaining Child Care in
Couples? Parental Investment in Cases of Matching and Mismatching Gender
Ideologies in Germany.” European Societies 20: 785–815.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14616696.2018.1473626.
OECD. 2018. “Balancing Paid Work, Unpaid Work and Leisure.”
https://www.oecd.org/gender/balancing-paid-work-unpaid-work-and-leisure.htm.
Oster, Emily. 2020. “Schools Are Not Spreading Covid-19. This New Data Makes the
Case.” The Washington Post, November 20, 2020.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2020/11/20/covid-19-schools-datareopening-safety/?arc404=true.
Pessin, Léa. 2018. “Changing Gender Norms and Marriage Dynamics in the United
States.” Journal of Marriage and Family 80 (1): 25–41.
Polyakova, Maria, Geoffrey Kocks, Victoria Udalova, and Amy Finkelstein. 2020.
“Initial Economic Damage from the COVID-19 Pandemic in the United States Is
More Widespread across Ages and Geographies than Initial Mortality Impacts.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 117 (45): 27934 LP – 27939.
35

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2014279117.
Qian, Yue, and Sylvia Fuller. 2020. “COVID-19 and the Gender Employment Gap
among Parents of Young Children.” Canadian Public Policy 46 (S2): S89–101.
Rajan, Dheepa, Kira Koch, Katja Rohrer, Csongor Bajnoczki, Anna Socha, Maike Voss,
Marjolaine Nicod, Valery Ridde, and Justin Koonin. 2020. “Governance of the
Covid-19 Response: A Call for More Inclusive and Transparent Decision-Making.”
BMJ Global Health 5 (5): e002655. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2020-002655.
Ridgeway, Cecilia L, and Shelley J Correll. 2004. “Unpacking the Gender System: A
Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations.” Gender & Society
18 (4): 510–31.
Roser, Max, Hannah Ritchie, Esteban Ortiz-Ospina, and Joe Hasell. 2020. “Coronavirus
Pandemic (COVID-19).” Published Online at OurWorldInData.Org. 2020.
https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus.
Rubin, Donald B. 1980. “Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data: The Fisher
Randomization Test Comment.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 75
(371): 591–93.
Russell, Beth S, Monica Hutchison, Rachel Tambling, Alexandria J Tomkunas, Horton,
and Abagail L. 2020. “Initial Challenges of Caregiving during COVID-19:
Caregiver Burden, Mental Health, and the Parent-Child Relationship.” Child
Psychiatry & Human Development 51: 671–82.
Scarborough, William J, Ray Sin, and Barbara Risman. 2019. “Attitudes and the Stalled
Gender Revolution: Egalitarianism, Traditionalism, and Ambivalence from 1977
through 2016.” Gender & Society 33 (2): 173–200.
Schafer, Mark, and Stephen Walker. 2006. Beliefs and Leadership in World Politics:
Methods and Applications of Operational Code Analysis. Springer.
Segal, Jeffrey A, and Albert D Cover. 1989. “Ideological Values and the Votes of US
Supreme Court Justices.” The American Political Science Review 83 (2): 557–65.
Shafer, K., M. Milkie, and C. Scheibling. 2020. “The Division of Domestic Labour
before & during the COVID-19 Pandemic in Canada.”
https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/24j87.
Sjöberg, Ola. 2004. “The Role of Family Policy Institutions in Explaining Gender-Role
Attitudes: A Comparative Multilevel Analysis of Thirteen Industrialized Countries.”
Journal of European Social Policy 14 (2): 107–23.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0958928704042003.
Songer, Donald R, and Stefanie A Lindquist. 1996. “Not the Whole Story: The Impact of
Justices’ Values on Supreme Court Decision Making.” American Journal of
Political Science 40 (4): 1049–63. https://doi.org/10.2307/2111742.
Stein-Zamir, Chen, Nitza Abramson, Hanna Shoob, Erez Libal, Menachem Bitan, Tanya
Cardash, Refael Cayam, and Ian Miskin. 2020. “A Large COVID-19 Outbreak in a
36

High School 10 Days after Schools’ Reopening, Israel, May 2020.”
Eurosurveillance 25 (29): 2001352.
Stepanikova, Irena. 2012. “Racial-Ethnic Biases, Time Pressure, and Medical Decisions.”
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 53 (3): 329–43.
Sullivan, Oriel, Jonathan Gershuny, and John P Robinson. 2018. “Stalled or Uneven
Gender Revolution? A Long‐term Processual Framework for Understanding Why
Change Is Slow.” Journal of Family Theory & Review 10 (1): 263–79.
Swinkels, Marij. 2020. “How Ideas Matter in Public Policy: A Review of Concepts,
Mechanisms, and Methods.” International Review of Public Policy 2 (3): 281–316.
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.4000/irpp.1343.
Thébaud, Sarah, Sabino Kornrich, and Leah Ruppanner. 2019. “Good Housekeeping,
Great Expectations: Gender and Housework Norms.” Sociological Methods and
Research, 1–29.
Tillman, Erik R. 2013. “Authoritarianism and Citizen Attitudes towards European
Integration.” European Union Politics 14 (4): 566–89.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1465116513483182.
Tjernström, Emilia, and Thomas Tietenberg. 2008. “Do Differences in Attitudes Explain
Differences in National Climate Change Policies?” Ecological Economics 65 (2):
315–24.
Treas, Judith, and Tsuio Tai. 2016. “Gender Inequality in Housework across 20 European
Nations: Lessons from Gender Stratification Theories.” Sex Roles 74 (11–12): 495–
511.
Tversky, Amos, and Daniel Kahneman. 1974. “Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics
and Biases.” Science 185 (4157): 1124–31.
UNESCO. 2021a. “Global Tracking of COVID-19 Caused School Closures and ReOpenings - Methodological Note.”
https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/en_methogological_note__unesco_map_on_covid-19_caused_school_closures_reopening_final.pdf.
———. 2021b. “Mapping of Online Articles on Covid-19 and Gender.” 2021.
https://en.unesco.org/news/mapping-online-articles-covid-19-and-gender.
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. 2020. “World Development Indicators.”
https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.COM.DURS.
Walsh, Sebastian, Avirup Chowdhury, Simon Russell, Vickie Braithwaite, Joseph Ward,
Claire Waddington, Carol Brayne, Chris Bonell, Russell M Viner, and Oliver
Mytton. 2021. “Do School Closures Reduce Community Transmission of COVID19? A Systematic Review of Observational Studies.” MedRxiv.
Yee, Albert S. 1996. “The Causal Effects of Ideas on Policies.” International
Organization 50 (1): 69–108.
Yildirim, T Murat, and Hande Eslen‐Ziya. 2020. “The Differential Impact of COVID‐19
37

on the Work Conditions of Women and Men Academics during the Lockdown.”
Gender, Work & Organization 28 (S1): 243–49.

38

Supplementary Information: Countries Embracing Maternal Employment Have Opened Schools
Sooner after COVID-19 Lockdowns
--- Replication files will be provided online upon publication --The sections Data and Measures and Country Selection and Sample Exclusion combine the information
for main analyses and robustness checks.
Data and Measures
School status and opening. Information on school closure status is from the UNESCO database “global
monitoring of school closures caused by COVID-19” (UNESCO, 2020). Please see this methodical note
for more information: https://en.unesco.org/sites/default/files/en_methogological_note__unesco_map_on_covid-19_caused_school_closures_reopening_final.pdf
The data can be accessed here: https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse
Gender ideology (attitudes toward maternal employment). Information on attitudes toward maternal
employment are from the Changing Gender Roles IV-module of the 2012 International Social Programme
(ISSP) 2012 (ISSP Research Group, 2016).
The data can be accessed here: https://dbk.gesis.org/dbksearch/SDesc2.asp?DB=D&no=5900
Robustness checks: Alternative source for measuring gender ideology (attitudes toward maternal
employment). An alternative source of attitudinal data is the World Value Survey (WVS) / European
Value Survey (EVS) (EVS/WVS, 2020). These surveys cover more countries but have fewer suitable
attitude items. There is one item that is included in both the ISSP and the latest wave of WVS/EVS (survey
years: 2017-2020): Child suffers (“a pre-school child is likely to suffer if his or her mother works”). We
conducted a robustness checks with this single item from the WVS/WVS to test our findings on a different,
and larger set of countries (ncountries = 61; see Table S1 for the list of all countries).
The data can be accessed here: https://search.gesis.org/research_data/ZS7505
Mobility patterns as measures of social activity. To measure where societies are located on the
lockdown-normality continuum, we use aggregate mobility patterns provided by the Google Covid-19
Community Mobility Reports (Google LLC, 2020).
The data can be accessed here: https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/index.html?hl=en
Covid-19 infection cases. Information on daily new infection cases is provided by Our World in Data
(OWID) (Roser et al., 2020). OWID draws these data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention
and Control (ECDC).
The data can be accessed here: https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus ;
https://covid.ourworldindata.org/data/owid-covid-data.csv (this link starts the download)
Robustness checks: Gross domestic product (GDP) per capita. Information on gross domestic product
(GDP) per capita is also provided by Our World in Data (OWID), and is published within the Covid-19
summary table linked above (https://covid.ourworldindata.org/data/owid-covid-data.csv) (Roser et al.,
2020). OWID draws these data from the World Bank.
Robustness checks: A country’s level of digitization – Digital Adoption Index by the World Bank. A
country’s level of digitization determines feasibility of digital, remote learning. As a measure for a
country’s level of digitization, we use the World Bank’s Digital Adoption Index, a worldwide index that
1

measures countries’ digital adoption among government, businesses, and the population.
The data can be accessed here: https://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016/Digital-AdoptionIndex
Robustness checks: Health system capacity – median age and the Global Health Security Index
(GHS) by the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, the Nuclear Threat Initiative (NTI) and the
Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU). Age predicts the probability that an infected person required medical
care, therefore, a country’s median age is a proxy for the share of severe infection cases (Dowd et al.,
2020). Data on median age is provided within the data on Covid-19 cases, see above. To capture the
preparedness and capacity of a country’s health system, we use the Global Health Security Index (GHS)
and median age of the population. The GHS was specifically designed to capture a country’s preparedness
for “biological threat”, including “infectious disease outbreaks” (Cameron, Nuzzo and Bell, 2019).
The data can be accessed here: https://www.ghsindex.org/report-model/
Robustness checks: Government primary expenditures. Data on government primary expenditure – a
proxy for the size of the welfare state – is from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and is measured as
percent of Gross Domestic Product.
The data can be accessed here: https://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/prim_exp@FPP/
Robustness checks: Child-rearing values, conformity vs. individual autonomy. Data on child-rearing
values is from the World Value Survey (WVS) / European Value Survey (EVS) – see above. These
surveys include a question on characteristics that respondents find desirable in children. The index for
conformity vs. individual autonomy values is constructed following Tillman (2013). It is a score that
counts how many values are named that are rather associated with conformity and order (good manners,
obedience, and religious faith; these enter as +1 each), and how many values that are rather associated with
individual autonomy and self-expression (independence, imagination, and tolerance; these enter as -1).
These data are available for 27 of our sample countries.
[Data access: see above  “Robustness checks: Alternative source for measuring gender ideology”]
Robustness checks: Cultural tightness-looseness. Data on cultural “tightness-looseness” come from
Gelfand et al. (2021) who draw them from Eriksson et al. (2021). This measure is a proxy for the strength
of societal norms and the tolerance for people who violate them. It is an average over six items which
include the following: “There are many social norms that people are supposed to abide by in this country”,
“There are very clear expectations for how people should act in most situations”, “In this country, if
someone acts in an inappropriate way, others will strongly disapprove”, and “People in this country almost
always comply with social norms”. This measure is available for 23 of our sample countries.
The data can be accessed here: https://osf.io/zvnd3/
Robustness checks: Maternal employment. Data on maternal employment come from the OECD Family
Database (“The labour market position of families”), and refer to the employment rates of mothers whose
youngest child is aged 6-14, which corresponds to compulsory school ages in many countries (OECD, no
date). These data are available for 26 countries from our sample.
The data can be accessed here: https://www.oecd.org/social/family/database.htm
https://www.oecd.org/els/soc/LMF_1_2_Maternal_Employment.xlsx (this link starts the download)
Regression Tables: main model and two further models
Table S3 displays the linear probability regression model, which was the basis for the predicted
probabilities displayed in Fig. 4 in the main paper. The model is a panel regression model (daily
2

observations nested in countries) with random effects (random intercept) at the country level.
Note that the predictions as displayed in Fig. 2 C) in the main paper and in Fig. S1 in this appendix
are based on the day-specific average values of mobility and infection cases. As an example, the points for
day 40 after the maximum lockdown are not predicted for the grand average value of mobility and
infection cases, but rather for the average mobility and infections data on day 40 over all countries. The
displayed prediction curves are predicted for the average attitude score of the less egalitarian country group
(value of the attitude variable = -0.34; displayed in orange) and for the average attitude score of the more
egalitarian country group (value of the attitude variable = 0.36; purple).
The second model in this table compares the categories “all schools in country are open” vs. “all
schools are closed or some are open”. Fig. S1 plots the predicted probabilities based on this model. This
model confirms that egalitarian attitudes are also significantly associated with schools being fully open.
The third model uses a dependent variable that makes use of all available information on school
openings. The variable is coded zero if all schools in the country are closed, 0.5 if schools are partly open,
and one if schools are fully open. The results are consistent: e.g., at 40 days after maximum lockdown, the
predicted value of the outcome variable is 0.19 points higher for the average attitude score of the more
egalitarian country group than for the average attitude score of the less egalitarian country group.
However, as the value of this outcome variable is more difficult to interpret (it cannot be easily interpreted
as a predicted probability), we do not show these models in the main paper.
Robustness Checks
We perform a number of additional tests to examine whether our results are robust. To examine the results
from these further analyses, we compare the effect of attitudes at day 40 after the maximum lockdown in
various different models and specifications. This effect is calculated as the marginal effect (of an increase
of one standard deviation) of the standardized attitude variable at day 40 (the interaction term between
attitudes and time implies that the effect of attitudes is different at different times). All predictor variables
are standardized. All alternative resulting predictor coefficients of maternal employment ideology are
depicted in Fig. S2 below, which shows point estimates and confidence intervals. Each graphed predictor
corresponds to one alternative model, which is discussed below in the order in which the depicted
coefficients are shown, from top to bottom.
Gender ideology: single items. As an alternative measure for attitudes toward maternal employment, and
to test whether the effect might be driven by a single, specific aspect of attitudes, we test all attitudinal
items separately (the models are the same as the main model displayed in Table S3, with the exception that
the composite attitude variable is replaced by the single item). The results show that there is a significant
and substantial effect of all single items, and that the effect does not rely on one specific operationalization
of attitudes.
Sample selection and variation. The ISSP contains one item that is also part of the latest wave of
WVS/EVS. To test whether the results also hold for different samples of countries, we run a model that
includes this item from the WVS/EVS data. The result is robust: there is a substantial and significant effect
of more supportive attitudes toward maternal employment. This indicates that our results are not dependent
on the specific sample of countries.
Alternative modeling strategy. In the main analyses, we ran linear probability models (LPMs). As a
robustness check, we apply a different modelling strategy and study school openings using survival
analysis. These analyses test whether gender ideology has an effect on the school opening rate (hazard
rate). However, using survival analysis, we can only study countries that were closed at the date of
maximum lockdown (which is the case for 31 out of the 35 countries in our main sample). As Table S4
3

shows, results are robust for this alternative modeling strategy. A one-point increase in the standardized
attitudes measure reduces the predicted time to school opening by 34.3%.
Controlling for GPD. As a further robustness check, we include gross domestic product per capita (GDP)
in the model. Richer countries (=higher GDP) might be able to ease lockdown measures faster than poorer
countries because they have more resources to open safely (e.g., resources to cover the cost of hygiene and
security measures, such as the usage of face masks and disinfection); and their medical systems are more
advanced, which means that they can sustain higher infection rates without their medical systems
collapsing (e.g., they have more hospital beds and medical ventilators). Attitudes toward maternal
employment are associated with the level of economic development of a country, as captured by the GDP.
For the main models, we have chosen not to include GDP, as it might result in overadjustment
(Schisterman, Cole and Platt, 2009). For this additional model, GDP is logged and enters the regression as
the main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the square-term of days
since maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of attitudes on school openings remains robust
when we include the control for GDP (however, the standard errors increase).
Controlling for level of digitization. A country’s level of digitization determines feasibility of digital,
remote learning. Digitization and gender ideology are both closely linked to economic and social
development. In consequence, digitization and gender ideology are also correlated. Therefore, as a further
robustness check, we control for a country’s level of digitization. The aim is to rule out the possibility that
gender ideology is a significant and substantial predictor, because it captures an effect that is actually due
to the digitization. The index for digitization – the Digital Adoption Index by the World Bank – enters the
regression as the main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the squareterm of days since maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of attitudes on school openings
remains robust.
Controlling for health system capacity and age structure. Covid-19 is particularly dangerous for
countries that have low capacities in the health care system, and that have an older population. Such
countries might generally react with harsher containment measures, including school closures. To account
for this, we run a robustness check where we control for median age and a measure of health system
capacity, the Global Health Security Index (GHS). As shown in Fig. S2, the coefficient of gender ideology
remains robust. We further test the two most relevant sub-dimensions of the GHS-Index and results are
robust (results not shown here). These are the sub-dimensions: “3. Rapid Response – Rapid response to
and mitigation of the spread of an epidemic” and “4. Health System - Sufficient and robust health system
to treat the sick and protect health workers” (Cameron, Nuzzo and Bell, 2019; Ravi et al., 2020). GHSIndex and median age enter the regression as the main terms, and in interaction with days since maximum
lockdown, and with the square-term of days since maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of
attitudes on school openings remains robust when we include the controls for health system.
Controlling for government primary expenditures. Countries with higher government primary
expenditures might open schools sooner for two reasons. First, countries with a relatively large welfare
state might have a culture of prioritizing public institutions over private ones and might therefore be more
likely to prioritize school openings over, e.g., shop openings. Second, countries with a larger welfare state
might have greater resources, e.g. personnel, to make schools pandemic proof. To account for this, we run
a robustness check that controls for government primary expenditure as percent of the GDP. This measure
enters the regression as the main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the
square-term of days since maximum lockdown. The coefficient of gender role attitudes remains robust.
4

Controlling for timing of school holidays. We control for the time between maximum lockdown and the
beginning of an academic break (summer holiday in the Northern Hemisphere) because e.g. countries with
an earlier summer break (relative to the pandemic) may have opened schools sooner, to provide students
with at least some time in school before the start of summer break. This measure enters the regression as
the main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the square-term of days
since maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of attitudes on school openings remains robust
when we include the control for timing of school holiday.
Code schools during holidays as “closed”. In our main analyses, school holidays are coded as missing
(and not as “open” or “closed”). This makes sense if we take holiday periods as exogenous: the academic
calendar is neither cause nor consequence of the pandemic. However, it might be that some countries
change their preset holiday schedules in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. Both directions of change
are possible: countries could extend/advance or shorten/postpone holidays. Countries might be motivated
to extend/advance holidays, e.g. to avoid bothering with remote learning. Countries could also be
motivated to shorten/postpone holidays, e.g. to compensate for the child’s cognitive and social backlog and
potentially the parental burden caused by an earlier period of school closure. Therefore, we run a further
model with an outcome variable that codes school holidays as “school closed completely”. As Fig. S2
shows, the effect of attitudes on school openings remains robust when we code school holidays as closed.
Controlling for child-rearing values, conformity vs. individual autonomy. Societies with high support
of child-rearing values that emphasize children’s conformity over autonomy may be more inclined to open
schools later. Therefore, we control for an index that captures child-rearing values and distinguishes
between countries that put more emphasis on child qualities that are associated with conformity and order
vs. individual autonomy and self-expression. The index for child-rearing values enters the regression as the
main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the square-term of days since
maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of attitudes on school openings remains robust when we
include the control for child-rearing values.
Controlling for cultural tightness-looseness. Previous research suggests that countries with stronger
societal norms and lower tolerance for people who violate them, i.e. “tighter” societies, are less affected by
the pandemic. Because this general tightness-looseness dimensions might also be related to gender role
attitudes, we run a further robustness check that includes this measure. The index for societal “tightness”
enters the regression as the main term, and in interaction with days since maximum lockdown, and with the
square-term of days since maximum lockdown. As Fig. S2 shows, the effect of attitudes on school
openings remains robust when we include the control for cultural “tightness”.
Including maternal employment. As we stated in the main manuscript, the maternal employment rate
acts as an alternative explanatory mechanism for the timing of school reopenings. It might be the case that
the differences in the timing of school openings are driven by unbiased, rational cost-benefit
considerations; and that high maternal employment rates increase the cost of school closures. Therefore,
we compare the explanatory effect of attitudes with the explanatory effect of the employment rate of
mothers of school-aged children. The employment rate of mothers of school-aged children is generally
quite high, at 76% on average. Indeed, the maternal employment rate is below 70% in only three countries
(Turkey: 35.6%; Mexico: 50.8%; Ireland: 60.7%).
Fig. S3 compares predictions from three regression models. The first includes only attitudes (our main
regression model, as displayed in Table S3); the second includes employment rates instead of attitudes;
and the third includes both attitudes and employment rates. A comparison of the first two models shows
that the effect of attitudes is around twice as large as the effect of employment rates. The third model
shows that once attitudes are introduced, employment rates no longer have an effect, but the effect of
5

attitudes remains relatively stable and statistically significant. This result supports our main findings.
Please see our discussion in response to this line of argument in the main article.
Placebo Test Using an Alternative Outcome Variable. If it is true that gender ideology predicts school
openings only through the proposed mechanism, then gender ideology should not predict (changes in)
other containment policy measures that are not closely related to gender ideology. Either, these other
openings measures should not be correlated with gender ideology, or the control variables should capture
the spurious correlation. In other words, the association between gender ideology and school reopenings is
not spurious and driven by an unobserved third variable that is correlated with gender ideology and
predicts the general speed of lifting containment measures. To test this, we run a placebo test where we
exchange the outcome variable. We draw data from the Oxford covid-19 government response tracker
(Hale et al., 2020). This data collection contains information on government responses concerning the
following containment measures: closing of educational facilities, closings of workplaces, cancellation of
public events, limits on private gatherings, closing of public transport, orders to confine to the home.
We compute an index of all government containment responses, except for closure of educational
facilities 1. If the effect of gender ideology on school reopenings is in fact causal and runs through the
proposed mechanism of gender ideology bias, then gender ideology should predict school openings, but
not the liftings of the other containment measures.
Fig. S4 compares the coefficient of gender ideology on two different outcome variables: school
reopenings and an index of other liftings of the other containment measures. To make the coefficient of
gender ideology comparable in the two models, the alternative outcome variable is recoded to have the
same mean and standard variation as the main outcome variable. Results show that gender ideology does
not predict liftings of the other containment measures. The coefficient is statistically insignificant and close
to zero. This robustness check provides further support for the proposed causal mechanism of gender
ideology bias.

0%

Schools fully open

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%
0

20

40
60
Days since maximum lockdown

80

Fig. S1. Predictions for the schools being fully open based on a panel regression model that predicts school
openings based on gender role attitudes interacted with the number of days since maximum lockdown;
controlling for general lockdown intensity and for infection cases (model 2 from Table S2).

1

This indicator measures something slightly different than our main measure for school openings, e.g. the measure from the
Oxford covid-19 government response tracker covers not only schools, but also universities. However, additional tests show
that results are robust for this alternative measure.

6

Main model
Main attitudes measure
Single attitude items
Warm relation
Child suffers
Family suffers
Want home
Housewife
Men money
Work school
Work U6
WVS/EVS-Data
Child suffers
Controlling for GDP
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for digitization
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for health syst. - overall
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for health syst. - subdim. 3
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for health syst. - subdim. 4
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for gov. expenditures
Main attitudes measure
Contr. for timing of school holidays
Main attitudes measure
Code holidays as closed
Main attitudes measure
Controlling for child values
Main attitudes measure
Contr. for "cultural tightness"
Main attitudes measure
-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

.5

Fig. S2. Robustness checks 1.
Only attitudes
Main attitudes measure

Only employment rate
% of mothers employed; child 6-14 yrs.

Combined model
Main attitudes measure
% of mothers employed; child 6-14 yrs.
-.2

0

.2

.4

.6

Fig. S3. Robustness checks 2. Comparing the effects of attitudes and of employment rates of mothers of
schoolchildren.
7

Main outcome: school status

Placebo outcome: other containment policies

0%

Index of other containment policies

Schools at least partly open

1

20%

↑
Model-based
prediction,
with control
variables

40%

60%

.8

.6

.4

.2

80%

↑
Observed
opening rate
0

100%

0

20

40
Days since maximum lockdown

60

80

0

20

40
Days since maximum lockdown

60

80

Fig. S4. Robustness checks 3. Placebo Test.
Table S1. Overview of countries included in the main analyses and different robustness checks (“X”
represents that the country is part of that analysis).
Main
analyses1
N = 35
Country
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Bolivia
Bosnia and
Herze
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Colombia
Croatia
Czechia
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Estonia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Guatemala
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lithuania
Malaysia

X
X
X

X

Control for
Control for
Employment
WVS, item:
“cultural
child-rearing
rates of
suffer child
tightnessvalues
mothers
N = 61
looseness”
N = 27
N = 26
N = 23
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X

X
X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X

X

Main
analyses1
N = 35
Country
Mexico
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Nigeria
North
Macedonia
Norway
Pakistan
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
South Korea
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Thailand
Turkey
Ukraine
United
Kingdom
United States
Venezuela
Vietnam
Zimbabwe
Argentina

X
X

8

X
X

Control for
Control for
Employment
WVS, item:
“cultural
child-rearing
rates of
suffer child
tightnessvalues
mothers
N = 61
looseness”
N = 27
N = 26
N = 23
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X
X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X

X

Table S2. Summary table for time-varying, day-specific control variables (macro-level data). ncountries =
35; ncountries X days = 3,109.
mean

sd

range

Percent change in time spent in residential areas

12.89

7.63

-2.24;34.32

Daily new cases per million inhabitants, smoothed

22.76

30.89

0.07;202.84

histogram

1.26
0.07;5.32
Daily new cases per million inhabitants, smoothed and logged a 2.43
Notes: Logged values are computed for the number of daily new cases plus one (to avoid negative values).

Table S3. Main regression model, regression model for alternative codings of the outcome variable, table
for one robustness check.
Main model
0 = schools fully closed
1 = schools at least partly
open
-0.00430*** (-5.16)
0.0000358*** (5.84)
0.0366
(0.34)
0.0139***
(9.34)

(2)
0 = schools fully or partly
closed
1 = schools fully open
-0.00574*** (-7.66)
0.0000767*** (13.81)
-0.0887
(-1.11)
0.00830***
(6.15)

Days since max. lockdown
Days since max. lockdown2
Attitudes (higher = more egalitarian)
Days since max. lockdown # Attitudes
(higher = more egalitarian)
Days since max. lockdown2 # Attitudes
-0.000132*** (-9.32)
-0.0000230
(-1.79)
(higher = more egalitarian)
Time spent in residential areas
-0.0609***
(-18.19)
-0.0366***
(-12.14)
Time spent in residential areas2
0.000488*** (5.96)
0.000672*** (9.05)
Infection cases
-0.00113*** (-3.41)
0.000410
(1.37)
Infection cases, logged
-0.0720***
(-6.71)
-0.0462***
(-4.76)
Constant
1.382***
(20.87)
0.599***
(10.84)
Observations: countries
35
35
Observations: countries X days
3109
3109
t statistics in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Infection cases and time spent in residential areas are smoothed using linear polynomial smoothing.

(3)
0 = schools fully closed
0.5 = schools partly open
1 = schools fully open
-0.00574*** (-7.66)
0.0000767*** (13.81)
-0.0887
(-1.11)
0.00830***
(6.15)
-0.0000230

(-1.79)

-0.0366***
0.000672***
0.000410
-0.0462***
0.599***
35
3109

(-12.14)
(9.05)
(1.37)
(-4.76)
(10.84)

Table S4. Parametric survival analysis, loglogistic survival distribution. Sub-sample: all countries where
schools were closed at the date of maximum lockdown.
Survival analysis
Attitudes (higher = more egalitarian)
0.657***
(-3.52)
Time spent in residential areas
1.192
(1.24)
Time spent in residential areas2
0.996
(-0.95)
Infection cases
1.038
(1.88)
Infection cases, logged
0.545
(-1.74)
Observations: countries
31
Number of failures (= school openings)
20
Time at risk: countries X days
1756
Exponentiated coefficients displayed (e.g. the value of 0.657 for attitudes shows that an increase in the attitudes measure
reduced the predicted time to school opening 34.3%).
t statistics in parentheses. * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
Infection cases and time spent in residential areas are smoothed using linear polynomial smoothing.

9

Additional References
Cameron, E. E., Nuzzo, J. B. and Bell, J. A. (2019) Global Health Security Index. Building Collective Action and
Accountability. Available at: https://www.ghsindex.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/2019-Global-HealthSecurity-Index.pdf.
Dowd, J. B. et al. (2020) ‘Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of COVID19’, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(18), pp. 9696–9698.
Eriksson, K. et al. (2021) ‘Perceptions of the appropriate response to norm violation in 57 societies’, Nature
Communications, 12(1481).
EVS/WVS (2020) ‘Joint EVS/WVS 2017-2021 Dataset (Joint EVS/WVS)’. GESIS Datenarchiv, Köln. ZA7505
Datenfile Version 1.0.0, https://doi.org/10.4232/1.13095. doi: 10.4232/1.13095.
Gelfand, M. J. et al. (2021) ‘The relationship between cultural tightness-looseness and COVID-19 cases and
deaths: a global analysis.’, Lancet Planetary health, 5196(20), pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1016/S2542-5196(20)30301-6.
Google LLC (2020) Google COVID-19 Community Mobility Reports. Available at:
https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/ (Accessed: 28 June 2020).
Hale, T. et al. (2020) ‘Oxford covid-19 government response tracker’, Blavatnik School of Government, 25.
ISSP Research Group (2016) ‘International Social Survey Programme: Family and Changing Gender Roles IV ISSP 2012’. GESIS Data Archive, Cologne. ZA5900 Data file Version 4.0.0. doi:
https://doi.org/10.4232/1.12661.
OECD (no date) OECD Family Database - The labour market position of families. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/els/family/database.htm#labour_market (Accessed: 6 July 2020).
Ravi, S. J. et al. (2020) ‘The value proposition of the Global Health Security Index’, BMJ Global Health, 5(10),
p. e003648.
Roser, M. et al. (2020) Coronavirus Pandemic (COVID-19), Published online at OurWorldInData.org.
Available at: https://ourworldindata.org/coronavirus (Accessed: 27 June 2020).
Schisterman, E. F., Cole, S. R. and Platt, R. W. (2009) ‘Overadjustment bias and unnecessary adjustment in
epidemiologic studies’, Epidemiology, 20(4), p. 488.
Tillman, E. R. (2013) ‘Authoritarianism and citizen attitudes towards European integration’, European Union
Politics, 14(4), pp. 566–589. doi: 10.1177/1465116513483182.
UNESCO (2020) Global monitoring of school closures due to COVID-19. Available at:
https://en.unesco.org/covid19/educationresponse (Accessed: 2 July 2020).

10

