Responding to adult social work clients’ needs in Finland during the COVID-19
pandemic

Merita Jokela
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare
Minna Kivipelto
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare
Heikki Hiilamo
Finnish Institute for Health and Welfare

Corresponding author: Merita Jokela (merita.jokela@th.fi)

Abstract
Ever since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the specialized health care resources have
been the main focus of political attention in any country. However, the pandemic and
subsequent lockdowns have also had a major impact on social services. The pandemic
increased service needs among those who were already adult social work clients before the
pandemic; it also created needs among new groups of clients, while the operating
environment for service provision changed dramatically.
In our study we 1) analyse the social and economic impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on
adult social work clients in Finland, 2) examine the old and new practices in adult social
work that were used and developed during the outbreak of the pandemic and 3) assess how
well social services were able to respond to clients’ needs during the pandemic. For the
analysis we use national survey data obtained from social workers in the Social Barometer
survey collected in May 2020 (n=496) and in January 2021 (n=412).
The findings show that social work in Finland succeeded in responding to rather clear and
concrete problems such as difficulties in applying for social benefits and lack of housing
while more complicated problems, such as unmanageable debts, loneliness and mental health
problems were not adequately responded to. At the same time, social workers assessed that
people suffering from these problems were the most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

Introduction
Ever since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, the specialized health care resources have
been the main focus of political attention in any country. However, the pandemic and
subsequent lockdowns have also had a major impact on social services. The pandemic
increased service needs among those who were already clients before the pandemic and has
created needs among new groups of clients, while the operating environment for service
provision changed dramatically. In many countries, social services were closed or remained
open with limited access, and community and group activities were discontinued.
In this study we examine the situation of vulnerable population groups in adult social work
during the COVID-19 pandemic and the response to their service needs. As the pandemic
continues, the social and economic inequalities related to its consequences become more
visible. A number of studies find that the economic consequences of the pandemic have been
most severe among young people and low-income earners (Adams-Prassl et al., 2020;
Alstadsæter et al., 2020; Lee et al., 2020) and particularly female and migrant workers are
more likely to lose their jobs during the pandemic (Oreffice/Quintana-Domeque, 2020;
Platt/Warwick, 2020). In addition to job and income losses, the COVID-19 crisis has
increased the psychological burden of individuals who are trying to cope with social
distancing measures and increased care responsibilities due to the closure of schools and
kindergartens and other public spaces (Salin et al. 2020).
In terms of social vulnerabilities Finland was perhaps better prepared than many other
countries. Finland is characterised by the Nordic welfare state model, known for low levels of
poverty and high levels of well-being. The Finnish welfare state is known for its
universalistic and all-encompassing approach to welfare. Unlike many other countries around
the world, Finland did not go under total lockdown at any point of the pandemic. However,
Finland's measures were momentarily even stricter than in the comparison countries. The
restrictive measures related to social distancing during the outbreak of COVID-19 created
serious challenges for public services, including social work, to provide services for all
citizens in need of support in a situation where face-to-face services were unavailable or
strictly limited. Subsequently, Finland has transferred gradually to a “hybrid strategy”,
referring to a move from extensive restrictive measures to enhanced management of the
epidemic (Tiirinki et al., 2020).
The massive lockdown during the months of March and April decreased the number of new
infections and dampened economic activity in Finland. Unemployment and layoffs rapidly
increased. The number of applications made to the Social Insurance Institution (Kela) for
basic unemployment benefits doubled, and applications for housing allowances increased by
more than a third. (Kangas 2020). A previous report on social work response to COVID-19
highlighted the role of digital tools (remote and digital meetings with clients), disruptions of
some non-urgent social services (including voluntary sector services such as daily groups for
older people, peer support groups for people with mental health problems), loss of contact
with basic services (such as schools, school nurses, mental health services, homeless shelters)
and accumulation of service debt which will become visible after the pandemic (Tiitinen et
al., 2020).
The digitalization of services was already a widely debated issue in social work prior to the
pandemic. In many European countries, the recent trend has been to digitalise social services,
which has created challenges for social work practices as face-to-face services are reduced
and clients’ own responsibility and online practices take on a greater role (Schou & Pors,
2018). The shift towards ‘e-social work’ (see Devlieghere & Moore, 2018; Peláez et al.,

2018) is said to affect particularly the most vulnerable groups of social assistance recipients
who apart from benefits need social services and individual counselling. On the other hand,
digitalization is viewed as a positive development as it may help to get in contact with clients
residing in more remote areas. (Misha et al. 2020.)
Several studies measure the economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on families in
different countries (e.g., Power, 2020; Martin et al., 2020) and some have also focused on the
ability of social security systems to respond to families’ and individuals’ income losses (e.g.,
Dutta & Fischer, 2021; Jamaluddin et al., 2021). However, knowledge on the use of services
particularly for the most vulnerable groups of population are less studied. This study aims to
fill the gap by concentrating on how well social services were able to respond to clients’
needs during the pandemic. Social workers’ views on their clients’ situation and the
functioning of social services gives valuable information on how well the welfare state is able
to take care of its citizens who are in most need of support in times of crisis.
Using two nationwide professional surveys from spring 2020 and 2021, we analyse the
situation of social work clients in Finland and the challenges that they have faced during the
COVID-19 pandemic from perspective of social workers. Furthermore, we examine the old
and new practices in social work that were used and developed during the COVID-19
pandemic. Lastly, we study how well social workers were able to respond to their clients’
needs during the isolation measures of the pandemic.

Adult social work in Finland
Finland has a long tradition of strong egalitarian approaches. The cornerstones of the Finnish
welfare state include non-discrimination and equality, services in health, wellbeing and
education financed by means of tax revenue, high social mobility, and an active civil society.
(Prime Minister’s Office, 2019.) However, Finland does have severe social division affecting
people in many ways including poverty and prolonged need for social assistance (Grekula et
al. 2020). Inequality is also reflected in the differences in health and social inclusion between
population groups and in the percentage of young people who are not in education,
employment or training (NEET).
This study focuses on adult social work that covers clients among the working age
population. Adult social work services are organized at the local level and they are used by
around five per cent of the adult population in Finland (Finsote 2018). Adult social work
plays a key role in promoting welfare, inclusion, and participation of adults (Karjalainen et
al., 2019). The main client groups in adult social work are substance abusers and long-term
unemployed, as well as so called NEET youth, i.e. young people who are outside the labour
market or without training (Author 2012; Holte et al., 2019). Earlier research shows that a
significant proportion of clients receiving social assistance suffer from problems related to
life management and health (Vaalavuo & Bakkum 2020; Jokela & Kivipelto 2021), and one
third of them are in need of social services (Author’s own, forthcoming). The principal issues
that social workers’ clients deal with include financial problems and management, but also
issues related to mental health and ability to work (Koponen, 2020, p. 103–104). Due to the
complex life situations, clients in adult social work are generally in situations with reduced
employment opportunities.
Social work is a multidisciplinary profession, where processes must be client-driven and
based on clients’ own goals (Karjalainen et al., 2019). Most common methods in Finnish
social work are supportive discussions with clients, social assistance and delivering suitable

services for clients. However, social work methods are not clear-cut, and different
methodological interventions are mixed. (Kivipelto et al., 2013, p. 25–26.)
Since most social work clients are in need of financial support, social assistance plays a key
role in adult social work. Basic social assistance, the last-tier means-tested minimum income
benefit, is centralised and administered by the Social Insurance Institution Kela. Municipal
social services are only responsible for the discretionary elements of social assistance,
preventive and supplementary social assistance which expenditure corresponds to around 10
per cent of total social assistance costs. Basic social assistance can be provided to individuals
or families living or residing in Finland whose income and assets do not cover their essential
daily needs, such as food and medicine. (Social Insurance Institution of Finland [KELA],
2020.)

Policies to address the vulnerable groups during the COVID-19 pandemic
The comprehensive nature of the Finnish social protection system was reflected in the fact
that not many changes were made to the existing benefits schemes as a result of the COVID19 pandemic. Temporary changes were made to unemployment benefits available to
employees and self-employed persons, including increases in benefit levels and looser
eligibility criteria. For individual who we laid off temporarily, it became possible to receive
unemployment benefit while studying (Social Insurance Institution of Finland, 2020a.)
A temporary compensation due to an epidemic outbreak for basic social assistance clients
was introduced for four months (September to December 2020) to support the most
vulnerable persons and families who have incurred extra costs as a result of the restrictions
imposed due to the coronavirus epidemic. The temporary compensation (75e per person) was
granted to persons who have received basic social assistance for part of the time or for the
whole time that the restrictions due to the coronavirus epidemic have been in force (Social
Insurance Institution of Finland, 2020b). In addition, the Ministry of Social affairs and Health
gave instructions to the authorities providing social assistance to ease the process of applying
for social assistance. These included simplifying means-testing during the first months of the
crisis and removing sanctioning (Social Insurance Institution of Finland, 2020a).
Social distancing measures are particularly affecting the livelihoods of those who cannot
work remotely and thus either run the risk of exposure when going to work or lose their
income if they stay at home (see Patel et al., 2020). For many households, possibilities to
choose between work and staying at home are small if they do not even have savings to cover
one month’s income. The potential of buffering incomes within household also depends on
spouse’s income (Platt/Warwick, 2020). In Finland, the social assistance spells among young
people were longer in 2020 than in previous years and the prevalence of social assistance
receipt increased particularly among young women (Jokela et al., 2021). In addition, COVID19 restrictions in Finland seem to have negative impact on young people with weakest social
resources who are shown to suffer from loneliness more often than others (Haikkola &
Kauppinen, 2020). The consequences of the pandemic do not only affect adults but are also
reflected in children’s wellbeing. A review of 12 studies concerning the effect of the
pandemic on vulnerable children showed increased levels of distress and problems in
accessing necessary services (Nelimarkka et al., 2021). In addition, policy reports indicate
towards an increase in domestic violence during the pandemic.
A study based on diary entries of 33 Finnish frontline social workers between March and
May 2020 showed that although social workers were unprepared for the situation, they

adapted to it quickly and adopted adequate ways of working (Harrikari et al.2021). A report
by Tiitinen et al. (2020) describing the situation as of July 2020 in Finland noted that social
workers were worried about older people in general and particularly those in care homes.
According to the report the daily groups for older people and other daily services had been
closed, and consequently, the relatives caring for them had no opportunities to rest and/or
take time off. The report by Tiitinen et al. (2020) pointed out that the social workers
experienced obstacles in approaching and supporting communities and clients/service users
resulting from the fact that during the lockdown the basic services such as schools, school
nurses, mental health services, homeless shelters were closed. The closure of services also
complicated the information flow to social services regarding the people in need of help.

Data and methods
For the analysis we use national survey data obtained from social workers in the Social
Barometer survey collected in May 2020 and January 2021. Social Barometer is an annual
survey managed by SOSTE (Finnish Federation for Social Affairs and Health) that has been
collected since 1991 from public welfare institutions, such as employment agencies, social
services and the Social Insurance Institution of Finland. The respondents include both
managers and street-level workers. The survey covers topics related to the wellbeing of
citizens, functioning of the health and welfare services and the position of the most
vulnerable citizens in welfare services. For the purpose of this study we focus on social
workers’ responses that were collected through municipalities and local government joint
services areas. They forwarded the questionnaire to social workers who then replied to the
questionnaire online. The total sample used here covers 496 respondents in 2020 and 412
respondents in the 2021 survey round. In the first survey the respondents were asked to
reflect on the situation during the spring of 2020 while in the second rounds they were asked
to reflect on the situation during a period from September to December 2020. The survey
includes both structured and open-ended questions. In this study, we primarily use the
responses of the structured questions. Some of the structured questions include an option for
the respondent to specify their response with their own words and we use these open-ended
responses to complement our analysis.
Since there is no information about the number of social workers to whom the questionnaire
was sent, it is not possible to calculate the response rate. However, at least one response was
given in 64 percent of municipalities and local government joint service areas in May 2020.
The corresponding figure in January was 53 percent.
The background characteristics of the respondents are presented in table 1. Most of the
respondents hold a Master’s degree in social work. The education level among the
respondents in May was a bit higher than in January (share of licenced social workers 75%
vs. 65%). In both data sets the proportion of workers with over five years of work experience
was 36 per cent.

Table 1. Education and work experience of the respondents, %

Highest degree obtained
Licenced social worker (Master's degree)
Other university degree
Bachelor/Master of Social Services (University of applied
sciences)
Other bachelor/ Master degree from university of applied
sciences
Secondary education
Other degree(s)
Work experience in current job in years
Less than a year
1 – 5 years
5 – 10 years
10 – 20
Over 20 years

2020
(n=496)

2021
(n=412)

75
7
15

65
6
23

-

4

3

1
1

23
41
17
14
5

16
48
16
13
7

Results
Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on social work clients
During the first lockdown period in the spring 2020, according to social workers the key
problem among clients was loneliness, which was highlighted by up to 45 percent of
respondents (Figure 1). Respondents were also concerned about problems clients were
experiencing in managing their finances and lives. Once most of the restrictions were lifted in
the summer of 2020 most of the social work practices resumed. At the end of 2020 social
workers were mostly worried about clients’ mental health. As many as 48 percent of workers
mentioned this as one of the most worrying things among their clients. More importantly,
social workers’ concern about clients’ mental health increased 23 percentage points from
spring 2020 to autumn 2020. Also the concerns for securing housing and problems associated
with substance abuse were more pronounced in the fall of 2020.
In both surveys the social workers were worried about clients’ financial problems and debts.
Altogether 42 percent of workers mentioned financial problems and debts among the most
worrying things among their clients in the spring. The situation didn’t change for the better in
the fall, when 42 percent of social workers mentioned this as one of the biggest problems
among their clients. Also, clients’ life management and problems in everyday life as well as
problems with alcohol were mentioned. Social workers described the situation in open-ended
questions as follows:

Unemployed job seekers needed help with benefit applications, a personal contact. They do not
get enough guidance and advice online or over the phone.

Clients do not have access to Kela, it is difficult to understand advice on the phone. It is difficult
especially for immigrants who do not speak Finnish.

Figure 1. Clients' problems according to social workers in March-May 2020 and SeptemberDecember 2020, %, (n=377-440)

In the spring, social workers were concerned about clients’ lack of social contacts; 45 percent
of social workers mentioned these worries among the highest concerns. At the end of the year
2020, workers’ concern about clients’ loneliness decreased 14 percentage points. Also
concerns about getting the COVID19-virus, coping as a parent, lack of hobbies and activities
and threat of unemployment and lay-offs decreased from spring 2020 to autumn 2020.
Comparing the results from the spring and fall of 2020 shows that the COVID-19 pandemic
influenced mostly social work clients’ lives in terms of financial situation, loneliness, life
management and mental health problems. The results point to an aggravation of problems in
these areas.

Social work practices during the COVID19-pandemic
Before the COVID19 pandemic on-site and outreach work were not widely used in Finland.
Resources and organizational practices were often cited as reasons for not using them.
(Author, 2016.) During the corona crisis, a change in practices became imminent when faceto-face interaction had to be discontinued. In the spring 2020, clients were met during
outdoor activities and walks. Also home visits and outreach work was done more than usual.
In the spring 2020 social workers felt that the development of new working practices was
very positive. The need for changes brought by the pandemic introduced a view that work
methods could and had to be changed to correspond with the circumstances. The situation in
a way empowered social workers and gave them a mandate to work differently.
In autumn 2020, 66 percent of social workers reported that contacting the clients by phone
had increased (a lot or quite a lot) from spring 2020 to autumn 2020. 46 percent of them
evaluated that contacting the client by video applications, such as Teams or WhatsApp,
increased a lot or quite a lot. Also, information, advice and guidance increased a lot or quite a
lot. Use of preventive or supportive social assistance increased, as well as helping the clients

with applying for basic social assistance. However, the response to the new practices varied
among the clients:
Some do not have the equipment or skills. Some do not find remote connections appropriate for
several reasons. Building trust requires more when you from remotely. On the other hand, some are able to
interact better than face to face.

Figure 2. Increased use of social work practices in September-December, compared to spring
2020, %, (n=372)

While practices for remote services were developed fast, contacting clients outside the office
did not increase between spring 2020 and autumn 2020. For instance, only 13 percent of
social workers brought up that outdoor meetings with clients increased significantly since
spring. In addition, outreach work, dismount social work and outdoor group activities
increased only little compared to spring.

Responding to clients’ needs in social work
In September to December 2020, social workers were able to respond well to concrete
service-needs such as food-aid, benefits or subsidies or clients with general life management
problems (Figure 3). Other issues that were responded to fairly well according to social
workers included families’ needs related to preventive or rehabilitative child welfare and
shopping assistance.
Obviously, social workers were not able to respond to all client groups’ service needs
satisfyingly during the COVID-19 pandemic. According to the results, social work was least
capable to respond to service needs of clients waiting for access to mental health services,
clients who had weak functional capacity and those lacking the ability to use remote or digital
services. The situation was not better for the lonely or people living in isolation due to the

COVID19. Also, service needs of substance and drug users as well as the indebted were met
weakly or fairly weakly.

Figure 3. Responding to the service-needs of different client-groups, according to the social
workers, September-December2020 (%) (N=379).

The respondents were asked in a separate question about the ability of the Social Insurance
Institution to respond to service need of clients in need of basic social assistance during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Around 40 per cent of social workers viewed the response to service
need as positive while around one fifth rated the response to service need as negative. The
open-ended responses of social workers highlighted the problems faced by the most
vulnerable groups who do not possess the skills to use digital devices or do not have access to
them.
[Problems most severe] among those who have nothing. Especially since they cannot take care
of their matters online. This client group will always need face to face service.

These population groups include the elderly, migrants with limited language skills and
persons with mental problems. The social workers also reported that public services are
increasingly replaced through services provided by faith-based organizations and NGO’s.
Their role was estimated to have grown considerably during the pandemic. Much of the nonstatutory support focused on offering practical help, such as food assistance, as well as
providing counselling and psychological and social support.
Comparing social workers’ assessment of those mostly affected by the crisis and the success
in responding to service need of different client groups, it appears that social work failed to
meet the service needs among those who have suffered most from the crisis. These groups
include people with financial needs and debts, people suffering from loneliness and people
with mental health problems. The survey results highlight that during the COVID-19 crisis
the Finnish welfare system was able to support people with clear and simple problems, such
as those requiring food aid or housing and benefits. On the other hand, for those with more
complex issues, help has often not been as easily accessible. It seems that Finnish social

security system is failing at what should be the core of social work: helping those most in
need.

Discussion
The COVID-19 crisis acted as a “stress test” for the Finnish welfare state (Kangas, 2020). If
the current trend continues Finland may come out as one of the best performers of COVID-19
crises in Europe in terms of both mortality and economic fall-out. The preliminary result of
the stress test was that Finnish social security system performed well in buffering the
negative economic effects of the pandemic for the general population (Greve et al., 2020;
Author’s own, forthcoming) but marginalized groups have been disproportionally affected by
the crises. This is most visible among social work clients. Aligning with earlier research (e.g.
Harrikari et al. 2021) we show that social work in Finland responded quickly to difficult
problems and situations risen from changing needs of clients. This study demonstrated that in
social work succeeded in meeting with rather clear and concrete problems such as difficulties
in applying for social benefits and lack of housing. However, more complicated problems,
such as clients’ financial situation and unmanageable debts, loneliness and mental health
problems were not adequately responded to. At the same time, social workers assessed that
people suffering from these problems were the most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
There are several explanations for the worrisome development. First, in Finland as in many
other countries, social work methods were significantly affected by the lockdown measures.
Self-directed digital services were strongly introduced in social- and health care. While the
digital services seem to have worked well for some clients, some of the most vulnerable
people slipped through the safety net as they were not able to use the remote and digital
services offered.
Second, clients had to struggle and to be patient while waiting for access to services,
especially to the mental health services. In Finland, there is no guarantee for a personal
meeting with a social worker. In basic mental health services, records without meeting a
client have increased sharply in the end of 2020 (THL, Avohilmo). In December 2020 an
average of 30 percent of adult psychiatry visits took place as remote visits (Suvisaari et al.,
2021). As noticed, lack of personal contacts and face-to-face –meetings caused hardship for
those who suffered mental health problems (Author 2021). The new social work methods
adopted in 2020 will thus be useful also after the epidemic.
Earlier research has demonstrated that access to social services depends on the client’s own
activity that might be weak (Blomgren et al., 2016). Borrowing Amartya Sen’s (2001)
phrasing, this increased unfreedom leaves vulnerable persons with little choices and little
opportunities for exercising their reasoned agency during the COVID-19 crisis. As proposed
by European Social Services (2021) public social services play a vital role in the recovery
from theCOVID-19 pandemic, through supporting the employment, health, and social
inclusion of the most vulnerable in local communities across Europe. Therefore, more
transparent, expedient, and easily accessible social services are needed. Gaining and
maintaining clients’ trust is also vital for the success of these services (Author, 2016). It is
also worth considering, if it is appropriate that legislated public services are replaced through
services provided through NGO’s.
Surveying social workers during the first year of the pandemic offered an opportunity to
quickly collect information on the changes in clients’ needs and new ways to respond to
them. Unfortunately we were not able to collect data from the same individuals and we

cannot therefore study changes in perceptions on individual level. As for the results
concerning the service needs of the clients it is necessary to note that we had no information
on how the clients themselves experienced the situation. It is possible that social work clients
have encountered problems and experienced service needs which have not been recognized
by the social workers. In interpreting our results it is also important to acknowledge that they
reflect the situation in 2020. In March 2021 Finland entered another period of lockdown. The
total social, mental and economical costs of COVID-19 in Finland are still unknown.

References
Blomgren, S., Karjalainen, J., Karjalainen, P., Kivipelto, M., Saikkonen, P., & Saikku, P.
(2016) Sosiaalityö, palvelut ja etuudet muutoksessa. Raportti 4/2016. Helsinki: Terveyden ja
hyvinvoinnin laitos. https://www.julkari.fi/handle/10024/130515
Devlieghere, J., & Roose, R. (2018). Electronic Information Systems: In search of responsive
social work. Journal of Social Work, 18(6), 650–665.
Dutta, A. & Fischer, H. W. (2021). The local governance of COVID-19: Disease prevention
and social security in rural India. World Development, 2021(138), 1–11.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2020.105234
Eronen, A., Hiilamo, H., Ilmarinen, K., Jokela, M., Karjalainen, P., Karvonen, S., Kivipelto,
M., Koponen, E., Leemann, L., Londén, P. & Saikku, P. (2020). Sosiaalibarometri 2020.
Helsinki: SOSTE ry.
Eronen, A., Hiilamo, H., Ilmarinen, K., Jokela, M., Karjalainen, P., Karvonen, S., Kivipelto,
M., Knop, J. & Londén, P. (2021). Sosiaalibarometri 2021. Helsinki: SOSTE ry.
European Social Network (2021). Investing in Social Services, Investing in Europe. Social
Services Essential for Europe’s Recovery. https://www.esn-eu.org/sites/default/files/202011/ESN_European%20Semester%202021_Interactive_spread_compressed.pdf
Finnish Institute for health and Welfare (2020). Far-reaching impacts of the COVID-19
epidemic on people’s well-being and social and health care services.
https://thl.fi/en/web/thlfi-en/-/far-reaching-impacts-of-the-covid-19-epidemic-on-people-swell-being-and-social-and-health-care-services
Grekula, E. M., Järvinen, A. & Saarinen, E. (eds) (2020). Poverty Watch. Poverty Watch
Report Finland 2020. EAPN-Fin 2020. http://www.eapn.fi/wpcontent/uploads/2020/10/EAPN-FIN-PowertyWatch-Poverty-Watch-Report-Finland2020.pdf
Greve, B., Blomquist, P., Hvinden, B., van Gerven, M. (2020). Nordic welfare states—still
standing or changed by the COVID‐ 19 crisis? Social Policy Administration, 2020(55), 295–
311. https://doi.org/10.1111/spol.12675
Haikkola, L. & Kauppinen, E. (2020). Nuorten korona-ajan yksinäisyys ja näkemykset
koronan vaikutuksista tulevaisuuteen. Poikkeusolot – nuorten arki koronan keskellä kirjoitussarja. Helsinki: Nuorisotutkimusseura.
https://www.nuorisotutkimusseura.fi/nakokulma66
Harrikari, T., Romakkaniemi, M., Tiitinen, L. & Ovaskainen, S. (2021). Pandemic and Social
Work: Exploring Finnish Social Workers’ Experiences through a SWOT Analysis, The
British Journal of Social Work, 2021, 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1093/bjsw/bcab052

Helliwell, J. F., Layard, R., Sachs, J. & De Neve, J. E. (Eds.), (2021). World Happiness
Report 2021. New York: Sustainable Development Solutions Network.
Holte, B. H., Swart, I. & Hiilamo, H. (2018). “The NEET Concept in Comparative Youth
Research: The Nordic Countries and South Africa”. Journal of Youth Studies, 22(2), 256–
272. https://doi.org/10.1080/13676261.2018.1496406
Jamaluddin, S. Z., Wah, F. Y. & Taher, M. A. (2021). Covid-19: a preliminary assessment on
the social security framework for an aged Malaysia. Commonwealth Law Bulletin, 47(1), 55–
71. https://doi.org/10.1080/03050718.2020.1834421
Jokela, Merita, Korpela, Tuija, Kivipelto, Minna, Jauhiainen, Signe (2021) Toimeentulotuen
saajamäärät kasvoivat vähän : koronaepidemia toi esiin järjestelmän joustavuuden.
Tutkimuksesta tiiviisti 4/2021. Helsinki: THL
Kangas, O. (2020). Finland: Policy measures in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. ESPN
Flash Report 2020/59.
https://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?advSearchKey=ESPNFlash&mode=advan
cedSubmit&catId=22&policyArea=0&policyAreaSub=0&country=0&year=0
Karjalainen, P. (2016). Sosiaalityön uusi asento: paikka, rooli ja orientaatio. In S. Blomgren,
J. Karjalainen, P. Karjalainen, M. Kivipelto, P. Saikkonen & P. Saikku. (Eds.), Sosiaalityö,
palvelut ja etuudet muutoksessa. Raportti 4/2016 (pp. 119–136). Helsinki: Terveyden ja
hyvinvoinnin laitos. https://www.julkari.fi/handle/10024/130515
Karjalainen, P., Metteri, A., Strömberg-Jakka, M. (2019). TIEKARTTA 2030. Aikuisten
parissa tehtävän sosiaalityön tulevaisuusselvitys. Sosiaali- ja terveysministeriön raportteja ja
muistioita 41/2019. Helsinki: Sosiaali- ja terveysministeriö.
Martin, A., Markhvida, M., Hallegatte, S. & Walsh, B. (2020). Socio-Economic Impacts of
COVID-19 on Household Consumption and Poverty. Economics of Disasters and Climate
Change, 2020(4), 453–479. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs41885-020-000703
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (2020a). Guidelines for Corona.
https://stm.fi/en/guidelines-for-the-prevention-of-coronavirus
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health (2020b). Preparedness for the COVID-19 disease.
https://stm.fi/en/coronavirus-preparedness
Mishna, F., Milne, E., Bogo, M. & Pereira, L. F. (2020). Responding to COVID-19: New
Trends in Social Workers' Use of Information and Communication Technology. Clinical
Social Work Journal, Published online 24 November, 2020.
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10615-020-00780-x
Moisala, J., Kivipelto, M. & Karjalainen, P. (2021). Etäpalveluille tarvitaan valtakunnalliset
kriteerit. Näkökulma. Lääkärilehti, 76(12–13), 776–777.
Nelimarkka, S., Maijala, S., Eriksson, P. & Heino, T. (2021). Koronapandemian vaikutuksia
lastensuojelun palveluihin ja asiakkaiden hyvinvointiin vuonna 2020. Työpaperi 5/2021.
Helsinki: Terveyden ja hyvinvoinnin laitos. http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-343-623-7
Pettinicchio, D., Maroto, M., Chai, L. & Lukk, M. (2021). Findings from an online survey on
the mental health effects of COVID-19 on Canadians with disabilities and chronic health
conditions. Disability and Health Journal, Available online 24 February 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dhjo.2021.101085

Oreffice, S. & Quintana-Domeque, C. (2020). Gender Inequality in Covid-19 Times:
Evidence from UK Prolific Participants. IZA Discussion Paper No. 13463.
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3648803
Patel, J. A., Nielsen; F., Badiani, A. A., Assi, S., Unadkat, V. A., Patel, B., Ravindrane, R. &
Wardle, H. (2020). Poverty, inequality and COVID-19: the forgotten vulnerable. Public
health, (2020)183, 110–111.
Platt, L. & Warwick, R. (2020). Are some ethnic groups more vulnerable to COVID-19 than
others? The Institute for Fiscal Studies, Nuffield Foundation.
http://www.ifs.org.uk/inequality/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Are-some-ethnic-groups-morevulnerable-to-COVID-19-than-others-V2-IFS-Briefing-Note.pdf (Last accessed 22 February
2021)
Power, K. (2020). The COVID-19 pandemic has increased the care burden of women and
families. Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy,16(1), 67–73.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15487733.2020.1776561
Prime Minister’s Office (2020). PMO’s Corona Management was Strengthen.
https://valtioneuvosto.fi/en/-/10616/valtioneuvoston-koronajohtamista-vahvistett iin
Salin M, Kaittila A, Hakovirta M, Anttila M. Family Coping Strategies During Finland’s
COVID-19 Lockdown. Sustainability. 2020; 12(21):9133.
Sen, A. (2001). Development as Freedom. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Social Insurance Institution of Finland (2020a). Unemployment benefit in the coronavirus
situation. https://www.kela.fi/web/en/unemployment-benefit-corona
Social Insurance Institution of Finland (2020b). Two temporary benefits available from Kela
amid the coronavirus outbreak. https://www.kela.fi/web/en/press-releases-about-thecoronavirus-situation/-/asset_publisher/u3rOjDyugFv4/content/two-temporary-benefitsavailable-from-kela-amid-the-coronavirus-outbreak
Social Insurance Institution of Finland (2020c). Social assistance in the coronavirus
situation. https://www.kela.fi/web/en/social-assistance-in-the-coronavirus-situation
Suvisaari, J., Kärkkäinen, J. &Vorma, H. (2021). Koronaepidemialla vaikutuksia
psykiatriseen erikoissairaanhoitoon, mutta vaikutuksissa alueellisia eroja. In:
Koronaepidemian vaikutukset hyvinvointiin, palveluihin ja talouteen. THL:n
seurantaraportti, viikot 2–3/2021, 27.1.2021, 17–18.
THL, Avohilmo (2021). Perusterveydenhuollon käynnit ja käyntisyyt. Terveyden ja
hyvinvoinnin laitos. https://thl.fi/fi/tilastot-ja-data/ohjeet-tietojentoimittamiseen/perusterveydenhuollon-avohoidon-hoitoilmoitus-avohilmo/raportit
Tiirinki, H., Tynkkynen, L. K., Sovala, M., Atkins, S., Koivusalo, M., Rautiainen, P.,
Jormanainen, V. & Keskimäki, I. (2020). COVID-19 pandemic in Finland - Preliminary
analysis on health system response and economic consequences. Health Policy and
Technology, 2020(9), 649–662. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hlpt.2020.08.005
Tiitinen, L., Ovaskainen, S., Harrikari, T., & Romakkaniemi, M. (2020). COVID-19 and
social work: A collection of country reports: Finland. In L. Dominelli, T. Harrikari, J.
Mooney, V. Leskošek, & E. Kennedy Tsunoda (Eds.), COVID-19 and Social Work: A
Collection of Country Reports (p. 40–44). The International Association of Schools of Social

Work. https://www.iassw-aiets.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/IASSW-COVID-19-andSocial-Work-Country-Reports-Final-1.pdf

