Urban nature in a time of crisis: recreational use of green space
increases during the COVID-19 outbreak in Oslo, Norway
Zander S. VENTER1; David N. BARTON1; Vegard GUNDERSEN1; Helene FIGARI1; Megan
NOWELL1
1

Terrestrial Ecology Section, Norwegian Institute for Nature Research - NINA, 0349 Oslo,
Norway

Key words:
Coronavirus; mobility; ecosystem service; aesthetic value; STRAVA; open space; environmental
green justice

Abstract
The global response to the COVID-19 pandemic has brought with it significant changes to human
mobility patterns. We aimed to explore how social distancing measures affected recreational use
of urban green space during the partial lockdown in Oslo, Norway. Mobile tracking data from
thousands of recreationists were used to analyze high resolution spatio-temporal changes in
activity. We estimated that outdoor recreational activity increased by 291% during lockdown
relative to a 3-yr average for the same days. This increase was significantly greater than expected
after adjusting for the prevailing weather and time of year and equates to approx. 86,000 extra
activities per day over the municipality (population of 690,000). Both pedestrians (walking,
running, hiking) and cyclists appeared to intensify activity on trails with higher greenviews and
tree canopy cover, but with differences in response modulated by trail accessibility and social
distancing preferences. The magnitude of increase was positively associated with trail
remoteness, suggesting that green spaces facilitated social distancing and indirectly mitigated the
spread of COVID-19. Finally, pedestrian activity increased in city parks, peri-urban forest, as well
as protected areas, highlighting the importance of access to green open spaces that are
interwoven within the built-up matrix. These findings shed new light on the value of urban nature
as resilience infrastructure during a time of crisis. The current pandemic also reveals some
important dilemmas we might face regarding green justice on the path towards urban planning for
future sustainable cities.

Introduction
The 2020 novel coronavirus pandemic has caused unprecedented changes to mobility, economic
activity and the associated environmental footprint (Muhammad et al 2020, Venter et al 2020a).
This is because, during lockdowns, governments have enacted key policy measures to reduce
the transmission of SAR-CoV-2 and protect public health. A primary measure has been the
curtailing of transport and public mobility (Musselwhite et al 2020), resulting in half of the world’s
population under some form of confinement (Sanford 2020). In some countries, including Norway,
lockdowns have been less severe and citizens have been allowed to spend time outdoors while
adhering to social distancing advisories. We use this natural experiment to explore recreational
use frequency and spatiotemporal patterns in relation to environmental factors in an urban setting.
This raises the question of whether urban green space, including publicly accessible street trees,
parks, natural vegetation and peri-urban forests, played a significant role in the way citizens
adapted to the pandemic containment measures, perhaps spending more time recreating in green
spaces. Researchers have already addressed the potential for urban nature to enhance resilience
of urban populations during the pandemic (Samuelsson et al 2020) to provide an ‘insurance value’
by increasing resilience of cities (Gómez-Baggethun and Barton 2013). However there is little
empirical evidence of the concepts of insurance value or resilience capacity, and specifically in
the case of this paper, the conditions for absorbing large and abrupt changes in demand for
recreational activity within green versus grey urban space, and the implications for public mental
and physical health.
Recreational activity has substantial health benefits (Kahlmeier et al 2014). For example, walking
has been shown to reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease by around 30% and all-cause
mortality by 20% (Hamer and Chida 2008).In Norway, as elsewhere, citizens tend to ascribe great
meaning and well-being to everyday walking in green environments such as parks and forests
(Rybråten et al 2019, Gundersen and Frivold 2008). Numerous research studies have also shown
that to recreate in green environments is more important for mental health benefits than recreation
in urban grey areas (Fong et al 2018). Therefore, understanding the role of green space for
recreational use is informative for any plans to achieve the sustainable development goals (SDG)
3 and 11 (good health and well-being; and sustainable and resilient cities). Furthermore, exploring
the change in use of public space is important given that the COVID-19 pandemic is expected to
bring about substantial changes to future design, use, and perceptions of public space (HoneyRoses et al 2020). In the planning of green spaces for urban resilience, equitable availability and
accessibility also need further consideration (Suárez et al 2020, Jennings et al 2012).
We leveraged mobile tracking data and Google mobility data from thousands of individuals in the
capital city of Oslo, Norway, to explore how COVID-19 containment measures affected
recreational use of green spaces. We hypothesised that (1) recreational use of green space
increased during lockdown relative to a 3-yr baseline average (2017-2019) for the same days of
the year. Secondly, we hypothesised that (2) the lockdown effect was significant after accounting
for the potential confounding effect of local weather variations. Thirdly, we hypothesised that (3)
lockdown-associated increases in recreational activity were greater over trail segments with

greater tree cover and vegetation greenness values due to preferences for greenviews. Finally,
we hypothesized that (4) increases in recreational use were greater on trails that are more remote
because of social distancing advisories. The policy implication of these hypotheses is that
accessible large open green space in combination with adherence to social distancing in the
population mitigates the negative health effects of physical mobility restrictions, while reducing
risk of disease transmission.

Methods and data
Study area
Oslo municipality is located in South-Eastern Norway on the Oslo Fjord (59′55N, 10′45E) with a
population of 693,491 which accounts for approximately 13% of the entire population of Norway
(Statistikkbanken 2018). For purposes of analysis the study area is subdivided into several
commonly used land cover/use classes (Fig. 1). The built zone (147 km2) includes virtually all the
city's residents, commerce and industry, and contains 47% green space cover, with a minimum
of 60 m2 of regulated green space (city parks in built zone Fig. 1) per inhabitant (Oslo kommune
2018).
Oslo’s
street
level
greenview
index
is
28,8%
(Treepedia;
http://senseable.mit.edu/treepedia/cities/oslo). The built zone is surrounded by boreal conifer
forest (frequently referred to as “Marka”) that covers 63% of the Oslo municipality area, and the
Norwegian principle of common access (allemannsretten) grants anyone the right, within certain
restrictions, to move freely across private and public uncultivated land (Outdoor Recreation Act,
1957). This area consists of a range of opportunities for recreation along an urban-wilderness
continuum (Gundersen et al 2015).
Recreational infrastructure in the more urban end of the recreational spectrum consists of 1400
km of forest roads and 2100 km of marked trails (Oslo Kommune 2018) . Oslo followed national
COVID-19 containment measures introduced on March 12th, including closing of kindergartens
and schools, indoor fitness and sports facilities, all food, drink and cultural venues; advisories
against travel to workplaces and use of public transport except for essential employment;
prohibition of the use of second homes and cabins outside home municipality and advisories to
confine recreation to home municipality; 2 m social distancing, group size limits of 5 people; and
quarantine for all international arrivals and suspected infected individuals. Notably for the topic of
this paper, indoor exercise facilities have been closed while people in quarantine have been
allowed to recreate outdoors with no range limitation apart from staying within home municipality.
The study period 12-31 March coincides with the period from when lockdown measures were
announced to the peak in hospital intensive care admissions in Oslo (Fig. S1).

STRAVA data processing
STRAVA has a substantial user base in Norway with 175,000 individual runners and 95,000
individual cyclists recording a total of 5.2 million trips over the past year. We purchased pedestrian
(walking/hiking/running) and ride (cycling) tracking data from STRAVA to assess recreational use

within Oslo municipality between 2016 and 2020 (Fig. S2). Activity statistics are reported in hourly
intervals per street/trail segment defined by an OpenStreetMap base layer. We used total activity
counts per time interval regardless of direction of travel as a response variable in our analysis.
The Oslo area contains over 7000 km of streets and trails utilized for recreation as detected by
STRAVA user tracks (Fig. 1).
To maintain privacy and anonymity, STRAVA only registers an activity on a given trail segment if
there are more than three users within a specified time period. Further, STRAVA users only reflect
a sample of the total population engaged in recreational activity. Therefore by default one is limited
to calculating relative changes in activity levels. To convert relative estimates into absolute activity
numbers for Oslo municipality, we calibrated the STRAVA data using two established pedestrian
and bicycle counters located at strategic points in the municipality. These counters (EcoCounter
with two-way pyroelectric sensor) have been installed and managed for high counter accuracy
following standard procedures (Andersen et al 2014). We first extracted activity data for the
street/trail geometries that intersected the location of the established counters. We then
performed a linear regression of monthly, weekly and daily counter totals on STRAVA activity
counts (Fig. S3). The monthly and weekly regression coefficients were used to establish
correction functions to estimate actual activity counts for all remaining trail segments over Oslo.
Finally, we corrected for the positive long-term trend in STRAVA data associated with its growing
user base by detrending the time series relative to the long-term annual average (Fig. S4).
While activity numbers per trail segment are useful for comparing location-specific trends in
recreational use, they cannot be simply translated into city-level counts. To estimate the total
count of recreational activity over Oslo municipality per time period (A), we used the function:

Where i is a single street segment, a is the calibrated activity count, l is the length of the segment
in kilometers, and f is the activity constant. We defined f as the average distance traveled per
recreational activity for pedestrian and cycling separately. Average distances were calculated
from origin-destination data provided by STRAVA. These data are only made available as monthly
aggregates and report total activity counts between unique pairs of origin-destination grid cells.
Grid cells are defined by 350m hexagons covering the study area. We calculated the average of
the travel distance between origin-destination pairs to derive the activity constant f for pedestrian
(4.4 km) and cycling (12.3 km) activity.

Google mobility and search data
To supplement and corroborate the STRAVA mobility data, we downloaded Google mobility
trends over the lockdown period (https://www.google.com/covid19/mobility/). These anonymized
data have been made public during the COVID-19 pandemic to support research and policy. They
report percentage deviations in visits and length of stay at various places relative to a median
day-of-month equivalent for January 2020. Secondly, we collected Google search query data from
Google Trends (https://trends.google.com/trends/) to assess the change in search activity for

keywords including forest (“Marka”), trip/hike (“tur”) and outdoors (“utendørs”), as proxy indicators
of outdoor recreation intention.

Identifying the COVID-19 effect
To identify the direct effect of COVID-19 mitigation actions on recreational activity, we measured
the change in average activity during lockdown dates (12 - 31 March 2020) relative to the same
dates during the previous three years (12 - 31 March 2017-2019). The 2017-2019 reference
period is hereafter referred to as the baseline. The calibrated hourly recreational activity data were
used to calculate these relative differences at both the street segment and the municipality level.
While comparing activity levels during lockdown dates relative to baseline averages accounts for
the effect of weekends, annual holidays and sports events, it does not account for the potential
confounding effect of abnormal weather variations - strong determinants of recreational activity.
We used three years (2017 to 2020) of daily weather data to build a generalized linear model of
daily recreational activity counts. Weather variables including temperature, rainfall amount, hours
of sunshine, wind speed and snow depth were collected from five weather stations in the study
area maintained by the Norwegian Meteorological Institute. We also included one-, two- and
three-day lagged effects for weather variables, as well as the sin and cos component of the day, week- and month-of-year variable to account for their cyclical nature. The model was trained on
all data up until 12 March 2020 and was used to predict what recreational activity levels were
expected to have been during 2020 lockdown dates (12 March onward) given the ambient
weather conditions. Model 95% prediction confidence intervals were produced and used as
benchmarks to assess whether the observed deviation in recreational activity was significantly
higher or lower than would be expected given the weather and time of year.

Spatial covariates
To address our hypothesis that changes in recreational activity would be elevated in green spaces
and specifically related to tree cover, vegetation greenness and trail remoteness, we collected a
range of environmental covariates for each trail segment in the Oslo municipality. We performed
Loess regressions (Jacoby 2000) of recreational activity changes on environmental covariates to
explore non-linear responses. We also aggregated activity counts and changes within discrete
spatial areas defined by land cover/use types that are meaningful to municipal decision makers
(Fig. 1). Land-use/cover data were obtained from the City Environment Agency (Bymiljøetaten)
and Statistics Norway (Statistikkbanken).
Tree cover was derived from digital surface (DSM) and terrain models (DTM) provided by the
Norwegian Mapping Authority (https://hoydedata.no/LaserInnsyn/). DSM and DTMs are
downloadable at 1m spatial resolution and are calculated using light detection and ranging
(LiDAR) remote sensing data. We calculated the canopy height model (CHM) by subtracting the
DTM from DSM. The CHM represents the height of all surface objects above ground level. To
isolate tree canopies from man-made surface objects, we used a dataset of all buildings within
the municipality to exclude building footprints from the CHM. The remaining surface objects are
predominantly trees, cars, movable containers or construction infrastructure. To exclude the

remaining non-tree objects we masked out small (< 3m) and very large (> 30m) objects which are
outside the typical height range of tree species found in Oslo.
We used the Google Earth Engine (GEE) cloud-computing platform (Gorelick et al 2017) to collect
satellite-derived measures of vegetation greenness over Oslo. The normalized difference
vegetation index, NDVI (Tucker 1979), was calculated from surface reflectance Sentinel-2
MultiSpectral Instrument data collected at 10m resolution. NDVI is a widely-used proxy for
vegetation vigour and productivity. We calculated the median NDVI from all available Sentinel
scenes intersecting Oslo during 2018 and 2019 summer months (June-August) to prevent
mitigate cloud and snow contamination. Images have been orthorectified and atmospherically
corrected before ingestion into GEE, however we applied a further processing step to filter out
cloudy pixels using the 'QA60' band. The average tree cover and NDVI was calculated over all
pixels within 10m of each recreational trail segment.
To capture the spatial diffusion/concentration of activity, we constructed indicators of trail
remoteness as both the population density and the recreational trail coverage (i.e. density) within
500m of each trail segment. Gridded population density data were downloaded at 250m resolution
from Statistics Norway (Statistikkbanken 2018). Recreational trail cover was calculated from the
total STRAVA trail network (all OpenStreetMap trails utilized by STRAVA users). All line segments
were buffered by 10m and the total surface area of neighboring trails within 500m of each trail
segment was calculated.

Results and discussion
Recreational activity increase
Outdoor recreational activity over Oslo municipality increased by 291% during 2020 lockdown
dates (13 March onward) relative to the 3-yr baseline average (Fig. 2). In absolute terms, the
number of unique daily recreational activities increased from 28000 to 114000 (86000 increase).
Assuming that each recreationist performs only one activity per day, this implies that the
percentage of Oslo’s population engaged in daily recreational activity increased from 4.1 to
14.6%. Furthermore, the total increases in lockdown activity were greater for cycling relative to
pedestrian activity categories (324 vs 259% increase; Fig. 2). The observed increases were
higher than we would have expected given the prevailing weather conditions during lockdown.
Specifically, activity counts were significantly higher than the weather benchmark model predicted
for pedestrian and cycling activities on 13 and 10 days of the two week post-lockdown period,
respectively (Fig. 2). This may reflect the avoidance of public transport during lockdown where
recreationists preferred to cycle to hiking locations. Part of the effect in cycling may also be due
to public transport commute being replaced by cycle commute, although this effect is small due
to advisories to work from home (Figure S7).
These aggregate increases in recreational activity are corroborated by aggregated Google
mobility data showing a 19% increase in visits to parks and green spaces (Fig. S5). At the same
time, Google searches originating in Oslo that included Norwegian words for forest (“Marka”),

trip/hike (“tur”) and outdoors (“utendørs”) all increased substantially during lockdown dates,
indicating increased recreation intent (Fig. S6). We interpret these observations as an immediate
response to the possibilities for doing outdoor recreation and at the same time comply with
lockdown restrictions in Oslo municipality. During lockdown indoor training facilities have been
closed with 10% of members cancelling their membership during the first two weeks of the
lockdown (E24 2020). Therefore access to open space for dispersed use in attractive
environments functioned as a substitute and refuge for a large part of the population during the
COVID-19 situation.
There was a notable shift in the diurnal pattern of recreational activity during lockdown. Activities
were more evenly spread over the duration of daylight hours instead of following a bimodal
morning-evening peak typical of pre-lockdown activity (Fig. S7). This change was more stark for
cycling relative to pedestrian activity, possibly reflecting the reduction in work-related morning
cycling commutes and the increase in daytime leisure cycling activity typical during weekends.
Walking and cycling are flexible daylight activities and it seems that people adapted to the COVID19 situation by spreading their activity over time in densely populated areas.

Spatial pattern of activity changes
The changes in recreational activity during lockdown were not homogenous over the city (Fig. 3;
Fig. 4). This pattern was consistent even when considering lockdown differences relative to the
two weeks directly preceding lockdown (Fig. S8). Activities were intensified in the urban periphery,
while marginal increases and, in some areas, decreases were evident toward the city center for
both pedestrian and cycling activities. This is not surprising given the advisories for home-office
work which reduced inner-city cycling and running commutes. At the same time there is much
more space to adhere to social distancing guidelines in the peri-urban areas, where there is easy
access to walkways, bikeways, forest roads, as well as marked and unmarked trails. Furthermore,
while proximity to urban green space seems to determine how active people are during work-days
(Gundersen et al 2016), distance might represent a smaller barrier on weekends (Bertram et al
2017). This weekly rhythm has been largely interrupted during lockdown, and this can perhaps
also account for some of the observed variations between the urban periphery and center.
The greatest increases were observed in the peri-urban “Marka” forest area (see Fig. 1 for
reference), while smaller relative increases were evident in the coastal zone, commercial and
agricultural areas (Fig. 4). While cycling activity increased with similar magnitudes across all land
cover classes, pedestrian activity increases were greater in green spaces including forest and city
parks compared to other city spaces (Fig. 4). This is also evident in the variation in recreational
use intensity across vegetation greenness and tree cover gradients (Fig. 5). Lockdown pedestrian
activities showed deviations from the baseline, increasing as a function of higher tree canopy
cover and greenviews. Cyclists appeared to intensify activity on trails with greenness in a range
of 0.2<NDVI<0.6, relative to a baseline preference for less green cover. This probably reflects the
shift from work-related commutes to centralised office locations to recreational cycling outside the
more densely built city center. Cycling does not show the incremental response to greenness
and canopy cover shown by pedestrians. This might be because cyclists typically travel at greater
speeds with more focused attention to the trail compared to pedestrians' slower speed, non-linear

travel and higher ability to satisfy visual sensing of their surroundings (Edensor 2000, Rybråten
et al 2019). This could explain differences in pedestrian and cyclist use of greener trails in our
data. Pedestrian and cycling use appear to peak and drop off at high thresholds of green cover
density, possibly reflecting the ease of movement through denser vegetation. Cyclists may find it
more challenging to cycle through dense vegetation (high NDVI) or dense forest with narrower
trails. Pedestrians on the other hand, are not limited by increased tree canopy cover, but only by
the density of vegetation associated with high NDVI values.
During the lockdown period, recreational use intensified within residential areas and city parks
nearly as much as in the forested zone (Fig. 4), highlighting the value and importance of innercity green spaces that are interwoven with the built-up city matrix. We know from previous
research that closeness to urban nature has a particularly strong impact on the level of physical
activity among children, the elderly, and other persons with reduced mobility (Kemperman and
Timmermans 2014, Shin et al 2011). Therefore we are cautious about highlighting the beneficial
effect of access to Oslo’s surrounding forests for the population as a whole given that small green
spaces within the city may be of crucial importance to some social groups. Indeed, Oslo’s
residential areas contain large amounts of tree cover which provide recreational ecosystem
services (Venter et al 2020b, Gómez-Baggethun and Barton 2013). We found that there was a
two-fold increase in both pedestrian and cycling activities on city trails with >75% tree canopy
cover (Fig. 5). This is in line with other studies that show how recreation in green spaces has
significant benefits for mental health (Rasmussen and Laumann 2013, Fong et al 2018, Bratman
et al 2019, Cox et al 2017).
We also find evidence that the government advisories for social distancing were considered, given
that recreationists appeared to choose trails that were more isolated (Fig. 6). Specifically, trails
with fewer neighboring trails and lower population densities within 500m had greater daily
pedestrian and cycling activity counts relative to the baseline state. This highlights the importance
of maintaining large, open green spaces that are accessible from built-up residential areas with
vegetation that facilitates an experience of remoteness that is also congruent with advisories for
social distancing and even self-isolation. By facilitating social distancing, we argue that open,
accessible and unmanaged green space in the urban periphery of Oslo provides additional
resilience to the city’s public health during the coronavirus pandemic. Indeed, there is evidence
that denser cities exhibit higher COVID-19 infection rates (Stier et al 2020), suggesting that green
infrastructure networks which increase the openness and porosity of a city structure may produce
future cities that are more resilient to viral pandemics.

Study limitations
There are several assumptions implicit in our analysis that could not be avoided given the data
available to us. Firstly, our analysis assumes that STRAVA adoption is relatively homogenous
over the city of Oslo. However, it is possible that STRAVA has biases along socio-economic
gradients, e.g. higher adoption rates in high income neighborhoods (Griffin and Jiao 2015), and
therefore results in a bias in the spatial distribution of activity counts. As a result of the spatial bias
we may be missing data on how low-income and marginal groups utilized green space during the
lockdown. The strength in our study is, however, that we measure relative activity differences over

time and we might assume that the same biases occur during lockdown and in the baseline period.
We were only able to leverage two fixed-point counter stations for calibration back to 2016, and
future efforts would benefit from stratifying counter stations across the city so as to correct for
spatial biases in STRAVA data.
Secondly, our interpretations on relative differences in cycling vs pedestrian activities relies on
the assumption that STRAVA mobile application is adopted in equal proportions across the
cycling and pedestrian recreational communities in Oslo. While this assumption is likely valid,
further work is required to calibrate relative differences between activity categories. Our groundtruth reference counters do not distinguish between cyclists and pedestrians and thus we were
not able to do this. Nevertheless, our calibration of the STRAVA activity counts using fixed-point
counter station estimates revealed a strong overall correlation (R2 = 0.8; Fig. S2). This is
comparable with the correlations found with STRAVA data in the UK (Sun et al 2017), USA
(Hochmair et al 2019, Griffin and Jiao 2015) and Australia (Conrow et al 2018, Norman et al
2019).

Broader implications
The findings from our study may be extended to relating mobility changes to enhanced ecosystem
service delivery. For instance, accounting for the benefit of green space for mental health
highlights the urgent need to mitigate the mental health burden under the pandemic conditions
(Holmes et al 2020). High resolution spatial and temporal recreation use data make it possible for
urban ecosystem accounts to identify the links between ecosystem service demand (recreational
use intensity), supply (accessible open green space), ecosystem urban condition (vegetation
density and canopy cover) and final benefits (public health, well-being) (Barton et al 2019).
Assessing this data during the extreme natural experiment caused by COVID-19, research can
provide policy-makers and planners with powerful additional evidence supporting the
conservation of existing green space and the allocation of scarce urban land to new open green
spaces that promote physical exercise and mobility. For example, redesigning streets and public
areas to free up space for pedestrians and recreationists may address several public health
objectives (Honey-Roses et al 2020).
A further policy implication of our findings for mobility advisories during the COVID-19 pandemic
is that accessible open green space in combination with population adherence to social distancing
can mitigate the predicted negative health effects of moderate physical mobility restrictions, while
reducing risk of disease transmission. Of course, Oslo’s abundant green space and relatively
relaxed lockdown measures stand in contrast to other European cities where green space is
limited or where citizens have been confined to their homes (Barton 2020). Despite this, it is
evident that urban green space provides a refuge service during the ongoing pandemic over the
short-term, but also enhances long-term resilience against similar shocks in the future
(Samuelsson et al 2020).
Importantly, the COVID-19 pandemic has shed light on what some aspects of everyday urban life
might look like in a more sustainable future: With higher residential density and reduced long
distance traveling the need for local recreational opportunities will increase the pressure on urban

green spaces (Russo and Cirella 2018). Our observations during the 2020 lockdown in Oslo
indicate that there is at least capacity for a 200-300% increase in recreational activity, however it
is unknown whether green spaces will become overcrowded and therefore reduce the beneficial
health effects (Akpinar 2016). Further, designing potential solutions will require knowledge about
the social mechanisms behind the observable recreational patterns as well as the managerial
conditions for taking green space into account in policy-making and planning processes.
Important questions of green justice relate to the social distribution of access to green space, both
in and between neighborhoods, as well as the interaction between different social groups in urban
green spaces. Research from other large cities suggests for instance that a political prioritizing of
collective sports and football fields over more “natural” green spaces may lead to better
recreational opportunities for some groups at the expense of others (King et al 2015, Wendel et
al 2012). In demographically and culturally mixed cities like Oslo, the social resilience effects of
urban green space depends on whether the design and management of green infrastructure is
able to facilitate a variety of recreational and leisure activities. To acknowledge urban green space
not only as a health buffer, but equally as a place where conflicts of interests occur suggests
further investigation into how citizens are represented and involved in local planning; and not least
identifying who maintains the power to decide what happens to the local urban green space.

Conclusions
We find evidence to support the hypothesis that recreational activity significantly increased during
the COVID-19 lockdown in Oslo and that increases were greatest over trails within greener and
more remote areas. The ecosystem services derived from urban green infrastructure are wellknown. However, empirical data on urban ecosystems often deals with incremental change in
urban development. Outside of simulation models, it is not possible to demonstrate the impact of
systemic shifts in urban design on inhabitants. The shock of COVID-19 mobility restrictions and
the public’s immediate reaction to them is an extreme natural experiment that for a limited time
opens a window on the importance of green space for urban resilience design. We suspect that
green spaces acted as a substitute for prohibited indoor fitness and sport activities, and a refuge
from stress during the COVID-19 lockdown, and might have even mitigated the spread of the virus
by facilitating social distancing, although this requires further investigation. Our study also
illustrates the utility of crowdsourced activity tracking data for monitoring changes in use of green
space that can potentially inform urban ecosystem accounting and planning policies for naturebased solutions that address sustainable development goals.

Acknowledgements
The research was carried out with support of the URBAN EEA project - Experimental Ecosystem
Accounting for Greater Oslo (URBAN EEA), MILJØFORSK programme, The Research Council
of Norway, contract #255156 (ZSV, MN) and URBAN SIS (Strategisk Instituttsatsing), Norges
Forskningsråd (prosjekt no. 160022/F40) (DNB, VG).

References:

Akpinar A 2016 How is quality of urban green spaces associated with physical activity and
health? Urban For. Urban Green. 16 76–83
Andersen O, Gundersen V, Wold L C and Stange E 2014 Monitoring visitors to natural areas in
wintertime: issues in counter accuracy J. Sustain. Tour. 22 550–60
Barton D 2020 Enabling Access to Greenspace During the Covid-19 Pandemic—Perspectives
from Five Cities Nat. Cities Online:
https://www.thenatureofcities.com/2020/05/04/enabling-access-to-greenspace-duringthe-covid-19-pandemic-perspectives-from-five-cities/
Barton D N, Obst C, Caparros A, Davand P, Fenichel E, Havinga I, Hein L, McPhearson T,
Randrup T and Zulian G 2019 Discussion paper 10: Recreation services from
ecosystems (New York: Expert Meeting on Advancing the Measurement of Ecosystem
Services for Ecosystem Accounting) Online: https://seea.un.org/events/expert-meetingadvancing-measurement-ecosystemservices-ecosystem-accounting
Bertram C, Meyerhoff J, Rehdanz K and Wüstemann H 2017 Differences in the recreational
value of urban parks between weekdays and weekends: A discrete choice analysis
Landsc. Urban Plan. 159 5–14
Bratman G N, Anderson C B, Berman M G, Cochran B, de Vries S, Flanders J, Folke C,
Frumkin H, Gross J J, Hartig T, Kahn P H, Kuo M, Lawler J J, Levin P S, Lindahl T,
Meyer-Lindenberg A, Mitchell R, Ouyang Z, Roe J, Scarlett L, Smith J R, van den Bosch
M, Wheeler B W, White M P, Zheng H and Daily G C 2019 Nature and mental health: An
ecosystem service perspective Sci. Adv. 5 eaax0903–eaax0903
Conrow L, Wentz E, Nelson T and Pettit C 2018 Comparing spatial patterns of crowdsourced
and conventional bicycling datasets Appl. Geogr. 92 21–30
Cox D T, Hudson H L, Shanahan D F, Fuller R A and Gaston K J 2017 The rarity of direct
experiences of nature in an urban population Landsc. Urban Plan. 160 79–84
E24 2020 Minst 60.000 nordmenn har meldt seg ut av treningssenter Online:
https://e24.no/naeringsliv/i/6jAz73/minst-60000-nordmenn-har-meldt-seg-ut-avtreningssenter
Edensor T 2000 Walking in the British countryside: reflexivity, embodied practices and ways to
escape Body Soc. 6 81–106
Fong K C, Hart J E and James P 2018 A review of epidemiologic studies on greenness and
health: Updated literature through 2017 Curr. Environ. Health Rep. 5 77–87
Gómez-Baggethun E and Barton D N 2013 Classifying and valuing ecosystem services for
urban planning Ecol. Econ. 86 235–45
Gorelick N, Hancher M, Dixon M, Ilyushchenko S, Thau D and Moore R 2017 Google Earth
Engine: Planetary-scale geospatial analysis for everyone Remote Sens. Environ. 202
18–27

Griffin G P and Jiao J 2015 Where does bicycling for health happen? Analysing volunteered
geographic information through place and plexus J. Transp. Health 2 238–47
Gundersen V S and Frivold L H 2008 Public preferences for forest structures: a review of
quantitative surveys from Finland, Norway and Sweden Urban For. Urban Green. 7 241–
58
Gundersen V, Skår M, O’Brien L, Wold L C and Follo G 2016 Children and nearby nature: A
nationwide parental survey from Norway Urban For. Urban Green. 17 116–25
Gundersen V, Tangeland T and Kaltenborn B 2015 Planning for recreation along the opportunity
spectrum: The case of Oslo, Norway Urban For. Urban Green. 14 210–7
Hamer M and Chida Y 2008 Walking and primary prevention: a meta-analysis of prospective
cohort studies Br. J. Sports Med. 42 238–43
Hochmair H H, Bardin E and Ahmouda A 2019 Estimating bicycle trip volume for Miami-Dade
county from Strava tracking data J. Transp. Geogr. 75 58–69
Holmes E A, O’Connor R C, Perry V H, Tracey I, Wessely S, Arseneault L, Ballard C,
Christensen H, Cohen Silver R, Everall I, Ford T, John A, Kabir T, King K, Madan I,
Michie S, Przybylski A K, Shafran R, Sweeney A, Worthman C M, Yardley L, Cowan K,
Cope C, Hotopf M and Bullmore E 2020 Multidisciplinary research priorities for the
COVID-19 pandemic: a call for action for mental health science Lancet Psychiatry
Online: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2215036620301681
Honey-Roses J, Anguelovski I, Bohigas J, Chireh V, Daher C, Konijnendijk C, Litt J, Mawani V,
McCall M and Orellana A 2020 The Impact of COVID-19 on Public Space: A Review of
the Emerging Questions
Jacoby W G 2000 Loess:: a nonparametric, graphical tool for depicting relationships between
variables Elect. Stud. 19 577–613
Jennings V, Johnson Gaither C and Gragg R S 2012 Promoting environmental justice through
urban green space access: A synopsis Environ. Justice 5 1–7
Kahlmeier S, Kelly P, Foster C, Götschi T, Cavill N, Dinsdale H, Woodcock J, Schweizer C,
Rutter H and Lieb C 2014 Health economic assessment tools (HEAT) for walking and for
cycling: methodology and user guide: economic assessment of transport infrastructure
and policies: 2014 update (World Health Organization)
Kemperman A and Timmermans H 2014 Green spaces in the direct living environment and
social contacts of the aging population Landsc. Urban Plan. 129 44–54
King D K, Litt J, Hale J, Burniece K M and Ross C 2015 ‘The park a tree built’: Evaluating how a
park development project impacted where people play Urban For. Urban Green. 14 293–
9
Muhammad S, Long X and Salman M 2020 COVID-19 pandemic and environmental pollution: A
blessing in disguise? Sci. Total Environ. 728 138820

Musselwhite C, Avineri E and Susilo Y 2020 Editorial JTH 16 –The Coronavirus Disease
COVID-19 and implications for transport and health J. Transp. Health 16 100853
Norman P, Pickering C M and Castley G 2019 What can volunteered geographic information tell
us about the different ways mountain bikers, runners and walkers use urban reserves?
Landsc. Urban Plan. 185 180–90
Oslo kommune 2018 Fagrapport. Grøntegnskap: en måling av grønnstruktur i Oslos byggesone.
(Oslo: Paln og bygningsetaten)
Rasmussen M and Laumann K 2013 The academic and psychological benefits of exercise in
healthy children and adolescents Eur. J. Psychol. Educ. 28 945–62
Russo A and Cirella G T 2018 Modern compact cities: how much greenery do we need? Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public. Health 15 2180
Rybråten S, Skår M and Nordh H 2019 The phenomenon of walking: diverse and dynamic
Landsc. Res. 44 62–74
Samuelsson K, Barthel S, Colding J, Macassa G and Giusti M 2020 Urban nature as a source of
resilience during social distancing amidst the coronavirus pandemic
Sanford A 2020 Coronavirus: Half of humanity now on lockdown as 90 countries call for
confinemen Euronews Online: https://www.euronews.com/2020/04/02/coronavirus-ineurope-spain-s-death-toll-hits-10-000-after-record-950-new-deaths-in-24-hou
Shin W-H, Kweon B-S and Shin W-J 2011 The distance effects of environmental variables on
older African American women’s physical activity in Texas Landsc. Urban Plan. 103
217–29
Statistikkbanken 2018 Population statistics: annually, estimated figures Online:
https://www.ssb.no/en/befolkning/statistikker/folkemengde/aar-berekna
Stier A, Berman M and Bettencourt L 2020 COVID-19 attack rate increases with city size
Mansueto Inst. Urban Innov. Res. Pap. Forthcom.
Suárez M, Barton D N, Cimburova Z, Rusch G M, Gómez-Baggethun E and Onaindia M 2020
Environmental justice and outdoor recreation opportunities: A spatially explicit
assessment in Oslo metropolitan area, Norway Environ. Sci. Policy 108 133–43
Sun Y, Du Y, Wang Y and Zhuang L 2017 Examining Associations of Environmental
Characteristics with Recreational Cycling Behaviour by Street-Level Strava Data Int. J.
Environ. Res. Public. Health 14 644
Tucker C J 1979 Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring vegetation
Remote Sens. Environ. 8 127–50
Venter Z S, Aunan K, Chowdhury S and Lelieveld J 2020a COVID-19 lockdowns cause global
air pollution declines with implications for public health risk medRxiv

Venter Z S, Krog N H and Barton D N 2020b Linking green infrastructure to urban heat and
human health risk mitigation in Oslo, Norway Sci. Total Environ. 709 136193
Wendel H E W, Zarger R K and Mihelcic J R 2012 Accessibility and usability: Green space
preferences, perceptions, and barriers in a rapidly urbanizing city in Latin America
Landsc. Urban Plan. 107 272–82

Main figures:

Figure 1. Map of Oslo municipality study area. All available path/trail segments utilized by
STRAVA users are colored by the majority land cover/use in which they are located.

Figure 2. Recreational activity time series. Daily pedestrian (run, walk, hike) and cycling
(bike) recreational activities recorded in Oslo before and after the coronavirus lockdown on 13
March (dashed red line). The 2020 time series (purple) is plotted in parallel to the time series for
the same dates averaged over a 3-yr baseline (green). Benchmark activity levels expected
given the local weather and time of year are plotted in black with 95% confidence interval
bands.

Figure 3. Spatial variation in recreational activity change. Average daily activity counts per
trail segment over Oslo during 2020 March lockdown dates compared to the average for the
same dates during a 3-yr baseline period (2017-2019). The activity differences (Δ activities day1
) between the two periods are mapped on the right.

Figure 4. Recreational activity changes by land use/cover zone. The magnitude of change
in total activity counts between lockdown dates (“Lockdown”) and the average for same dates
over the baseline period (2017-2019, “Baseline”) are plotted with points and line segments for
major municipal land cover/use classes. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence intervals. Plots
are arranged by the magnitude of change, decreasing from left to right.

Figure 5. Trail greenery vs recreational activity change. Loess regression lines plotted for
relationships between daily activity counts and two measures of trail greenery extracted for
every trail segment over the city (n = 131716). Separate lines are plotted for March lockdown
dates (13-31) and a baseline period (average of lockdown date-equivalents 2017-2019).

Figure 6. Trail remoteness vs recreational activity change. Loess regression lines plotted for
relationships between daily activity counts and two measures of trail remoteness extracted for
every STRAVA trail segment over the city (n = 131716). Separate lines are plotted for March
lockdown dates (13-31) and a baseline period (average of lockdown date-equivalents 20172019).

Supplementary figures:

Figure S1. Study period relative to COVID-19 intensive case hospital admissions in Oslo.
Hospital admissions are plotted in red. Source: adapted from
https://www.vg.no/spesial/2020/corona/fylker/03/kommuner/0301/

Figure S2. STRAVA activity counts over Oslo. Daily counts for pedestrian (run, walk, hike)
and cycling (bike) recreational activities are plotted with points. Loess regression lines (moving
averages) are plotted with lines and 95% confidence interval ribbons.

Figure S3. STRAVA activity count calibration. The relationship between STRAVA total
monthly (A), weekly (B), and daily (C) activity counts and ground-truth counts from two fixedpoint counter stations in Oslo between 2017 and 2020. Linear regression lines are fitted in bold
with a 1:1 dashed line for reference. Regression adjusted R2 and root mean square error
(RMSE) are reported.

Figure S4. Detrending STRAVA time series. An illustration of the raw and detrended STRAVA
time series of daily activity counts. A linear regression line is plotted in blue to show the longterm trend

Figure S5. Google mobility trends over Oslo municipality. Relative changes (%) in visits
and lengths of stay at various localities as recorded by Google’s anonymized mobility dataset.
The date of coronavirus lockdown (13 March) is plotted with a dashed red line.

Figure S6. Google search trends originating in Oslo municipality. Time series for 2019 and
2020 showing the relative frequency (0: no hits and 100: maximum hits) of search terms used in
Google. The date of coronavirus lockdown (13 March) is plotted with a dashed red line.

Figure S7. Hourly distribution of recreational activity. The hour-specific proportion of
activities performed over 24-hr day in Oslo. Proportions are plotted for 2020 lockdown dates and
the average for date-equivalents during a 3-yr baseline period (2017-2019).

Figure S8. Activity comparison pre- vs post-lockdown. Average daily activity counts per trail
segment over Oslo during two-weeks pre- and post-lockdown (13 March 2020). The activity
differences (Δ activities day-1) between the two periods are mapped on the right.

