"x"
"1" "How Families Matter for Health Inequality during the COVID-19 Pandemic"
"2" "Mieke Beth Thomeer 1"
"3" "Jenjira Yahirun 2"
"4" "Alejandra Colón-López 1"
"5" "1 Department of Sociology, The University of Alabama at Birmingham, Heritage Hall 460, 1401 University Blvd., Birmingham, AL 35233. mthomeer@uab.edu"
"6" "2 Department of Sociology, Bowling Green State University"
"7" "A version of this article has been  published in  the   Journal of Family Theory and Review ,  https://doi.org/10.1111/jftr.12398"
"8" "Acknowledgments:   Yahirun acknow ledges partial support from the  Center for F amily and Demographic Research,  Bowling Gr een State University, which has  core funding  from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver  National Inst itute of Child Health and Human  Devel opment (P2CHD050959). This work  was also supp orted by the National Institute  on Agin g (R01AG069251;   Thomeer & Reczek, Principal investigators)."
"9" "Ho w Families Matter for Health Inequality during the COVID-19 Pandemic"
"10" "Abstract:  We theorize that social conditions surrounding the  COVID-19  pandemic have the potential to increase the importance of families for health and  widen  existing inequalities. We suggest  three  primary tenets important for understanding families and health during COVID-19 . First, risks of specific COVID-19 outcomes and other   health problems are unevenly distributed across families. Sec ond,  how  families  impact  health during the COVID-19 pandemic is c onditional on  public policies, organizational d ecisions, and concurrent events. Third,  many health i nequalities  driven by racism, sexism, classism, and other oppressive societal force  are  amplified  during COVID-19, but the extent to which this is occurring is shaped by families and by the public policies, organizational decisions, and concurrent events that also  impact families  and health .   As health disparities  continue to emerge from  th is  pandemic, we call on researchers and policy-makers to pay attention to the multiple ways that families matter."
"11" "On March 31, 2020, New York Governor Andrew Cuomo tweeted, “ T he virus is the great equalizer,” echoing a belief many others had espoused in the early days of the COVID-19 pandemic  (Cuomo, 2020) . This  statement  builds on the reality   that COVID-19  could infect anyone, from wealthy  celebrities like Tom Hanks to  minimum-wage clerk s at   grocery store s .  In response to   Governor Cuomo’s statement,   many social s cientists and commentators  produced  evidence - based analysis of early COVID-19 infection and fatality rates —as well as unemployment, poverty statistics, and  other health  and well-being measures— showing  that the virus  did not affect  everyone equally but  was  much more impactful for  disadv antaged members  within  society,  including  people of color , immigrants,  people  with lower socioeconomic status (SES), and  people  with disabilities  ( Clark et al., 2020;  Laster Pirtle, 2020 ;  Yancy, 2020 ) .  Within the U.S.,  health disparities stemming from the pandemic  ha ve   overlapped with  an economic recession, a contentious presidential election, and  protests over the murders of Breonna Taylor, George Floyd, and many other Black  people by police.  Dr. Uché  Blackstock refers  to these coinciding events as a “crisis within a crisis”  (Martin, 2020) , with large implications for health disparities across society (Krieger, 2020).  Despite being called the “great equalizer,” it is increasingly clear that COVID-19 is magnifying existing  health  inequalities."
"12" "In this article, we draw attention to the role that families   play in understanding health  disparities  during the COVID-19 pandemic, with implica tions for understanding the importance of family  during other crisis points.  Our objecti ve is to focus on families as  “groups of related people, bound by connections that are biological, legal, or emotional” (Cohen, 2020c: 5). Family ties can be divided roughly into five main categories: families of origin (i.e., parents, siblings), extended kin ( e.g., grandparents,  cousins, in-laws), families of c hoice, intimate/ romantic partners, and offspring (i.e., children, grandchildren) . A lthough providing detailed discussions of each of  these ties is beyond the scope of this article,  we  aim  to   provide a  conceptual framework  focused generally on families and applicable across each tie . We point readers interested in a more detailed overview of  intergenerational ties  during the COVID-19 pandemic to Stokes and Patterson’s   review  (2020)  or in couple dynamics  during the pandemic   to   a review  by  Pietromonaco and   Overall  (2020), as well as  many other articles in  the  special issue from  Family Processes  on “COVID-19, Families, and Family Therapy . ”"
"13" "Our  framework posit s  that  the social conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic   have the potential to make families even more salient  for health, with this  relationship  conditional on public policies, organizational decisions, and concurrent events .  These  dynamics  in  turn  exacerbat e  existing  health  inequalities ,  namely  those driven by racism, sexism, heterosexism, ageism, classism,  ableism,  and other oppressive forces within society. We point to emerging evidence showcasing  how  family  ties  have been impacted by COVID-19, with scholars  anticipating  more  long-term  ripple effects on the family  ( Cohen , 2020 b ; Verdery  et al. , 2020) . In  developing this framework , we highlight how the COVID-19 pandemic is  embedded within other social contexts , and these together have  profound implications fo r the association between families , health,  and  health disparities .   Our aim is for the conceptual framework presented here  to be viewed as dynamic, rather than static, providing a starting point for  interdisciplinary  research agendas relating  the role of  families  and  health inequalities during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"14" "Families  and Health Inequalities"
"15" "Our conceptual framework   builds on a social ecological approach, highlighting how individuals , families,  and their social environments mutually affect each other  over the life course  (Bronfenbrenner , 1986 ).  O ur framework is  grounded in  several theoretical approaches   alongside  existing empirical research which together point to how multiple components of families and  family life—distributed unequally throughout the population— and the extrafamilial context (e.g., public policies, concurrent events)  can help us understand widening health disparities during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Our framework provides three primary tenets for understanding the role of families in expanding or reducing health inequities during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"16" "Primary Tenets"
"17" "Our first tenet builds from  a long history of research highlighting how  f amilies  are a key social factor   shaping  health outcomes and health disparities at the population level   ( see  Umberson & Thomeer, 2020  for overview )  and asserts that families are particularly important institutions shaping health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Prelimi nary evidence suggests that  multiple components  of family life   ha ve  shifted due to COVID-19 (e.g., increased family violence,  growth in  multigenerational households) , and the  implications  of families  for health and well-being are arguably heightened as people spend more time at home and rely on family members as  a major  part of their social safety net  ( Bettinger-Lopez, 2020;  Cohen, 2020a, 2020b ;  Prime et al., 2020 ) .  Our second tenet argues that   t he impact of families on health during the COVID-19 pandemic is conditional on  public policies (e.g., school closings, unemployment benefits), organizational decisions (e.g., limiting nursing home visitors, workplace furloughs), and concurrent events (e.g., public protests, economic recession)  (Berger & Carlson, 2020).  Drawing on research that indicates that   many health inequalities by race, gender, class, and other socially constructed positions are widening during COVID-19  ( Clark et al., 2020; Krieger, 2020; Yancy, 2020) ,  our third tenet argues   that  the extent to which this is occurring is shaped by families and by the public policies, organizational decisions, and concurrent events that impact families .  These heterogeneous impacts are   due  largely  to  racism, sexism, heterosexism, ageism, classism, ableism, and other oppressive  forces ,  likely  contributing to the exacerbation of health disparities  during the pandemic ."
"18" "Theoretical Background"
"19" "Before we elaborate on each of these tenets, we briefly summarize the main  theoretical approaches which undergird our framework. First,  the  fundamental cause   framework  argues that social conditions are a primary and robust determinant of health, with the  specific  mechanisms shifting over time and across place  (Phelan et al., 2010) .  F amilies  act as  a central   institution  through  which  resource s are  distributed and  organized , with some family forms increasingly advantaged compared to others  as described in the   diverging destinies perspective .  The diverging destinies perspective   provides insight into how  different aspects of family are distributed unevenly across the population  in ways that matter for well-being  (McLanahan & Jacobsen, 2015) .  In recent decades,  individuals with  higher levels of  educational attainment   are  more likely to delay marriage and childbearing  and  to  avoid divorce and separation , whereas people with fewer years of schooling  have  experience d  more marital disruptions and higher rates of non-marital childbearing  (McLanahan  &  Jacobse n , 2015) . Because  the state arguably  dictates which family forms are  preferred , this furthers   social advantages  to specific family  makeups .  Thus , t he link between  SES  and family life has  consequences fo r health inequalities ,  such that   marital  status  and  conditions of parenthood shape  health outcomes  for adults and children  within the family .   T he fundamental cause and diverging destinies  perspective s   together highlight   how  variation in family forms  is  linked to health inequality, including  during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"20" "Second,  our approach  builds on the  family systems theoretical  approach which sees family members as interdependent,  such  that individual people’s health outcomes are shaped by their family members (Broderick, 1993).  This  approach parallels  the linked lives concept from the  life course perspective   (Carr, 2018) , which suggests that characteristics an d experiences of family members  influence  the health of those within the family because  their  lives are intertwined.  These  approaches   also  complement  a  social ecological perspective  that examine s  the dynamic interrelations among various personal and environmental factors (Bronfenbrenner, 1986) . The se three approaches   emphasiz e  extrafamilial factors—such as public policies—alongside interfamilial factors ,  highlighting the interplay between the micro, meso, and macro levels dynamics. This is  useful for  unpack ing   the multi-level ways in which  families  likely  matter for health during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"21" "Third,  based on an  intersectionality perspective  (Collins, 1998), we know that social structures and positions interact with each other such that a college-educated Black genderqueer person’s experiences of family are shaped  by their race and racism  together with  their class and classism and their gender and sexism.  An intersectionality perspective   emphasize s  the r ole of institutions and polices,  especially how these interact with one another to shape life chances.  This   framework  is complemented by a  family diversity perspective  which  sees family as a source of coping to improve health for marginalized groups  (Collins, 1998 ; Williams, 2019 ).  For example, rather than concluding that single-parent households   are damaging to health, a family diversity perspective  highlights  the strengths of these family profiles, especially those not measured in traditional surveys.  Building on both intersectionality and family diversity,  we argue that  research  on families during the COVID-19 pandemic without contextualizing them within broader structures of   oppressive systems  (e.g., racism, sexism, classism ) and the  policies and concurrent events  fram ing  these structures  and systems   offers an incomplete picture."
"22" "Tenet 1: Family-Based Health Disparities"
"23" "We now provide an overview of each of these tenets, focusing on existing empirical research support ing  each tenet   and  offering some  conjectures  to  future research.  The first tenet  draws attention to how famil y structure s , composition s , and dynamics  shape health outcomes and  health disparities at the population level during the COVID-19 pandemic.  As an important caveat, some of the observed correlations between family variables and health outcom es are due to selection factors , which should lead us to be cautious in interpreting the observed links between family and health . Additionally, we discuss family structures, compositions, and dynamics  below as separate components of family, but their impact is often interdependent. Finally,  as we elaborate in the second  and third  tenet s , the association between families and health during COVID-19 is highly context dependent and does not reflect inherent costs or benefits of  specific family forms  but rather  public polici es, oppressive  structures,  and other external realities ."
"24" "Family Structure-Based Health Disparities during  the  COVID-19 Pandemic"
"25" "A number of studies indicate that there  are  differential risks in contracting COVID-19  across  family structure s , which includes the presence and absence of specific family ties, the number of family ties, geographic proximity to family ties, and the extent of contact with family  tie s .  Multigenerational households have stood out as  family structure s where COVID-19 exposure and transmission may be  heightened   (Stokes & Patterson, 2020) . Within multigenerational households ,  older adults  may be  exposed to the virus through their p roximity to younger generations  who   might provide care fo r them and  hold “essential jobs ”  (e.g.,  store clerks ,  healthcare workers )  (Balbo et al., 2020) .  In addition, t he share of multigenerational households  has increased since the  start  of COVID-19; s pecifically, the  proportion  of adults ages 18-29 living with a parent or grandparent grew ,   likely  due to young adults exiting COVID-19 hotspots and experiencing financial strains  ( Cohen, 2020 a ) . Aside from the risks of c ontracting COVID-19  in multigenerational households, these family structures are also potentially associated with more caregiving and family responsibilities, with health costs for the caregivers and health benefits for those receiving care.  Recent evidence indicates that long-term family caregivers experienced  worse physical and psychological health in the early part of the pandemic compared to non-caregivers  (Park, 2020) . This caregiving burden is heightened for  “sandwich  generation ”  adults with b oth older parents and young  children, especially if  older adults fall ill and childcare is  unavailable due to closed daycares and schools  (Stokes & Patterson, 2020) ."
"26" "Yet multigenerational households are not the only family structure  that  intensif y  health risk s for its members  during the pandemic .   S ingle-person households face specific social and economic challenges compared to other h ouseholds during COVID-19 , with implications  for their health .  Researchers note many benefits associated with living alone  (Kilinenberg, 2013) , but these benefits may be muted during the COVID-19 pandemic as gatherings outside o f one’s household are limited .  A  multi-country study associated  lockdowns  with feelings of low control ,  social isolation ,  and elevated levels of anxiety  and depression  (van Mulukom et al., 2020).  Beyond the household, people without any family ties—defined as “kinless” — are at risk of social isolation,  a situation  associated with a wide range of negative health outcomes   and  amplified  during the pandemic   (van Mulukom et al., 2020) .  This may be especially dire for older adults.  Recent analysis of federal data suggests that social isolation has contributed to 13,200 excess dementia deaths since the pandemic began (Wan ,  2020), and e vidence indicates that older adults who rely on non-residential family membe rs to provide instrumental  (e.g., shoppin g for groceries, transportation ) and social support experienced more severe consequences from physical distancing measures   (Berg-Weger & Morley, 2020) .   As people face unemployment or work from home, as well as attend virtual religious services and avoid physical gatherings, the COVID-19 pandemic potentially intensifies the importance of family structure and living arrangements for health and well-being."
"27" "As an additional important aspect of family structure, the loss of family members through deaths are clearly increasing as a result of the pandemic  (Wrigley-Field, 2020) , hence contributing to the rise  of  worse  physical and mental health  outcomes  (Umberson et al., 2017) .   P erhaps  this is  uniquely consequential during the COVID-19 pandemic as these deaths are often unexpected, potentially in isolation, clustered within families, and possibly perceived as due to family member conduct. Beyond deaths, family members separated due to immigration, deportation, incarceration, and residence within other institutions (e.g., nursing homes, military)  may not benefit from their  support systems  due  to  limited visitations .  T he prevalence of each of these types of losses are greatest for Black and Latinx families compared to White families , due to structural racism as we discuss more in the third tenet   (Wrigley-Field, 2020) ."
"28" "Family Composition-Based Health Disparities during COVID-19 Pandemic"
"29" "Family composition refers to the sociodemographic, economic, psychological, and health characteristics of people within a family , among others .  Research on family composition and health outcomes tends to focus on two key characteristics: health status   and  educational attainment .  First,  social contagion studies explain how health can “spread” across family relationships beyond infectious diseases, such that one  family  member who smokes increases other  family member s’ risk of smoking  (Christakis & Fowler, 2009) .  By its nature, h aving a family member with COVID-19 matters for one’s own risk of becoming ill, given that  COVID-19  is a highly infectious disease . Contact tracing indicates how COVID-19 spread s  through family clusters, especially at high contact events  (e.g., birthday gatherings,  weddings ,  funerals )   (Zhang et al., 2020) .  Moreover ,  COVID-19 poses special risk to people who are immunocompromised or with specific comorbidities, placing their family members in a difficult position to avoid infection and/or any  c lose  contact with at-risk family members.  For example, a letter in  The Lancet  emphasized the  widespread anxiety  commonly experienced among families of children with cancer  during the pandemic  (Kotecha, 2020).  Many people caring for or living with people with comorbidities or compromised immune systems may work essential jobs outside of the home and/or need to send their children to school or childcare, adding to the COVID-19 risk for the household.  Isolated family caregiving without supports is associated with worse health  (Tebb & Jivanjee, 2000) , yet this may be the safest way to provide care during the pandemic.  This is likely an impossible balance for many, especially with preceding stressors and costs associated with caregiving  (Park, 2020) ."
"30" "Second,  educational attainment fundamentally shapes people’s responses to COVID-19 and the risk of  exposure ; specifically, higher education affords the ability to understand and adapt to complex heath information   and  provides access to  remote working arrangements  and  instrumental resources  (e.g., health insurance)   consequential  for navigating COVID-19 risk .   In the U.S., survey data show that early belief in physical distancing measures to “flatten the curve” was higher among college-educated people  (Rabouin, 2020) .  Yet despite education al  attainment technically belonging to the individual who earned the degree, the impact of education  has ripple effects throughout  the family  ( Yahirun et al., 2020 ) .   Therefore,  beliefs about physical distancing could spread within  family networks , meaning benefits from higher education that reduce COVID-19 infection rates would be shared  by less-educated family members .  M ost of the previous scholarship on the health impact of family members’ SES considers a “downstream” effect between parents’  educational attainment  and children’s health  ( Hayward and Gorman, 2004 ) , but more recent studies identify an “upstream” associatio n whereby children’s education  attainment also shapes their parents’ health   (Friedman & Mare, 2014; Yahirun et al., 2020) .  Both generational directions likely matter for COVID-19-related health risks.  For example, recent research finds that adult children may be important sources of health knowledge for their older parents in interpreting  and navigating health care access  (Jiang & Kaushal, 2020)  and encouraging healthier behaviors  (Friedman & Mare, 2014) .  Beyond health  and educational attainment , other characteristics of family members likely also matter for COVID-19 and related health risks , such as their political views, religious beliefs and practices, and geographic location ."
"31" "Family Dynamic-Based Health Disparities during the COVID-19 Pandemic"
"32" "Family dynamics --i ncluding the degree of support or strain, violence, social control, and intimacy, to name a few -- condition the extent to which family structure and family composition shapes health,  perhaps  especially during the COVID-19 pandemic.  S ocial support from family members , defined  as instrumental aid, emotional caregiving, and information exchanges,   are a key way in which families benefit health   ( Umberson & Thomeer, 2020 ) ,  yet levels  of familial support have changed  during the COVID-19 pandemic.   For example, a  recent study found that ,  prior to the pandemic, most  single mothers  occasionally relied on their family for support, but during the pandemic th is shifted into extreme poles-- daily help or none at all (Hertz et al., 2020)."
"33" "COVID-19  has generated  elevated stress levels  across the population ,  and f amily stress in particular rose  w ith COVID-19 re la ted stressors  ( van Mulukom  et al., 2020) .   With respect to intimate relationships,  financial and economic hardship  may inhibit communication  and prevent couples from  problem-solving  current challenges  ( Neff & Karney, 2017 ) .  Barriers to communication weaken union stability and  increase the stress experienced by the couple.   Recent  studies identify how stressors  related to lockdowns  also  increased  within intimate relationships ( Overall et al., 2020 ;  Pietromonaco & Overall, 2020 ) .    As one example,   f orced proximity  through physical distancing policies   is a central risk factor for aggression and anger, which could enhance relationship strain  (Van Bavel et al., 2020) .  Supporting this, on e  study found that people whose living arrangements c hanged as a result of the COVID -19 pandemic had a higher likelihood of  increased stress and family conflict than those whose living arrangements remained stable  (Evandrou et al., 2020) .  Additionally, f amily members with different perspectives about the risks of contracting COVID-19 and behavioral measures to reduce virus transmission (e.g., mask wearing, physical distancing) may also experience increased relationship strain.  Currently, projections estimate that,  similar to trends following natural disasters and economic recessions, an increase in divorce will follow as a result of COVID-19  (Goldstein, 2020) . Data from China already illustrate a rapid spike in divorce filings following the re-opening of government bureaucratic offices in March 2020  (Liu, 2020) ."
"34" "Stressors related to financial insecurity, lockdowns, and  physical distancing policies also place  additional strain on parents.  A  survey  found  higher parental perceived stress among   parents  w ho experienced more  COVID-19-related stressors (Brown et al., 2020) .  Strain within  intimate relationships  could also be exacerbated by the presence of children, with parents at potential odds regarding how much exposure poses a risk to children   (Calarco et al., 2020) .  Spillover effects of couple-level stress  are  also tied to parenting anxiety and stress during the pandemic ( Brown et al., 2020 )"
"35" "Factors that increase social strain within the family during the COVID-19 pandemic could lead to intimate partner violence (IPV)  and other forms of family violence .  In the U.S.,  data depict 10 percent more IPV reports in New York State in March 2020 compared to the previous month  (Boserup et al., 2020) .  Social isolation, often used by perpetrators of  IPV  to restrain victims from seeking support, has been a central force behind the rising number of IPV   reports globally  (Bettinger-Lopez, 2020) .  I ncreased stress, unemployment, economic anxiety, and unavailable formal social services because of government closures  and decreased financial support  also set the  stage for increased violence  (Prime et al., 2020) .  This attention to family dynamics  filter the impact of the  COVID-19 pandemic  and shape consequent health outcomes."
"36" "Tenet 2: The Role of Public Policies , Organizational Decisions,  and Concurrent Events"
"37" "Although evidence   from our first tenet  illustrates   how  families shape health, our second and third tenet  explains how the  specific  health impacts of  family ties during the COVID-19 pandemic are not universal. Rather, they exist within a broader social context that further frame and shape these patterns. In this second tenet, we draw attention to the empirical evidence supporting the claim  on  how  larger institutional and structural factors–specifically public policies, organizational decisions, and concurrent events–condition the effects of  famil y on  health  during the COVID-19 pandemic ."
"38" "Public Policies"
"39" "Policies position specific family structures, compositions, and dynamics in ways that positively or negatively shape health and health disparities (Berger & Carlson, 2020). For example,  the positive association between marriage and good health is facilitated through public policies, such as s pousal access to employer-sponsored health insurance and  federal   tax benefits for married couples  (Umberson & Thomeer, 2020).  Many U.S. policies  are built on the assumption that family members are willing and able to provide support and resources during economic  and health crises  ( Cherlin & Seltzer,  2014) . The U.S. health care  and economic  system s  rely  on the work of family members to provide unpaid care for older adults and children, offering little tangible support to caregivers  (Collins, 2019) .   P ublic policies   privilege certain famil y forms  an d plac e  undue strains on  others ,  and  certain policies implicitly assert the legitimacy of specific family forms over others.  For example, t he assumption that the most important family ties are  between biological parents and children  complicates grandparents’ ability to gain parenting rights over grandchildren they are  raising and makes  stepparent  roles ambiguous, all with consequential health outcomes for children  (Russell et al., 2018) ."
"40" "We argue that policies that have attempted to address the economic and health consequences of COVID-19 have the potential to make family even more important for health and well-being  and thus  either reduce or exacerbate existing inequalities. For example, early shelter-in-place policies, wherein states told residents to  avoid  physical contact with  persons beyon d   their immediate household, privileged those individuals residing in the same housing structure. Federal economic relief packages also included more money for married couples who filed taxes jointly and additional funding for their children—but no stimulus for families without U.S. citizenship or legal permanent residence  (Clark et al., 2020) . School closures further  impact the extent to which families matter for health, especially  when  the government or employers  do not provide extra support;   b eing a parent  during the COVID-19 pandemic  is more stressful and worse for well-being  than prior to the pandemic  (Brown et al., 2020) . This is most consequential for single parent households  ( Choi, 2020;  Hertz et al, 2020) .  These policies may  create a model of a society where every family unit is out to gain for themselves, hoarding resources and overlooking those in their communities who may need support."
"41" "As another example of how public policies burden certain family forms, especially single parent households, s tates and cities have enacted bureaucratic hurdles for accessing benefits,  such as  unemployment and food banks, that require enormous time sacrifices—making multiple phone calls, waiting in long times, tracking down masks to go in public—that may be beyond the capabilities of  families  already struggling with household duties  (Herd & Moynihan, 2019) . These bureaucratic processes fail to recognize that families  who  struggle to meet these demands are the same families that need these supports the most. Policies  that  focus on the nuclear family leave  those without a spouse and/or adult children on the sideline and  offer services based on  an inaccurate and  outdated  picture of family life. Beyond bureaucratic hurdles, families who managed to keep their jobs  during the COVID-19 pandemic  but are now working part-time or unreliable shifts have experienced a reduction  in  family income that limits their access to healthy foods  and other health-related resources . Compared to unemployed workers, those who are underemployed do not have access to full unemployment programs or certain means-tested benefits, including food stamps. Families who cannot access healthy food through food stamps are more likely to purchase high caloric and  processed foods  or skip a meal to overcome food insecurity, which could lead to malnutrition, obesity, or diabetes  (Hamadani et al., 2020) ."
"42" "In studying the impact of policies, cross-contextual comparisons may be especially instructive. Within the U.S., health researchers have widely discussed how state and local policies set the stage for widening mortality and morbidity disparities  (Montez, 2020) . The lack of investment in public health infrastructure in certain states even before the emergence of COVID-19 will likely drive health disparities between U.S. states even further. Conversely, international comparisons could shed light on which policies are most successful at helping families buffer the negative heath and economic impact of the pandemic, as well as policies that helped to mitigate disparities between families. Cross-national differences in shutdowns, physical distancing mandates,  contact tracing,  and recommendations in mask-wearing provide a “natural experiment” of a certain type to examine how policies shape population health outcomes during this pandemic  (Pearce et al., 2020) ."
"43" "Organizational Decisions"
"44" "Beyond public policies from the  s tate, other organizations enact decisions that shape the environment through which families impact health during the COVID-19 pandemic.  O rganizations  related to health care, education, employment, banking, housing, immigration, and criminal justice , among others,   contribute to the landscape in which families form and operate. Changes in each of these have the power to shape the associations between families and health. The closures of private daycares, layoffs and furloughs by companies, and limit ed  visit s  in long-term care facilities, among other decisions and policies made by various organizations, matter for family life and—by extension—COVID-19 and other health risks.  A s governments make assumptions about families in their policies, so too do private organizations. Workplace and childcare policies create important contexts through which families  shape  COVID-19-related outcomes, either benefit ing  or harm ing  the health of caregivers and family members. Whereas some workplaces have shown flexibility in workplace demands, especially for parents of young children, others have not  (Williams, 2020) . As childcare facilities shut down due to the pandemic, employers who demand that their employees work full-time from home expect that childcare duties can be given to—or at least shared with—a partner  (Calarco et al., 2020) ."
"45" "Similarly, organization decisions  in  nursing home s  have impacted  the health consequences of  relationships between older adults in these facilities and their family members. Within the long-term care setting, the inability to visit vulnerable family members could harm the mental health of older adults within these facilities, who likely already suffer from social isolation ( Stokes & Patterson, 2020) .  Moreover, these organizational policies have  implications for the well-being of family members inside and outside of long-term care facilities. These examples indicate that researchers interested in family and health should  also  consider the roles of workplaces, schools, neighborhoods, medical and care institutions, places of worship, and other organizations that shape health and family life."
"46" "Concurrent Historical Events"
"47" "Beyond organizations and institutions, we must consider the role of the broader historical context of the COVID-19 pandemic, examining how concurrent events  influence the role of  families  and  health  (Krieger, 2020) .  One concurr ent event with the pandemic was  the  mass protests across the U.S. in response   to the  continued killing of Black people by police .  On March 13, 2020,  at the same time that  awareness of the COVID-19 pandemic became salient in the U.S., Breonna Taylor, a Black woman, was shot and killed by police  in her own home in Lexington . About two months later, on May 25, 2020, George Floyd, a Black man, was killed in Minneapolis after a police officer knelt on his neck for several minutes.  And on October 26, 2020, Walter Wallace, a Black man ,  was shot and killed by police in Philadelphia, and thirty people were arrested in the protests on that same day.  Deaths  of Black people by police officers have been occurring for decades in the U.S., with little meaningful government action to reduce these fatalities  (Laster Pirtle, 2020) . Institutional racism that devalues Black lives leads to extreme inequalities in mortality outcomes for Black people compared to non-Hispanic White people in the U.S.  (Wrigley-Field, 2020) .  Thus, the COVID-19 pandemic is just one event that matters for the health and well-being of Black families, and this pandemic should be contextualized within other concurrent events, each tied to continued racism within multiple institutions in the U.S. We discuss this more in the third tenet."
"48" "An additional concurrent event tied closely to the COVID-19 pandemic with implications for long-term family and health dynamics is the economic recession. As a recent parallel,  during the 2008 recession, due to  a collapse in housing value and stock prices, a drastic rise of the unemployment rate, and mortgage foreclosures and delinquencies ( Danziger, 2013; Hout et al., 2011 ), the economic stability and health of many families was jeopardized. Similar to the 2008 recession, the COVID-19 pandemic has threatened economic stability by increasing the national  unemployment rate, from 4.4 to 14.7 percent between March and April 2020 (US BLS 2020). T his impacts the  long-term well-being  of families  and provides a key backdrop for understanding how families matter for health during the pandemic.   In addition to protests over police brutality and the economic recession, o ther contexts to consider  in understanding the roles families play in health outcomes during the COVID-19 pandemic   include  the current political administration in the U.S.  and  high levels of  politica l  polariz ation in the   country , the timing of the U.S. presidential election, deportation policies targeted at immigrant families, health care reform efforts, and the climate crisis ."
"49" "Tenet 3 : Families as Embedded within Other Sociodemographic-Based Health Disparities"
"50" "Our third tenet states that  many  health in equalities by race, gender,  class , and other socially constructed positions  are widening during COVID-19, but the extent to which this is occurring is shaped by families and by  the  public policies , organizational decisions, and concurrent events  that  also  impact families.   Within this tenet, we recognize that families are embedded within broader structures and systems—including racism, sexism, heterosexism, ageism, classism, and ableism – shaping  public policies, organizational decisions, and concurrent events—both their existence and their impact . This in turn shapes  how, when, and why families matter for health.  As Krieger states, “Health inequities comprise differences in health status across social groups that are unjust, avoidable, and, in principle, preventable” (2020: 1620). Thus, we draw attention to these disparities during the COVID-19 pandemic as spaces of injustice that can be addressed through structural changes (Williams, 2019).  Within this tenet, we note that f amilies are highly diverse and changing rapidly, hence there is no universal story of when, why, and how families  might  shape healt h during the COVID-19 pandemic.   Based on our theoretical approaches and existing empirical evidence , we anticipate that differences in families can help us make sense of the  emerging disparities and resiliencies around COVID-19, and we highlight some ways this may be occurring  for race, gender, and SES ."
"51" "Race, Families, and COVID-19"
"52" "We first  address  existing research regarding how families  might be associated with race -based COVID-19 outcomes as well as other health outcomes. Early counts of deaths due to COVID-19 across U.S. cities illustrated racial disparities  to the detriment of Black,  Latinx , and Native American   populations .  For example, i n Michigan, Black residents represented 40 percent of deaths in a state where they make up only 14 percent of the total population  (Yancy, 2020) .  Motivated by this  disparity ,  twenty U.S. cities and counties and three states —alongside the American Medical Association— declared that racism is a public health crisis  (Vestal, 2020) .  Health  scholars suggest  multiple  ways in which race is linked to higher mortality incidence  due to COVID-19  among Black communities:  for example,  Black individuals are more likely to have existing comorbidities that increase t he risk of death from COVID ;  Black people are more likely to live in poverty and crowded housing conditions ;  and  Black persons are more likely  to work “essential” jobs that put the m in direct contact with others ( Hooper et al., 2020) .  But  w hen considering racial disparities within any specific health outcome  and the linking mechanisms ,  we must  also conceptualiz e  and historiciz e  the social construction of race , for example, situating constructions of race within settler colonialism in the U . S .  ( Williams,  2019 ).    We note that social determinants of health do not occur within a vacuum: historic racism, housing discrimination, and oppression tied to a divestment in communities of color shaped t hese factors and place Black,  Latinx , and Native American  communities at risk of both comorbidities and contracting and dying from COVID-19 ( Laster Pirtle, 2020) .  Thus ,  we emphasize that  driving these  other explanations  is th e  fact  Black  individuals  are exposed to  racial  discrimination  at the micro, meso, and macro levels  (Hooper et al., 2020) ."
"53" "We draw attention to the family as a  key factor that is understudied yet helpful in conceptualizing the impact of COVID-19 on Black communities  and other communities of color , both in examining why the health disparities exist at all and in considering why they are not larger .  U nderstanding how families matter for health during the COVID-19 pandemic means seeing how continued structural racism within the U.S. impacts Black families in particular  ( Laster Pirtle  2020) .  To illustrate, w e highlight the role of living arrangements and particularly multigenerational living .  In 2016, 26 percent of Black people and 27 percent of Latinx people were living in multi-generational households, slight increases since 2009  (Cohn & Passel, 2018) .  However,  as explained above,  multigenerational housing arrangements  may have been an early culprit in the spread of the virus , driven by policies and organizational decisions that did little to support these families .  Another example of how race  and racism  interacts with families to shape health outcomes during this pandemic is how  racial differences in family-level access to resources is likely exacerbating racial disparities in health.  Moreover , family composition, and specifically family members’ educational resources, are  important when considering  the safety net that kin may lean on, but also when considering health spillovers, behaviors, and the interpretation of ne w– and in the case of COVID-19 – rapid ly changing health information.  In the  U.S. , although far more Black students attend and complete four-year colleges than the past, the racial gap  in  college attainment prevails  (McFarland et al., 2019) . This suggests that the pace and progress of access to educational resources at the family level may be slower to close ,  and ,  thus, those offspring with a college education may face increased pressure to act as a safety net provider for  less educated family members."
"54" "We also draw attention to  the role of agency within families, such that  people choose to engage in specific behaviors that may increase or reduce their risk of COVID-19. Notably, white individuals and families are the group  that have exhibited  the riskiest health behaviors related to COVID-19. For example,  social distancing  was more prevalent  in U.S. counties with more Black resident s  compared to counties with more white residents  (Huang, 2020) .  Black ad ults were also more likely than W hite adults to delay or avoid medical care because of COVID-19-related concerns, demonstrating the complex decision making involved in balancing health concerns (Czeisler et al., 2020).  Black families were among the groups most likely to choose virtual learning options for children, yet these families—along with low SES families—were also the most likely to be within school districts with relatively few supports to p romote quality remote schooling (Smith & Reeves, 2020) .  These  actions  by Black families  to  reduc e   their  COVID-19 risk are likely somewhat driven by the recognition of greater risk of COVID-19 infection and death within Black communities  and  being more likely to   know someone who died from COVID-19 (Verdery et al., 2020). In fact, in June 2020, about 11 percent of Black Americans reported being close with someone who had died of COVID-19, compared to four percent of white Americans (Stafford & Fingerhut, 2020). Deaths  of people within one’s social networks , a result of racist systems as discussed above, then impact health behaviors differentially across racial groups. With these complex processes in mind, we call for future research to consider the multiple ways race, racism, and family shape health within the context of COVID-19 and the backdrop of policy decisions and concurrent events."
"55" "Gender, Families, and COVID-19"
"56" "We also suggest that the family plays a role in understanding gender heal th inequalities during COVID-19. Several empirical studies have considered this in the context of mothe rhood.   The closing of schools and daycare centers have contributed to a  decrease  in the number of hours women have spent on  paid labor, likely due to an increase in  childcare and housework   ( Collins  et al. , 2020 ). Between August and September 2020, more than four times as many women than men dropped out of the labor force (Connley, 2020).  We expect  these employment transitions  to  have a meaningful impact on women’s health and well-being.  T his could be mitigated through policy decisions that provide  childcare supports to families or promote job security with paid leave options. Given that historical inequalities within intimate relationships related to unpaid work have contributed to gender health gaps (Thomeer et al., 2013),  we expect that these changes in family dynamics due to the COVID-19 pandemic may serve to widen the gender health gap more."
"57" "The gender health gap  is likely especially pronounced  within single-parenting  in the U.S .  Single-mother families in the U.S. lack in stitutional support that single- m other families  in other ad vanced industrial countries possess , including state-funded childcare, parental leave, and universal health care  (Collins, 2019) . This lack of institutional support s  contributes to the poor economic situation of many single mothers in the U.S., whereas single mothers in other advanced industrial economies fare comparatively better in terms of socioeconomic and overall well-being  (Glass et al., 2016) .  Single mothers in the U.S. face  the untenable challenge of working while also providing care for children  during  the COVID-19 outbreak  (Choi, 2020 ; Hertz et al., 2020 ) . For those single mothers who lost their jobs because of  the economic fallout of COVID-19 , the pandemic also pushed many into financial  instability  with long-term health consequences ."
"58" "Beyond the role of gender and family for women’s COVID-19 risk, we can also examine  the relationship between the family and COVID-19 risks for  men.  I mportantly, early e pidemiological evidence suggested  that men have higher rates of infection and mortality from COVID-19 compared to women, with several proposed biological pathways to understand this  disparity  (Klein et al., 2020) .  Beyond these biological explanations demonstrating greater risk for males, social explanations also likely play a role—for example,  discourses around masculinity contribute to oppositional sentiments about wearing a mask, physical distancing, and even recognizing COVID-19 as a legitimate threat  ( Cassino & Bessen-Cassino, 2020 ) . Previous research on gender and family suggest that within heterosexual contexts, women monitor men’s health and health behaviors, and through social control encourage men to practice healthier behaviors  (Umberson et al., 2018) . Although not studied in the COVID-19 context, we  expect  that wives, mothers, daughters, and other family roles  occupied by women  would promote men’s mask wearing, physical distancing, hand washing, and other behaviors to reduce COVID-19 risk. If this is the case, we would expect this to exacerbate the COVID-19 gap within groups of men by family status  (e.g., better outcomes for married men compared to single men) . Furthermore, the stress of social control may harm women’s health  more  when they are in relationships with men  ( Umberson et al., 2018) ."
"59" "Less studied, families likely also matter for understand health among transgender and other gender nonconforming people during the pandemic. One study found that transgender (and other gender minority and sexual minority) youth identified being isolated with unsupportive families and the loss of in-person identity-based socialization and support as two of the biggest stressors during the pandemic, with this harming their mental health (Fish et al. 2020). The authors concluded that efforts were needed to provide resources and support for these populations, or there is a large risk that known health disparities experienced by transgender and other gender nonconforming populations compared to cisgender populations would likely increase  (Salerno et al., 2020) .  Families of choice are likely also important for transgender and other gender  nonconforming people during the COVID-19 pandemic, providing supports that buffer against stress and health  and ec o nomic  risks associated with the pandemic."
"60" "SES, Families, and COVID-19"
"61" "Finally, we address disparities across families by SES, considering how existing  socio economic divides in the U.S. deepened due to the COVID-19 pandemic and likely expand ed  health disparities for low SES compared to high  SES families —especially given the current policy landscape with relatively few supports for low - SES families impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic . Recent data show  how  U.S.  households at the  bottom income quintile  were detrimentally impacted by the pandemic compared to those in the top income quintile. The share of children living in households in which no one earned an income doubled from 7 percent in February 2020 to 15 percent in April  (Bokun et al., 2020) . More than one-third of those at the bottom income quint ile were laid off compared to 8 percent  of those at the top income quintile  (Rothwell, 2020) . The deepening class divide as a result of the pandemic has parallel translations to who can adhere to physical distancing measures, including the abi lity to work from home, to  secure childcare outside of large-scale institutions  (e.g., nannies)  and  to  access medical benefits and medical leave in the event of falling sick  (Reeves & Rothwell, 2020) ."
"62" "As noted earlier,  family structures are unevenly distributed by SES. Children living in households where the most-educated family member attained less than a college degree are more likely to live in single parent households  ( Pew Research  Center, 2015) . Two-parent families, who are more likely to be comprised of college-educated adults  (Mare, 2016) , make up an increasing share of America’s middle-upper class  and are most  able to work from home and follow “stay-at-home” measures.  Preliminary data indicate stark differences in the impact of COVID-19 on economic well-being based on family structure; 14.2 percent of children living with single parents  saw their parent lose their job in the early months of the pandemic whereas only 6.4 percent of children living with two parents had both parents become unemployed  (Bokun et al., 2020) .  The two-parent structure also means that parents could ostensibly share childcare responsibilities especially for those with young children  ( Collins et al., 2020;  Prickett et al., 2020) . Thus, the pandemic deepens the financial and economic well-being gap between single and married-couple parents, and the health of single-parent families  may  deteriorat e  due to loss of employer-based health insurance, food insecurity, or housing . Because COVID-19 has increased immediate economic disparities across family structures, it is likely that we will continue to see widening health disparities as higher SES families recover  more quickly from the recession  and lower SES families are left behind."
"63" "Beyond Race ,  Gender , and SES"
"64" "Beyond  the focus on race, gender, and SES, other  sociodemographic markers  (e.g.,  sexuality, age, disability st atus, immigration  status , religion) are  also known to shape family relationships and are integrally associat ed with broader health outcomes. These  positions  likely also  influence  COVID-19 outcomes ,  although  they  have not been  widely  studied.  F rom  an intersectionality perspective, these socially constructed positions interact with each other—and the broader organizational and institutional context—to shape how families matter for health. This is illustrated in thinking about the impact of school closings. Although empirical consideration has been limited, school closings   had the greatest costs for Black and Latinx mothers with low SES, especially given the limited support provided by federal and local governments.  This greater cost is due to an intersection of historical racism which led to significant segregation and disparities in school quality and resources, sexism which contributed to women being primarily responsible for childcare within communities, and classism which  limited low SES’s people’s abilities to support  themselves financially with a steady , well-paid,  flexible job s  (Bowleg, 2020) . Rather than working in iso lation, these factors intersect and create unique needs  overlooked by many policymakers. We call for closer consideration of the intersectional factors that matter for studies of families and health, especially in seeing how families contribute to—or reduce health disparities during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"65" "Conclusion"
"66" "The conceptual framework outlined here has implications for understanding the role of families during other crisis points. For example, we have already seen the numerous ways in which families shape the response to economic crises. But we can also imagine how the effects of natural disasters, which are increasingly predictable with climate change, are both  influenced by  the family. Currently, the fallout from COVID-19 suggests that we are headed for widening gaps between the married and the single, those with caregiving responsibilities and those without, people living with others and people in isolation. Multigenerational living, long a solution to financial precarity among  poor, working-class, and  non-White communities, now endangers the lives of older adults who cannot avoid contact with younger household me mbers. And those without family  have always been at special risk for health issues and premature mortality, and this is likely heightened  by  COVID-19."
"67" "As an important note, we began this project in Spring 2020, early during the COVID-19 pandemic, and edited this manuscript in Fall 2020. This means that many important studies about families and health inequalities during COVID-19 were not published in time for us to include within this discussion, and also that many of the empirical examples we do cite are based on preliminary data analysis.  The preliminary research that has been done is impress i ve —and growing on a daily basis—but there is still more research to be done on how families  influence our   understanding the COVID-19 pandemic.  We  urge researchers  in the  months and years ahead  to co nsider collecti n g   data  that focuses not only on individual health outcomes  during the COVID-19 pandemic , but also  that would allow for empirical analyses  on  how  family structure, composition, and dynamics  have  shifted  health disparities  during the pandemic.  Prior surveys on population health tend to neglect collecting information on the  social and demographic characteristics of  family  members, whereas surveys on family life frequently have scar c e indicators on health and health behaviors.  Thus, we see a greater need for the collection of both types of information  in the immediate future. Likewise, to better understand the pathways  through which  families shape  health outcomes  that we have outlined in this paper,  the need for qualitative data based on interviews  and observations  with families is imperative  as this provides needed insight into the processes and meanings of the pandemic at this family   level  (Fine & Abramson, 2020) .  We believe that an essential area for future research w ill  be to   understand  how COVID-19  is also shifting the structure,  composition,  and dynamics of families .  We alluded to some of these   behavioral  changes throughout  this article , for example  how the pandemic will decrease the size of the family network through deaths , but  response to the  COVID-19  pandemic  may  also  lead to positive changes within the family as well. For example, some families may  encourage their members t o  return to s chool in order to secure stable employment after the pandemic is over.  This shift  in family investment strategies  could  positively impact  how families respond to future crises .  Her e, we note that public policies  are particularly important in  shap ing  how families are impacted by the pandemic."
"68" "We  conclude by  not ing  that  although our  article   suggests ways in which families are likely contributors to widening health disparities during the COVID-19 pandemic,  the negative consequences of how families respond to  this health emergency  are not  all  inevitable.  Rather than  succumb to the isolation of  physical  distancing, w e see how families have used technology to retain and possibly even strengthen ties despite distancing measures.  In addition,   COVID-19 has laid bare pre-existing racial inequalities in society, whereby Black and Latinx communities are disproportionally becoming ill, dying, or suffering from the economic fallout of the pandemic  ( Bowleg, 2020;  Krieger, 2020) . And yet, this too has struck a chord with many White families, who join the movement for racial justice for the first time. Broadly, the disruption of “normal life” prior to COVID-19 offers  unique  opportunities to imag ine a different type of future,  one  where families —especially looking beyond the “traditional” family— may help  mitigate  the gap in health inequalities , rather than  serve to widen them ."
"69" "Works Cited"
"70" "Balbo, N., Billari, F., & Melegaro, A. (2020 , April 6 ).  “ The strength of family ties and COVID-19 . ”   Context .   https://contexts.org/blog/structural-shocks-and-extreme-exposures"
"71" "Berg-Weger, M., & Morley, J. E. (2020).  Loneliness and  s ocial  i solation in  o lder  a dults  d uring the Covid-19  p andemic: Implications for  g erontological  s ocial  w ork . Springer."
"72" "Berger, L. M., & Carlson, M. J. (2020). Family policy and complex contemporary families: A decade in review and implications for the next decade of research and policy practice. Journal of Marriage and Family, 82(1), 478-507. https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12650"
"73" "Bettinger-Lopez, C. (2020, May 13).  A  d ouble  p andemic: Domestic  v iolence in the  a ge of COVID-19 .   Council on Foreign Relations. https://www.cfr.org/in-brief/double-pandemic-domestic-violence-age-covid-19"
"74" "Bokun, A., Himmelstern, J., Jeong, W., Meier, A., Musick, K., & Warren, R. (2020 , July 28 ).  The  u nequal  i mpact of COVID-19 on  c hildren’s  e conomic  v ulnerability . https://thesocietypages.org/ccf/2020/07/28/the-unequal-impact-of-covid-19-on-childrens-economic-vulnerability/"
"75" "Boserup, B., McKenney, M., & Elkbuli, A. (2020). Alarming trends in US domestic violence during the COVID-19 pandemic.  The American Journal of Emergency Medicine . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajem.2020.04.077"
"76" "Bowleg, L. (2020). We’re not all in this together: on COVID-19, intersectionality, and structural inequality.  American Journal of Public Health, 110 (7), 917."
"77" "Broderick, C. B. (1993).  Understanding family process: Basics of family systems theory . Sage."
"78" "Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). Ecology of the family as a context for human development: Research perspectives.  Developmental Psychology ,  22 (6), 723-742."
"79" "Brown, S. M., Doom, J. R., Lechuga-Peña, S., Watamura, S. E., & Koppels, T. (2020). Stress and parenting during the global COVID-19 pandemic. Child abuse & neglect, 104699. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chiabu.2020.104699"
"80" "Calarco, J. M., Meanwell, E., Anderson, E., & Knopf, A. (2020).  “My husband thinks I’m crazy”: COVID-19-related conflict in couples with young c hildren. SocArXiv. October 9. doi:10.31235/osf.io/cpkj6"
"81" "Carr, D. (2018). The linked lives principle in life course studies: Classic approaches and contemporary advances. In  Social networks and the life course  (pp. 41-63). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-71544-5_3"
"82" "Cassino, D., & Bessen-Cassino, Y. (2020). Of masks and men? Gender, sex and protective measures during COVID-19.  Politics & Gender ,  OnlineFirst . https://doi.org/10.1017/S1743923X20000616"
"83" "Cherlin, A. J., & Seltzer, J. A. (2014). Family complexity, the family safety net, and public policy.  The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  654 (1), 231-239. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0002716214530854"
"84" "Choi, K. H. (2020, May 21).  COVID-19 & parenting challenges .   Psychology Today. https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/social-fabric/202005/covid-19-parenting-challenges?fbclid=IwAR3kDmGvPYCdnQWZzDNvXCvNoidDBiDDc4hj0_eLYqEyzQjSBBz0B-ssZHI"
"85" "Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2009).  Connected: The surprising power of our social networks and how they shape our lives . Little, Brown Spark."
"86" "Clark, E., Fredricks, K., Woc-Colburn, L., Bottazzi, M. E., & Weatherhead, J. (2020). Disproportionate impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on immigrant communities in the United States.  PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases, 14 (7), e0008484."
"87" "Cohen, P. N. (2020 a ).  July data show 2.7 million extra young adults living at home.   August 7.  Family Inequality.  https://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2020/08/16/july-data-show-2-7-million-extra-young-adults-living-at-home/"
"88" "Cohen, P. N.  (2020 b ).   Early pandemic demographic indicators . September 12. Family Inequality. https://familyinequality.wordpress.com/2020/09/12/early-pandemic-demographic-indicators/"
"89" "Cohen, P. N. (2020c).  The Family: Diversity, Inequality, and Social Change . 3 rd  Edition. New York: WW Norton and Company."
"90" "Cohn, D. V ., & Passel, J. S. (2018).  A record 64 million Americans live in multigenerational households . https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2018/04/05/a-record-64-million-americans-live-in-multigenerational-households/"
"91" "Collins, C. (2019).  Making motherhood work: How women manage careers and caregiving . Princeton University Press."
"92" "Collins, C., Landivar, L. C., Ruppanner, L., & Scarborough, W. J. (2020). COVID‐19 and the gender gap in work hours. Gender, Work & Organization."
"93" "Collins, P. H. (1998). Intersections of race, class, gender, and nation: Some implications for Black family studies.  Journal of Comparative Family Studies ,  29 (1), 27-36. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.3138/jcfs.29.1.27"
"94" "Connley, C. (2020). More than 860,000 women dropped out of the labor force in September, according to new report.  CNBC  October 2 https://www.cnbc.com/2020/10/02/865000-women-dropped-out-of-the-labor-force-in-september-2020.html"
"95" "Cuomo, A.  [ @NYGovCuomo ]. (2020, March 31).   This virus is the great equalizer. Stay strong little brother.   You are a sweet, beautiful guy and my best friend.  [Tweet].  Twitter .   https://twitter.com/NYGovCuomo/status/1245021319646904320"
"96" "Czeisler, M.É., Marynak, K., Clarke, K.E., Salah, Z., Shakya, I., Thierry, J.M., Ali, N., McMillan, H., Wiley, J.F., Weaver, M.D. and Czeisler, C.A., 2020. Delay or avoidance of medical care because of COVID-19–related concerns—United States, June 2020.  Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 69 (36), 1250-1257. https://dx.doi.org/10.15585%2Fmmwr.mm6936a4"
"97" "Danziger, S. (2013). Evaluating the effects of the great recession.  The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  650 (1), 6-24. https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0002716213500454"
"98" "Evandrou, M., Falkingham, J., Qin, M., & Vlachantoni, A. (2020). Changing living arrangements, family dynamics and stress during lockdown: evidence from four birth cohorts in the UK. SocArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/kv8dg"
"99" "Fine, G. A., & Abramson, C. M. (2020). Ethnography in the time of Covid-19. Vectors and the vulnerable.  Etnografia e ricerca qualitativa, 13 (2), 165-174."
"100" "Fish, J. N., McInroy, L. B., Paceley, M. S., Williams, N. D., Henderson, S., Levine, D. S., & Edsall, R. N. (2020). “I'm kinda stuck at home with unsupportive parents right now”: LGBTQ youths' experiences with COVID-19 and the importance of online support.  Journal of Adolescent Health, 67 (3), 450-452. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2020.06.002"
"101" "Friedman, E. M., & Mare, R. D. (2014). The schooling of offspring and the survival of parents.  Demography ,  51 (4), 1271-1293. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1007/s13524-014-0303-z"
"102" "Glass, J., Simon, R. W., & Andersson, M. A. (2016). Parenthood and happiness: Effects of work-family reconciliation policies in 22 OECD countries.  American journal of sociology ,  122 (3), 886-929. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1086/688892"
"103" "Goldstein, M. (2020, April 13).  Will divorce rates spike after coronavirus?  Boston Globe.  https://www.bostonglobe.com/2020/04/10/lifestyle/will-divorce-rates-spike-after-covid-19/"
"104" "Hamadani, J.D., Hasan, M.I., Baldi, A.J., Hossain, S.J., Shiraji, S., Bhuiyan, M.S.A., Mehrin, S.F., Fisher, J., Tofail, F., Tipu, S.M.U., & Grantham-McGregor, S. (2020). Immediate impact of stay-at-home orders to control COVID-19 transmission on socioeconomic conditions, food insecurity, mental health, and intimate partner violence in Bangladeshi women and their families: An interrupted time series.  The Lancet Global Health, 8 (11), e1380-e1389."
"105" "Hayward, M. D. and B. K. Gorman (2004). The long arm of childhood: The influence of early-life social conditions on men's mortality.  Demography ,   41 (1): 87-107."
"106" "Herd, P., & Moynihan, D. P. (2019).  Administrative burden: Policymaking by other means . Russell Sage Foundation."
"107" "Hertz, R., Mattes , J., & Shook, A. (2020). When paid work invades the family: Single mothers in the COVID-19 p andemic.  Journal of Family Issues , 0192513X20961420."
"108" "Hooper, M. W., Nápoles, A. M., & Pérez-Stable, E. J. (2020). COVID-19 and racial/ethnic disparities.  Jama . https://doi.org/doi:10.1001/jama.2020.8598"
"109" "Hout, M., Levanon, A., & Cumberworth, E. (2011). Job loss and unemployment.  The great recession , 59-81."
"110" "Huang, V. S., Sutermaster, S., Caplan, Y., Kemp, H., Schmutz, D., & Sgaier, S. K. (2020). Social distancing across vulnerability, race, politics, and employment: How different Americans changed behaviors before and after major COVID-19 policy announcements.  medRxiv . https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.04.20119131"
"111" "Jiang, N., & Kaushal, N. (2020). How  c hildren's  e ducation  a ffects  c aregiving: Evidence from  p arent’s  l ast  y ears of  l ife.  Economics & Human Biology , 100875. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ehb.2020.100875"
"112" "Kilinenberg, E. (2013).  Going solo: The extraordinary rise and surprising appeal of living alone . Penguin."
"113" "Klein, S. L., Dhakal, S., Ursin, R. L., Deshpande, S., Sandberg, K., & Mauvais-Jarvis, F. (2020). Biological sex impacts COVID-19 outcomes.  PLoS pathogens ,  16 (6), e1008570. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.ppat.1008570"
"114" "Kotecha, R. S. (2020). Challenges posed by COVID-19 to children with cancer.  The Lancet Oncology, 21 (5), e235. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1470-2045(20)30205-9"
"115" "Krieger, N. (2020). ENOUGH: COVID-19, Structural Racism, Police Brutality, Plutocracy, Climate Change—and Time for Health Justice, Democratic Governance, and an Equitable, Sustainable Future.  American Journal of Public Health,   110 (11), 1620–1623.  https://dx.doi.org/10.2105%2FAJPH.2020.305886"
"116" "Laster Pirtle, W. N. (2020). Racial capitalism: a fundamental cause of novel coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic inequities in the United States.  Health Education & Behavior , 1090198120922942. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198120922942"
"117" "Liu, Y.-L. (2020, June 4).  Is COVID -19 changing our relationships?  BBC. https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20200601-how-is-covid-19-is-affecting-relationships"
"118" "Mare, R. D. (2016). Educational homogamy in two gilded ages: Evidence from inter-generational social mobility data.  The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science ,  663 (1), 117-139. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0002716215596967"
"119" "Martin, R. (2020, June 9).  Examining  r acial  d isparities  o bserved  d uring  c oronavirus  p andemic .   NPR. https://www.npr.org/2020/06/09/872711019/examining-racial-disparities-observed-during-coronavirus-pandemic"
"120" "McFarland, J., Hussar, B., Zhang, J., Wang, X., Wang, K., Hein, S., Diliberti, M., Cataldi, E. F., Mann, F. B., & Barmer, A. (2019). The Condition of Education 2019. NCES 2019-144.  National Center for Education Statistics ."
"121" "McLanahan, S., & Jacobsen, W. (2015). Diverging destinies revisited. In  Families in an era of increasing inequality  (pp. 3-23). Springer."
"122" "Montez, J. K. (2020).  Examining Population Health Across US States Using Secondary Data, Logistic Regression, and Graphics . SAGE Publications Ltd."
"123" "Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2017). Acknowledging the elephant in the room: how stressful environmental contexts shape relationship dynamics. Current Opinion in Psychology, 13, 107-110. doi: 10.1016/j.copsyc.2016.05.013"
"124" "Overall, N., Chang, V., Pietromonaco, P., Low, R., & Henderson, A. M. (2020). Relationship functioning during COVID-19 quarantine. PsyArXiv. August 9. doi:10.31234/osf.io/7cvdm."
"125" "Park, S. S. (2020). Caregivers’  m ental  h ealth and  s omatic  s ymptoms  d uring COVID -19.  The Journals of Gerontology: Series B . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbaa121"
"126" "Pearce, N., Lawlor, D. A., & Brickley, E. B. (2020). Comparisons between countries are essential for the control of COVID-19.  International Journal of Epidemiology . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyaa108"
"127" "Phelan, J. C., Link, B. G., & Tehranifar, P. (2010). Social conditions as fundamental causes of health inequalities: theory, evidence, and policy implications.  Journal of health and social behavior ,  51 (1_suppl), S28-S40. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0022146510383498"
"128" "Pietromonaco, P. R., & Overall, N. C. (2020). Applying relationship science to evaluate how the COVID-19 pandemic may impact couples’ relationships.  American Psychologist.  Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/amp0000714"
"129" "Prickett, K. C., Fletcher, M., & Chapple, S. (2020 , July, 3 ).  The parenting myth revealed by lockdown .  https://www.newsroom.co.nz/ideasroom/the-parenting-myth-revealed-by-lockdown"
"130" "Prime, H., Wade, M., & Browne, D. T. (2020). Risk and resilience in family well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic.  American Psychologist ,   75 (5), 631-643. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/amp0000660"
"131" "Rabouin, D. (2020, March 23).  Americans' belief in \"flattening the curve\" increases with education .   Axios. https://www.axios.com/flattening-the-curve-coronavirus-education-poll-b70a59db-7698-4207-a513-ff9be330971e.html"
"132" "Reeves, R. V., & Rothwell, J. (2020 , March 27 ).  Class and COVID: How the less affluent face double risks . https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2020/03/27/class-and-covid-how-the-less-affluent-face-double-risks"
"133" "Rothwell, J. (2020 , June 1 ).  The  u nequal  d istribution of  e conomic  d amage  f rom COVID-19 . https://news.gallup.com/opinion/gallup/311714/unequal-distribution-economic-damage-covid.aspx"
"134" "Russell, L. T., Coleman, M., & Ganong, L. (2018). Conceptualizing family structu re in a social determinants of h ealth framework.  Journal of Family Theory & Review ,  10 (4), 735-748. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/jftr.12296"
"135" "Salerno, J. P., Williams, N. D., & Gattamorta, K. A. (2020). LGBTQ populations: Psychologically vulnerable communities in the COVID-19 pandemic.  Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy ,  12 (S1), S239-S242. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/tra0000837"
"136" "Smith, E. & Reeves, R. V. (2020).  S t uden ts of color most likely to be learning online: Districts must work even harder on race equity . https://www.brookings.edu/blog/how-we-rise/2020/09/23/students-of-color-most-likely-to-be-learning-online-districts-must-work-even-harder-on-race-equity/"
"137" "Stafford, K., & Fingerhut, H. (2020). Poll: Black Americans most likely to know a COVID-19 victim.  AP News  June 15 https://apnews.com/article/52ed0842bd17102560e5d896be79d38c"
"138" "Stokes, J. E., & Patterson, S. E. (2020). Intergenerational  r elationships,  f amily  c aregiving  p olicy, and COVID-19 in the United States.  Journal of Aging & Social Policy , 1-9. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1080/08959420.2020.1770031"
"139" "Tebb, S., & Jivanjee, P. (2000). Caregiver isolation: An ecological model.  Journal of Gerontological Social Work ,  34 (2), 51-72. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1300/J083v34n02_06"
"140" "The Pew Research Center. (2015 , Dicember 17 ).  The American Family Today . https://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2015/12/17/1-the-american-family-today/"
"141" "Thomeer, M. B., Umberson, D., & Williams, K. (2013). Women, stress, and health. In  Women and health  (pp. 685-695). Academic Press."
"142" "Umberson, D., Donnelly, R., & Pollitt, A. M. (2018). Marriage, social control, and health behavior: A dyadic analysis of same-sex and different-sex couples.  Journal of health and social behavior ,  59 (3), 429-446. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1177%2F0022146518790560"
"143" "Umberson, D., Olson, J. S., Crosnoe, R., Liu, H., Pudrovska, T., & Donnelly, R. (2017). Death of family members as an overlooked source of racial disadvantage in the United States.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,  114 (5), 915-920."
"144" "Umberson, D., & Thomeer, M. B. (2020). Family  m atters: Research on  f amily  t ies and  h ealth, 2010-2020.  Journal of Marriage and Family ,  82 (1). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/jomf.12640"
"145" "U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2020.  Labor Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey. August 20.   https://data.bls.gov/timeseries/LNS14000000"
"146" "Van Bavel, J. J., Baicker, K., Boggio, P. S., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M., Crockett, M. J., Crum, A. J., Douglas, K. M., & Druckman, J. N. (2020). Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic response.  Nature Human Behaviour , 1-12. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-020-0884-z"
"147" "van Mulukom, V., Muzzulini, B., Rutjens, B. T., van Lissa, C. J., & Farias, M. The Psychological Impact of Lockdown During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Exacerbating Factors and Mitigating Actions. https://files.osf.io/v1/resources/fs2n9/providers/osfstorage/5f2970759c9094020948604b?action=download&direct&version=1"
"148" "Verdery, A. M., Smith-Greenaway, E., Margolis, R., & Daw, J. (2020). Tracking the reach of COVID-19 kin loss with a bereavement multiplier applied to the United States.  PNAS , Online. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2007476117"
"149" "Vestal ,  C. Racism is a public health crisis, say cities and counties. Pew Stateline. June 15, 2020. Available at: https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2020/06/15/racism-is-a-public-health-crisis-say-cities-and-counties."
"150" "Wan, W. (2020). Pandemic isolation has killed thousands of Alzheimer’s patients while families watch from afar.  Washington Post , September 16. https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2020/09/16/coronavirus-dementia-alzheimers-deaths/?arc404=true"
"151" "Williams, D. T. (2019). A call to focus on racial domination and oppression: a response to “racial and ethnic inequality in poverty and affluence, 1959–2015.” P opulation Research and Policy Review, 38 (5), 655-663. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11113-019-09538-x"
"152" "Williams, J. C. (2020, August 6).  Real  l ife  h orror  s tories  f rom the  w orld of  p andemic  m otherhood .   The New York Times,   23. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/06/opinion/mothers-discrimination-coronavirus.html"
"153" "Wrigley-Field, E. (2020).  US Racial Inequality May Be as Deadly as COVID-19 . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. https://doi.org/https://osf.io/9csa6/"
"154" "Yahirun, J. J., Sheehan, C. M., & Mossakowski, K. N. (2020). Depression in later life: The role of adult children’s college education for older parents’ mental health in the United States.  The Journals of Gerontology: Series B ,  75 (2), 389-402. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gby135"
"155" "Yancy, C. W. (2020). COVID-19 and African Americans.  J AMA . https://doi.org/doi:10.1001/jama.2020.6548"
"156" "Zhang, J., Tian, S., Lou, J., & Chen, Y. (2020). Familial cluster of COVID-19 infection from an asymptomatic.  Critical Care ,  24 , 1-3. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1186/s13054-020-2817-7"
