Can a COVID-19 Vaccine Live up to Americans’ Expectations?
A Conjoint Analysis of how Vaccine Characteristics
Influence Vaccination Intentions
Forthcoming at Social Science & Medicine
Matthew Motta. Assistant Professor. Dept of Political Science. Oklahoma State University.
Contact: matthew[dot]motta[at]okstate[dot]edu

Objective: A vaccine for the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) could prove critical in establishing
herd immunity. While past work has documented the prevalence and correlates of vaccine
refusal, I assess how a less explored topic -- properties of vaccines themselves (e.g., national
origin, efficacy, risk of side effects) -- might influence vaccination intentions. This information
can help public health officials preempt differential vaccination intention, and inform health
communication campaigns that encourage vaccine uptake.
Rationale: Previous research suggests that Americans should be more likely to intend to
vaccinate if presented with a US-made vaccine that carries a low risk of minor side effects, is
highly effective, is administered in just one dose, and has spent significant time in development.
Methods: I administered a conjoint experiment (N = 5,940 trials) in a demographically
representative survey (N = 990) of US adults to assess how variation in vaccine properties
influence self-reported public vaccination intentions.
Results: I find that respondents prefer vaccines that are US-made, over 90% effective, and carry
a less than 1% risk of minor side effects. This is potentially problematic, as some leading vaccine
candidates are produced outside the US, and/or may be more likely to produce minor side effects
than respondents would otherwise prefer. Worryingly, intended vaccine refusal rates exceed 30%
for a vaccine meeting these optimal characteristics. Encouragingly, though, Americans show no
clear preference for vaccines administered in one dose, or developed in under a year, and do not
appear to draw a distinction between weakened viral vs. mRNA-based vaccines.
Conclusion: Americans’ preferences for a novel coronavirus vaccine may be at odds with the
vaccine that ultimately hits the market, posing both policy and health communication challenges
for vaccination uptake.

Keywords: COVID-19; Vaccine Refusal; Health Psychology; Vaccine Properties; Survey
Research; Survey Expriments

1

A safe and effective vaccine against the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) could prove critical in
establishing herd immunity. According to current epidemiological estimates, between 40-60% of
Americans must become immune to the disease – either through recovering from the disease, or
via inoculation from a vaccine – in order to put the virus’ spread into decline (Kwok et al., 2020;
Britton et al., 2020; Bartsch et al., 2020). As of this writing, there are dozens of potential vaccine
candidates in development (Craven 2020).
However, a growing line of research suggests that between one fifth to one third of
American adults plan to refuse a vaccine for COVID-19, once one becomes available (Thigpen
& Funk 2020; Lunz-Tujilo & Motta 2020). Previous work has also found that Americans are
considerably more likely to refuse vaccination if they distrust scientific authorities (e.g., Yaqub
et al., 2014; Motta 2020), and has documented stark demographic differences in vaccine
intention (e.g., racial and ethnic minority groups are less likely to intend to vaccinate, citing
concerns about vaccine safety, efficacy, and affordability; Callaghan et al., unpublished).
Less is known, however, about how properties of vaccines themselves might influence
vaccination intentions. With hundreds of potential candidates advancing through clinical trials,
the vaccine or vaccines made available to the US public could vary along a number of different
dimensions (e.g., country of origin, effectiveness, risk of minor side effects). Even in a time of
global pandemic -- when we might expect Americans to be less scrupulous about the factors that
influence their pursuit of a vaccine that could put the virus’ spread into decline and help bring
about the resumption of “life as normal” -- I expect that even minor differences in how vaccines
are developed and manufactured could have large increases on vaccination intentions.

2

I find that Americans have strong preferences for vaccine candidates produced in the US,
that are highly (at least 90%) effective at protecting against infection, and that offer a low chance
of experiencing minor side effects (1 in 100). This is potentially problematic, as leading vaccine
candidates may miss some or all of what Americans deem to be optimal benchmarks.
Worryingly, intended vaccine refusal rates exceed 30% for even a vaccine that meets all of the
above specifications.
Still, there is some room for optimism. The results also suggest that Americans are
generally indifferent regarding candidates’ time spent in development (with a slight preference
for those taking more than a year to develop), doses (with a slight preference for a 1-dose
vaccine), and antigen type. This is encouraging news, as a vaccine could be released for public
use by the end of the year, and may take multiple doses to achieve effectiveness.
I conclude by discussing how the results of this research can help inform effective
vaccine uptake health communication efforts; both with respect to the novel coronavirus, and for
future vaccines. I also discuss how these results can aid public health officials in better
preempting intentions to vaccinate for different vaccines that may ultimately come to market.

How Vaccine Characteristics Might Influence Intended Uptake
Potential vaccine candidates for the novel coronavirus can vary along a number of
different dimensions that may influence Americans’ willingness to get vaccinated. For example,
candidates can vary in their country of origin -- with the US (e.g., Moderna), China (e.g., Wuhan
Institute of Biological Products), and the UK (e.g., Oxford AstraZeneca) having made
considerable progress in producing a viable vaccine candidate (Craven 2020).

3

Previous public opinion research documents widespread misinformation about the origins
of COVID-19, and public suspicion about the possibility that the Chinese government had a role
to play in “creating” or disseminating the virus (e.g., Motta Stecula & Farhart 2020; Casesse,
Miller, & Farhart 2020; Uscinski et al., 2020). Perhaps relatedly, initial survey evidence suggests
that Americans are more likely to intend to vaccinate against COVID if a vaccine is produced in
the US, compared to China (Morning Consult 2020). More generally, recent market research
studies have found that -- given the choice -- Americans tend to prefer consuming goods
produced in the US compared to those produced elsewhere (e.g., McGoldrick et al., 2020).
Consequently, I suspect that Americans will be more likely to prefer a vaccine originating from
the US to those originating from the UK and (especially) China (H1a).
It is important to note that, shortly before this study was conducted, a untested Russian
vaccine (Sputnik V) was approved for use in Russia. The announcement received substantial
media attention in the US, much of which was negative (Cohen 2020). Consequently, as will
become apparent shortly (see: Table 1), I also investigate opinions about a hypothetical vaccine
originating from Russia. Consistent with the evidence reviewed above, and in the context of
strong public outcry about the vaccine, I hypothesize that Americans will be less likely to prefer
a hypothetical Russian vaccine than one originating from the US, UK, or China (H1b).
Additionally, vaccine candidates will vary in their potential effectiveness at preventing
people from contracting the virus. Although we cannot know candidates’ potential effectiveness
until clinical trials conclude and are replicated by the FDA, we do know that the US has set a
50% minimum effectiveness threshold in order for vaccines to be disseminated (FDA 2020), and
that (encoruagingly) early late-stage clinical trial data suggest effectiveness of greater than 90%
for leading vaccine candidates (e.g., Grady 2020). Previous research suggests Americans will be

4

more likely to intend to vaccinate if they perceive greater health benefits from doing so (e.g.,
Nan & Kim 2014). Consequently, I hypothesize that Americans will prefer more-effective
vaccine candidates to those that are less effective (H2).
Vaccines may also vary in their risk of producing minor side effects. Early clinical trials
suggested, for example, that more than 1 in 2 individuals who received Oxford-Astra-Zeneca’s
mRNA vaccine experienced minor side effects like swelling at the injection site, chills, and/or
fever (Folegatti et al., 2020). Whether or not these findings hold in later stage clinical trials is yet
to be determined (e.g., vaccine makers may abandon antigen dosage levels that most strongly
elicit minor side effects), but some medical experts have raised the possibility that leading
coronavirus vaccine candidates may be “reactogenic” (Branswell 2020); i.e., eliciting
perceptible, yet minor, manifestations of an immune response (Herve et al., 2019). Several
studies have documented that perceived risks of experiencing side effects due to vaccinating -even if those side effects are fairly minor, or inconsistent with scientific data on vaccine safety -can have a powerful influence on decreasing vaccination intentions (e.g., Tucker Edmonds et al.,
2010; Jolley & Douglas 2014; Nyhan & Reifler 2015; Callaghan et al., 2019). Consequently, I
hypothesize that Americans will be less likely to prefer vaccines with higher risks of minor side
effects (H3).
Potential COVID-19 vaccines will also vary in their time to development. Vaccine
candidates, which typically take several years to become commercially available, are being
developed at a historically rapid pace (Lurie et al., 2020), in part due to the consolidation of
Stage 2 and 3 clinical trials via “Operation Warp Speed” (RDA 2020). Some leading candidates
(e.g., AstraZeneca) may be available for public consumption by December 2020 (Aripaka &
Nadkar 2020). Still, while the pace of development is remarkable, many Americans are

5

nevertheless concerned about the possibility that development might be “rushed;” potentially
compromising safety and efficacy for the sake of speed (Morning Consult 2020). Consequently, I
hypothesize that Americans may be more likely to prefer vaccines that spend a greater amount of
time in development (H4).
Moreover, it is possible that a vaccine for COVID-19 will need to be administered in
multiple doses in order to achieve full effectiveness. For example, early clinical trial data suggest
that Moderna’s mRNA vaccine candidate must be administered in two doses in order to stimulate
a strong immune response (Jackson et al., 2020). Past research on other multi-dose vaccines
suggests that Americans are less likely to pursue vaccination -- and may have more difficulty
doing so -- when multiple doses are required to achieve full effectiveness (e.g., Nelson et al.,
2009). As a result, I hypothesize that Americans will be less likely to prefer vaccines that require
just one dose in order to achieve its projected effectiveness (H5).
Finally, vaccines will vary in the type of procedure by which they aim to generate an
immune response. While some promising candidates are mRNA based (i.e., they contain the
viral code necessary to create viral proteins, which the body can then identify and fight off; e.g.,
Moderna), others hope to simulate an immune response via “inactivated” viruses or viral proteins
(e.g., Novavax). Still others feature a weakened or “attenuated” version of the virus (e.g.,
University of Melbourne, Sinovac; Callaway 2020). These differences have received substantial
attention in the popular press – in part due to the idea that an effective mRNA vaccine would be
the first of its kind.
Conceivably, Americans might be more reluctant to try vaccines that have never
successfully been brought to market in the past (i.e., mRNA), or that feature a version of the
virus that they may worry could get them sick (i.e., attenuated vector vaccines). However, as

6

many Americans lack even basic knowledge about how viral transmission and immunity (Miller
1998; Downs et al., 2007), it is unclear whether or not they might draw meaningful distinctions
between these types of vaccines. Consequently, in lieu of a formal hypothesis, I propose the
following research question: Does the procedure by which vaccines aim to produce an immune
response influence Americans’ preference for some vaccines over others? (RQ1)

Data & Measures
Data.
Data for this study come from a demographically representative survey (N = 990) of US
adults conducted on August 24-25, 2020. Respondents were recruited via Lucid Theorem’s
online opt-in sampling service, which uses quota sampling to ensure representativeness on
nationally representative benchmarks for respondents’ age, gender, race, educational attainment,
household income, four-category Census region, and political party (see: Callaghan et al., 2019
for an example of U.S. vaccine hesitancy research using this platform). Data from Lucid have
been shown to closely mirror known demographic benchmarks, and replicate well-studied
experimental findings (Coppock & McClellan 2019). Please refer to Supplemental Table S1 for a
comparison of data from this study to nationally representative demographic benchmarks.

Outcome Measures.
The primary outcome variable in this study is a measure of whether or not respondents
intend to receive each of the vaccine candidates (labeled A-C in the first rating task, and D-F in
the second) to which they were randomly assigned (more on this below). I asked respondents, in
a matrix grid placed directly below the conjoint experiment to “Please tell us how likely you

7

would be to choose to receive any of the following vaccines.” Respondents could then indicate
their intentions on a ten-point numeric scale with verbal labels at 1 “not likely at all” and 10
“very likely.”

Conjoint Experimental Design & Analytical Strategy
I test these expectations using a conjoint experimental design (Luce & Tukey 1964;
Strezhnev et al., 2013; Hainmueller et al., 2014). Conjoint experiments are useful for testing
hypotheses where the number of varied dimensions (“attributes”) and the different values they
can take on (“levels”) would create a prohibitively large design. That is, if we were to divide up
the sample and randomly assign just one treatment per respondent, the number of possible
assignments would approach or even exceed the number of respondents participating in the
survey (a “small cell” problem).
Conjoint experiments circumvent this issue by (1) asking respondents to rate multiple
treatments simultaneously (and/or in repeated trials), (2) randomly assigning levels within each
attribute across treatments and individuals, and (3) estimating the effect of each attribute on an
outcome variable of interest; assuming random assignment to all other level combinations, and
accounting for correlated errors within respondents (e.g., standard error clustering or multilevel
modeling).
Although one limitation of conjoint experiments is that we often cannot estimate the
effect of any one possible treatment -- i.e., specific combinations of levels across attributes -- the
approach has been shown to produce valid treatment effect estimates at the attribute level
(Hainmueller et al., 2014). In this case, we can determine which types of vaccines are the most

8

effective at influencing uptake, even if we cannot say with certainty which particular
combination of attributes is the most effective.
In this case, I designed a conjoint experiment that works by first presenting respondents
with three different vaccine candidates, and then asks them to assess how likely they would be to
receive each one. Vaccine candidates vary along six dimensions (attributes), corresponding to the
hypotheses and research questions outlined above (see: column 1 in Table 1).
After finishing this first rating task, I asked respondents to complete the procedure a
second time. This means that, in total, each respondent provides us with six ratings of all six
attributes. Most of these attributes can take on three possible values (again, informed by the
above discussion), with the exception of the number of doses required to achieve effectiveness
(which takes on only two values), antigen type (which takes on only two values), and the country
of origin (which takes on four values). I assigned levels randomly both across attributes and
respondents. Figure 1 provides an image of the screen respondents saw while completing this
survey, including a hypothetical rating task to which they could have been assigned.
This setup implies that there are 432 different vaccine combinations that respondents
could potentially be asked to rate (in conventional experimental parlance, a 4 X 3 X 3 X 3 X 2 X
2 design). Because I obtain six attribute ratings per individual (see above), in a sample of 990
US adults (see: Data), this implies that every level of most attributes will be rated at least 1,980
times on average; with the exception that each level of the country attribute will be rated 1,485
times on average, whereas the dosage and antigen attributes will be rated 2,970 times on average.
It further implies that every possible combination of attributes and levels will be rated at least 13
times (on average). As such, I have a sufficiently large sample to detect even small attributelevel effects, and can be reasonably assured that every possible combination will be rated.

9

I test the theoretical expectations outlined earlier (i.e., H1-H5, and RQ1) by constructing
an OLS regression model that regresses respondents’ vaccination intentions on their assignments
to each level of each attribute, for each rating task. These data are structured in “long” format,
such that each row corresponds to one of six rating tasks completed by each respondent (i.e., the
unit of observation is each rating task).
To account for the possibility of non-random variance across participants (e.g., the
possibility that some rate all vaccines more favorably or negatively than others) I cluster standard
errors at the respondent level; as is recommended in previous research (see: Hainmueller et al.,
2014). Additionally, and pursuant with the assumptions outlined in Hainmueller and colleagues’
work (2014), I assume that ratings on the rating tasks are independent of one another (i.e., that
presenting respondents with any one particular vaccine candidate does not influence how other
candidates are evaluated). All analyses are conducted using Stata 15. Note also that I do not
impute missing data, as there were very few missing observations across respondents and
experimental trials (missingness levels <0.7% in all cases).

Table 1. Conjoint Experimental Design Summary
Attribute

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

United
States

United
Kingdom

China

Russia

Effectiveness

50%

70%

90%

--

Risk of Minor Side Effects (e.g.,
fever, chills)

1 in 2

1 in 10

1 in 100

--

1

2

--

--

mRNA

Weakened
virus

--

--

Country of Origin

Doses Required
Vaccine Type

10

Months Spent in Development

9

12

15

--

Note. Summary of Conjoint Experimental Procedure. Note that respondents are shown three
possible combinations of the attributes listed above, in two successive trials (six total ratings).

Figure 1. Illustration of the Conjoint Experiment’s Rating Task

Note. The above image reflects a potential rating task that respondents could have been assigned
while taking this survey. This image is printed version of a survey preview screen, using
Qualtrics survey software.
11

Before moving on, it is important to note this conjoint experiment features a rating based
outcome variable, as opposed to a discrete choice outcome. A discrete-choice experiment asks
respondents to choose between one of several products they might buy, candidates they might
vote for, or, in this case, which vaccine they might choose to receive. Some argue that choicebased tasks are conceptually superior to both rating and ranking tasks; especially in economic
contexts where individuals are more-commonly asked to select one product over another
(Louviere, Flynn, & Carson 2010).
However, in the specific case of studying COVID-19 vaccination intentions, a ratingbased task is likely more conceptually appropriate than a discrete choice task. This may be the
case for at least two reasons. First, although several vaccine candidates may become available for
public consumption in the coming months, high demand and supply chain limitations could
imply that Americans have little choice regarding which vaccine is available to them. In other
words, COVID-19 vaccine uptake is not a straightforward economic or purchasing decision.
Consequently, it is important to investigate not whether Americans seek out one vaccine over
another, but to assess change in their their stated intentions to vaccine under different potential
offerings (i.e., the vaccine that might be most available to them).
Second, it may be the case that people are willing to receive multiple vaccines with
different properties; i.e., that they deem several potential candidates to be acceptable. This is a
possibility we might miss if looking only at respondents’ choice of one vaccine over another.
Moreover, in addition to the conceptual appropriateness of a rating-based conjoint task,
recent research has found that results from the discrete choice and ratings approaches often
closely mirror one another (e.g., see Hainmueller et al., 2014). Consequently, it appears both
conceptually and empirically appropriate to employ a rating-based task in this study.

12

Results
The conjoint experimental results are displayed in Figure 2. Each circle corresponds to a
parameter estimate from the regression model, with 95% confidence intervals extending out from
each one. Because all variables are scored to range from 0-1, parameter estimates can be
interpreted as the percentage point change in vaccination intention, compared to an omitted
reference group (denoted in the left-hand side of the Figure). Recognizing that percentage point
changes do not provide a sense of baseline vaccination intention, however, I supplement these
analyses by transforming parameter estimates into linear predictions (expressed as likelihood
ratings), holding all other attributes constant (in text). Full model output is available in Table 2
(Column 1).

Identifying an Optimal Vaccine Candidate
Before assessing each set of testable hypotheses, Figure 2 presents a general picture of
which vaccine attributes are most likely to maximize vaccine uptake. Generally speaking,
respondents strongly prefer vaccines that are produced in the US, compared to those produced in
the UK, China, or Russia. This is perhaps problematic, given that promising vaccine candidates
may be produced by a UK company (e.g., AstraZeneca). Respondents also, perhaps somewhat
self-evidently, prefer highly (90%) effective to less-effective vaccines, and those that carry the
low risk (1 in 100) of minor side effects. This too is potentially problematic, given that – as
reviewed earlier – leading vaccine candidates suggest both lower levels of efficacy and higher
prevalence of minor side effects than the public otherwise deems optimal.
Encouragingly, though, respondents say that they would only be slightly less likely to
vaccinate if a vaccine must be administered in multiple doses, and are generally accepting of

13

vaccines produced on rapid timetables (i.e., they only slightly more likely to prefer a vaccine
taking more than a year to develop). Respondents are also neither more nor less likely to prefer
mRNA-based vaccines to those that feature a weakened virus.
Consequently, the optimal vaccine candidate, per this conjoint analysis, would be one
that is made in the US, 90% effective, carries a less than 1 in 100 chance of experiencing minor
side effects, is administered in 1 dose, and spent 15 months in development. The predicted
likelihood that respondents would choose to receive a vaccine with these properties is just over
68% (95% CI: 65, 71). Unfortunately, this analysis suggests that even a vaccine meeting
respondents’ expectations could have a refusal rate of over 30%. This raises the possibility
Americans’ expectations for a COVID-19 vaccine may not match reality. While it is encouraging
to see that multi-dose vaccines, and those developed on accelerated timeframes, do not not
necessarily discourage Americans from vaccinating, resistance to vaccines produced outside the
US – and preferences for vaccines that are more-effective and less-risky than leading candidates
– could potentially interfere with vaccine uptake if the vaccines that become available for public
use in the US are (subjectively) “sub-optimal.”

Attribute-Specific Analyses
Having identified the most preferred vaccine characteristics from the conjoint setup, I
next turn to each of the specific hypotheses outlined earlier. First, Figure 2 presents strong
support for H1a. On average, respondents report that they are more likely than not (58%) to
intend to receive a US based vaccine. Vaccination intentions drop to 52% for a vaccine produced
in the UK (β = -0.06), and just 37% for a vaccine produced in China (β= -0.21); both of which
are statistically significant decreases (p < 0.05 in both cases).

14

Figure 2. The Effects of Hypothetical Coronavirus Vaccine Characteristics on Vaccination
Intentions
Origin: China (vs. US)
Origin: Russia (vs. US)
Origin: UK (vs. US)
Effectiveness: 70% (vs. 50%)
Effectiveness: 90% (vs. 50%)
Side Effect: 1 in 10 (vs. 1 in 100)
Side Effect: 1 in 2 (vs. 1 in 100)
Type: Weakened Virus (vs. mRNA)
Doses: 2 (vs. 1)
Dev. Time: 12 months (vs. 9)
Dev. Time: 15 months (vs. 9)
-20%

-10%

0

+10%

+20%

Likelihood of Vaccinating

Note. OLS regression coefficients presented (circles) with 95% confidence intervals extending
from each one. Standard errors are clustered at the respondent level. All independent variables
are dichotomous, and the outcome variable is scored to range from 0-1. Coefficients are
expressed (substantively) as percent change in vaccination intentions, relative to each denoted
baseline on the left-hand side of the Figure.

Figure 2 also offers some support for H1b. Respondents are significantly less likely (β= 0.18, p < 0.05) to intend to receive a Russian vaccine, compared to an American vaccine or UK
vaccine. However, as evidenced by the overlapping confidence intervals in Figure 2, this
difference is not statistically discernible, and, in fact, is slightly smaller, than that of a vaccine
produced in China.
The results also offer support for H2. On average, respondents are more likely than not
(41%) to refuse a vaccine with 50% effectiveness (the minimum to be considered for public use

15

in the US). Compared to a minimally-effective vaccine, Americans are significantly more likely
to intend to receive a vaccine with 70% effectiveness (47%; β= 0.06, p < 0.05), and more likely
than not to intend to receive a vaccine with 90% effectiveness (52%; β= 0.10, p < 0.05).
Likewise, and perhaps unsurprisingly, respondents are more likely to prefer vaccines that
carry lower risks of minor side effects. On average, the likelihood that respondents choose to
vaccinate – if a vaccine carries a 1 in 100 risk of minor side effects – is 48%. Encouragingly,
vaccine intentions drop off only slightly (47%) for vaccines that carry a 1 in 10 risk of minor side
effects; which does not represent a statistically significant decline (β= -0.02 , p > 0.10).
However, consistent with H3, intentions drop off significantly (45%; β= - 0.04, p < 0.05) for
vaccines presenting a 1 in 2 risk of side effects.
Interestingly, the results provide only mixed evidence in support of H4 and H5. Whereas
respondents are more likely than not (53%) to intend to vaccinate if presented with a vaccine
developed in 9 months, a 12 month timetable offers only a modest increase in intention (54%)
which fails to attain statistical significance (β= 0.00, p > 0.10); inconsistent with H4. However,
and consistent with H4, respondents indicated significantly higher intentions to vaccinate (57%;
β= 0.02, p < 0.05) when presented with candidates that spend more than a year (15 months) in
development.
Additionally, I find limited evidence in support of H5. While respondents are
significantly more likely to prefer a candidate that requires only a single dose (compared two two
doses) to achieve effectiveness (β= -0.02, p < 0.05), the size of this effect is substantively
modest. The likelihood that Americans vaccinate drops from 56% for single dose vaccines, to
53% for two-dose vaccines.

16

Finally, with respect to RQ1, I observe no statistically significant differences in
vaccination intentions across antigen types. Compared to mRNA-based vaccines, respondents are
neither more nor less likely to prefer vaccines with more-conventional weakened virus antigen
elements (β= 0.00, p > 0.10).

Robustness Checks
The effects presented in Figure 2 are robust to several alternate estimation strategies.
First, while the models presented earlier account for the possibility of non-random variance
across participants by clustering standard errors at the respondent level, some may prefer to
estimate these adjustments hierarchically. Consequently, I re-estimated the results presented in
Figure 2 via a mixed effects linear model with respondent-level random effects. The results are
provided in Column 2 in Table 2 (which includes the results presented visually in Figure 2, for
reference, in Column 1).
The results are highly similar across estimation strategies, with just one exception.
Whereas a 1 in 10 chance of experiencing minor side effects was negative and failed to attain
statistical significance (β= -0.02, p > 0.10) in Figure 2, an effect of the same size (β= -0.02) did
attain conventional levels of two-tailed significance in the random effects model (p < 0.05). The
two sets of results were otherwise substantively and statistically consistent.
Further, in addition to accounting for the possibiltiy of correlated errors at the respondent
level, some might also ask whether or not there are systematic demographic differences between
respondents with respect to their intentions to vaccinate (e.g., see Callaghan et al., unpublished),
and whether or not these differences might influence the effects depicted in Figure 2. Table 2,
Colum 3, presents the results of models which adds control variables denoting respondents’ age

17

(dichotomous indicators of whether respondents are aged 25-44, 44-65, or older than 65),
educational attainment (a dichotomous indicator of whether or not respondents completed
college), race (indicators denoting whether respondents self-identify as Black [non-Hispanic] or
Hispanic), gender (a dichotomous indicator of whether respondents self-identify as female), and
annual household income (measured on a 24 point scale ranging from <$14,999 to $250,000 or
more; and intervalized to range from 0-1).
The results again suggest a strong degree of consonance between the results presented in
Figure 2 and the results that include a series of demographic controls (Table 2, Column 2).
Additionally, I find that some evidence of demographic differences in Americans’ intentions to
vaccinate. Higher income (β= 0.17) and college-educated (β= 0.10) respondents tend to rate
vaccine candidates significantly more favorably (p < 0.05, in both cases). Women (β= -0.03) and
individuals older than 44 (β= -0.12 for the 45-65 age range; β= -0.09 for the 65 and older age
range) are significantly less likely to do so (again, p < 0.05 in both cases). Collectively, these
results suggest that while there are systematic demographic differences in how respondents rate
vaccine candidates, these results do not alter the results presented in Figure 2.
Finally, to further probe the possibility of heterogeneous treatment effects, I estimated
four additional models where I interact each vaccine attribute with all demographic factors that
exhibited a statistically significant effect on the vaccine rating outcomes in Table 2, Column 3.
The models are presented in the Supplementary Materials in Table S2. There, I find little
evidence of heterogeneous treatment effects. Of the 66 interactions tested across four models –
stratified (i.e., estimated in separate models, to avoid overfitting concerns) by respondents’
household income, age, educational attainment, and gender – I find little consistent evidence of

18

moderated treatment effects. Just 10 of the 66 tests produced statistically significant effects (15%
of tests conducted); the majority of which reflect differences attributable to respondents’ age.
Specifically, I find no evidence of moderated treatment effects by respondents’ household
income levels or gender. However, I do note some evidence of moderated treatment effects by
age category. Both individuals aged 44-65 and individuals aged 65 and older are significantly
less likely to want to receive a vaccine originating from China (β = -0.20 , p < 0.05 and β = 0.36, p < 0.05, respectively), Russia (β = -0.19 , p < 0.05 and β = -0.32, p < 0.05, respectively),
and the UK (β = -0.09 , p < 0.05 and β = -0.11, p < 0.05, respectively), relative to the United
States. I also find that individuals aged 65 and older are significantly more likely to prefer
vaccines with 90% effectiveness or greater (β = 0.07 , p < 0.05), and less likely to prefer
vaccines with a 1 in 2 risk of experiencing minor side effects (β = -0.07 , p < 0.05), while
individuals aged 44-65 are significantly less likely to prefer vaccines that contained a weakened
virus as an antigen (β = -0.05 , p < 0.05). Finally, I find that college educated individuals are
somewhat more likely to prefer a vaccine made in the UK to one made in the US (β = 0.05 , p <
0.05).

Table 2. Models Used to Estimate Figure 2 & Robustness Check Summay

Origin: China (vs.
US)
Origin: Russia (vs.
US)
Origin: UK (vs. US)

(1)
OLS

(2)
Mixed

(3)
OLS

Respondent Clustered
SEs

Respondent Random
Effects

Respondent Clustered
SEs + Demographic
Controls

-0.21*

-0.21*

-0.21*

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.18*

-0.19*

-0.19*

(0.02)
-0.06*

(0.01)
-0.06*

(0.01)
-0.06*

19

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.06*

0.06*

0.06*

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.11*

0.12*

0.11*

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.02

-0.02*

-0.01

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

-0.04*

-0.05*

-0.04*

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

Type: Weakened
Virus (vs. mRNA)

-0.00

-0.00

-0.01

Doses: 2 (vs. 1)

(0.01)
-0.02*
(0.01)

(0.01)
-0.02*
(0.01)

(0.01)
-0.02*
(0.01)

Dev. Time: 12
months (vs. 9)

-0.00

0.01

-0.00

(0.01)

(0.01)

(0.01)

0.02*

0.03*

0.02+

(0.01)
-

(0.01)
-

Age 25-44

-

-

Age 44-65

-

-

Age 65+

-

-

College Educ.

-

-

(0.01)
0.17*
(0.03)
-0.01
(0.02)
-0.12*
(0.03)
-0.09*
(0.03)
0.10*
(0.02)

Black (NonHispanic)

-

-

Hispanic

-

-

Female

-

-

0.55*
(0.02)

0.55*
(0.01)

Effectiveness: 70%
(vs. 50%)
Effectiveness: 90%
(vs. 50%)
Side Effect: 1 in 10
(vs. 1 in 100)
Side Effect: 1 in 2
(vs. 1 in 100)

Dev. Time: 15
months (vs. 9)
Household Income

Intercept

-0.01
(0.03)
0.01
(0.03)
-0.03*
(0.02)
0.54*
(0.03)

Random Effects
20

Components
Variance (Intercept)

-

Variance (Residual)

-

N
Likelihood Ratio
Test
R2

0.05*
(0.01)

0.06 *
(0.01)
5,901
5,901
LR = -1,039
χ2(1) = 1,911*
0.08
* p < 0.05, + p < 0.10; two-tailed

-

5,584
0.17

Note. OLS regression coefficients presented, with standard errors in parentheses. Column 1
presents the parameters used to construct the results presented in Figure 2 (please refer to the
figure for additional details). Column 2 presents a model analogous to that presented in Column
1, swapping the use of clustered standard errors for respondent-level random effects in a mixed
linear model using the mixed command in Stata 15. Random effects components are presented
at the bottom of the table. Finally, Column 3 presents a model analogous to that presented in
Column 1, with the addition of demographic controls.
Discussion
The conjoint experiment reported in this study suggests that several differences in
COVID-19 vaccine properties can have a powerful impact on Americans’ intentions to
vaccinate. Specifically, Americans are significantly more likely to prefer vaccines developed in
the US (compared to the UK, China, or Russia), pose a minimal risk of side effects, and that are
highly effective at warding off infection. These findings are potentially problematic, as some
leading vaccine candidates may fall short of achieving some or all of these benchmarks. Further,
results from the conjoint experiment suggest that, even under ideal conditions, Americans’
intentions to vaccinate may be suboptimal. However, and perhaps more-encouragingly,
Americans are less discerning regarding the type of antigen featured in the vaccine (mRNA vs. a
weakened virus), whether the vaccine is administered in one (vs. two) doses, and the amount of
time the vaccine spent in development. All conjoint experimental are robust to several different
modeling specifications, and are generally uniform across demographic subgroups.
21

The results observed in this study could have important implications for public health
policy, and health communication about the vaccine. Concerning the former, public health
officials can preempt the possibility of differential intentions to vaccinate for vaccines with
different qualities. This may prove useful in avoiding vaccine shortages and accurately
estimating the supply necessary to meet demand; both with respect to the novel coronavirus, and
for vaccines that may share properties in common with those studied in the conjoint experiment.
Additionally, understanding how differences in vaccine characteristics influence
intentions could help inform effective health communication encouraging vaccine uptake. If
Americans prefer some vaccines to others (e.g., those that are American-made), highlighting that
information in promotional messages could help increase public enthusiasm for a vaccine. If, on
the other hand, Americans find some characteristics undesirable (e.g., those originating from
outside the US), health communicators may consider making a special effort to assuage public
concerns in that area (e.g., by emphasizing that foreign-made vaccines must meet US health
guidelines to be administered in the US, and/or that manufacturing includes the involvement of
US companies).
Lessons from this research may also prove useful in helping to inform public health
policy and health communication beyond the ongoing pandemic. Although this research focuses
specifically on a vaccine against just one illness, many of the vaccine properties studied in this
paper apply to other vaccines currently in development (e.g., a novel Lyme disease vaccine
candidate developed by a French company, and which may require multiple doses to be
effective; see Motta 2020). Some might argue that assessing the effect of vaccine properties on
uptake during a pandemic poses a “conservative” test of the effects documented in this paper;
i.e., that the public may be willing to overlook differences that would ordinarily disincentivize

22

vaccination for the sake of overcoming the pandemic. Consequently, insights gleaned from this
research could be even more impactful when studying other vaccines in development.

Limitations
This study is not without some noteworthy limitations. First, this research studies selfreported vaccine intention ratings. The use of hypothetical self-reported data is, of course,
partially due to the timing of this study; i.e., because data were collected prior to the availability
of a novel vaccine. Still, it is important to caveat that – while individuals’ vaccination intentions
have been shown to be strong predictors of whether or not they actually choose to get vaccinated
(e.g., Godin et al., 2010; Gerend & Shepard 2012) – the degree to which intentions are
associated with uptake behavior for this specific vaccine is an open question.
Moreover, it is important to bear in mind that the conjoint analyses presented here feature
a ratings-based task. As mentioned earlier, ratings-based tasks are appropriate in application to a
COVID-19 vaccine, as people may not have the ability to choose which specific vaccine they
ultimately receive – especially in the early phases of vaccine rollout – and may be receptive to
receiving several different potential vaccines. Still, a notable limitation of this research is that the
data do not allow for an investigation into whether or not people might choose one vaccine over
another. When studying new and developing vaccines in the future, scholars should consider
investigating whether the results of ratings-based tasks differ from tasks that ask respondents to
choose one vaccine over another; relying on decision (vs. rating) based tasks when appropriate.
Additionally, this study was conducted at only a single moment in time, and amid global
pandemic. Although recent research suggests that public confidence in vaccine safety (in
general) tends to resemble opinion estimates observed prior to the pandemic (e.g., Lunz-Trujilo

23

& Motta, unpublished), and that intentions to receive a coronavirus vaccine have held relatively
steady throughout the pandemic (e.g., see Callaghan et al., unpublished), it is nevertheless
possible that surges or declines in cases could impact public intentions to vaccinate. Vaccine
intentions could also fluctuate over time due to factors unrelated to pandemic conditions.
Consequently, I urge readers to consider the specific conditions (e.g., disease prevalence) under
which this study was conducted when attempting to draw conclusions about it. Constant
monitoring of vaccine opinion, either via the use of repeated cross-sectional surveys or (ideally)
longitudinal surveys, could help detect shifts in intentions that might impact the insights gleaned
from this study, and necessitate additional conjoint experimental research.
Given these limitations, future research may benefit from validating self-reported
intention data with self-reported retrospective behavioral data, and by re-administering this study
at several points in time. Researchers could, for example, re-contact participants in a study like
the one presented in this paper (i.e., longitudinally), or by re-administering the experiment
throughout the rollout of a new vaccine. If possible, efforts to then validate self-reported
behaviors with actual evidence of vaccine uptake (e.g., providing respondents with cash
incentives to provide photographic, redacted evidence of a receipt from a pharmacy; doctor’s
note; etc.) would further strengthen the validity of insights gleaned from this study.
Additionally, to better understand the relevance of this work for other types of vaccines,
scholars ought to consider replicating this study with respect to other (voluntary) vaccines in
development. Although I was not able to do so in the present study, researchers might consider
conducting qualitative interviews with vaccine specialists to determine which vaccine attributes
are worth further study, and/or conduct pre-test interviews with survey respondents to ascertain
relevant vaccine preferences. While elements of the conjoint experimental setup would almost

24

certainly need to be amended on a case-by-case basis, my hope is that the utility of the paradigm
makes this an ideal approach for future work.

Conclusion
The work offers both encouraging and discouraging findings about Americans’
willingness to get vaccinated against COVID-19. On the one hand, Americans’ preferences
regarding a potential vaccine’s country of origin, effectiveness, and risk of minor side effects are
at odds with some characteristics of leading vaccine candidates. This could potentially pose a
challenge to vaccine uptake, as the results suggest that even a (subjectively) optimal vaccine –
i.e., one that is highly effective, low-risk, and US made – could produce vaccine refusal rates
exceeding 30%.
On the other hand, though, Americans have no clear preferences regarding how long
vaccine candidates spend in development, the number of doses that must be administered to
effectively ward off infection, or antigen type. This, more encouragingly, may imply some
amount of receptivity to vaccines released before the end of the year in 2020, and administered
in more than one dose.

25

References
Aripaka, P. & Nadkar, T. (2020). AstraZeneca’s Potential Coronavirus Vaccine. Reuters
Factbox. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-coronavirus-astrazenecafactbo/factbox-astrazenecas-potential-coronavirus-vaccine-idUSKBN25L1OH
Bartsch, S.M., O'Shea, K.J., Ferguson, M.C., Bottazzi, M.E., Cox, S.N., Strych, U.,
McKinnell, J.A., Wedlock, P.T., Siegmund, S.S., Hotez, P.J. and Lee, B.Y., 2020.
How Efficacious Must a COVID-19 Coronavirus Vaccine be to Prevent or Stop an
Epidemic by Itself. medRxiv.
Branswell, H. (2020). Covid-19 vaccines may cause mild side effects, experts say,
stressing need for education, not alarm. STAT News.
https://www.statnews.com/2020/07/27/covid-19-vaccines-may-cause-mild-sideeffects-experts-say-stressing-need-for-education-not-alarm/
Britton, T., Ball, F., & Trapman, P. (2020). A mathematical model reveals the influence of
population heterogeneity on herd immunity to SARS-CoV-2. Science.
Cassese, E. C., Farhart, C. E., & Miller, J. M. Gender Differences in COVID-19
Conspiracy Theory Beliefs. (2020). Politics & Gender, 1-12.
Cohen, E. (2020).Fauci says Covid-19 vaccine may not get US to herd immunity if too
many people refuse to get it. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2020/06/28/health/faucicoronavirus-vaccine-contact-tracing-aspen/index.html
Callaghan, T., Motta, M., Sylvester, S., Trujillo, K. L., & Blackburn, C. C. (2019). Parent
psychology and the decision to delay childhood vaccination. Social science &
medicine, 238, 112407.
Callaghan, T., Moghtaderi, A., Lueck, J. A., Hotez, P. J., Strych, U., Dor, A., ... & Motta,
M. (2020). Correlates and Disparities of COVID-19 Vaccine Hesitancy. Available
at SSRN 3667971.
Callaway, E. (2020). The race for coronavirus vaccines: a graphical guide. Nature,
580(7805), 576.

26

Cohen, J. (2020). Russia’s Approval of a COVID-19 Vaccine is Less than Meets the Press
Release. Science. https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/08/russia-s-approvalcovid-19-vaccine-less-meets-press-release
Coppock, A., & McClellan, O. A. (2019). Validating the demographic, political,
psychological, and experimental results obtained from a new source of online
survey respondents. Research & Politics, 6(1), 2053168018822174.
Craven, J. (2020). COVID-19 Vaccine Tracker. Regulatory Affairs Professional Society.
https://www.raps.org/news-and-articles/news-articles/2020/3/covid-19-vaccinetracker
Edmonds, B. M. T., Coleman, J., Armstrong, K., & Shea, J. A. (2011). Risk perceptions,
worry, or distrust: What drives pregnant women’s decisions to accept the H1N1
vaccine?. Maternal and child health journal, 15(8), 1203-1209.
Folegatti, P. M., Ewer, K. J., Aley, P. K., Angus, B., Becker, S., Belij-Rammerstorfer, S.,
... & Dold, C. (2020). Safety and immunogenicity of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19
vaccine against SARS-CoV-2: a preliminary report of a phase 1/2, single-blind,
randomised controlled trial. The Lancet.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA). (2020). Development and Licensure of Vaccines to
Prevent COVID-19. Office of Communication, Outreach, and Development
(OCOD). https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidancedocuments/development-and-licensure-vaccines-prevent-covid-19
Gerend, M. A., & Shepherd, J. E. (2012). Predicting human papillomavirus vaccine uptake
in young adult women: comparing the health belief model and theory of planned
behavior. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 44(2), 171-180.
Grady, D. (2020). Early Data Show that Moderna’s Vaccine is 94.5% Effective. The New
York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/11/16/health/Covid-modernavaccine.html
Godin, G., Vézina-Im, L. A., & Naccache, H. (2010). Determinants of influenza
vaccination among healthcare workers. Infection Control & Hospital Epidemiology,
31(7), 689-693.
Hainmueller, J., Hopkins, D. J., & Yamamoto, T. (2014). Causal inference in conjoint
analysis: Understanding multidimensional choices via stated preference
experiments. Political analysis, 22(1), 1-30.

27

Hervé, C., Laupèze, B., Del Giudice, G., Didierlaurent, A. M., & Da Silva, F. T. (2019).
The how’s and what’s of vaccine reactogenicity. NPJ vaccines, 4(1), 1-11.
Jackson, L. A., Anderson, E. J., Rouphael, N. G., Roberts, P. C., Makhene, M., Coler, R.
N., ... & Pruijssers, A. J. (2020). An mRNA vaccine against SARS-CoV-2—
preliminary report. New England Journal of Medicine.
Jolley, D., & Douglas, K. M. (2014). The effects of anti-vaccine conspiracy theories on
vaccination intentions. PloS one, 9(2), e89177.
Kwok, K. O., Lai, F., Wei, W. I., Wong, S. Y. S., & Tang, J. W. (2020). Herd immunity–
estimating the level required to halt the COVID-19 epidemics in affected countries.
Journal of Infection, 80(6), e32-e33.
Louviere, J. J., Flynn, T. N., & Carson, R. T. (2010). Discrete choice experiments are not
conjoint analysis. Journal of Choice Modelling, 3(3), 57-72.
Luce, R. D., & Tukey, J. W. (1964). Simultaneous conjoint measurement: A new type of
fundamental measurement. Journal of mathematical psychology, 1(1), 1-27.
Lunz-Trujlo, K. & Motta, M. (2020). Many Vaccine Skeptics Plan to Refuse a COVID-19
Vaccine, Study Suggests. US News & World Report.
https://www.usnews.com/news/healthiest-communities/articles/2020-05-04/manyvaccine-skeptics-plan-to-refuse-a-covid-19-vaccine-study-suggests
Lurie, N., Saville, M., Hatchett, R., & Halton, J. (2020). Developing Covid-19 vaccines at
pandemic speed. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(21), 1969-1973.
McGoldrick, M. et al. (2020). Shifting Expectations: Wave 2. The Short and Long-term
Implications of COVID-19 on Businesses and the Economy. FTI Consulting -Strategic Communications. https://fticommunications.com/covid-19/shiftingexpectations-survey-may2020/
Morning Consult. July 24-27 National Tracking Poll. Politico.
https://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000173-9877-d36e-abff-fdffb3090000
Motta, M. (2020). Could concern about climate change increase demand for a Lyme
disease vaccine in the US?. Vaccine, S0264-410X.

28

Nan, X., & Kim, J. (2014). Predicting H1N1 vaccine uptake and H1N1-related health
beliefs: The role of individual difference in consideration of future consequences.
Journal of Health Communication, 19(3), 376-388.
Nelson, J. C., Bittner, R. C., Bounds, L., Zhao, S., Baggs, J., Donahue, J. G., et al. (2009).
Compliance with multiple-dose vaccine schedules among older children,
adolescents, and adults: results from a vaccine safety datalink study. American
journal of public health, 99(S2), S389-S397.
Nyhan, B. and Reifler, J. (2015). Does correcting myths about the flu vaccine work? An
experimental evaluation of the effects of corrective information. Vaccine, 33(3),
pp.459-464.
Strezhnev, A., Hainmueller, J., Hopkins, D. J., & Yamamoto, T. (2013). Conjoint Survey
Design Tool: Software Manual. Cited on, 69.
Thigpen, C.L. & Funk, C. (2020). Most Americans expect a COVID-19 vaccine within a
year; 72% say they would get vaccinated. Pew Research Center - Fact Tank.
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2020/05/21/most-americans-expect-a-covid19-vaccine-within-a-year-72-say-they-would-get-vaccinated/
Uscinski, J. E., Enders, A. M., Klofstad, C., Seelig, M., Funchion, J., Everett, C., ... &
Murthi, M. (2020). Why do people believe COVID-19 conspiracy theories?.
Harvard Kennedy School Misinformation Review, 1(3).
Yaqub, O., Castle-Clarke, S., Sevdalis, N., & Chataway, J. (2014). Attitudes to
vaccination: a critical review. Social science & medicine, 112, 1-11.
Zimmer, C. & Thomas, K. Scientists are Optimistic about New COVID-19 Vaccine
Studies from Novavax. The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/08/04/health/covid-19-vaccine-novavax.html

29

