"x"
"1" "A Timeline Response: How  Does  Islamic Organizations Respon d to  COVID-19 in Indonesia?"
"2" "Aisyah Putri Rahvy 1 , Ilham Akhsanu Ridlo 2"
"3" "1 Department of Health Policy and Administration, Faculty of Public Health, Universitas Airlangga"
"4" "(email:  aisyah.putri.rahvy-2017@fkm.unair.ac.id   )"
"5" "2 Corresponding author. The Airlangga Centre for Health Policy ( ACe HAP ),"
"6" "Department of Health Policy and Administration, Faculty of Public Health, Universitas Airlangga"
"7" "(email:  ilham.ridlo@fkm.unair.ac.id )"
"8" "Abstract"
"9" "Indonesia has made several regulations to end the pandemic, including PSBB.  This regulation is related to physical distancing in all sectors and activities, including religious activities. To  strengthen this policy, MUI and other Islamic organizations have made  fatwa  and official statement about how worships, especially those which are done in groups should be conducted during this pandemic. But efforts made by government and other organization s are not enough to ensure society that these regulations will not affect their religiousity. This paper is a literature review aimed to describe and analyze religious-related cases of COVID-19 pandemic in Indonesia. It includes MUI, Muhammadiyah, and Nahd latul Ulama responses ( fatwa  and official statement) to this issue and public responses as well. It also compared this case to vaccine hesitancy case, due to similarities between these two cases. Both of these cases are dealing with religious dogma as it a ffects the policies’ effectivity.  Religious and community leaders are needed in this kind of cases in order to help government promote and educate people about health issues from religious perspectives. Moreover, some kinds of punishment made by governmen t are needed to strengthen  fatwa s and rulings, as most of these religious opinions do not have legal enforcement."
"10" "Keywords:"
"11" "Pandemic; Islamic Organization; Covid-19; Public Health Response; Indonesia"
"12" "Introduction"
"13" "For the last four months, many countries  have been struggling to tackle COVID-19 pandemic. Most of countries are applying lockdown to assure physical distancing and minimize contact between people. Policies and regulations made to end this pandemic indeed are not easy for the citizens, including  Indonesian. Only two months after confirming its first two cases in March 2 nd  2020, Indonesia is currently in battle with 10.843 confirmed cases in May 2 nd  2020 with 1.665 recovered cases from COVID-19 and 831 deaths. The growth of this pandemic finally f orced  government to make several regulations in order to flatten the epidemic curve. In April 3 rd , Ministry of Health published PSBB ( Pembatasan Sosial Berskala Besar , Large-scale Social Limitation) regulation, Indonesian version of lockdown. Jakarta, the  capital city of Indonesia which is also the most impacted city by coronavirus pandemic applied PSBB a week after, followed by other areas like Depok, Bogor, Surabaya, and others. Although Indonesian government does not apply full lockdown which includes no  activity in and out in every sectors, this version of lockdown also requires people to limit their activities outside their houses unless some essential sectors ruled in Minister of Health’s regulation about PSBB.  It plainly brings about a huge differenc e to people’s day-to-day basis in both public and private sectors, as well as religious activities. Based on this policy, government also limits any kind of large-scale religious activities. Question raised after PSBB applied is more likely: Until how far  Indonesians will obey this regulation when it comes to religious matters?"
"14" "Indonesia is famous of its reputation as country with the largest muslim population in the world, while data from Central Bureau of Statistics in 2010 showed that 87.18% population i n Indonesia are muslims. It is also a fact that Indonesian muslims mostly join some Islamic organizations, such as Muhammadiyah, Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), and so on. These organizations play important role in guiding their followers, especially in terms of wor ship. Furthermore, MUI (Majelis Ulama Indonesia) also takes part as an institution which has authority to give  fatwa ,   a formal ruling or point of Islamic law given by qualified formal institution or scholar ( mufti ). Since Indonesia does not have mufti to m ake  fatwa , government gives MUI the right to give  fatwa  over religious matter.  For instance, when the issue of vaccine hesitancy was breaking in Indonesia years ago, MUI made Fatwa No. 4 year 2016 about  halal  status of immunizations (Sulistyani. 2017). Th is  fatwa  was also a way to help government promoted immunizations to the citizens and countered anti-vaccination arguments from Islamic perspective."
"15" "During COVID-19 pandemic, this kind of issue again is spreading in society while government tries to limi t some forms of Islamic worship for physical distancing purpose.  In terms of worship, there are types of worship those performed in groups, such as Shalat Jum’ah, Shalat Tarawih, and so on. But with social limitation regulation applied, many of these wors hip will not  being able to be performed since it will increase the possibility of virus spread. The first issue came out about this is associated with different perspectives of some Indonesian muslim about how to perform these prayers in pandemic.  Further more, the role of Islamic organizations in guiding their followers in term of religious worships during pandemic is also being questioned."
"16" "Majelis Ulama Indonesia (MUI), Muhammadiyah, Nahdlatul  Ulama (NU) and Their Positions in Muslims Society in Indonesia"
"17" "Indonesia, with the fact that the majority of its population is muslim, also consists of several muslim  groups and organizations. These groups have differences in some aspects, such as  mazhab , priorities and aims of the organizations as well related to Islamic worships. Islamic organizations indeed play important role in society by leading their followers t o certain kind of beliefs and thoughts. On the other side, Indonesia also has Majelis Ulama Indonesia (MUI) as a representative of all muslim groups in Indonesia."
"18" "MUI is a non-governmental organization formed in July 26 th  1975 in Jakarta, Indonesia. The f unction of this organization is to provide a place for  ulama ,  zu’ama , and Islamic scholars to lead and guard muslims in Indonesia and encourage the religious life in society. Although it is not officially a formal part of the government, but Indonesian gov ernment mostly relies on MUI  fatwa s and thoughts over several issues such as  halal-haram  of vaccine, and so on.   Fatwa  or Islamic ruling is made by MUI through Komite Fatwa, that has the authority to establish  fatwa  over religious public issues, especially  those which are associated with  fiqh  and  aqidah,  along with the purity of Indonesian muslims in performing their devotion."
"19" "Talking about Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama (NU), these two organizations are often being considered as two largest muslim organ izations in Indonesia. Muhammadiyah was found in November 18 th  1912 by Kyai Haji Ahmad Dahlan, about thirty three years before Indonesia had its independence. Muhammadiyah includes  Majlis Tarjih , a commission aimed to examine Islamic opinion ( fatwa ) over  k hilafiyah  or debatable issue based on Islamic Law: Holy Qur’an and  hadith  (Mujib, 2015) .     This commission was formed in 1928 and has made several  fatwa  including Muhammadiyah opinion towards  vape   or electronic cigarette. Meanwhile, Nadlatul Ulama was found  in January 31 st  1926. Similar to Muhammadiyah, NU also formed a special commission to examine  fatwa  in 1992 named  Bahsul Masail.  Its purpose is to examine and decide  fatwa  of  khilafiyah  issue using  fikrah nadliyah , a framework of thinking based on  Ahlussu nnah Wal Jama’ah  (Mujib, 2015)"
"20" "MUI surely has made some  fatwa s to help government end this pandemic as soon as possible. This is aimed to minimize the virus from spreading through worship performances, as well as to strengthen the consistency of PSBB regu lation. Islamic organizations and leaders are fully aware that PSBB regulation may result some conflicts and different interests among muslims in Indonesia, because of its scope in regulating religious worships performance especially for those done in grou ps. But sadly, this approach is not effective enough to handle different perspectives and interests related to religious worships during pandemic. At glance, different beliefs between people related to this issue is not something problematic. But it does b ecome as problematic as possible while breaking news is flooding in social media, stating there are some cases related to SARS-CoV-2 spread through religious worships. Knowing a number of reports about faith-related cases in pandemic, we realize that these  factors contribute to high increase of coronavirus confirmed cases in Indonesia. Moreover, these phenomena are some proofs of how certain worships have impacts to government efforts in tackling coronavirus pandemic."
"21" "This paper would like to provide report ing of Islamic organizations response during pandemic in terms of Islamic worships impacted by COVID-19 pandemic. This includes ways of these organizations support PSBB and government effort to tackle the coronavirus. It lies on facts that Islamic organiza tions in Indonesia, Nahdlatul Ulama for example, is playing a significant role in resulting Islamic law consideration through its  Bahsul Masa’il  (Nofialdi, 2015). Align with NU, Muhammadiyah also takes part in this area with  Majlis Tarjih . These organizati ons, in conjunction with their idea and thoughts, more and less contribute to muslims perspective of Islamic worship performance during pandemic. Furthermore, this paper also analyzes public response to fatwa and regulation made based on the timeline."
"22" "Me thods"
"23" "This paper emphasized the analysis of Islamic organization role during COVID-19 pandemic. Analysis was made after all events related to Islamic organization and muslims response had been arranged in form of timeline. Since this paper was a literature  study, data from other researches are collected and analyzed in line with the aim of this study. The main areas of this paper include Islamic organization responses, also phenomena of both pros and cons coming from the public towards those responses. Rese archers will focus on MUI as the formal and authorized organization by Indonesian government to make  fatwa s or Islamic ruling. As for two other organizations, Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul  Ulama, their responses in the form of  fatwa , official statement, and humanities acts were included in this research. Muhammadiyah and Nadlatul Ulama were discussed further in this paper due to their positions as two largest Islamic organizations in Indone sia. Events and cases related to Islamic worships in specific were obtained from media, and analyzed. Moreover, only initial case of coronavirus spread is included in timeline."
"24" "Cases analyses in this paper were compared to other faith-related health issue  like vaccine hesitancy. We believe that these two issues have similar characteristic, as government needs to strengthen health policies with  fatwa  or religious opinions to solve refusal of public to these health policies due to their religious beliefs."
"25" "R esults"
"26" "Timeline of Islamic Organization Response and Related Cases"
"27" "Fatwa MUI No. 14 year 2020 was published"
"28" "In March 16 th  2020, MUI made a  fatwa  related to worship performance during pandemic. This fatwa includes the rule of  Shalat Jum’ah  and  Shalat Jama’ah  while in pandemic with Holy Quran,  Hadits , and  qaidah fiqhiyyah  as its bases. MUI commanded all muslims to  prevent any possible activity which  increase the potentials of coronavirus spread as the part of  al-Dharuriyat al-Khams . MUI also ruled certain condition in which muslims could go to mosque, based on the status or level of their area related to COVID-19."
"29" "Cluster of Ijtima’ Gowa"
"30" "This event w as supposed to be held in March 19 th -22 nd  2020 in Gowa , Sulawesi Selatan. Government dismissed this event before it was ever started. But around 8000 people had gathered in Gowa, and few days later some other areas in Indonesia confirmed COVID-19 cases related to this cluster. In May 13 th  2020, nine patients  in Manggarai Barat were confirmed coronavirus positive from this cluster."
"31" "Masjid Jammi Tamansari case in Jakarta Barat"
"32" "In March 26 th  2020, three  jamaah  were confirmed positive and about 170 others were under surveillance. This mosque were famous as pilgrim age place for years. 78 foreigners and 100 citizens were quarantined in mosque area for 14 days."
"33" "Fatwa MUI No. 18 year 2020 was published"
"34" "If MUI in March 16 th  2020 published a fatwa as Islamic worship performance guide, eleven days later in March 27 th  2020 , a fatwa about  tajhiz al-jana’iz  or Islamic Funeral ruling was made and published to the public. It contains procedures of taking care of muslims who died because of coronavirus based on Islamic rules and medical protocols. It includes how bathing the bod y, shrouding, and  Shalat Jenazah  or funeral prayer are conducted under medical protocols, such as bathing it without opening the body’s plastic wrap and keeping the body inside coffin."
"35" "Tahlilan  case in Tulungagung"
"36" "As tradition when there was someone who ha d just died in neighborhood, in 3 rd  April 2020 a citizen (MA) in Tulungagung held a “tahlilan”, a form of prayer for the dead for his father. 3 days later, he started to experience COVID-19 symptoms. His father was not diagnosed as coronavirus patient, so  they did the funeral with a non-medical protocol. But MA was suspected to be exposed to the virus while taking care of his father in hospital. This case contributed to the increase of 12 patients in total, making this a new cluster in Tulungagung."
"37" "Tahlilan  case in Bogor"
"38" "Similar to what happened in Tulungagung 9 days before, around 25 people were under surveillance because of tahlilan by April 12 th  2020. People who attended tahlilan found out that the one they were praying for was confirmed as COVID- 19 positive a week later. This case caused a massive increase in ODP (Orang Dalam Pengawasan) or people under surveillance in Bogor, Jawa Barat."
"39" "Banyumas case"
"40" "In 18 th  April 2020, at least 10 people were confirmed as other coronavirus cases in Banyumas, Ja wa Tengah. One of the suspects performed  shalat jamaah,  or a form of prayer done by group in local mosque. After tracking other people who were in contact with the suspect, they found 10 positive cases in sum which later named as Kober cluster. The first c onfirmed case was in Gowa for  Ijtima’   Ulama  that supposed to be held in 19 th -22 nd  March, 2020."
"41" "Parepare case"
"42" "Three  new COVID-19 cases confirmed in 26 th  April 2020 at Parepare, Sulawesi Selatan was associated with  shalat jamaah  in Mosque Al Manar . One of the suspect had travelled abroad and often attended gatherings held in mosque. Local government had made some warnings related to any form of gathering, including ones held in mosque."
"43" "The letter of Takmir Masjid in Banyumas"
"44" "After having a case related to  shalat jamaah  as a part of Islamic worship, 10 days later in April 28 th  2020 a letter by some  takmir   masjid  or people who are in charge to take care of local mosque in Banyumas were being controversial since it included the i dea of destroying the mosque. Takmir published the letter as a form of protest to the government which implemented Fatwa MUI No. 14 year 2020."
"45" "Fatwa MUI No. 28 year 2020 was published"
"46" "After making fatwa about worship performance, in May 13 th  2020 MUI pub lished a document which included a guide to perform  Eid Al-Fitr  at home during pandemic. Similar to its first fatwa (Fatwa MUI no. 14 year 2020), this fatwa also talks about how Indonesian  muslims should perform Islamic worship during coronavirus pandemic  specifically  Eid Al-Fitr  prayer."
"47" "Muhammadiyah Letter and Guide for  Eid Al-Fitr  was published"
"48" "As one of the largest Islamic organizations in Indonesia, Muhammadiyah in May 14 th  2020 made a letter and guide about performing  Eid Al-Fitr  prayer during pandemic. This letter and guide are made by  Majlis Tarjih  as a part of Muhammadiyah which has authority to give certain fatwa specifically for Muhammadiyah followers."
"49" "Boyolali  case"
"50" "In May 14 th  2020, about 19 people in Boyolali were isolated after burying a muslim without medical protocol. They found out in two days later that the one they performed Islamic funeral for was confirmed SRS-CoV-2 positive. Family and local governmen t were questioning the protocol of funeral from his hospital in Jakarta, which they claimed it had not applied any medical protocol and informed any statement if the patient were a COVID-19 suspect."
"51" "Solo case"
"52" "May 16 th  2020, local government put 90 familie s in Serengan, Solo under surveillance after they had been detected to be in contact with a coronavirus suspect while performing  tarawih  prayer. Seven people of them were developing COVID-19 symptoms and classified as under surveillance patients."
"53" "Banjarba ru case"
"54" "An under surveillance patient in Banjarbaru, Kalimantan Selatan was forced to be buried with non-medical protocol by her family in May 26 th  2020. The hospital, police officers, and local government had explained to her family the necessity and importance of medical protocol for COVID-19 suspect funeral, but they refused to use it. After hours of negotiation, her family finally let the hospita l and other institution to perform medical protocol."
"55" "Discussion"
"56" "Role of MUI and Islamic Organizations during Pandemic"
"57" "Laypeople were less likely to be convinced that health policy is rooted in a certain ideology, values, or philosophy and this is implied  drom no identifiable effect of political pasrtay support acceptability  ( Zein  et al., 2020) . When it comes to giving  fatwa  or Islamic law for Indonesian muslims, government seems to put MUI in  trust with no exception. MUI is the actor behind Indonesian government-muslims relationship, as it bridges both sides’ perspectives and stances in public policy-making. The role of MUI is mostly interpreted through  fatwa s.  Fatwa  in oxford dictionary means  “a legal ruling on a problem related to Islamic law delivered by some authentic and famous authority”.  It is basically needed to help government rule some issues related to private and religious performances, and to ensure that these performances are stil l on track with Islamic beliefs and teachings. A  fatwa  over something is made through  ijtihad , which is defined by Al Amidi as “to spare no effort in the quest of discovering the supposed rules of the Shariah in the sense that the mujtahid leaves no stone  unturned” (Pakeeza & Fatima, 2016).   Ijtihad  can only be done by  mujtahid , or person who is classified as capable to perform ijtihad. Hamzah (2017) explained that urgency of MUI  fatwa s could be translated in two forms. First one,  fatwa s play an important r ole to describe the way MUI responses to socio-cultural phenomena and conflicts in society, plus those related to government regulations and policies from Islamic perspectives. Second,  fatwa s has the urgency to unite and lead Indonesian muslims thought tow ards certain issues as the result of socio-cultural transformation."
"58" "Looking back to the contribution of MUI during the pandemic, it has published three different  fatwa s which related to daily and routine worship performances, Islamic Funeral ruling ( tajhi z al-janaiz) , and  Eid Al-Fitr  prayer performance. These three  fatwa s are Fatwa MUI No.14 year 2020, Fatwa MUI No. 18 year 2020, and Fatwa MUI No. 28 year 2020. These  fatwa s are strong bases for muslims in Indonesia to perform their devotion during COVID-19  pandemic. All of those  fatwa s have explained in detail about how to perform regular prayers like  Shalat Jum’ah  and  Shalat Jama’ah  which often being done together in mosques, as well as  Eid Al-Fitr  prayer that in Indonesia usually includes the habits of fa mily gathering, visiting relatives,  mudik  and so on. These kinds of worship cannot be done in a regular way of performance while Indonesia is still in war with the pandemic. Since it consists physical and social contact with a lot of people, it may be dang erous for muslims if they keep insisting on performing these prayers in the regular form."
"59" "This goes as well with Islamic Funeral ruling or in  fiqh,  it is called as  tajhiz al-jana’iz . In a normal condition, burial of the body will involve such ceremonies l ike bathing the body which often conducted by several people, shrouding, and  Shalat Jenazah  or funeral prayer. In Islam, dead body is not buried in a coffin but only shrouded in cloth named  kain kafan . But when it comes to the body of coronavirus patients  or suspects, doing these ceremonies without medical protocol will be such a disaster as we do not know whether the corpse is still able to spread the virus or not. MUI response to this is similar with its response to Tsunami Aceh in 2004, through Fatwa No.  34. At that time, MUI responded quickly by making a  fatwa  over funeral ruling during the emergency period.  This  fatwa  was made under consideration and  rukshah  (dispensation) that body of the victims should be taken care based on  fiqh  of emergency conditi on. Right now after recognizing this issue in COVID-19 pandemic era, MUI again showed quick responses to public needs by publishing three important  fatwa s over prayers those performances are considered as the most impacted by COVID-19 pandemic. Moreover, M UI has also provided and explained certain  dalil  from Holy Quran,  hadith , and  ushul fiqh  as the foundation to make those  fatwa s. As a formal and authorized organization, MUI indeed has the responsibility to ensure that  fatwa s given to the society are in li ne with Islamic rules."
"60" "But  fatwa  as one type of Islamic law has this non-binding legal force characteristic, or in  fiqh  it is known as  mulzim-ghair mulzim . Al-Syâtibî in Muhammad (2016) defines  fatwa  as an explanation of  syara’  or Islamic Shari’ah ruling  which is not forcing all muslims to follow and perform it. This is in line with Mulyati (2019), that  fatwa  contributes to the process of forming religious norms in society with its “quality feeling” effect to create religious emotion and moral sanction ins tead of legal enforcement. With these characteristics, effectivity of  fatwa  in the society is fully depended on people’s submission towards the  fatwa  its elf. Even when MUI is supported by the government and treated as the representative of all muslims in Indonesia despite the absence of several small muslim groups in it, MUI is still not able to force Indonesian muslims to follow its  fatwa s, as both  fatwa   in general and MUI  fatwa  in specific do not have the authority of law enforcement."
"61" "At the same time, two other Islamic organizations also show some responses to this pandemic. Muhammadiyah through  Majlis Tarjih  has made a guide for its followers to perfor m  Eid Al-Fitr  in their own houses. In line with that, Muhammadiyah leaders also make some public statements related to how Muhammadiyah followers should obey the government and lessen physical contacts. Meanwhile, Nahdlatul Ulama also shows its supports by  educating people about COVID-19 prevention through some socializations in mosques,  ta’lim , and  pesantren  or Islamic boarding school. These two organizations have done several humanity acts, such as distributing masks and food to people who are in need, an d preparing their hospitals to be referrals.  Furthermore, both of these organizations have spread information about COVID-19 using their websites, as a platform to do health promotion and education from both medical and Islamic point of views. A study of  Slamet and Laila (2018) in Jepara showed that both Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama were using several media platforms, like websites and printed publications to spread information. Even in some specific areas, Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama were using r adio. The important role of religious organizations and community leaders in promoting health is not a new thing to realize. A study from Tomkins  et al.  in 2015 showed that collaboration between religious organizations, health organizations, and policy mak ers contributed to immunization promotion and delivery in Pakistan, after it had been previously opposed. It also has been proven that religious leaders and organization take part in promoting certain health behavior to their followers. Heward-Mills in 201 8 found the relation between unhealthy habits prevention, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, and African faith leaders’ role by promoting it in Sunday church service. This is supporting the idea of faith leaders who are able to give such crucial impa cts to their followers’ health behavior and habits."
"62" "In Indonesia, most of people are willing to obey rules if those are made and supported by their religious organizations and leaders. Along with MUI, organizations like Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama hav e their own commissions of  ulama  or  fuqaha’  which function is to give thoughts and consideration towards certain issues based on Islamic perspectives. Muhammadiyah has  Majlis Tarjih , and Nahdlatul Ulama is standing with  Bahsul Masail.  The differences of MU I and these organizations’ commissions can be seen from their scope of influence. MUI as an authorized organization by the government has wider scope of influence, as  it makes  fatwa s which are applied for all groups of muslims. This is possible because MUI  is consisted of ulama from most all Islamic organizations in Indonesia, as a way to ensure that these organizations’ opinions and perspectives are heard and considered. This also means that Muhammadiyah and Nahdlatul Ulama place their representatives ther e for MUI. But when it comes to  Majlis Tarjih  and  Bahsul Masail , both of these commissions have different styles in examining issues from Islamic side as certain Islamic organizations usually have their own bases and referrals of  fiqh . This is surely narro wing its scope of influence merely to their followers. But at the same time it will enhance the possibility of the acceptance from its followers, because most of certain groups’ followers will have a tendency to listen and obey their own groups’ regulation s (Setiawan, 2014)."
"63" "Three big Islamic organizations in Indonesia have done a lot of effort to support government during the pandemic. But still, their efforts have some other questions related to how effective the efforts are and how obedient their follow ers are to those  fatwa s and advices. The answers of these questions are further discussed in the next part of this paper."
"64" "Responses from the Public and How this is not a “Fresh” Issue"
"65" "After MUI published  fatwa s related to COVID-19, the public was starting  to react responsively to those rules. Islamic organizations, like Muhammadiyah, Nahdlatul Ulama, and many more are suggesting Indonesian muslims to obey both government rules and MUI  fatwa s. Religious community leaders care also influencing their follower s by using faith-based approach. It is actually not a new idea that health programs can be impacted by faith and religious worship. Sabahelzain (2019) studied the relation between vaccination hesitancy and religious belief in Pakistan. He found out that mo st community health workers agreed of religious belief and attitudes from parents as the causal of vaccine hesitancy. His study proves the connection of faith and health behavior, while religious faith is influencing most of certain religion followers’ tho ughts and acts that related to their health. A study from Lane  et al.  (2018) found that religion was ranked 3 rd  as the reason of vaccine hesitancy globally based on WHO/UNICEF Join Reporting Data from 2014-2016. Reasons related to religion were “ due to cer tain religious sects (minority) ” and “ traditional cultural beliefs ”. Religion was constantly being in the 3 rd  place as reason of vaccine  hesitancy for three years in a row. This a proof that health issue somehow can be connected to certain faiths or belief s."
"66" "Also in Indonesia, this issue is not really something fresh. Religious belief is often being a main reason why people are against certain programs or policies. Religious faith of parents make them prohibit their children from getting immunizations. A s tudy from Sulistiyani (2017) showed a phenomenon in which families in Sendangmulyo, Semarang was reluctant to give their children immunizations. This happened even after MUI published Fatwa MUI No. 4 year 2016 that specifically examined Islamic opinion of  vaccine. Through that  fatwa , MUI ensured the permission of immunizations under certain condition. First, immunization is permissible ( mubah ) as it is a form of  ikhtiar  or an effort to prevent diseases. Second, vaccine should be made by  halal  materials. Whe n it is under an emergency condition and it will threaten somebody’s life if he/she is not vaccinated, vaccine is still permissible despite the availability of  haram  materials. But after publishing such fatwa, there are still some cases related to communit y reluctance of immunizations. In Sendangmulyo, more than 50 percent of participant believed that vaccine was  haram  or not allowed because of its  haram  materials. Furthermore, immunizations was never been discussed explicitly in certain religious gathering  such as  ta’lim , making its status of permission stayed unclear in the society. This also indicated the lack of awareness and role of religious leaders in community to educate their followers of certain issues related to faith and belief. But this is in co ntrast with a study from Padmawati  et al.  in 2018 about the rotavirus vaccine acceptance of religious and community leaders in Yogjakarta. Her study explained the need of  halal  label for rotavirus vaccine in order to increase community acceptance. Moreover, religious and community leaders were aware that their role as key players could contribute to promote vaccine in society especially in post-labeling.  From these studies, we  can assume that not all religious and community leaders in Indonesia are already aware of their role in educating their followers about health-related religious issues.  It is also obvious if not all of them understand the potentials of their roles to lead  and influence their followers in this kind of issues."
"67" "The question is: how these phenomena of vaccine related to today’s issue about COVID-19? Both vaccine and coronavirus pandemic issues are strongly connected to people’s religious  beliefs and performan ces. Also, these two issues are in a similar condition, in which society is currently threaten by certain diseases and government needs to do something to prevent harms. If MUI and other Islamic organizations have made actual responses to support immunizat ions from religious side, this time during the pandemic they once again express their responses as a form of responsibility towards their followers. Sadly, both of these cases are dealing with society’s religious dogma. People believe that using vaccine co nsists of  haram  materials will affect their worships to God, in spite of MUI  fatwa  about its usage in emergency condition. The same goes with the case of COVID-19 pandemic. Most of faith-related coronavirus cases in Indonesia are due to community belief th at anything should not prevent them to perform religious worships, not even a pandemic. The thing that they do not realize about is that religious worship performances can be progressive to current condition if it is needed. The case of  tahlilan  in Tulunga gung and Bogor for example, they put aside the harms of gathering in order to pray for the dead in tahlilan. In Tulungagung, the suspect of COVID-19 is not the dead, but his son instead. While in Bogor, they found out later that the one they were performin g  tahlilan  for is another coronavirus confirmed case. This kind of cases is actually preventable. About a month before, government had demanded social and physical distancing for all people to slow down the spread of SARS-CoV-2. This means certain religiou s or cultural activities which include gathering of people should not be conducted during pandemic. But unfortunately, government through Ministry of Health published PSBB regulation at the same day with Tulungagung case in April 3 rd  2020. Even so, the cas e in Bogor was quite avoidable as it happened nine days after such regulation was made."
"68" "If those two cases are associated with Islamic funeral, other cases in Jakarta, Banyumas, and Parepare were about enactment of  shalat jamaah  and religious gathering as  one kind of worships in Islam. In Jakarta, Masjid Jammi Tamansari is famous as a pilgrimage place, making lot of people come to this place for religious purposes. So when government confirmed three cases of COVID-19 in the mosques March 26 th , it also put  about 170 people under surveillance. In Banyumas, ten coronavirus cases came from a mosque in April 18 th  2020, after a suspect who traveled to Gowa weeks before regularly performed  shalat jamaah  and infected other people.. Government later classified these  ten cases in a specific cluster named Kober cluster. Similar kind  of case also happened in Parepare April 26 th  2020. Local government found three confirmed cases of COVID-19 after tracing people who had several physical contacts with a suspect through  sha lat jamaah  in Mosque Al Manar. In fact, local government had warned the citizens about any kind of gathering including religious gathering in mosque. But still, some people insisted to perform prayers and  ta’lim  in mosque when government had already locked  the mosque’s fence by climbing up the fence to enter the mosque. In Solo, 90 families were put under surveillance after performing  tarawih  prayer together with a coronavirus suspect in May 16 th . These cases happened weeks after MUI bring out a  fatwa  of pe rforming  jamaah  prayers in pandemic period. Moreover, a case of Gowa’s  Ijtima’ Ulama  adds another fact of how people will prioritize any effort to fulfill their religious-based needs. This event was supposed to be held in March 19 th -22 nd , but it was forced  to be finished before it was even started with around 8000 people had gathered in Gowa. This case is not only related to how Islamic organizations could prevent any possible harms in religious gathering, but also how government applied an early warning sy stem to stop SARS-CoV-2 from spreading through this kind of event. PSBB regulation was made 3 weeks after this event, making it “late” enough to prevent a number of people from gathering."
"69" "Meanwhile, cases related to  tajhiz al-janaiz  are found in Boyolali  and Banjarbaru. For Boyolali case in May 14 th , both of family and local government were not aware of the patient status. This is the basis why they still performed Islamic funeral ruling without medical protocol. But in point of fact, national government t hrough BNPB ( Badan Nasional Penanggulangan Bencana , Indonesian National Board of Disaster Management) had ordered medical protocol for every patient, both confirmed and not-yet confirmed patients as coronavirus positive in April 20 th .  This is a way to pre vent the spread of SARS-CoV-2 during funeral. From this case, we know that there was an unclear communication between hospital, family, and government which resulted in another religious-related case of COVID-19. As for Banjarbaru case in May 26 th , the fam ily was not being supportive in term of conducting medical protocol for the funeral. Even if the patient was classified as under surveillance patient and not yet as a coronavirus patient, but both government and MUI have explained why the normal performanc e of Islamic funeral is not possible to be conducted. Furthermore, MUI also explains in detail how  tajhiz al-jinayah  should be performed during the pandemic and why it is permitted to do so based on  fiqh ."
"70" "From those cases, we may see that these are an ev idence of people’s religious and personal beliefs characteristic which cannot easily be affected by externalities, even when it consists of another religious perspective comes from another religious organization. Also, this may be an effect of non-binding  fatwa  characteristic. According to Mulyati (2019),  fatwa  has a characteristic named as  mulzim ghair-mulzim , explaining how  fatwa  may not have a power to “force” people to apply it. MUI  fatwa  does not contain legal enforcement from law perspective, but it d oes have an impact of society’s “quality feeling” by creating a sense of guilt and other moral sanctions.  For this case, we may observe that MUI  fatwa  does not really cause a change of religious behavior and worships in pandemic. Moreover, the role of rel igious community leaders in those cases are not effective enough. Even in Banyumas after confirming 10 cases of COVID-19 in April 18 th , ten days later  takmir  of the mosque made a letter expressing refusal on physical distancing for  jamaah  prayer by wanting  to destroy the mosque instead. MUI, Muhammadiyah, Nadlatul Ulama and other Islamic organizations in Indonesia may have made certain moves to influence muslims in preventing coronavirus spread. But these organizations have a wide scope of influence. Even M UI is to lacking of certain muslim groups’ representatives. This is why such organizations movement cannot be successful enough in guiding muslims as their followers to certain Islamic opinions. Therefore, local community leaders are needed to educate thei r followers about certain worships performance during the pandemic. If they do not do such thing,  fatwa  and other regulations will not be enough to rule people in terms of religious activities. This is related to Padmawati  at el.  (2019) that community lead ers played an important role by educating and influencing their followers about vaccine  halal  status."
"71" "Both issues have the same kind of barrier in society. In facts, these problems need supports from religious organizations in order to ensure muslims that government effort towards certain health issues are tolerable and will not affect individual religious ity. In addition, if people are still reluctant to obey both government and MUI  fatwa , a form of punishment should be made for this kind of cases. As  fatwa  does not have legal enforcement, government may examine and determine certain rules as well as punis hment in order to make people obedient to their regulations. MUI and other Islamic organizations’  fatwa s are supportive to government regulations. So it is possible for both institutions to formulate a penalty for people who do not follow regulations relat ed to  religious worships during COVID-19 pandemic. This is also stated in a study from Ahmed  et al.  (2018) that authorities in certain countries like Pakistan and Malaysia applied strict punishments to parents who refuse vaccinations for their children. Go vernment also may take this idea into another discussion of human right, about how punishing people who are not obedient during the pandemic is not against the religiousity right as part of human rights, while it is actually protecting each citizens’ right  to live."
"72" "Conclusion"
"73" "Indonesia is dealing with religious-related cases of COVID-19.  Several responses of Islamic organizations like MUI, Muhammadiyah, and Nadlatul Ulama are proven not effective enough to ensure society how religious worship can be progressive to nowadays iss ue which is COVID-19 pandemic. Actually, this is not the very first time Indonesia is dealing with this kind of issue. Vaccine hesitancy has been problematic for years, as it is strongly related to society’s religious belief. Therefore, government and Isla mic organizations should analyze public responses and evaluate their policies by benchmarking PSBB regulation and  fatwa s related to vaccine hesitancy case. This step will help government to increase the effectivity of PSBB regulation, especially  in religi ous-related cases of coronavirus."
"74" "References"
"75" "Ahmed, A., Lee, K. S., Bukhsh, A., Al-Worafi, Y. M., Sarker, Md. M. R., Ming, L. C., & Khan, T. M. (2018). Outbreak of vaccine-preventable diseases in Muslim majority countries.  Journal of Infection and Public  Health ,  11 (2), 153–155.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiph.2017.09.007"
"76" "Bernie, M. (n.d.).  Mengurai Penyebab Masifnya Penyebaran COVID-19 Klas ter Ijtima Gowa . tirto.id. Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   https://tirto.id/mengurai-penyebab-masifnya-penyebaran-covid-19-klaster-ijtima-gowa-e2bh"
"77" "Bustomi, M. (n.d.).  3 Jemaah Masjid Jammi di Taman Sari Positif Covid-19, Wali Kota: Di Situ Tempat Ziarah . KOMPAS.com. Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   https://megapolitan.kompas.com/read/2020/03/28/12152941/3-jemaah-masjid-jammi-di-taman-sari-positif-covid-19-wali-kota-di-situ"
"78" "Edaran PP Muhammadiyah Tentang Tuntunan Salat Idulfitri dalam Kondisi Darurat Covid-19—Berita | Muhammadiya h . (n.d.). Edaran PP Muhammadiyah Tentang Tuntunan Salat Idulfitri Dalam Kondisi Darurat Covid-19 - Berita | Muhammadiyah. Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   http://m.muhammadiyah.or.id/id/news-19055-detail-edaran-pp-muhammadiyah-tentang-tuntunan-salat-idulfitr i-dalam-kondisi-darurat-covid19.html"
"79" "Fariha, F., & Pakeeza, S. (2016). Ijtihad as a Legislative Function: Role of Ijtihad , Ifta and Taqleed in Legislative Process.  Journal of Islamic and Religious Studies ,  1 , 33–45.   https://doi.org/10.12816/0032208"
"80" "Fatwa MUI No 28 Tahun 2020 Tentang Panduan Kaifiat Takbir Dan Shalat Idul Fitri Saat Covid 19. (2020, May 13).  Majelis Ulama Indonesia .   https://mui.or.id/produk/fatwa/28023/fatwa-mui-no-28-tahun-2020-tentang-panduan-kaifiat-takbir-dan-shalat-idul-fitri-saat-covid-19/"
"81" "FATWA NO 14 TAHUN 2020 – PENYELENGGARAAN IBADAH DALAM SITUASI TERJADI WABAH COVID-19. (2020, March 17).  Majel is Ulama Indonesia .   https://mui .or.id/berita/27674/fatwa-penyelenggaraan-ibadah-dalam-situasi-terjadi-wabah-covid-19/"
"82" "Fatwa No 18 Tahun 2020 – PEDOMAN PENGURUSAN JENAZAH (TAJHIZ AL-JANA’IZ) MUSLIM YANG TERINFEKSI COVID-19. (2020, March 28).  Majelis Ulama Indonesia .   https://mui.or.id/produk/fatwa/27752/fatwa-no-18-tahun-2020-pedoman-pengurusan-jenazah-tajhiz-al-janaiz-muslim-yang-terinfeksi-covid-19/"
"83" "Fatwa-MUI-No.4-Tentang-Imunisasi.pdf . (n.d.). Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   http://www.halalmui.org/images/stories/pdf/Fatwa-MUI-No.4-Tentang- Imunisasi.pdf"
"84" "Gunadha, R. (2020, April 18).  10 Warga Banyumas Positif Virus Corona Setelah Salat Berjemaah di Masjid . suara.com.   https://jateng.suara.com/read/2020/04/18/182944/10-warga-banyumas-positif-virus-corona-setelah-salat-berjemaa h-di-masjid"
"85" "Hamzah, M. M. (2017). PERAN DAN PENGARUH FATWA MUI DALAM ARUS TRANSFORMASI SOSIAL BUDAYA DI INDONESIA.  Millah: Jurnal Studi Agama ,  1 (1), 127–154.   https://doi.org/10.20885/millah.vol17.iss1.art7"
"86" "Herlambang, A. (2020, May 20).  Makamkan Jenazah Korona Tanpa Protokol, 19 Warga Boyolali Diisolasi . AyoSemarang.com.   http://m.ayosemarang.com/read/2020/05/20/57294/makamkan-jenazah-korona-tanpa-protokol-19-warga-boyolali-diisolasi"
"87" "Heward-Mills, N. L., Atuhaire, C., Spoors, C., Pemunta, N. V., Priebe, G., & Cumber, S. N. (2018). The role of faith leaders in influenci ng health behaviour: A qualitative exploration on the views of Black African christians in Leeds, United Kingdom.  The Pan African Medical Journal ,  30 (199), Article 199.   https://doi.org/10.11604/pamj.2018.30.199.15656"
"88" "Kiki. (n.d.).  BREAKING NEWS. Keluarga Jenazah PDP di Banjarbaru Tolak Penanganan Protokol Covid-19!  Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   https://kanalkalimantan.com/breaking-ne ws-keluarga-jenazah-pdp-di-banjarbaru-tolak-penanganan-protokol-covid-19/"
"89" "Lane, S., MacDonald, N. E., Marti, M., & Dumolard, L. (2018). Vaccine hesitancy around the globe: Analysis of three years of WHO/UNICEF Joint Reporting Form data-2015–2017.  Vaccin e ,  36 (26), 3861–3867.   https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2018.03.063"
"90" "Levi, L. (n.d.).  Nekat Salat Berjamaah di Masjid, Lagi-Lagi 3 Wa rga Dinyatakan Positif Corona, 100 Orang Diisolasi . Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   https://health.grid.id/amp/352124159/nekat-salat-berjamaah-di-masjid-lagi-lagi-3-warga-dinyatakan-positif-corona-100-orang -diisolasi?page=2"
"91" "Muhammad, N. E. (2016). Fatwa dalam Pemikiran Hukum Islam.  Al-Mizan ,  12 (1), 150–177."
"92" "Mujib, F. (2017). PERKEMBANGAN FATWA DI INDONESIA.  Nizham Journal of Islamic Studies ,  3 (1), 94–121."
"93" "Mulyati, M. (2019). KONTRIBUSI MUI DALAM PENGEMBAN GAN DAN PENERAPAN HUKUM ISLAM DI INDONESIA.  Al-Mashlahah Jurnal Hukum Islam dan Pranata Sosial ,  7 (01), 83–100.   https://doi.org/10.30868/am.v7i01.547"
"94" "Nofialdi, N. (2019). Peran Nahdatul Ulama (Nu) dalam Pembangunan Hukum Islam di Indonesia.  Al-Qisthu: Jurnal Kajian Ilmu-Ilmu Hukum ,  17 (1), 11–18.   https://doi.org/10.32694/010660"
"95" "Padmawati, R. S., Heywood, A., Sitaresmi, M. N., Atthobari, J., MacIntyre, C. R., Soenarto, Y., & Seale, H. (2019). Religious and community leaders’ acceptance of rotavirus vaccine introduction in  Yogyakarta, Indonesia: A qualitative study.  BMC Public Health ,  19 (1), 368.   https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-019-6706-4"
"96" "Sabahelzain, M. M., Mo ukhyer, M., Dubé, E., Hardan, A., Borne, B. van den, & Bosma, H. (2019). Towards a further understanding of measles vaccine hesitancy in Khartoum state, Sudan: A qualitative study.  PLOS ONE ,  14 (6), e0213882.   https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213882"
"97" "Setiawan, W. (2016). FANATISME DALAM BERORGANISASI (Studi Sikap Pengurus Pimpinan Daerah Muhammadiyah Ponorogo).  Muaddib : Studi Kependid ikan dan Keislaman ,  4 (1), 20–44.   https://doi.org/10.24269/muaddib.v4i1.93"
"98" "Slamet, A., & Laila, A. F. (2018). Strategi Dakwah Nahdlatul Ulama d an Muhammadiyah di Kabupaten Jepara dalam Perspektif Pemanfaatan Media Massa.  An-Nida : Jurnal Komunikasi Islam ,  10 (1), Article 1.   https://ejournal.unisnu.ac.id/JKIN/article/view/748"
"99" "Sulistyani, P., Shaluhiyah, Z., & Cahyo, K. (2017). GAMBARAN PENOLAKAN MASYARAKAT TERHADAP IMUNISASI DASAR LENGKAP BAGI BALITA (Studi di Kelurahan Sendangmulyo, Kecamatan Tembalang, Kota Semara ng).  Jurnal Kesehatan Masyarakat (e-Journal) ,  5 (5), 1081–1091."
"100" "Tomkins, A., Duff, J., Fitzgibbon, A., Karam, A., Mills, E. J., Munnings, K., Smith, S., Seshadri, S. R., Steinberg, A., Vitillo, R., & Yugi, P. (2015). Controversies in faith and health care.  Lancet (London, England) ,  386 (10005), 1776–1785.   https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60252-5"
"101" "Yohanes, D. (n.d.).  Acara Tahlilan Jadi Klaster Baru Penularan Covid-19 di Tulungagung, Ratusan Orang DIduga Tertular—Halaman 3—Tribunnews.com . Retrieved May 29, 2020, from   https://m.tribunnews.com/amp/corona/2020/04/22/acara-tahlilan-jadi-klaster-baru-penularan-covid-19-di-tulungagung-ratusan-orang-diduga-tertular?page=3"
"102" "Zein,  R. A., Putri, N. K., & Ridlo, I. A. (2020). Do justice and trust affect acceptability of Indonesian social health insurance policy?  International Journal of Health Governance ,  25 (1), 78–92.  https://doi.org/10.1108/IJH G-05-2019-0028"
