“It just isn’t a priority.” Will primary
science learning loss be forgotten?
Cherry Canovan (corresponding author), University of Central Lancashire
Email: ccanovan@uclan.ac.uk
Naomi Fallon, University of Central Lancashire
Email: nfallon6@uclan.ac.uk

Abstract
This study is part two of an ongoing investigation into the impacts of the UK’s Covid-19 related
school closures on primary science teaching and learning. In part one, conducted during the closures
of spring 2020, we found that science teaching had suffered in ways that were likely to entrench
inequality in who can access STEM education and careers.
The research reported in this paper, conducted during the second round of closures in early 2021,
found that little progress had been made in mitigating science learning loss at primary level, with
less than 10% of parents aware of any efforts in this regard. Meanwhile a concerning number of
teachers were worried that reversing science learning loss was not a priority for schools, and/or
reported that no efforts had been made to tackle this.
Parents felt that in general, home learning in the second closure period was much more effective
than in 2020. However science provision, although somewhat improved, was still perceived by many
to be disappointing in quantity and/or quality. Teachers were still finding science a challenge to
teach, although one major barrier from the first closures, a lack of access to IT, had largely been
addressed.
The results show that a lack of ‘catch-up’ activity risks science learning loss being forgotten, while
the second round of closures has likely exacerbated the relative learning loss in science over other
‘core’ subjects. Both these effects have negative implications for attempts to interest young people
in STEM education and careers.

Introduction
In January 2021, faced with soaring Covid-19 cases nationwide, the UK government decided at short
notice to close primary schools in England. This was the second round of closures, following those of
spring/summer 2020, and lasted for eight school weeks.
Since the first closures began in March 2020, evidence has been emerging, both in the UK1–3 and
around the world4–6, of related learning loss.
During the first closures, we studied how the move to home learning had affected science teaching
and learning for primary-age children7. Surveying teachers and parents, we found that science
teaching had disproportionately suffered, particularly in areas of high deprivation. We also found

that the situation was likely to exacerbate existing inequalities in who can access science – results
that were reported in the ASE’s Education in Science magazine8.
Attention has now begun to focus on how best to repair the damage9,10. Reporting on 380 interim
school visits carried out in September-October 2020, Ofsted11 found that many but not all schools
had returned to teaching all subjects, but most were adapting the curriculum in response to pupils’
knowledge gaps. However, they added that
Nearly all primary school leaders said that they were prioritising reading and mathematics,
with very few schools focusing on science.
This is worrying, as research shows12 that young people’s attitudes to science are largely fixed by the
end of primary school. In our earlier paper, we argued that reversing science learning loss should be
prioritised in order not to miss this window.
With the sudden advent of another round of home schooling, we decided to go back to our
participants. We wanted to know how much learning loss parents and teachers perceived children to
have suffered in science, and how this was being addressed. We also wanted to know how science
provision in Closure Period 2 (CP2) differed from Closure Period 1 (CP1).
We aimed to address the following questions:
•
•

How much learning loss in science was observed after CP1 by teachers and parents? How
was this mitigated during the autumn term when children were back in the classroom?
How did primary-level home learning differ between Closure Period 2 (CP2) and Closure
Period 1 (CP1), both in general and for science specifically?

Methods
To answer the above questions, we approached parents and teachers who had participated in our
earlier study (henceforth referred to as Phase 1) and had agreed to be contacted again. Those who
agreed then completed a survey about their experiences with primary science teaching and learning
in CP2.
Our Phase 1 study design proposed that Phase 2 would be completed “after schools return to
normal teaching”. However with another prolonged set of closures, we felt it important to gather
real-time evidence of the impacts on primary science, together with a picture of how efforts to
reverse learning loss had been progressing. The study outlined here is therefore Phase 2; we
anticipate Phase 3 taking place during academic year 2021-22.
Our survey contained both quantitative and qualitative items. We received a total of 100 responses,
77 from parents and 23 from teachers, comprising 47% of the available pool. The original parent
sample was skewed towards those with higher levels of science education, meaning that the current
sample has the same bias. As the vast majority (74/77) of respondents were resident in England, this
report is from the perspective of English education; differing education systems in the other UK
nations mean that the results do not necessarily extrapolate to those areas.
To provide a uniform approach across both studies, we adhered to protocols from Phase 1 in which
respondents remained anonymous. Both studies were approved by the appropriate ethics panel at
the University of Central Lancashire.

Results
Learning loss
We asked parents what learning loss their child had suffered in a range of subjects during CP1.
Respondents were able to choose from a variety of options, and to choose more than one. By far the
most common response was that children had experienced learning loss across the board; however
science as a stand-alone option was chosen more frequently than English and maths. Those choosing
‘other’ mainly expressed issues such as lack of socialisation.

Meanwhile all teachers observed learning loss in the three core subjectsa when children returned to
school in September 2020; although the option of ‘no learning loss’ was given, no respondents
selected this. Significant learning loss was reported by more than half of respondents for science and
maths, rising to 75% for English.

a

In English schools, maths, English and science are defined as ‘core’ subjects, while other disciplines such as
history, geography and music are categorised as ‘foundation’ subjects. Curricula differ across the other
countries of the UK.

We then asked both parents and teachers what mitigation or catch-up work had been used to tackle
the reported learning loss, both for general learning and science specifically.
First we asked parents what steps their child’s school had taken to mitigate general learning loss.
Around 60% of parents who responded reported that school had taken action of some sort, with the
remainder split between ‘None/None that I am aware of’, and ‘unsure/don’t know’.
Opinions as to the efficacy of catch-up work varied widely. While some were very positive – “A lot of
support has been provided by the school for academic and mental health needs,” – others indicated
that their child had suffered or been held back by efforts to make sure others were up to speed, or
had been put under excessive pressure to catch up. Some knew that catch-up was happening but
didn’t know in what way: “I’m not sure to be honest. They just reassured us they would catch them
up.”
When we asked parents to name which subjects catch-up work had focused on, by far the most
common were English and maths. Only one parent mentioned science, although a small number said
all areas had been covered. As already mentioned, our parent respondent group had an
overrepresentation of those with advanced science qualifications; it is likely, therefore, that they
would be more aware of any science catch-up work provided than the general population.

We then asked parents: “During the Autumn term, what steps, if any, were taken by the school to
mitigate SCIENCE learning loss? There were two main groups of answers; those who said ‘None’ or
‘None that I am aware of’, and those that were unsure/didn’t know. Only a very small number – less
than 10% – were aware of any action taken by schools to counteract science learning loss. The
difference between parents’ reports of mitigation work generally and for science can be seen below.

Teachers were asked to what extent they were able to mitigate learning loss, in both science and
other subjects; overall, respondents felt that efforts to reverse losses in the core subjects had only
been partly successful. Maths was the only subject where a few teachers felt they had been able to
mitigate all learning loss; concerningly, in science, a fifth reported they had been unable to reverse
any learning loss.
When asked about strategies to tackle general learning loss, many teachers reported that the usual
curriculum was replaced with what some called a “recovery” curriculum, focusing on maths, English
and areas identified as missed. Additional work or catch-up groups were also introduced, alongside
targeted support for some pupils.
For learning loss in science specifically, a few teachers reported having taken specific initiatives such
as extra teaching or curriculum adjustment, whilst for others this was integrated into the school’s
broader strategy. However a significant minority of our respondents – 10/23 – reported that no
catch-up work for science had been planned or attempted. Several used phrases such as “I’m afraid
it just isn’t a priority.”
Reflecting on how school closures had affected science teaching and learning at primary level, some
teachers expressed concern that science learning loss would not receive the same attention as
maths and English and so would persist:
Science was already a struggling subject in many schools, my fear is that a lot of teachers
won't see the importance of it and just see that focusing on maths and English is the most
important.
A couple of teachers reported secondary impacts on science learning through the loss of extracurricular activities such as science clubs and science weeks, and some suggested that future lesson
planning and curricula would have to incorporate missed subject knowledge and skills development.
Home learning in CP2
As well as learning loss from CP1, we asked parents and teachers about their experiences of home
learning in CP2. There was a broad consensus among parents that in general, home education
resources provided during CP2 were an improvement on CP1, with only around 10% suggesting that
provision had stayed the same or worsened.

Participants were asked “How, if at all, does the remote education provided by your children’s
school during CP2 differ from that given in CP1?” Free text responses yielded a number of positive
themes, including
•
•
•
•
•

daily provision of content;
live online lessons/meet-ups;
schooling more structured/organised;
greater volume of work provided;
teachers giving more feedback on assignments.

A typical comment was:
…there was very little education in period 1. Now it is structured with a daily timetable, prerecorded lessons, assignments to hand in with feedback given and live lessons every day.
In order to compare the two closure periods, we asked parents about the three core subjects, as well
as one foundation subject, history, to act as a comparator. We asked parents whether they agreed
that “School provided enough work, of a good quality”; as can be seen, perceptions on this point
improved dramatically between CP1 and CP2, with satisfaction very high for maths and English in
CP2. However science, although improved, continued to lag behind, with scores comparable to
history.

Although there was consensus that general teaching and learning in CP2 was greatly improved, there
was much more variety of opinion when it came to the quantity and quality of science provision.
Participants were asked two open-ended questions about science: “How, if at all, does the science
education provided by your children’s school during CP2 differ from that given in CP1?” and “Please
tell us about any changes you perceive in the effectiveness of science teaching from CP1 to CP2.”
Although a small majority of responses stated that science provision was somewhat improved being provided more regularly and/or of better quality – a quarter of responses stated that during
CP2, science was either not taught at all or provision was very minimal, while another group
questioned the quality of work provided.

Positive responses included “There’s more of it [science] and it’s more structured,” and “The work
provided is much better quality and more doable at home.” However such views were to a large
extent offset by negative perceptions of quantity and/or quality by other parents.
Reports of no science teaching in either lockdown were depressingly common, with comments such
as “CP1: non-existent. CP2: very minimal,” and “I haven’t been given anything for either lockdown.”
Where science teaching was provided, parents did not always find it satisfactory. The quantity of
work was one issue highlighted:
She gets maths and English everyday so it would be nice to get some more science work.
Science is only covered as part of the curriculum every fortnight.
For other parents, quality was lacking. One reported that “We have been sent links to a couple of
Operation Ouchb videos,” while another noted that “[Provision] has improved, however, I do believe
science has taken a back seat overall to maths and English.” Some parents were disappointed by a
lack of hands-on science activities: “…they haven’t done anything very practical during CP2, more
internet-based games, videos etc…”.
Such responses may be due to continuing difficulties experienced by teachers in this area. During
CP1, teachers reported three major barriers to science teaching – poor access to equipment,
whether families could provide adequate resources, and concerns about parents’ abilities to support
science learning. In our Phase 2 survey, teachers were asked to what extent they had experienced
these barriers in each closure period. The overwhelming majority reported that they were still
experiencing these barriers; however there was some positive change. In CP1, all three aspects were
cited as major barriers by the majority of teachers, while in CP2 parental ability to support science
learning was the only barrier still cited as a major issue by more than half of teachers (59%). In
particular, around two-thirds of teacher respondents reported that IT/tech provision had been given
to families in need. However several teachers felt that a new barrier – prioritisation of English and
maths over science by both schools and families – had led children to disengage with science.

When asked how changes to working patterns such as more live teaching had impacted on science in
CP2, around a quarter of teachers cited benefits: “[The] ability to question them effectively – explore
b

A popular BBC show aimed at children and focusing on medical matters.

what they already know and build upon.” However around a half expressed difficulties and/or
negative impacts. These included practical difficulties in teaching science through remote channels:
I am now completing a weekly live science lesson, however as all of our topics this year are
very practical, I am finding this very difficult to carry out successfully.
Others reported being told not to include science in live lessons:
Science I miss teaching… I have been told by my school to send out Oak Learning videos so
I’m not even teaching it anymore.

Discussion and conclusions
It is clear that parents and teachers are concerned about the learning loss arising from CP1. The
majority of parents (57%) felt that their child had suffered learning loss across the board, with more
perceiving this for science than for maths or English. Although teachers felt that learning loss was
most severe in English, all respondents had also witnessed learning loss in science.
Mitigation work, however, was not focused on science. Teachers felt that learning loss had been
reversed most successfully in maths, while some stated that they had been unable to reverse any
science learning loss at all. Parents were generally aware of efforts within school to provide catch-up
activity, but this was heavily focused on maths and English. Less than 10% of parents were aware of
any attempt by their school to address science learning loss.
Meanwhile whilst it is clear that in general, primary-level home education in CP2 was a great
improvement on CP1, the picture is again less positive for science. Although a small majority of
parents reported that more science was being taught and/or was of a better quality, a quarter said
that their child received no science teaching in CP2, and a significant cohort reported poor quality
provision. Whilst most parents agreed that in CP2 schools were providing enough, good quality work
in maths and English, the figure was much lower for science and was more comparable to the
assessment of history work, a foundation rather than core subject.
As in CP1, meanwhile, teachers continued to find it difficult to teach science. Although some of the
barriers identified by teachers in spring 2020 had been mitigated, particularly by the widespread
provision of IT equipment to families in need, these were still all experienced to some extent by
nearly all teachers. The increased demands of provision in CP2 had brought its own challenges, with
half reporting that the new way of working had negatively impacted in some way on their ability to
teach science.
In our earlier paper, we found evidence that teaching and learning science at primary level had been
particularly difficult in CP1, and argued that this needed to be addressed as a matter of urgency,
because young people’s attitudes to science are largely fixed by the end of primary school. Sadly, our
study of primary science in CP2 shows that, while provision was improved in some cases, many
difficulties remained compared to other subjects, meaning that relative learning loss was likely
exacerbated. Meanwhile work to reverse learning loss has been heavily focused on maths and
English, with very little attempt to turn things around in science. Unless concerted action is taken
over the next academic year, primary science learning loss risks being forgotten, with the result that
more young people will be excluded from STEM learning and careers.

References
1.

Andrew A, Cattan S, Dias MC, et al. Inequalities in Children’s Experiences of Home Learning
during the COVID-19 Lockdown in England.; 2020. https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14975

2.

Cullinane C, Montacute R. COVID-19 and social mobility impact brief #1: School shutdown.
Sutt Trust. 2020;(April):1-11. https://www.suttontrust.com/our-research/covid-19-and-socialmobility-impact-brief/

3.

Rose S, Twist L, Lord P, et al. Impact of School Closures and Subsequent Support Strategies on
Attainment and Socio-Emotional Wellbeing in Key Stage 1: Interim Paper 1.; 2021.
https://www.nfer.ac.uk/impact-of-school-closures-and-subsequent-support-strategies-onattainment-and-socio-emotional-wellbeing/

4.

Engzell P, Frey A, Verhagen MD. Learning Loss Due to School Closures During the COVID-19
Pandemic. Published online 2021. OSF.IO/VE4Z7

5.

Lichand G, Alberto Doria C, Leal Neto O, Cossi Fernandes JP. The Educational Impacts of
School Closures and Reopening in the Pandemic: Evidence from Brazil. SSRN Electron J.
Published online May 5, 2021.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3841775

6.

Maldonado JE, De Witte K. The effect of school closures on standardised student test
outcomes. FEB Res Rep Dep Econ. 2020;(September). https://lirias.kuleuven.be/3189074

7.

Canovan C, Fallon N. Widening the divide: the impact of school closures on primary science
learning. SN Soc Sci. 2021;1(5):117. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s43545-02100122-9

8.

Canovan C. The effect of school closures on primary science education – a study. Education in
Science. Published 2020. Accessed May 21, 2021.
https://www.ase.org.uk/resources/education-in-science/issue-282/effect-of-school-closuresprimary-science-education-–-study

9.

Sutton Trust. Fairness First: Social Mobility, Covid and Education Recovery.; 2021. Accessed
May 21, 2021. https://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2021/05/Fairness-FirstSocial-Mobility-Covid-Education-Recovery.pdf

10.

British Academy. Shaping the COVID Decade: Addressing the Long-Term Societal Impacts of
COVID-19.; 2021.

11.

Ofsted. COVID-19 Series: Briefing on Schools, October 2020.; 2020.
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_d
ata/file/933490/COVID-19_series_briefing_on_schools_October_2020.pdf

12.

Archer L, Osborne J, DeWitt J, Dillon J, Wong B, Willis B. Young people’s science and career
aspirations, age 10 – 14. Aspires. Published online 2013.
https://www.kcl.ac.uk/ecs/research/aspires/aspires-final-report-december-2013.pdf

