Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19

Long Title:
Studying the prominence effect amid the COVID-19 crisis:
implications for public health policy decision-making.

Short title:
Studying the prominence effect amid the COVID-19 crisis

Authors: Yossi Maaravi*, Ben Heller^

*The Adelson School of Entrepreneurship, Interdisciplinary Center (IDC), Herzliya,
Israel
^ Baruch Ivcher School of Psychology, Interdisciplinary Center (IDC), Herzliya,
Israel

Supporting Information:
S1 Dataset: The data that support the findings of this study are openly available at
https://osf.io/vh2r6/?view_only=42c180392c5c4e0c959141d214d844a0

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
Abstract
Background:
The novel COVID-19 has brought upon crucial policy- and decision-making
situations, especially when making judgments between economic and health concerns.
One particularly relevant decision-making phenomenon is the prominence effect,
where decision-makers base their decisions on the most prominent attribute of the
object at hand (e.g., health concerns) rather than weigh all the attributes together. This
bias diminishes when the decision-making mode inhibits heuristic processes. In this
study, we tested the prominence of health vs. economic concerns across two decisionmaking modes - choice (prone to heuristics) and matching (mitigates heuristics) during the peak of the COVID-19 in the UK using Tversky et al.’s classic
experimental paradigm. We added to the classic experimental design a priming
condition.
Methods and Findings:
Four hundred twenty participants from the UK were recruited via a crowd-working
platform. They were presented with two casualty-minimization programs, differing in
lives saved and costs: program X would save 100 lives at the cost of 55-million-pound
sterling, whereas program Y would save 30 lives at the cost of 12-million-pound
sterling. Half of the participants were required to choose between the programs
(choice condition). The other half were not given the cost of program X and were
asked to determine what the cost should be to make it as equally attractive as the
program Y. Participants in both groups were primed for either: a) economic concerns;
b) health concerns; or c) control (no priming). Results showed that in the choice
condition, unless primed for economic concerns, health concerns are more prominent
(only under economic priming was there a significant preference for program Y,

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
p<0.001). In the matching condition, on the other hand, the prominence of health
concerns did not affect decision-makers, as they all “preferred” the cheaper option.
Conclusions:
These results add further support to the practical relevance of using the proper
decision-making modes in times of consequential crises where multiple concerns,
interests, and parties are involved.

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
Introduction
In just a few months since COVID-19 was first reported in China, the virus has spread
globally, infecting millions, killing hundreds of thousands, and undermining
economies [1]. Soon after, the World Health Organization announced a global
emergency, and governments across the globe have taken numerous measures to fight
the virus. Some of the most common measures include isolation, quarantine, and
social distancing [2].
While these measures have clear advantages health-wise, their effect on economies
has been disastrous [3]. An example is the total shut down of the multi-trillion-dollar
traveling industry [4]. This tension between health and economic interests has led to
numerous debates among political leaders worldwide (e.g., UK, US, or Brazil). These
debates present an essential question, namely: how do decision-makers judge different
alternatives (e.g., two different programs to fight the pandemic), when these
alternatives vary across more than one criterion (e.g., their death toll vs. their financial
impact)?
Research in behavioral decision-making has long shown that decision-makers diverge
significantly from the rational “homo-economicus” of classic economics [5]. It was
suggested that uncertainty is a breeding ground for irrational or biased judgments that
are based on intuition, emotions, stereotypes, or heuristics [6]. Such patterns are
prevalent even when decisions are crucial (e.g., health issues [7]) or made by
professionals (e.g., courtroom judges [8]).
A relevant behavior is people’s tendency to overly focus on a single dominant
attribute of objects they judge [9]. One particularly apt bias is the prominence effect people’s tendency to focus on the most prominent attribute of judged objects instead
of weighing all criteria [10]. Tversky et al. (1988) presented decision-makers a

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
problem where health and economic considerations were mixed, a paradigm aptly
suitable for research into our current situation. Using two modes of decision (i.e.,
choice vs. matching), they were able to show that people tend to overly focus on the
more salient attribute of casualties rather than costs. As detailed below, we used the
same scenario with British subjects amid the COVID-19 crisis with the following
changes: the virus instead of traffic accidents, a town in the UK instead of Israel, and
pound sterling instead of dollars.
We hypothesized that unless decision mode (i.e., matching) or a priming manipulation
[11] deliberately made participants pay more attention to the economic criterion, they
would overly emphasize casualties over costs.
Method
Participants.
Participants from the United Kingdom (129 males and 291 females, all adults above
18 years of age) were recruited through a crowd-working platform and were paid to
answer an online questionnaire.
Procedure.
Scenario. Tightly based on one of Tversky et al.’s (1987) scenarios, participants were
presented with a scenario regarding the predicted number of COVID-19 related
casualties (600) over the next year in a small town in the UK. They were then
required to consider two programs (program X and program Y), described in terms of
yearly costs to the economy (in millions of Pound Sterling) and the number of
casualties. Participants were asked to imagine themselves as either: 1. Policymakers
in the Ministry of Treasury; 2. Policymakers in the Ministry of Health; 3. Control
group participants were not given a role.

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
Decision measure. Half of the participants were required to choose between the two
programs (choice condition): program X would lower casualties to 500 at the cost of
55-million-pound sterling, and program Y would lower casualties to 570 at the cost of
12-million-pound sterling.
The other half received the same information except that program X’s price was
missing. They were required to determine a cost that would make it as equally
attractive as program Y (matching condition). To do so, they were first asked whether
55-million-pound sterling was the right number, and were then asked to type their
appropriate cost.
Results and discussion
Choice condition. A binomial test indicated that the proportion of participants in the
treasury group who chose program Y (69.4%) over program X (30.6%) was
significantly greater than 50% (chance value), p = .001 (2-sided; see figure 1). There
was no significant difference in these proportions for participants in both the health
(Y= 59.4%, X= 40.6%) and the control groups (Y= 52.9%, X= 47.1%). Two chisquare tests were performed to examine the relationship between role and programchoice proportions. Whereas the proportions of health and control groups did not
differ significantly, treasury and control groups were significantly different: χ2 (1, N =
142) = 4.11, p = .043 (see figure 1).
At first glance, these results seem to diverge from Tversky et al.’s prominence effect.
There, participants – who were not given any roles (i.e., treasury vs. health) - had
significantly preferred program X (higher costs, fewer casualties), which implied the
prominence of saving lives over costs. Although our results do not show a significant
preference for program X in the control group, 50% of participants still chose it –
despite its disproportionate cost to the lives-saved ratio. This finding, coinciding with

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
the beginning of the lockdown in the UK (which made the economic issues much
more salient and relevant), lends support to the claim that health issues were still the
most prominent. To claim that the financial matters were more salient (which might
have been expected given the timing), we would see a significant preference for
program Y. Nevertheless, only economic priming yielded this result. Coupled with the
results of the matching condition below, a strong case could be made for the
prominence of health issues over economic issues in the choice condition.

Figure 1: Program Choice Percentage

†
*

Note. Figure depicting the percentage of participants who chose each program within each
role. * p < .001, † p < .05

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19

Matching condition. A binomial test indicated that the proportions of participants in
the treasury (95%), health (97%), and control (98%) groups who thought that 55million-pound sterling was too high a price were significantly greater than 50%
(chance value), p < .001 (2-sided).
Triangulating lives saved (in comparison to the 600 that would die without any
program in place) with the cost of program Y, resulted in the appropriate cost of
program X being 40-million-pound sterling. Thus, three single sample t-tests were
performed with 40 million pounds as the criterion. The analysis show that this was
indeed the case in the treasury (M= 15.87, SD= 9.44), health (M= 16.43, SD= 7.65),
and control (M= 16.19, SD= 9.73) groups: t (65)= -20.74, p< 0.001; t (67)= -25.38, p<
0.001; and t (60)= -19.10, p< 0.001 respectively. The same analysis using 20 as a
stricter criterion yielded similar results in the treasury (t (65)= -3.54, p= 0.001), health
(t (67)= -3.84, p< 0.001), and control (t (60)= -3.05, p= 0.003) groups.
In other words, when asked to do matching instead of choosing, participants
overwhelmingly preferred the more economical program. Indeed, they thought 55million-pound sterling was too high of a matching price. Additionally, their proposed
matching price, regardless of role priming, significantly lower than 40 and even 20.
Comparing these results to the choice condition patterns suggests that lives saved (and
not costs) were the more prominent attribute for participants who chose program X
(approximately 50%).
Indeed, only when priming for economic concerns did we see a difference in choice
favoring the more economical program, indicating the prominence effect.
Taken together, our results support Tversky et al.’s (1987) prominence effect study
and lend further support to the claim that to optimize these all-too-familiar types of

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
decision-making situations, decision-makers should match the options instead of
choosing between them.

Conclusion
Given the highly consequential decisions policymakers must make in times of crisis,
it is crucial to understand which decision-making paradigms might lead to better, less
biased decisions. The prominence of health over economic issues may lead to
irrational differences between choosing versus matching. Thus, changing the
decision-making paradigm from simply choosing alternatives to a matching paradigm
can aid policymakers to better weigh all attributes.

Running head: THE PROMINENCE EFFECT AMID COVID-19
References:
1. Sohrabi C, Alsafi Z, O’Neill N, Khan M, Kerwan A, Al-Jabir A, Iosifidis C, Agha R.
World Health Organization declares global emergency: A review of the 2019 novel
coronavirus (COVID-19). International Journal of Surgery. 2020 Feb 26.
2. Wilder-Smith A, Freedman DO. Isolation, quarantine, social distancing and
community containment: pivotal role for old-style public health measures in the novel
coronavirus (2019-nCoV) outbreak. Journal of travel medicine. 2020
Mar;27(2):taaa020.
3. Atkeson A. What will be the economic impact of covid-19 in the us? rough estimates
of disease scenarios. National Bureau of Economic Research; 2020 Mar 19.
4. Nicola M, Alsafi Z, Sohrabi C, Kerwan A, Al-Jabir A, Iosifidis C, Agha M, Agha R.
The socio-economic implications of the coronavirus and COVID-19 pandemic: a
review. International Journal of Surgery. 2020 Apr 17.
5. Neale MA, Bazerman MH. Negotiator cognition and rationality: A behavioral
decision theory perspective. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes.
1992 Mar 1;51(2):157-75.
6. Tversky A, Kahneman D. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. science.
1974 Sep 27;185(4157):1124-31.
7. Senay I, Kaphingst KA. Anchoring-and-adjustment bias in communication of disease
risk. Medical Decision Making. 2009 Mar;29(2):193-201.
8. Danziger S, Levav J, Avnaim-Pesso L. Extraneous factors in judicial decisions.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011 Apr 26;108(17):6889-92.
9. Maaravi Y, Hameiri B. Deep pockets and poor results: The effect of wealth cues on
first offers in negotiation. Group Decision and Negotiation. 2019 Feb 15;28(1):43-62.
10. Tversky A, Sattath S, Slovic P. Contingent weighting in judgment and choice.
Psychological review. 1988 Jul;95(3):371.
11. Tulving E, Schacter DL. Priming and human memory systems. Science. 1990 Jan
19;247(4940):301-6.

