How the Far-Right Polarises Twitter:
’Highjacking’ Hashtags in Times of COVID-19
Philipp Darius1 and Fabian Stephany2,3?
1

Hertie School of Governance, Berlin
Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford,
Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society, Berlin

2
3

Abstract. Twitter influences political debates. Phenomena like fake
news and hate speech show that political discourse on micro-blogging
can become strongly polarised by algorithmic enforcement of selective
perception. Some political actors actively employ strategies to facilitate
polarisation on Twitter, as past contributions show, via strategies of
’hashjacking’ 4 . For the example of COVID-19 related hashtags and their
retweet networks, we examine the case of partisan accounts of the German far-right party Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) and their potential use of ’hashjacking’ in May 2020. Our findings indicate that polarisation of political party hashtags has not changed significantly in the last
two years. We see that right-wing partisans are actively and effectively
polarising the discourse by ’hashjacking’ COVID-19 related hashtags,
like #CoronaVirusDE or #FlattenTheCurve. This polarisation strategy
is dominated by the activity of a limited set of heavy users. The results
underline the necessity to understand the dynamics of discourse polarisation, as an active political communication strategy of the far-right, by
only a handful of very active accounts.

Keywords: COVID-19 · Hashtags · Networks · Political communication
strategies · #CoronaVirusDE · #FlattenTheCurve

1

Introduction

The Coronavirus pandemic was accompanied by a so-called ‘infodemic’. This
term refers to the acceleration of information and high uncertainty in the information environment, as for instance, in science, the media or policymaking.
Moreover, there was a surge of dis- and misinformation and most debated ‘conspiracy theories/myths’ during the pandemic that additionally disrupted the
media and information system. In this article, we show that far-right actors
used long established strategies such as ‘hashjacking’ using political opponents
hashtags and public hashtags to influence public opinion formation and leverage
their own content. In this article, we assess polarisation strategies by partisans
?
4

Corresponding Author: fabian.stephany@oii.ox.ac.uk
The use of someone else’s hashtag in order to promote one’s own social media agenda

2

Darius and Stephany

of the German right-wing populist party “Alternative für Deutschland” during
two observation periods in 2018 and 2020. The analytical approach builds on
community detection algorithms from social network analysis and logistic regression models to determine the likelihood of strategic hashtag hijacking or
“hashjacking”.
The results indicate that far-right users and politicians have been successful
in establishing counterpublics on Twitter and were much more involved in linking
their messages to wider discourses than partisans of other parties. By comparing
the polarisation of party hashtags between 2018 and 2020, we identify political
partisan groups and show that polarisation of party hashtags is relatively stable
and highest for the far-right #AFD. Moreover, our results indicate that Twitter
debates on #CoronaVirusDE and #FlattenTheCurve are strongly polarised, too.
The group of accounts spreading critical messages, questioning the existence of
COVID-19 or the necessity of measures taken against the virus, is populated by
partisans of the far-right. Within the far-right partisan movement around #AFD
a handful of heavy users are retweeting most of the content. It is important to
know the dynamics of social media discourse, when engaging in it: A small group
of political partisans, in our case of the far-right AfD, systematically polarises
discussions on public hashtags to influence public opinion formation and leverage
their own content.

2

Background

Social platforms have become central hubs and fora for political debates, economic transactions, marketing and social communication. As a consequence,
social platforms take an increasingly important role in the formation of public
opinion, political campaigning and political news consumption. Yet, the media
environment can be described as hybrid [1], since television remains an important
source of information and media consumption for large parts of the population
[2]. Nevertheless, the share of citizens for which the Internet and social platforms represent the most important channels for political news consumption is
increasing in many countries, e.g., Germany and the US.
For extreme parties and political opinions, social media offer additional channels for political communication in which extreme political actors do not need to
follow the values and norms of traditional mass media and are thus able to spread
their respective ideology [3]. These alternative communication channels (social
platforms and messengers) are particularly attractive for right-wing populist
and radical-right politicians who often have a hostile attitude towards established media and less access to traditional media channels [3]. Thus, right-wing
populist actors and movements benefited disproportionately from the emergence
of social media, since they could bypass traditional media gatekeepers and communicate directly with their respective target audiences [4]. Now social platform
companies increasingly take a role of being gatekeepers of information or “custodians of the Internet” [5]. Besides, the direct contact to political actors and
the represented ideologies enables the effect of a self-socialisation of citizens and

How the Far-Right Polarises Twitter

3

users into right-wing populist beliefs and worldview [6]. Consequently, social media also provide an opportunity for top-down claims of leadership for populist
parties and politicians [6].
As stated by the literature, social media have become an important political forum for the formation of political opinion and consequently also political
persuasion and debate. When mapping these debates it is possible to identify
different groups that arise due to ideologically aligned messaging behaviour [7,
8]. One strategy used by more or less organised political groups that is especially relevant for Twitter is the hijacking or ‘hashjacking’ of hashtags [9–13].
This notion refers to the function of a hashtag to represent an issue, movement
or organisation and the general expectation that the stream of information and
messages pertaining to these hashtags resembles in some way the public opinion
on that matter [14–16]. Consequently, the action of ‘hashjacking’ as using hashtags that were established by politically opposed groups or a general civil society
discourse, is executed with the goal of quantitatively dominating the content referring to this specific hashtag [12]. With regards to public hashtag debates, this
strategy forms an adverse group or counter-public that is separated from the
wider discourse and forms a separated cluster [17, 18].

3

Hypotheses

Revisiting our investigations on ’hashjacking’ in 2018 [12] and based on the
presented literature on ’hashjacking’ strategies, we formulate the following hypothesis.
As the share of citizens for which the Internet and social platforms represent
the most important channels for political news consumption is increasing and
political discourse is increasingly taking place on platforms like Twitter, we
assume that debates around the major political parties in Germany remains to
be polarised.
H1): The polarisation of retweet networks of political party hashtags did not
change between 2018 and 2020.
Likewise, we assume that civil society discourse on Twitter relating to issues
like the containment of the COVID-19 pandemic is subject to polarisation.
H2): Retweet networks of COVID-19 related hashtags show a significant degree
of polarisation.
As alternative communication channels (social platforms and messengers) are
particularly attractive for right-wing populist and radical-right politicians, we
assume that COVID-19 related hashtags, like #CoronaVirusDE and #FlattenTheCurve, have been systematically targeted by German far-right partisans of
#AFD.
H3): There is a significant activity of right-wing partisan accounts in
contra-clusters of COVID-19 retweet networks.

4

Darius and Stephany

4

Research Design

The study is based on Twitter data that was collected by accessing Twitter’s
Rest API and using political party hashtags of German parties represented in
the federal parliament (#AFD, #CDU, #CSU, #FDP, #GRUENE, #LINKE,
#SPD) and COVID-19 related hashtags (#CoronaVirusDE and #FlattenTheCurve) as a macro-level selection criterion. In total this study builds on a sample
(n=101,765) of all public accounts using one or multiple of the selected political
party hashtags between May 28th and June 4th in 2018 and 2020 on Twitter.
The analysis focuses on a network approach and a visualisation of the retweet
networks in Gephi using the Force2 layout algorithm [19] for each hashtag where
retweeting creates a link (edge) between two accounts (nodes). Since the data
was collected as separate streams of data pertaining to each hashtag, an account using several hashtags during the observation period in a retweet or being
retweeted, will appear in each of the respective hashtag networks.
Political discourses on Twitter show polarised or clustered structures due
to the retweeting behaviour, as indicated by the literature. The analysis, consequently, focuses on the retweeting networks of the chosen hashtags. In a first
step of analysis the modularity (community detection) algorithm [20] assigns the
nodes to different communities based on the structural properties of the network
graph. The cluster membership is indicated by the colour of nodes in Figure 2.
Thereafter, the interpretability of the clustering, as being in support of or opposition to a party, is controlled with a qualitative content analysis of the 50 most
retweeted accounts similar to Neuendorf et al. [21]. This pro-/contra-polarisation
of each party retweet network allows us to assign accounts as partisans of a specific party hashtag.
Based on previous invesitagations [12], we know that a high pro-party X &
contra-party Y association indicates ’hashjacking’ strategies. Consequently, we
use a logistic regression model to test all cluster combinations (as the likelihood
to be in a contra-cluster of hashtag Y given a node was in the partisan cluster of
party X). We decide to apply a logistic model for the assessment of cross-cluster
heterophily, since our dependent variable is binary (location in contra-cluster)
and the resulting odds are easy to interpret. Assuming there is no group that
uses other party hashtags more frequently, users from all clusters should have
the same odds to appear in the other network clusters. Thus, a high affiliation
between two clusters in terms of their users being more likely to appear in both
of them is an indication for strategic hashtag use or ’hashjacking’.

5

Results

In the first part of the analysis, we compare the polarisation of German political
party hashtags, i.e., the share tweets in either a pro and contra-cluster, between
our data sample collected 2018 and 2020. As illustrated in Figure 1, we observe
that the share of polarised tweets did not change much between 2018 and 2020,
thus confirming research hypothesis 1). Polarisation, in our definition, is still

How the Far-Right Polarises Twitter

5

among highest for #AFD, while the polarisation, i.e., growth of the contracluster, has likewise increased for the hashtag of the Socialdemocrats (#SPD).

#FDP

#CSU

#GRUENE

#LINKE

#CDU

#SPD

#AFD

Share of Tweets (%)

100

75

50

25

0
2018

2020

2018

2020

2018

2020

2018

2020

Contra

2018

2020

2018

2020

2018

2020

Pro
Darius, P. & Stephany, F. (2020) | bit.ly/hashjacking

Fig. 1. In comparison to our data collected in May 2018, polarisation (the share of pro versus contra tweets) of the seven major German party hashtags has not changed significantly.
It is still among highest for #AFD, while the polarisation (growth of the contra-cluster)
has likewise increased for the hashtag of the Socialdemocrats (#SPD)

Secondly, similar to party hashtags, we construct retweeting networks for
two COVID-19 related hashtags most popular in Germany in May 2020: #CoronaVirusDE and #FlattenTheCurve. With the example of #CoronaVirusDE,
Figure 2 illustrates the shape of these networks. After the application of a Louvain clustering [22] and modularity (community detection) algorithm, at least
two different clusters emerge. Accounts coloured in dark blue in the bottom left
of the network are centred around the account of @tagesschau, Germany’s major public-service national and international television news service. Similar to
the accounts in the centre of the network (in light blue colours), users retweet
news and governmental updates on COVID-19 in Germany. However, accounts
the top-right cluster (in orange) have mainly shared tweets in which #CoronaVirusDE had been used for questioning the existence of COVID-19 or the necessity of measures taken against the virus. Many of these accounts are partisans
of #AFD, as indicated in red. The strong clustering of the #CoronaVirusDE

6

Darius and Stephany

retweet network (same holds for #FlattenTheCurve) indicates a confirmation of
hypothesis 2); retweet networks of COVID-19 related hashtags show a polarisation of users.

Fig. 2. In April 2020, users of the hashtag #CoronaVirusDE are clearly clustered. Users
top-right clusters (orange) have shared tweets questioning the existence of COVID-19 or
the necessity of measures taken against the virus. 42 percent of these users and 69 of the
100 most active retweeters are partisans of the hashtag #AFD (highlighted in red). We
estimate the odds that a user retweeting #CoronaVirusDE in critical tweets is a #AFD
partisan: Odds(X  Contra #CoronaV irusDE | X  #AF D partisan).

Based on the distribution of users in the retweet accounts of #CoronaVirusDE
and #FlattenTheCurve we calculate conditional odds of ’hashjacking’, i.e., the
likeliness that an account in the contra-cluster of a given COVID-19 hashtag
is part of a given partisan network, as shown in Figure 3A). Here, we see that
partisans of #AFD are five times more likely to occur in the contra-cluster of
#CoronaVirusDE and 1.5 times more likely to be part of the contra-cluster of
#FlattenTheCurve than a user chosen at random. On the contrary, partisans
of other party hashtags are less likely to appear in either of the contra-clusters.
This finding delivers evidence confirming research hypothesis 3); a significant

How the Far-Right Polarises Twitter

7

(A)

#CoronaVirusDE

#FlattenTheCurve

Odds of "Hashjacking"

5.0

2.5

0.0

−2.5

#AFD

#CDU

#CSU

#FDP #GRUENEN #LINKE

#SPD

#AFD

#CDU

#CSU

#FDP #GRUENEN #LINKE

#SPD

Partisans of
Darius, P. & Stephany, F. (2020) | bit.ly/hashjacking

(B)

Accounts that are retweeted

Accounts that retweet

#SPD

#LINKE

Partisans of

#GRUENE

#FDP

#CSU

#CDU

#AFD
1

10

100

1000

1

10

100

1000

Activity (log−scaled)
Darius, P. & Stephany, F. (2020) | bit.ly/hashjacking

Fig. 3. (A) For the retweet networks of #CoronaVirusDE and #FlattenTheCurve, partisans
of #AFD are five times, respectively 1.5 times more likely to appear in a contra-cluster
than a user chosen at random. Partisans of other major Germany political party hashtags
are less likely to occur in a contra-cluster. (B) The group of #AFD partisans contains a
set of heavy users. 39 percent of all #AFD partisan retweets in our sample refer to one
percent of #AFD partisan accounts. Similarly, 50 percent of all retweets stem from the ten
percent most active users.

8

Darius and Stephany

’hashjacking’ activity of right-wing partisans, which is higher than for partisan
groups of other political party hashtags.
Lastly, we examine the activity distribution of individual partisan accounts.
Figure 3B) shows accounts across partisans by their activity of retweeting and
being retweeted. For all partisan groups, we see a large share of users with
very little activity (less than one retweet). However, the distribution of #AFD
partisans appears to be extremely long-tailed; it contains a set of heavy users.
In fact, 39 percent of all #AFD partisan retweets in our sample reference one
percent of all #AFD partisan accounts. Similarly, 50 percent of all retweets stem
from ten percent of the most active users. The activity (retweeting) of far-right
partisans is higher than for partisan groups of other political party hashtags.
Many of these heavy users contribute to the polarisation of COVID-19 related
hashtags, like #CoronaVirusDE. The #AFD partisan accounts in the network
in Figure 2 are highlighted in red. Their dominance in the sceptic contra-cluster
(orange) is clearly visible. 42 percent of all users in the #CoronaVirusDE contracluster are #AFD partisans. In fact, 69 of the 100 most active users (in terms
of retweets) in this cluster are partisans of #AFD.

6

Conclusion

In this study we investigate the discourse polarisation on Twitter as a result of
far-right partisans’ application of a hashjacking strategy. For the case of COVID19 related hashtags and German major political party hashtags, we find that partisans of the “Alternative für Deutschland” (#AFD), systematically polarised
discussions on #CoronaVirusDE or #FlattenTheCurve. Similarly, we find that
polarisation on political party hashtags in Germany did not change much between 2018 and 2020. But for the exception of the Socialdemocrats’ hashtag
(#SPD), with a growing opposition cluster, polarisation remains highest for
the far-right. #AFD partisans are much more likely to engage in retweeting on
COVID-19 related hashtags questioning the existence of COVID-19 or the necessity of measures taken against the virus. At the same time, we highlight that the
activity of far-right partisans is much driven by a handful of very active users.
50 percent of all retweets among #AFD partisans stems from the ten percent
most active accounts.
Our work validates the assumption of a high polarisation of debates related to
COVID-19. Furthermore, we find evidence that this polarisation is strategically
driven by partisans of the far-right. It takes only a small set of very active
accounts to polarise retweeting debates on hashtags such as #CoronaVirusDE
or #FlattenTheCurve. For users, it is important to be aware of these dynamics
of social media discourse, when engaging in it. For platform providers, we show
that the critical monitoring of a selected set of accounts can help to contain the
spread of misinformation at large.

How the Far-Right Polarises Twitter

9

References
1. A. Chadwick, The hybrid media system: Politics and power. Oxford University
Press, 2017.
2. N. Newman, R. Fletcher, A. Schulz, S. Andi, and R. Nielsen, “Digital news report
2020,” 2020.
3. S. Engesser, N. Ernst, F. Esser, and F. Büchel, “Populism and social media: how
politicians spread a fragmented ideology,” Information, Communication & Society,
vol. 20, pp. 1109–1126, Aug. 2017.
4. S. Stier, L. Posch, A. Bleier, and M. Strohmaier, “When populists become popular:
comparing Facebook use by the right-wing movement Pegida and German political
parties,” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 20, pp. 1365–1388, Sept.
2017.
5. T. Gillespie, Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, content moderation, and the
hidden decisions that shape social media. Yale University Press, 2018.
6. B. Krämer, “Populist online practices: the function of the Internet in right-wing
populism,” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 20, pp. 1293–1309, Sept.
2017.
7. M. D. Conover, J. Ratkiewicz, M. Francisco, B. Goncalves, A. Flammini, and
F. Menczer, “Political Polarization on Twitter,” p. 8, 2011.
8. M. D. Conover, B. Gonçalves, A. Flammini, and F. Menczer, “Partisan asymmetries in online political activity,” EPJ Data Science, vol. 1, Dec. 2012.
9. L. Bode, A. Hanna, J. Yang, and D. V. Shah, “Candidate networks, citizen clusters,
and political expression: Strategic hashtag use in the 2010 midterms,” vol. 659,
no. 1, pp. 149–165.
10. A. T. Hadgu, K. Garimella, and I. Weber, “Political hashtag hijacking in the US,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 55–
56.
11. C. VanDam and P.-N. Tan, “Detecting hashtag hijacking from twitter,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on Web Science, WebSci ’16, pp. 370–371,
Association for Computing Machinery.
12. P. Darius and F. Stephany, ““hashjacking” the debate: Polarisation strategies of
germany’s political far-right on twitter,” in International Conference on Social
Informatics, pp. 298–308, Springer, 2019.
13. C. Knüpfer, M. Hoffmann, and V. Voskresenskii, “Hijacking MeToo : transnational
dynamics and networked frame contestation on the far right in the case of the ‘120
decibels’ campaign,” pp. 1–19.
14. A. Bruns and J. E. Burgess, “The use of Twitter hashtags in the formation of ad
hoc publics,” in Proceedings of the 6th European Consortium for Political Research
(ECPR) General Conference 2011, 2011.
15. A. Bruns, B. Moon, A. Paul, and F. Münch, “Towards a typology of hashtag
publics: a large-scale comparative study of user engagement across trending topics,”
vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 20–46.
16. P. Pond and J. Lewis, “Riots and twitter: connective politics, social media and
framing discourses in the digital public sphere,” vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 213–231. Publisher: Routledge eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1366539.
17. C. Puschmann, J. Ausserhofer, N. Maan, and M. Hametner, “Information laundering and counter-publics: The news sources of islamophobic groups on twitter,”
p. 8.

10

Darius and Stephany

18. W. W. Xu, “Mapping connective actions in the global alt-right and antifa counterpublics,” p. 22.
19. M. Jacomy, T. Venturini, S. Heymann, and M. Bastian, “Forceatlas2, a continuous
graph layout algorithm for handy network visualization designed for the gephi
software,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 6, p. e98679, 2014.
20. V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast unfolding
of communities in large networks,” Journal of statistical mechanics: theory and
experiment, vol. 2008, no. 10, p. P10008, 2008.
21. K. A. Neuendorf, The content analysis guidebook. Los Angeles: SAGE, second
edition ed., 2017.
22. P. De Meo, E. Ferrara, G. Fiumara, and A. Provetti, “Generalized louvain method
for community detection in large networks,” in 2011 11th international conference
on intelligent systems design and applications, pp. 88–93, IEEE, 2011.

