Quantitative Political Economy Research Group

Department of Political Economy
King’s College London

The political scar of epidemics

QPE Working Paper 2020-7

Cevat G. Aksoy
Barry Eichengreen
Orkun Saka

June 12, 2020

The Political Scar of Epidemics
Cevat Giray Aksoy, Barry Eichengreen, Orkun Saka1
June 2020
Abstract
What will be political legacy of the Coronavirus pandemic? We find that epidemic
exposure in an indi id al imp e ionable years (ages 18 to 25) has a persistent
negative effect on confidence in political institutions and leaders. We find similar
negative effects on confidence in public health systems, suggesting that the loss of
confidence in political leadership and institutions is associated with healthcarerelated policies at the time of the epidemic. In line with this argument, our results
are mostly driven by individuals who experienced epidemics under weak
governments with less capacity to act against the epidemic, disappointing their
citizens. We provide evidence of this mechanism by showing that weak
governments took longer to introduce policy interventions in response to the
COVID-19 outbreak. These results imply that the Coronavirus may leave behind a
long-lasting political scar on the current young generation ( Gene a ion Z ).
JEL Codes: D72; F50; I19
Keywords: epidemics; trust; democracy, political approval

1

Aksoy is a Principal Economist at the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), part- ime A i an P ofe o of Economic a King College London and Re ea ch
Associate at IZA Institute of Labour Economics. Eichengreen is a Professor of Economics and
Political Science at the University of California, Berkeley, Research Associate at the National
Bureau of Economic Research and Research Fellow at the Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Saka is an Assistant Professor at the University of Sussex, Visiting Fellow at the London School of
Economics and Research Associate at the Systemic Risk Centre. We thank Nicolás Ajzenman,
Damien Bol, Ralph De Haas, Sergei Guriev, Beata Javorcik, Dan Treisman, and webinar participants
at the Bank of Finland for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Kimiya Akhyani for providing
very useful research assistance. Views presented are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the EBRD. All interpretations, errors, and omissions are our own.

1

1. Introduction
Epidemics are stress tests for governments. Public officials and institutions face the
pressing challenge of assembling information and mounting effective interventions
against a rapidly spreading and potentially catastrophic disease.

They must

communicate that information, describe their policies and, importantly, convince
the public of their trustworthiness. Thus, Fukuyama (2020) argues that the keys to
success in dealing with COVID-19 are
he he ho e leade

he he ci i en

p e ide o e a compe en and effec i e

hei leade , and
a e. B

a of

example, Rothstein (2020) ascribes the greater success at containing the COVID19 in the Nordic countries than in Italy in part to greater trust in government.
Trust in government is not a given, however, stereotypes about Nordics and Italians
notwithstanding. Specifically, there is reason to ask whether COVID-19 itself will
affect trust in political institutions and leaders, and if so how. On the one hand,
he e i

he

all

o nd he flag h po he i . Trust in and support for political

institutions and leaders tends to rise in the wake of disasters (Mueller 1970, Baum
2002), although the persistence of this change is unclear.2 On the other hand, trust
and support for the government may be affected negatively because the authorities
failed to limit the effects of the pandemic. In this case also, however, persistence is
unclear.
In this paper, we provide the first evidence on the effects of epidemics on political
trust.3 We use individual-level data on confidence in political institutions and
2

For example, Chanley (2002) shows that in the days after the 11 September 2001 attacks, public
trust in the U.S. government rose to levels not seen since the mid-1960s.
3
There is limited evidence on other political impacts of epidemics and containment efforts.
Campante et al. (2020) find that heightened concern about Ebola led to lower voter turnout in the
United States but no evidence of an anti-incumbent effect. Amat et al. (2020) show that following
the COVID-19 outbreak in Spain, citizens expressed a stronger preference for technocratic
governance and strong leadership. Bol et al. (2020) surveyed citizens of 15 European countries and
find that the imposition of lockdown was associated with a 2 percent increase in trust in government.
Another body of research examines the impact of trust in government on epidemics and containment
efforts. Marlow et al. (2007) show that trust in government is a predictor of flu vaccine acceptance
by mothers in the United States. Using survey evidence from Liberia during the Ebola epidemic,
Blair et al. (2017) report that respondents who expressed low trust in government were less likely
to take precautions in their homes or abide by government-mandated social distancing.

2

approval of political leaders from the 2006-2018 Gallup World Polls (GWP),
fielded in nearly 140 countries annually. We link these individual responses to the
incidence of epidemics since 1970 as tabulated in the EM-DAT International
Disasters Database. Building on work suggesting that attitudes and behavior are
durably molded in what psychologists refer to as the impressionable lateadolescent and early-adult years, we show that exposure to epidemics at this stage
in the life course durably shapes confidence in political institutions and attitudes
toward political leaders.
We find that individuals who experience epidemics in their impressionable years
(specifically ages 18 to 25) display less confidence in political leaders,
governments, and elections. The effects are substantial: an individual with the
highest exposure to an epidemic (relative to zero exposure) is 7.2 percentage points
less likely to have confidence in the honesty of elections; 5.1 percentage points less
likely to have confidence in the national government; and 6.2 percentage points less
likely to approve the performance of the political leader. (The respective averages
of these three variables in our sample are 51 percent, 50 percent, and 50 percent.)
These effects represent the average treatment values for the remainder of life. They
decay only gradually and persist for at least two decades.
There is significant heterogeneity in these effects. Less educated individuals
respond more strongly, adopting even more negative attitudes toward political
institutions and leaders. Residents of urban areas respond more negatively than
those residing in rural areas. Women display larger drops in confidence. The
negative impact of epidemic exposure is larger in middle- and high-income
countries.
We then explore amplification and transmission mechanisms. We show that the
effects we identify are specific to communicable diseases, such as viruses, which
can spread contagiously and where a timely and effective public policy response is
critical for containment. For non-communicable diseases, in contrast, we do not see

3

the same impact of past impressionable-year outbreaks on subsequent views of the
trustworthiness of governments and leaders.
In addition, we document that individuals exposed to epidemics in their
impressionable years are less likely to have confidence in the public health system
and the safety and efficacy of vaccination. The former is indicative of trust in the
overall health policies of the government, while the latter can be taken as reflecting
attitudes specifically toward pharmaceutical interventions. These findings suggest
that the perceived (in)adequacy of health-related government interventions during
epidemics, both pharmaceutical and non-pharmaceutical, are important for trust in
government more generally.
We also show that the magnitude of the effect we identify depends on the strength
of the government at the time of the epidemic. When individuals experience
epidemics under weak governments, the negative impact on trust is larger and more
persistent. This is consistent with the idea that such governments are less capable
of effectively responding to epidemics, hence leading to a long-term fall in political
trust.
We substantiate this conjecture by considering this same conditioning factor,
government strength, in the context of COVID-19. We show that government
strength is associated with statistically significant improvements in policy response
time (the number of days between the date of first confirmed case and the date of
the first non-pharmaceutical intervention). This supports the notion that
government strength at the time of the epidemic is a predictor of effective policy
responses and that its absence amplifies the negative revision of political trust in
response to epidemics.
Finally, we show that our results are driven by the reaction to epidemic exposure in
democracies. In democracies, residents sharply and persistently revise (downward)
their political trust in the event of impressionable-year epidemic exposure. The
same is not true in autocracies. Evidently, citizens expect democratic governments
to be responsive to their health concerns, and where the public-sector response is

4

not sufficient to head off the epidemic they revise their views in unfavorable ways.4
In autocracies, in contrast, there may not exist a comparable expectation of
responsiveness and hence no impact on political trust. In addition, democratic
regimes may find consistent messaging more difficult. Because such regimes are
open, they may allow for a cacophony of conflicting official views, resulting in a
larger impact on trust when things go wrong.
Our analysis offers the broadest cross-national evidence to date on the relationship
between exposure to epidemics and political trust. Where a few previous papers
have considered individual countries and epidemics, our data cover some 750,000
respondents from 142 countries. This allows greater confidence in the generality of
the findings. By incorporating a wide range of fixed effects, controlling various
observable characteristics as well as past exposure to other economic and political
shocks, we can address potential concerns with omitted variables.5
A word on terminology before proceeding. We group the terms confidence, trust,
and approval under the general heading of trust. Confidence is the belief that certain
future outcomes will obtain. Trust is vesting confidence in specific institutions or
individuals for delivering those outcomes.6 Approval is a function of trust and other
factors, such as, in the present context, success in containing epidemics. In addition
to analyzing indi id al q e ion ha inq i e abo

4

he e ponden

confidence in,

Consistent with this, Economist (2020) shows that democracies typically respond more effectively
to epidemics; our results suggest that when they disappoint this expectation, they are more severely
punished.
5
Our treatment variable, exposure to epidemics, is a natural disaster and as such is more plausibly
exogenous than the man-made shocks employed in previous literature (described below) Note that
i i commonplace in he la o ega d epidemic and pandemic a Ac of God and o in oke
escape clauses in contracts, whereby parties experiencing a natural disaster are no longer responsible
for their obligations. To be sure, the number of people affected by a virus in different countries will
still depend on country characteristics. That said, there is also a random component in natural
infection and mortality rates across different types of epidemics, which changes from virus to virus
and thus brings randomness to our setting. For example, Ebola was more deadly but less contagious
than COVID-19). Additionally, the timing and the appearance of a virus can be regarded as random
insofar as it is not possible to predict when a new virus may appear.
6
Checkland, Marshall, and Harrison (2004) and Smith (2005), also working in a public health
context, argue that confidence is something that is entrusted in systems (what we refer to here as
institutions), whereas trust is vested in individuals (in the present context, leaders). A further
discussion of the relationship between trust and confidence is Adams (2005).

5

trust in, or approval of a political institution or leader, we use the average and first
principal component of these variables as a way of better isolating their common element.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews kindred
literatures. Sections 3 through 5 describe our data, empirical strategy, and model.
Section 6 presents the baseline results, while Section 7 reports a battery of
robustness checks. Section 8 then offers evidence on mechanisms, after which
Section 9 concludes.
2. Literature
Our analysis connects up to several literatures. First, there is previous work in
economics on the determinants and correlates of trust.7 Contributions here (e.g.
Greif 1989, Alesina and La Ferrara 2000) tend to focus on trust in other individuals
rather than in political institutions and leaders. Exceptions are Algan et al. (2017)
and Dustmann et al. (2017).8 Algan et al. study the implications of the Great
Recession for voting for anti-establishment parties, as well as for general trust and
political attitudes, using regional data for Europe. They show that lack of political
7

In addition, there is work in political science and psychology. Levi and Stoker (2000) survey work
in political science on how trust is conceptualized. They argue that trust is both relational and
conditional. By relational, they mean that it involves an individual making herself vulnerable to
another individual, group, or institution (such as government) that has the capacity to do her harm
or to betray her. By conditional, they mean that trust is placed in specific individuals and institutions
over specific domains. Citizens may entrust their lives to their government during wartime or in a
public health emergency, for example, but not otherwise. Work in psychology proceeds along
similar lines. Thus, Mayer et al. (1995) also distinguish three dimensions of trustworthiness, which
they denote ability, benevolence, and integrity. By ability, they mean the perceived technical
competence of the trustee in a particular domain of interest. Perceptions of ability, therefore, consist,
as he p i , of a bjec i e e al a ion of he a io s skills and capabilities that may be needed
fo he
ee o ac all accompli h ha i i being
ed o do. Bene olence de i e f om he
extent to which the trustor believes the trustee is prepared to expend effort to protect the trustor.
Integrity refers to the perception that the trustee follows a set of internalized values acceptable to
the trustor. All three aspects may be relevant to the problem at hand.
8
Other recent papers also analyze approval of leaders and governments, but they consider different
independent variables than we do here. Margalit (2011) shows that job losses from import
competition depressed the vote share of the incumbent president in 2004 and 2008 in the United
States. Jensen et al. (2017) also find that trade-related losses in manufacturing cost incumbents
votes. Aksoy et al. (2018) show that trade shocks affect political approval of governments and
leaders, Guriev et al. (2019) show that an increase in broadband mobile internet access reduces
government approval, and Guriev and Treisman (2019) find that approval of leaders is higher in
non-democracies when media and internet are restricted covertly, but approval ratings fall when
citizens observe censorship.

6

trust tends to be associated with crisis-driven economic insecurity. Dustmann et al.
(2017) use data from the European Social Survey to identify economic and social
characteristics associated with a lack of trust in national parliaments and the
European Parliament. They find that positive economic outcomes are important for
trust in national parliaments, but that voters look to other competences when
evaluating the trustworthiness of the European Parliament.
Another relevant literature analyzes how past experience shapes attitudes and
behaviors. Malmandier and Nagel (2011) show how the stock market returns
experienced by an individual affect his or her subsequent financial risk taking.
Krosnick and Alwin (1989) and Osborne et al. (2011), among others, show that
preferences vis-a-vis partisanship and party affiliation are affected by past
experience and, once formed, remain stable for long periods.
Third, there is the literature on the importance of the impressionable years in
durably shaping attitudes and values. An influential study pointing to the
importance of this stage of the lifecycle for belief and value formation is the
repeated survey of women who attended Bennington College between 1935 and
1939 (Newcomb 1943, Newcomb, Koenig, Flacks and Warwick 1967), among
whom beliefs and values formed then remained stable for long periods. An early
statement of the resulting hypothesis is Dawson and Prewitt (1969); Krosnick and
Alwin (1989), among others, then pinpoint the impressionable years as running
from ages 18 to 25.
The importance of the impressionable years has been rationalized in various ways.
Some chola

da

on Mannheim

ea lie concep of he f e h enco n e ,

suggesting that views are durably formed when late adolescents and early adults
encounter new ideas or events for the first time. Others invoke Erikson (1968) to
suggest that individuals at this age are especially open to new influences because
they are at the stage of life when they are forming a sense of self and identity. Still,
others suggest that attitudes are pliable at this stage of the lifecycle because views
have not yet been hardened by confirmatory information (Converse, 1976). Spear

7

(2000) links the literature on the impressionable years to work in neurology
describing neurochemical and anatomical differences between the adolescent and
adult brain, suggesting that these neurochemical and anatomical changes are
associated with durable attitude formation.
In terms of applications, Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014) establish that
experiencing a recession between the ages of 18 and 25 has a significant impact on
political preferences and beliefs about the economy. Using survey research from
Chile, Etchegaray et al. (2018) show that individuals in their impressionable years
during periods of political repression have a greater tendency to withhold their
opinions, compared to those who grew up in less repressive times. Farzanegan and
Gholipour (2019) find that Iranians who experienced the Iran-Iraq War in their
impressionable years are more likely to prioritize a strong defense. Akbulut-Yuksel,
Okoye, and Yuksel (2018) show that Germans in their impressionable years during
the Nazi expulsion of Jews are less interested in politics later in adulthood,
compared to the less exposed.
We now complement this literature on the durable effect of past experience,
specifically in the impressionable years, by showing that exposure to epidemics
between the ages of 18 and 25 has a negative effec on indi id al trust in political
institutions and leaders that persists for many years.
3. Data
Our principal data sources are 2006-2018 Gallup World Polls (GWP) and the EMDAT International Disasters Database. GWP are nationally representative surveys
fielded each year starting in 2006 in about 150 countries, with responses from
approximately 1,000 individuals in each country. Our full sample (depending on
outcome variable) includes around 750,000 respondents in 142 countries.9

We drop observations for Nagorno-Karabakh, Northern Cyprus, Somaliland, and Puerto Rico, as
they are not international recognised independent states.
9

8

The outcome variables come from questions asked of all Gallup respondents about
their confidence in the national government, their confidence in the honesty of
elections, and their evaluation of the job performance of the incumbent leader: (i)
In ( hi co n
abo

he hone

), do o ha e confidence in each of he follo ing, o no :
of elec ion ? (ii) In ( hi co n

each of the follo ing, o no :

Ho

abo

Ho

), do o ha e confidence in

he na ional go e nmen ?

(iii) Do

you approve or disapprove of the job performance of the leadership of this
co n

?

10

A visual summary of these variables is in Appendix Figure B.1-B.3.

GWP provides information on responden

age, gende , ed ca ional a ainmen ,

marital status, religion, urban/rural residence, labor market status, and income.
Controlling for employment status and income allows us to measure the impact of
past epidemics on confidence in political institutions and leaders free of any direct
effect on material well-being.
We also examine responses to three parallel questions as placebo outcomes:
whether respondents have confidence in the military; confidence in financial
institutions or banks; and confidence in media freedom. This helps us to determine
whether what we are capturing is the impact of epidemic exposure on trust and
confidence in political institutions and political leaders specifically, as distinct from
any impact on trust in society, its institutions, and its leaders generally.
Data on the worldwide epidemic occurrence and its effects are drawn from the EMDAT International Disasters Database from 1970 to the present.11 These data are
compiled from UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance
companies, research institutes, press agencies, and other sources.12 The database
The e q e ion a e pa of he Gall p na ional in i ion inde . If a e ponden a k fo
clarification or interpretation of the question, Gallup surveyors are ained o an e Ho e e you
in e p e he q e ion, o I i ha e e he q e ion mean o you. If a e ponden a k he he
there is a more neutral e pon e op ion han e o no,
e o a e ained o a k he he
he e i one ha o lean mo e o a d .
11
EM-DAT was established in 1973 as a non-profit within the School of Public Health of the
Catholic University of Louvain; it subsequently became a collaborating center of the World Health
Organization.
12
EM-DAT also gathers historical information on epidemics that took place before it was founded
in early 1970s; however, those data are patchy and biased towards well-recorded epidemics. Hence
10

9

includes epidemics (viral, bacterial, parasitic, fungal, and prion) meeting one or
more of the following criteria:
10 or more deaths;
100 or more individuals affected;
Declaration of a state of emergency;
Calls for international assistance.
Each epidemic is tagged with the country where it took place. When an epidemic
affects several countries, the database contains separate entries for each country.
EM-DAT provides information on the start and end date of the epidemic, the
number of deaths and the number of individuals affected, where the number of
individuals affected is how many require assistance with basic survival needs such
as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical treatment during the
period of emergency. Figure 1 is a visual summary of these data. We aggregate all
epidemic-related information in this database at the county-year level and merge it
with Gallup World Polls.
In some of our robustness checks, we employ an additional panel dataset on
diseases from Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) and a dataset on
recent epidemics from Ma et al. (2020). To explore underlying mechanisms, we use
data from the Wellcome Global Monitor, Google Trends, the European Center for
Disease Prevention Control, the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center, and
the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker.13
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for the outcome variables, country
characteristics, and individual characteristics. Averaging across all country-years,
nearly 50 percent of respondents say they have confidence in the honesty of
elections, have confidence in the national government, or approve of the

we only focus on epidemic cases that EM-DAT li e collec ed af e i a fo nded in 1970 . We
do not provide the full country-year-epidemic list here due to space constraints, but this is available
upon request.
13
See Appendix A for additional details on these data sources and our construction of variables.

10

performance of the leader. There of course is huge heterogeneity within and across
countries.14
Our dataset includes 47 epidemics and pandemics since 1970. This includes large
outbreaks of Cholera, Ebola, and H1N1 and also more limited epidemics.15 Many
of these epidemics and pandemics affected multiple countries. 137 countries
experienced at least one epidemic since 1970.16
4. Identification
An ideal experiment (from the point of view of the analyst but not the victims)
would randomly allocate epidemics across countries and measure the causal impact
on political trust by comparing the change in individual attitudes in treated and
untreated countries. In the (fortunate) absence of such an experiment, we resort to
a strategy similar to that employed by Giuliano and Spilimbergo (2014).
Our main independen

a iable i an indi id al e po

e o epidemic d ing hi

or her impressionable years, that is, between the ages of 18 and 25. Specifically, we
mea

e he a e age n mbe of people in he indi id al

affected by an epidemic ( ela i e

co n

o pop la ion) d ing ha

of e idence
indi id al

impressionable years. We limit our sample to individuals born in the same country
in which they were interviewed by Gallup.17
One can imagine several potential threats to this strategy. First, our estimates could
be driven by factors that are specific to each cohort, since our treatment categorizes

For comparison, 72 percent respondents had confidence in the military, while only 60 and 54
percent had confidence in banks and financial institutions and in the media, respectively, where we
use responses to these questions in placebo tests.
15
Averaged across available years, H1N1, Ebola, Dysentery, Measles, Meningitis, Cholera, Yellow
Fever, Diarrhoeal Syndromes, Marburg Virus, and Pneumonia were the top 10 diseases causing the
most epidemic mortality worldwide.
16
This includes 51 countries in Africa, 40 in Asia, 22 in the Americas, 19 in Europe, and 5 in
Oceania. The most epidemic-prone countries in the dataset are Niger (25), Nigeria (25), Congo (22),
Cameroon (21), Mozambique (20), Sudan (20), Uganda (20) and India (19). Advanced countries in
our sample all experienced 5 or fewer epidemics.
17
We cannot guarantee that these individuals spent all of their impressionable years in their country
of birth, but any measurement error arising from this concern only stacks the cards against us by
lowering the precision of our estimates.
14

11

individuals in each country by year of birth. Some cohorts could have cohortspecific attitudes toward political institutions and leaders or be more or less trusting
than others in general. Individuals born in the late 1940s and early 1950s, for
example, may vest less trust in political institutions and leaders because they
experienced the widespread protests against political repression in the late 1960s,
their impressionable years. We therefore include dummies for the year of birth to
compare the individuals only within the same birth cohort.18
Second, independent of the cohort effects, individuals may exhibit differential
behavior across the life cycle. For instance, they may become more (or less) trusting
as they age. Their political views and ideologies may change from more liberal
when young to more conservative when older. Age-specific factors may also matter
if different generations were exposed to epidemics with different probabilities.
Given advances in science and improvements in national healthcare systems, one
might anticipate that epidemics are less likely to be experienced by younger
generations. We address these concerns by including a full set of age-group
dummies, which eliminates any influence on our outcome variables of purely agerelated and generational effects.
Generational trends in political attitudes could also be heterogeneous across
countries. Some national cultures may be more flexible and open to change in
individual values and beliefs, leading to larger differences across generations. We
therefore include country-specific linear age trends in our models.
Third, any relevant but omitted variable that varies across countries and years can
bias estimates even when conventional country and year fixed effects are included.
This issue arises in our setting where we observe indi id al

a i de

o ad

national political institutions and leaders. Because the identity of those leaders and
the structure of those institutions may change over time, it can be difficult to
separate these shifts in identity and structure from the treatment (i.e., the epidemic).
Including these dummies biases our estimates downward if epidemics are correlated across
countries and affect them simultaneously. In this case, any common effect of an epidemic on a
specific cohort will be subsumed by these cohort-specific dummies, and our treatment will pick up
the variation in past epidemics only when they were staggered across countries.
18

12

For instance, even when approval of a leader declines following an epidemic, we
may not capture this effect if the epidemic simultaneously triggers a change in the
identity of the leader, bringing in someone for whom approval levels are higher.
We address this problem by including dummies for each county-year pair. This
eliminates all heterogeneity in our outcome variables that can be traced to countryspecific time-varying factors, such as changes in the government or leader. Thus,
our treatment only compares individuals within the same country and survey year,
ensuring that these individuals face the same political institutions and leaders. This
strategy also mitigates concerns that our results are driven by other structural
differences between countries that are repeatedly exposed to epidemics and those
that are not.
Fourth, in any study of the impact of past experience on current outcomes, the
underlying assumption is that the effect is durable and can be observed later in time.
This indeed con i

e he e ence of he imp e ionable ea

hypothesis. To

the extent that this is not the case because the effect has a relatively short half-life,
our empirical strategy will be biased towards failing to reject the null hypothesis of
no effect. We explore this later by tracing the impact of past epidemic experience
across different age groups and show that the effect is persistent and decays only
gradually as individuals age.
Fifth, although we fully saturate our specifications with fixed effects, there could
still be other past experiences correlated with epidemics. We therefore also control
for 12 aspects of political risk in the country in question during he indi id al
impressionable years. In a separate test where we can use long-span datasets on
economic and political variables, we again condition the estimates on past GDP,
inflation, growth and democracy. Including these additional controls for past
experience has no impact on the coefficients of interest. Lastly, we control for
contemporaneous individual characteristics and economic circumstances captured
by Gallup. These controls, detailed when we specify the model, minimize the
possibility that the impact of a past epidemic is transferred to current outcomes via
one of these variables.

13

5. Model
To assess the effect of past epidemic exposure epidemic on confidence in political
institutions and trust in leaders, we estimate the following specification:

Yi, c, t, a, b =

1Exposure

+

3Number

+

ict

to epidemic (18-25)icb +

of people affectedct-1 +

4Cc

+

5Tt

2Xi

+

6Aa +

(1)
7Bb

+

8Cc*Age

where Yictab is a dummy variable for whether or not respondent i of age a and
birthyear b in country c at time t approves or has confidence in an aspect of their
co n

poli ical in i

ion o leade hip. We foc

on approval of the job

performance of the leader of the country, confidence in national government, and
confidence in the honesty of elections., All three questions are coded as dummy
variables, with one representing a positive answer and zero otherwise. We estimate
linear probability models for ease of interpretation.
To measure the Exposure to epidemic (18-25), we calculate for each individual the
number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the population, averaged
over the 8 years when the individual was aged 18 to 25, consistent with the
imp e ionable ea

hypothesis. When estimating the coefficient of interest

1,

we control for whether or not the individual is also exposed to an epidemic
contemporaneously. This is operationalized as the number of people per capita
affected by an epidemic in the country of residence in the year immediately prior
to the year of the interview.19
We specify the vector of individual controls Xi as including indicator variables for
living in an urban area and for the presence of children in the household (any child

This variable is lagged to ensure that the independent variable is realized before the dependent
variable, since Gallup World Polls may interview individuals at any point within the year of the
interview.
19

14

under 15), and dummy variables for gender, marital status, employment status,
religion, educational attainment, and within-country-year income deciles. We
control for income before taxes in both log and log squared form.20
We include fixed effects separately at the levels of country (Cc), year (Tt), and age
(Aa). The country dummies control for time-invariant variation in the outcome
variable caused by factors that vary cross-nationally. Year dummies capture the
impact of global shocks that affect all countries simultaneously. Age dummies
control for the variation in the outcome variable caused by factors that are
heterogeneous across (but homogenous within) age groups. We also include
country-specific age trends (Cc*Age) and cohort fixed-effects (Bb) for reasons
explained in Section 4.
In a fully saturated specification, we also include country-year fixed effects, which
account for possible omitted country features that may change with time (such as
GDP per capita, population, political regime, etc.). We cluster standard errors by
country and use sample weights provided by Gallup to make the data representative
at the country level.
6. Results
Tables 2-4 report estimates of Equation (1). The dependent variable in Table 2 is
a dummy indicating that the respondent has confidence in the honesty of elections.
Table 3 reports analogous estimates where the dependent variable is a dummy
indicating that the respondent has confidence in the national government. Table 4
presents results where the dependent variable is a dummy indicating that the
respondent approves of the job performance of the leadership of his or her country.
In all three tables, Column 1 reports estimates with country, year, and age group
fixed effects. Column 2 adds the logarithm of individual income and its square,

The income measure includes all wages and salaries, remittances from family members living
elsewhere, and all other income sources. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using
he Wo ld Bank indi idual consumption PPP conversion factor. This makes income estimates
comparable across countries.
20

15

demographic characteristics, within country-year income decile fixed effects, and
labor market controls. Column 3 adds country-specific age trends, while column 4
adds cohort fixed effects. Column 5 fully saturates the specification with
country*year fixed-effects, non-parametrically controlling for all potentially
omitted variables that can vary across countries and years.21
Column 1 of Table 2 shows a negative and statistically significant relationship
be een e po

e o an epidemic in he indi id al

impressionable years and

confidence in the honesty of elections. The measure of contemporaneous epidemics
is also negatively associated with confidence in the honesty of elections; its
coefficient differs significantly from zero at the 10 percent confidence level.22
Columns 2 to 4 show that the estimated effects change little as controls are added.23
Column 5 restricts all variation to within country-year observations and reports
conservative estimates that are smaller in magnitude but still significant at 1 percent
level. In our preferred model (Column 4), an individual with the highest exposure
(0.032, that is, the number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the
population in indi id al

impressionable years) relative to individuals with no

exposure has on average 7.2 percentage points (-2.258*0.032) less confidence in
the honesty of elections in the remaining part of their lives after impressionable
years.24 Given that the mean level of this outcome variable is 51 percent, the effect
is substantial.

This specification requires us to drop the contemporaneous measure of epidemics, since this only
varies across countries and years.
22
Readers may recall some discussion of how confidence in the presidential primary election in
Wisconsin in 2020 might be affected by it occurring in the midst of COVID-19. Among the
mechanisms highlighted in this debate is the possibility that mail-in balloting and other
complica ion ill lo he o e co n and in i e a di
of he elec ion p oce
(Ad Hoc
Committee for 2020 Election Fairness and Legitimacy 2020).
23
We al o checked fo bad con ol (Ang i and Pi chke, 2008). One migh o
ha ome of
the individual characteristics (such as household income) are themselves affected by epidemic
related economic shocks. However, excluding them completely or including them as ordinal
variables does not substantively change the point estimates for our variables of interest (these results
are available upon request). We keep these controls in our baseline specification to avoid omitted
variable bias.
24
Because epidemics are rare events and our main independent variable of interest, Exposure to
epidemic (18-25), is skewed to the right, it may not be appropriate to use its standard deviation or
mean for understanding the effect size.
21

16

Tables 3 and 4 report results for confidence in the national government and
approval of the performance of the leader. The results on impressionable-year
epidemic exposure have the same sign, same statistical significance, and similar
magnitude (a 5.1 percentage point decrease in confidence in the national
government, where the mean outcome level is 50 percent, and a 6.2 percentage
point decrease in approval of the political leader, where the mean outcome level is
50 percent).25
How persistent are the effects?
We investigate persistence by first estimating our baseline specification on the
subsample of individuals closest to their impressionable years (that is, ages 26 to
35) and then repeatedly rolling the age window forward by one year in a series of
separate estimates. This permits us to observe how the coefficients change as we
increase the distance between the age range in which impressionable individuals
had exposure to epidemics and the age at which they are surveyed. If the effects are
persistent, then the estimated coefficient should not change substantially as distance
increases between time of exposure and time of observation.
Figure 2, based on Column 4 of Table 2-4, shows the effect of epidemic exposure
on the outcome variables. The effects on the base subsample (i.e., 26-35) are more
than three times larger than the point estimates for the full sample, confirming that
the age groups closest to the experience window (i.e., 18-25) are disproportionately
affected (compared to other age groups). For this base sample, the median distance
between the past experience window (median age: 21.5 years) and the subsample
(median age: 30.5 years) is 9 years, hence documenting the effect of past epidemics
in the medium term.
When the model is re-estimated on successively older subsamples, the magnitude
of the impact remains stable for the first six estimations following base sample but
Our results are also robust to excluding countries with very high approval ratings for their leaders
and governments.
25

17

then decays gradually. It nearly vanishes when estimated on the subsample of
individuals aged 36 to 45, when the median distance between the experience
window and the subsample is 19 years. On this basis, we conclude that epidemic
experience during the impressionable years has persistent effects on political trust
that persist for nearly two decades of adult life.
Heterogeneity
We consider the baseline specification (Column 4 of Table 2) for various
subsamples. Each cell of Table 5 reports a separate regression. Each column shows
the coefficient estimates for our main variable of interest: average epidemic
exposure during the impressionable years. We report the baseline estimates for our
main outcome variables in the top row. The subsequent rows show results by gender
(rows 2 and 3); by per capita income of the country (rows 4 and 5); by the education
of the individual (rows 6 and 7); by urban/rural residence (rows 8 and 9); by within
country-year household income tercile (row rows 10, 11 and 12); and by the
political regime (democratic or other) (rows 13 and 14).26
These results reveal considerable heterogeneity. Individuals with less than degreelevel education (those who have completed fewer than four years of education
beyond high school) respond to epidemics more strongly, adopting even more
negative attitudes toward political institutions and leaders.27 Individuals in urban
areas have more strongly negative views of political institutions and leaders as a
result of earlier epidemic exposure, compared to those residing in rural areas.28
Women display larger drops in confidence in government and leaders.29 Many of
these differences are statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence level.

We classify political regimes based on the most recent Polity5 dataset. Countries with Polity
scores 5 and above are classified as democracies.
27
With the exception of attitudes toward political leadership.
28
A conjecture here is that epidemics spread more contagiously in more urban areas, causing urban
residents to more radically revise their attitudes regarding governments in the wake of an outbreak.
29
In contrast, men and women respond similarly in terms of confidence in elections.
26

18

In addition, we observe differences in magnitudes and statistical significance as a
function of country characteristics. The negative impact of epidemic exposure on
confidence in the government and its leader is larger in middle- and high-income
countries, although the difference across groups is not always statistically
significant.
Importantly, the negative impact of an epidemic tends to be larger in countries with
democratic political systems than in non-democracies; the difference in coefficients
is consistently significant at standard confidence levels. An interpretation is that
respondents expect democratically-elected governments to be responsive to their
needs and that they are especially disappointed when such governments do not
respond in ways that prevent or contain an epidemic. In contrast, the effect of prior
epidemic exposure is insignificantly different from zero in non-democracies, where
there may be no similar presumption of responsiveness. Alternatively, democratic
regimes may have more difficulty with consistent messaging. Because such regimes
are open, they may allow for a cacophony of conflicting official views, resulting in
a larger impact on confidence and trust. Either way, our results are driven by
respondents in democratic regimes.
These results go some way toward addressing the issue of external validity in the
context of COVID-19. The effects we report here are not limited to low-income
countries, autocratic governments, or fragile democracies the kind of regimes that
are popularly associated with prominent epidemics such as Ebola. This suggests
that our results may also have broader applicability to global pandemics such as
COVID.
7. Robustness
In this section we report further analyses establishing the robustness of our findings.
Are the results unique to political institutions and leaders?
It is important to establish that the relationship between epidemic exposure and
subsequent views of political institutions and leaders is not simply part of a broader

19

reassessment of national and social institutions. If exposure to past epidemics
worsens attitudes toward all national institutions, it would be misleading to interpret
the findings in Tables 2-4 as the effect of the epidemic exposure on trust in political
institutions and leaders narrowly defined. To examine this, we estimate similar
models for placebo outcomes related to views of other institutions.
Each column of Appendix Table B.1 reports a regression model for a different
outcome variable. Outcome variables equal one if the individual has confidence in
the military (column 1); in banks and financial institutions (column 2); and in media
freedom (column 3). There are no meaningful relationships between past epidemic
exposure and confidence in these institutions, consistent with our hypothesis that
loss of trust by individuals with epidemic experience is specific to political
institutions.
Are the results driven by non-comparable samples?
Another concern is the possibility of heterogenous, non-comparable samples across
the three response variables because not all Gallup respondents answered all three
questions. We therefore now consider only on individuals who answered all three
q e ion . We con

c a ne

a iable ( political trust ) ha mea

e he a e age

response of an individual across three main outcome variables. We construct a
second dependent variable ( fi

p incipal componen of

) ha is the first

principal component of these three variables. The results, reported in Appendix
Tables B.2-B.3, confirm that our findings are robust across overlapping samples
and alternative measures of political trust.30
Are the results unique to impressionable years?
We also confirm that the effect of prior epidemic exposure on trust in political
institutions and leaders is limited to epidemic exposure in the impressionable years.
Appendix Figure B.4 shows the effect of exposure in different eight-year age

Additional results available on request are very similar when re-estimated on the same sample
with the three individual outcome variables.
30

20

windows (analogous to the eight-year window of ages 18 to 25).31 The analysis
again considers our two composite dependent variables: the average of the three
outcome variables and the first principal component of the responses. In both cases,
the negative effect is only evident when epidemic exposure occurs in the
indi id al imp e sionable years.32
Are the results robust to alternative data sets for epidemics?
We also confirm our results using alternative data for epidemics. We consider the
recent large-scale epidemics reported in Ma et al. (2020), which constructs a
country panel dataset starting in the early 2000s. Several aspects of this dataset
make it less than ideal for our setting. One is its short time span, which allows us
to consider only individuals young enough to be in their impressionable years
between 2000 and 2018.33 Another is that the dataset does not contain countryspecific intensity measures and thus only can be used in dichotomous form. As will
be clear later, epidemic intensity matters, in that only large epidemics have a
significant impact on political trust.
With these concerns in mind, we re-estimate our baseline specification on this
alternative dataset. In Appendix Table B.4, exposure to an epidemic (18-25) takes
a value of 1 if the respondent experienced SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, or Zika in
his or her impressionable years. The results for confidence in elections and approval
of the leader are robust to the use of these alternative data. In line with our earlier
results, the adverse impact of past epidemics is only evident in democratic
countries.

We repeat the analysis only for the first four windows after birth to make sure we have age-wise
comparable samples across separate estimates.
32
We again find the same for the three individual response variables. Results are available upon
request.
33
This also means that we must drop all observations in Gallup before 2008-9 to ensure that the first
impressionable-years cycle (2000-2007) is calculated before we apply this variable onto individuals.
31

21

Are communicable diseases special?
Poor public-policy responses to communicable diseases may have an especially
powerful negative effect on trust in political institutions because of the danger that
those diseases can spread contagiously, making that policy response especially
urgent. In contrast, non-communicable diseases may develop over longer periods
and bee driven by individual decisions and characteristics, such as lifestyles and
demographics, instead of or in addition to government policy. This suggests that
non-communicable diseases may not have equally powerful long-term effects on
trust in political institutions and that if they do such effects should be smaller.
In Appendix Table B.5 we distinguish communicable and non-communicable
diseases using data from IHME for the period between 1990 and 2016.34 The
communicable and non-communicable disease measures are population-adjusted
and expressed in terms of Disability Adjusted Life Years Lost (DALYs). 35 As
explained by Roser and Ritchie (2020), DALYs are a standardized metric allowing
for direct comparison and summing of the burden of different diseases. We present
results for all countries in Column 1, for democratic countries in Column 2, and for
non-democratic countries in Column 3. The top panel shows results for the outcome
a iable confidence in the hone

of elec ion , he middle panel fo

confidence

in the na ional go e nmen , and he bo om panel fo he app o al of he leade .
Each column in each panel is a separate regression in which we simultaneously
include both types of past exposure (exposure to communicable and
noncommunicable diseases, respectively).
We continue to find a significant negative impact, as before, on confidence on the
government and in elections of past exposure to communicable diseases. In

Similar to the previous exercise, this dataset is again restrictive compared to EMDAT which
spans a much longer time period starting from 1970s.
35
Communicable diseases include diarrhea, lower respiratory disease, other common infectious
diseases, malaria & neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, and tuberculosis. Non-communicable
diseases include cardiovascular diseases, cancers, respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and endocrine
diseases, mental and substance use disorders, liver diseases, digestive diseases, musculoskeletal
disorders, and neurological disorders.
34

22

contrast, we find no statistically significant association between trust in these
political institutions and exposure to non-communicable diseases during the
impressionable years. Thus, the results confirm that the association we document
are unique to communicable diseases. It remains the case, as before, that the full
sample results are driven by respondents in democratic countries.
Are large epidemic exposures different?
The effects we identify are larger for more severe epidemics. In Appendix Table
B.6, we re-estimate our baseline model and, instead of the continuous variable
reported in the top row, use indicators for the top 0.5 percent of exposures to
epidemics, the top 1 percent, the top 2 percent, and the top 5 percent each in a
separate estimation. Having an epidemic exposure that falls in the top 0.5, 1, or 2
percent of exposures causes a significant fall in an indi id al

confidence in

elections, the national government, and its leader. Moreover, the magnitude of the
effect linearly increases with more intense experiences, which leads us to undertake
the next analysis.
Are the results driven by intensive or extensive margin?
In Appendix Table B.7, we distinguish the intensive and extensive margins of the
treatment. For the extensive margin, we construct a binary variable based on
he he

he n mbe of pe on affec ed b epidemic d ing he indi id al

impressionable years is positive or zero. This captures whether the effect is due to
having any level of epidemic exposure. For the intensive margin, we limit the
sample to individuals with positive epidemic exposure in their impressionable
years. Approximately 55 percent of respondents in our surveys have no exposure
to epidemics when impressionable and hence are dropped.
The results in Table B.7 show that the treatment works via the intensive rather than
the extensive margin. It is not simply being exposed to an epidemic that generates
the previously-reported effects; rather, conditional on being exposed, the severity
of the epidemic drives the results. When individuals with no epidemic exposure are

23

excluded from the sample, the estimated effects of past exposure are, if anything,
larger than in the full sample.
Are the results driven by other past experience?
Appendix Tables B.8 and B.9 analyze whether the results are driven by other
omitted economic and political shocks that individuals may have experienced in
their impressionable years. We use the ICRG dataset in Appendix Table B.8,
which measures a co n

economic and poli ical conditions along 12

dimensions.36 Appendix Table B.9 presents results after controlling for GDP
growth, GDP per capita, inflation rate, and political regime (Polity2 scores).
In both tables, we calculate the average values for each one of these dimensions
during the impressionable years of each individual. Including these past
experiences as controls makes for smaller samples, since ICRG covers only part of
our period. Still, none of these additional controls has a meaningful impact on the
coefficients for past epidemics.37

These are (1) government strength - an a e men bo h of he go e nmen abili o carry out
its declared programs and its ability to stay in office; (2) socioeconomic conditions - an assessment
of the socioeconomic pressures in a society that could constrain government action or fuel social
dissatisfaction; (3) investment profile - an assessment of factors affecting risks to investment not
captured by other political, economic and financial risk components; (4) internal conflict - an
assessment of political violence in the country and its actual or potential impact on governance; (5)
external conflict - an assessment of the risk to the incumbent government from foreign action,
including both non-violent external pressure and violent external pressure; (6) corruption - an
assessment of corruption in the political system; (7) military in politics an assessment of the
mili a
in ol emen in poli ic , even at a peripheral level; (8) religious tensions an assessment
of whether a single religious group seeks to replace civil law by religious law and to exclude other
religions from the political and/or social process; (9) law and order an assessment of the strength
and impartiality of the legal system and popular observance of the law; (10) ethnic tensions - an
assessment of the degree of tension within a country attributable to racial, national, or linguistic
divisions; (11) democratic accountability - a measure of how responsive government is to the people;
and (12) bureaucracy quality an assessment of whether bureaucracy has the strength and expertise
to govern without drastic changes in policy or interruptions in government services.
37
Past epidemic exposure also has the same magnitude and significance when excluding the other
past experience controls but estimating the specifications over the smaller, ICRG-compatible
sample. These results are available on request.
36

24

Falsification checks
We undertake two falsification exercises. Appendix Table B.10 focuses on the
GWP subsample of individuals aged 30 or above who migrated to the country of
interview in the previous 5 years. We can be sure that these individuals did not
spend their impressionable years in the country of the interview. For falsification
purposes, we assume that they did so (as opposed to spending those years in their
country of origin). Second, Appendix Table B.11 assigns all individuals in the full
sample to a random country for the calculation of their experience during
impressionable years while keeping all else the same as in Tables 2-3-4.
In both cases, we find no effect of these made- p and

andoml -a igned

treatments on political trust.
Event study of short-term response to recent pandemics
As mentioned earlier, Ma et al. (2020) provide a comprehensive dataset of
pandemic events in this century. By creating an event-study setting around the dates
on which a pandemic was declared by the WHO for a specific country, we can
investigate how the political trust of a co n

pop la ion changes shortly after a

pandemic. To do this, we slightly modify the model as follows:

Yi, c, t, a, b =
+

3Cc

+

1LaggedPandemicict
4Tt

+

5Aa +

6Bb

+

+

2Xi

7Cc*Age

(2)
+

ict

LaggedPandemic is a dummy taking on a value of 1 if the WHO announced a
pandemic for the country c in the year immediately preceding survey year t and 0
otherwise. This variable is lagged by one year to ensure that all respondents in the

25

country experienced the pandemic (since Gallup surveys could be undertaken at
any point of a year).38
Table B.12 shows that political trust among a co n

e iden starts declining

immediately after a pandemic. In Figure B.5, we re-estimate our model changing
the timing of our main variable of interest.39 The two types of countries (those with
and without a pandemic) share a common trend in the pre-event window; the
divergence starts only after the pandemic. Two years after the pandemic, approval
of the leader has declined by more than 6 percentage points on average. This effect
is substantial and persistent, consistent with the findings of our main analysis.
8. Evidence on Mechanisms
Weak, unstable governments with limited legislative strength, limited unity, and
limited popular support presumably are less able to mount effective responses to
epidemics. If they are therefore most prone to disappointing their constituents, we
would expect the effects we identify to be strongest when the government in office
at the time of exposure is weak and unstable, other things equal.
To explore this hypothesis, we use ICRG data on government strength. These data,
which start in 1984, measure the unity of the government, its legislative strength,
and its popular support.40 We expect weak governments to perform poorly in

Here we do not include the past epidemic exposure variable as we would like to capture the
response of the whole population, rather only those for whom we can calculate the past experience
window.
39
This helps to visualise the short-term response and also to check if the countries that were struck
by a pandemic and those that were not shared similar trends in terms political trust before the
pandemic hit the former. We conservatively restrict the event window around the pandemic to
plus/minus 2 years. This is because different pandemic events in Ma et al. (2020) may hit the same
country in a matter of couple of years, which complicates the proper identification in larger event
windows.
40
Whereas in the ICRG dataset this index is labelled government stability, we refer to it as
government strength, since we think this is a better name for what is essentially the implementation
capacity of the incumbent government.
38

26

epidemics, and conjecture that individuals will downgrade their confidence in
government and trust in its leaders more severely as a result.41
We first calculate the average score for government strength during the indi id al
impressionable years. We then construct an indicator variable that takes the value
of 1 for this past experience if the observation is in the bottom half/tercile/quartile
of the government strength index score.42 We include this measure of
impressionable-year government strength by itself in addition to interacting it with
impressionable-year epidemic exposure to distinguish epidemic-specific and
general effects. This leads to the following specification:

Yi, c, t, a, b =

10Exposure

+

9Government

+

3Number

+

ict

to epidemicicb x Government strength icb

strength icb +

0

+

of people affectedct-1 +

1Xict

+

2Exposure

4Cc

+

5Tt

+

(3)

to epidemicicb

6Aa +

7Bb

+

8Cc*Age

Results of estimating Equation (3) are shown in Table 6. We find large effects for
the interaction terms. The estimated effect of exposure to an epidemic is more than
twice as large if the epidemic is experienced under a weak government.
Figures 3-5 show further evidence of the importance of government strength at the
time of the epidemic. We again restrict the observations to the 26-35 age range and
re-estimate the Equation (3) when rolling the age window forward. In each figure,
the top panel shows the estimates for the total effect on individuals experiencing
epidemics under weak governments, while the bottom panel shows the

Such a finding would be in line with other studies finding that weak and unstable governments
suffer loss of support because of their limited capacity to take appropriate policy actions in the wake
of financial crises and economic downturns (Caselli and Tesei, 2016; Cox and Weingast, 2018).
42
It is crucial to include this variable categorically rather than in a continuous form to make sure
that it is unlikely to respond to changes in the pandemic experience.
41

27

corresponding estimates for individuals experiencing epidemics under strong
governments.
For all outcomes, the negative impact on trust is larger and more persistent for
respondents who experienced epidemics under weak governments. Again, this is
consistent with the notion that these individuals became and remained more
di enchan ed i h hei co n

poli ical in i

ion and leaders, insofar as those

institutions and leaders failed to adequately respond to the country-wide publichealth emergency.
Health policy at the time of the epidemic
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists vaccination as one of the
Ten G ea P blic Heal h Achie emen in he 20 h Cen

beca e of i impac

on morbidity and mortality (Barraza et al., 2018). B implica ion, go e nmen
pharmaceutical interventions, in particular their vaccination policies, have played
an important role in the prevention of contagious disease. Using data from the
Wellcome Global Monitor, we, therefore, analyze whether attitudes regarding the
health system and vaccination are affected by exposure to an epidemic.
In the top panel of Table 7, the outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the
respondent has confidence in the national healthcare system (via GWP). In the
second panel, it is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent agrees or
ongl ag ee

ha

accine a e effec i e. In the third panel, it is a dummy

variable indicating the respondent agrees or strongly agrees that
In the fourth panel, it i a d mm
ecei ed a accine

ha

a

accine a e afe.

a iable indica ing he e ponden

child en

ppo ed o p e en hem f om ge ing childhood

diseases such as polio, measles, or mumps. In the final panel, it is whether the
e ponden ag ee o

ongl ag ee ha

accine a e impo an fo child en o

ha e. The pecifica ion i again similar to Column 4 of Table 2.
The results show that here too opinions are affected negatively and significantly by
prior epidemic exposure. These results suggest that the same experience causing

28

indi id al o lo e confidence in ocie

capaci

pecificall

o deli e adeq a e

health outcomes also causes them to lose confidence in the political system and its
leaders more generally. In line with previous findings,
Table 8 then shows that the negative impact of epidemic exposure is larger in
countries with democratic political systems. These results are in line with LegidoQuigley et al. (2020), who argue that the integration of specific services like
vaccination into the health system as a whole amplifies the capacity to absorb and
adapt to health crises. Again consistent with earlier findings, individuals exposed
to an epidemic in their impressionable years have more negative perceptions of
health-related government policies if the epidemic was experienced under a weak
government. 12 of the 15 different interactions here are significant at the 95%
confidence level.
Evidence from COVID-19
Given the absence of internationally comparable data on policy interventions in
response to past epidemics, we examine the association of government strength
with policy interventions in the context of COVID-19. Following Aksoy et al.
(2020), Figures 6-8 first show COVID-19 related developments in South Korea,
France, and the United Kingdom. We choose these countries because they followed
very different trajectories in terms of public attention, policy interventions, and the
spread of the virus. South Korea, France, and the United Kingdom are broadly
similar in terms of their GDP per capita, urbanization, and population age structure
(median age in all three countries is roughly 41). But they differ in terms of
government strength: the ICRG score is 8.25 for South Korea, 7.5 for France, and
6 for the United Kingdom.43
The figures show the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases and deaths, public
attention to COVID-19 as measured by Google Trends, and the date of the first

The ela i el lo co e fo he UK ma come a a
p i e o eade . ICRG go e nmen
strength score include points for government unity, legislative strength and popular support. That
the UK has had minority and coalition governments may therefore account for its ranking.
43

29

non-pharmaceutical intervention (school closure, workplace closure, public event
cancellation, public transport closure, or restrictions on within-country movement
in the own country). We also report the number of days between the date of the first
confirmed case and the date of the first COVID-19 non-pharmaceutical
intervention.
In South Korea, public attention rose rapidly after the first domestic case. The
government responded within 11 days of the first case with domestic interventions
aimed at curbing the epidemic. In France and the UK, in contrast, public attention
remained low for several weeks after the first reported case. In France, domestic
restrictions were imposed only after 36 days, while the UK government waited 45
days before imposing the first restrictions. These slow reactions were associated
with rapid growth in confirmed cases and deaths in both countries. Simple
comparisons among countries are complicated by the existence of other influences,
such as past exposure to epidemics.44 Still, these comparisons are suggestive of the
idea that government strength is positively associated with speed of response to the
outbreak.
We can investigate the relationship between government strength, measured as
before, and the number of days between the date of first confirmed case and the
date of the first COVID-19 policy (i.e. non-pharmaceutical intervention: school
closure, workplace closure, public event cancellation, public transport closure, or
restrictions on within-country movement) on a larger sample of countries. The
sample consists of 78 countries that adopted non-pharmaceutical interventions
between January 1, 2020 and March 31, 2012. We estimate OLS models while
controlling for average Google search volume one week before the policy
intervention to account for the possibility that public attention to COVID-19
accelerates the non-pharmaceutical response. We also control for (log) cumulative
own country cases one week before the policy, (log) cumulative own country deaths
one week before the policy, (log) GDP per capita, (log) urbanization rate, (log) total
44

Thus, it has been suggested that Asian countries responded quickly because of their past
experience with Avian flu.

30

population, (log) share of the population age 65 and above, Polity2 score, and a
dummy variable indicating whether a country experienced an epidemic since 2000.
Table 9 reports the results for the full sample in Column 1, for countries with
above-median Polity2 scores in Column 2, and for countries with below-median
Polity2 scores in Column 3.45 Government strength is associated with a statistically
significant improvement in policy response time: a one standard deviation (0.765)
increase in government strength reduces policy response time by three days.46 This
is a strong hint of why exposure to epidemic leads to major negative revisions of
confidence in governments and trust in political leaders when governments are
weak.
According to Column 2, a one standard deviation (0.765) increase in government
strength reduces the policy response time by four days in more democratic countries
(those with above-median Polity2 scores). In contrast, there is little evidence that
government strength reduces the policy response time in countries with belowmedian Polity2 scores. It is sometimes suggested that more democratic countries,
where it is necessary to build a political and social coalition in support of restrictive
policies, found it more difficult to respond quickly to the outbreak of COVID-19,
compared to less democratic co n ie

he e p e do-democ a ic leade

can

move unilaterally to limit traditional political and civil rights and short-circuit
democratic processes. 47 Evidently, government weakness is mostly a problem in
democratic societies, since this is there where it translates into a greater delay and
less timely intervention.

We cannot split the sample into democracies vs. non-democracies because we have only 10
countries in the non-democracy sample. This is why we instead split the sample by below and above
the median polity score.
46
Three days can make a substantial difference in the context of COVID-19, gi en he infec ion
high rate of reproduction when no non-pharmaceutical intervention is put in place.
47
See for example the discussion in Diamond (2020).
45

31

9. Conclusion
Trust and confidence in government are important for the capacity of a society to
organize an effective collective response to an epidemic. Yet there is also the
possibility that experiencing an epidemic can nega i el affec an indi id al
confidence in political institutions and trust in political leaders, with negative
implications for this collective capacity. We have shown that this negative effect is
statistically significant. It is large and persistent. Its largest and most enduring
impact is on the attitudes of individuals who are in their impressionable lateadolescent and early-adult years when an epidemic breaks out. It is limited to
infectious or communicable diseases, where a government's success or failure in
responding is especially important. It is the largest in settings where there already
exist doubts about the strength and effectiveness of government. By implication,
countries where the strength of government is limited are the countries most at risk,
not just from COVID-19 but also from future epidemics, insofar as the current
epidemic can result in the further erosion of trust in political leaders and institutions.
We al o find ha epidemic e po

e in one imp e ionable ea matters mainly

for residents of democratic countries. Residents in democracies sharply revise
downward their confidence and trust in political institutions and leaders following
significant exposure, whereas the same is not true in autocracies. It may be that
citizens expect democratic governments to be responsive to their concerns and that
where the public-sector response is not adequate, they revise their attitudes
unfavorably. In autocracies, there may not exist a comparable expectation of
responsiveness. In addition, democratic regimes may find consistent messaging
more difficult. Because such regimes are open, they may allow for a cacophony of
conflicting official views, resulting in a larger impact on confidence and trust.
The implications are disturbing. Imagine that more trust in government is important
for effective containment, but that failure of containment harms trust in

32

government.48 One can envisage a scenario where low levels of trust allow an
epidemic to spread, and where the spread of the epidemic reduces trust in
government still further, hindering the ability of the authorities to contain future
epidemics and address other social p oblem . A Schmi (2020) p

i , lack of

trust in government can be a circular, self-reinforcing phenomenon: Poor
performance leads to deeper distrust, in turn leaving government in the hands of
ho e i h he lea

e pec fo i .

A relevant study by Ajzenman e al. (2020) e amine ho poli ical leade
o d and ac ion
affec people beha io in he con e of COVID-19 pandemic. The authors show that after
B a il p e iden p blicl and empha icall di mi ed he i k a ocia ed i h he COVID-19
virus and advises against isolation, social distancing by residents in pro-government localities fall
relative to places in which pro-government sentiment is weaker.
48

33

References
Ad Hoc Commi ee fo 2020 Elec ion Fai ne and Legi imac (2020), U gen
recommendations in law, media, politics, and tech to advance the legitimacy of, and
the p blic confidence in, the November 2020 U.S. elec ion , Pel a on Cen e for
the Study of Democracy (April).
Adam , B. (2005), T
e
Canada Report CR-2005-203.

confidence, Defence Research and Development

Aj enman, N., Ca alcan i, T., & Da Ma a, D. (2020). Mo e han Wo d : Leade
Speech and Risky Behavior During a Pandemic, unpublished manuscript.
Akbulut-Yuksel, M., D. Okoye and M. Y k el (2018), Social changes in
impressionable years and the formation of political a i de ,
np bli hed
manuscript, Dalhousie University (February).
Aksoy, C. G., Guriev, S., & Treisman, D. S. (2018). Globali a ion, go e nmen
pop la i , and he g ea kill di ide, NBER Wo king Pape no. 25062.
Aksoy, C. G., Ganslmeier M., Poutvaara P. (2020). Google ea che p edic polic
responses to COVID-19 pandemic, unpublished manuscript.
Ale ina, A. & E. La Fe a a (2000), The de e minan of
Paper no.621.

, NBER Wo king

Algan, Y., Guriev, S., Papaioannou, E. and Passari, E., (2017). The E opean
c i i and he i e of pop li m, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2017(2),
pp.309-400.
Alwin, D., F. Cohen, and T. Newcomb (1991), Political attitudes over the life span:
The Bennington women after fifty years, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Amat, F., Arenas, A., Falcó-Gimeno, A. and M o , J., (2020). Pandemic meet
democracy. Experimental evidence from the COVID-19 c i i in Spain ,
unpublished manuscript.
Ba m, M. (2002), The con i en fo nda ion of the rally-round-the-flag
phenomenon, International Studies Quarterly 46(2), pp.263-298.
Blair, R., B. Morse & L. T ai (2017), P blic heal h and p blic
: S e
e idence f om he Ebola i
di ea e epidemic in Libe ia, Social Science
Medicine 172, pp.89-97.
Campante, F. R., Depetris-Cha in, E., & D an e, R. (2020), The Vi of fear:
The political impac of Ebola in he US, NBER Wo king Pape no.26897.

34

Bol, D., Giani, M., Blai , A., & Loe en, P. J. The effec of COVID 19 lockdo n
on political support: Some good news for democracy?. European Journal of
Political Research. Forthcoming.
Caselli, F. and Tesei, A., (2016). Re o ce indfall , poli ical egimes, and
poli ical abili , Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(3), pp.573-590.
Chanle , V. (2002), T
in go e nmen in he af e ma h of 9/11: De e minan
and Con eq ence , Political Psychology 23(3), pp.469-483.
Checkland, K., M. Marshall and S. Harrison (2004), Quality and Safety 13, pp.130135.
Converse, P.E. (1976), The Dynamics of Party Support: Cohort-Analyzing Party
Identification, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Cox, G.. and B. R. Weinga (2018), E ec i e con ain , poli ical abili y, and
economic g o h, Comparative Political Studies 51 (3), pp.279-303.
Dawson, R. and K. Prewitt (1969), Political Socialization, Boston: Little, Brown &
Co.
Diamond, L. (2020), Ame ica COVID-19 di a e i a e back fo democ ac ,
The Atlantic (16 April),
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/04/americas-covid-19-disastersetback-democracy/610102/
Dustmann, C., B. Eichengreen, S. Otten, A. Sapir, G. Tabellini and G. Zoega
(2017), E o e
defici : ca e and emedie , London: CEPR Press.
Economi (2020), O
June): 77.

in he open: Co id-19 and democ ac , Economist (6

Erikson, E. (1968), Identity, Youth and Crisis, New York: Norton.
Etchegaray, N., A. Scherman and S. Valen ela (2018), Te ing he hypothesis of
impressionable years with willingness to self-sen o in Chile, International
Journal of Public Opinion Research 31: 331-348.
Farzanegan, M. and H. Gholipo (2019), G o ing up in the Iran-Iraq war and
preferences for strong defen e, MAGKS Join Di c ion Paper Series in
Economics No.07-219, Philipps-University Marburg.
Fetzer, T., Witte, M., Hensel, L., Jachimowicz, J., Haushofer, J., Ivchenko, A.,
Ca ia, S., Re kaja, E., Ro h, C., Fio in, S. and Gome , M., (2020). Global
Behaviors and Perceptions in the COVID-19 Pandemic . NBER Wo king Pape ,
no.27082 (May).

35

F k ama, F. (2020), The hing ha de e mine a co n
e i ance o he
coronavi , The Atlantic (30 March),
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2020/03/thing-determines-how-wellcountries-respond-coronavirus/609025/
Giuliano, P., & A. Spilimbergo, (2013). G o ing p in a ece ion, Review of
Economic Studies 81(2), 787-817.
G eif, A. (1989), Rep a ion and coali ion in medie al ade: E idence on he
Magh ibi ade , Journal of Economic History 49(4), pp.857-882.
Guriev, S., Melnikov, N., & Zh a ka a, E. (2019). 3G In e ne and Confidence
in Go e nmen , np bli hed man c ip .
Guriev, S. and Treisman D., (2019), The pop la i
empi ical in e iga ion, npublished manuscript.

of a ho i a ian leade : An

Jen en, J.B., Q inn, D.P. and We mo h, S., (2017), Winne and lo e in
in e na ional ade: The effec on US p e iden ial o ing, International
Organization, pp.1-35.
Krosnick, J. and D. Al in (1989), Aging and susceptibility to attitude change,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 57: 416-425.
Legido-Quigley, H., Asgari, N., Teo, Y.Y., Leung, G.M., Oshitani, H., Fukuda, K.,
Cook, A.R., Hsu, L.Y., Shibuya, K. and Heymann, D., (2020), Are highperforming health systems resilient against the COVID-19 epidemic?, The
Lancet, 395(10227), pp.848-850.
Le i, M. and L. S oke (2000), Poli ical
of Political Science 3, pp.475-507.

and

o hine , Annual Review

Ma, C., Roge , J. H., & Zho , S. (2020). Global economic and financial effects
of 21 cen
pandemic and epidemic , np bli hed man c ip .
Maie , B. F., & B ockmann, D. (2020), Effec i e con ainmen e plain
subexponential growth in recent confirmed COVID-19 ca e in China Science.
Malmandier, U. & S. Nagel (2011), Dep e ion babie : Do mac oeconomic
e pe ience affec i k aking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(1), 373-416.
Mannheim, K. (1928), The problem of gene a ion , Essays on the Sociology of
Knowledge, London, Routledge (translation 1952).
Ma gali , Y. (2011), Co l
job : T ade-related layoffs, government
compen a ion, and o ing in US elec ion , American Political Science Review,
105(1), pp.166-188.

36

Ma lo , L., J. Walle & J. Wa dle (2007), T
and e pe ience a p edic o of
HPV vaccine accep ance, Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics 3(5), pp.171175.
Ma e , R., J. Da i & F. Schoo man (1995), An in eg a i e model of
o gani a ional
, Academy of Management Review 20(3), pp.709-734.
Mian, A., Sufi, A., & Trebbi, F. (2014). Resolving debt overhang: Political
constraints in the aftermath of financial crises. American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 6(2), 1-28.
M elle , J. (1970), P e iden ial pop la i
Political Science Review 64, pp.18-34.

f om T man o John on, American

Murray, C. J., Barber, R. M., Foreman, K. J., Ozgoren, A. A., Abd-Allah, F., Abera,
S. F., and Abu-Rmeileh, N. M. (2015). Global, egional, and na ional di abili adjusted life years (DALYs) for 306 diseases and injuries and healthy life
expectancy (HALE) for 188 countries, 1990 2013: quantifying the epidemiological
an i ion, The Lancet, 386(10009), 2145-2191.
Newcomb, T. (943), Personality and social change: Attitude formation in a student
community, New York: Dryden.
Newcomb, T., K. Koenig, R. Flacks and D. Warwick (1967), Persistence and
change: Bennington College and its students after 25 years, New York: Wiley.
Osborne, D., D. Sears and N. Valen ino (2011), The end of the solidly democratic
south: The impressionable-years hypothesi , Political Psychology 32: 81-107.
Pew Resea ch Cen e (2020), P blic
in go e nmen : 1958-2019,
https://www.people-press.org/2019/04/11/public-trust-in-government-1958-2019/
(11 April).
Roser, M. and Ritchie, H. (2020), B den of Di ea e . Re ie ed f om:
https://ourworldindata.org/burden-of-disease
Ro h ein, B. (2020), T
i he ke o figh ing he pandemic, Scien ific
American (24 March), https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/trust-isthe-key-to-fighting-the-pandemic/.
Schmi , M. (2020), In he ake of i COVID-19 failure, how do we restore trust
in go e nmen ? New America Weekly (23 April).
Smi h, C. (2005), Unde anding
and confidence: T o pa adigm and hei
ignificance fo heal h and ocial ca e, Journal of Applied Philosophy 22, pp.299316.

37

Spea , L. (2000), Ne obeha io al change in adole cence, Current Directions
in Psychological Science 9(4), pp.111-114.
Zhang, J., Litvinova, M., Liang, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, W., Zhao, S., ... & Ajelli, M.
(2020), Change in con ac pa e n hape he d namic of he COVID-19
o b eak in China, Science.

38

Figure 1: Average Number of People (per million) Affected by Epidemics, 1970-2017

Notes: This figure shows the number of people affected by epidemics (per million), averaged across all available years.
Source: EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, UN Population Database, 1970-2017, and a ho
calculations.

39

Figure 2: Effects of Epidemics in Impressionable Years over Subsamples with Rolling Age-Windows

Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Column 4 of Table 2 and only the estimated coefficient on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) is plotted. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

40

Figure 3: Effects of Epidemics on Confidence in Elections over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-Windows (separately under weak and strong governments)

Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

41

Figure 4: Effects of Epidemics on Confidence in Government over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-windows (separately under weak and strong governments)

Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

42

Figure 5: Effects of Epidemics on Approval of the Leader Over Subsamples
with Rolling Age-Windows (separately under weak and strong governments)

Note: This figure shows the persistency of the effects on three main outcome variables by restricting
the observations to the respondents who are in the 26-35 age range at the time of the survey (Base
sample) and then repeatedly rolling this age window forward by one year for each separate
estimation. The specification is Equation 3/Table 6. The lower panel only plots the coefficient on
Exposure to epidemic (18-25) whereas the upper panel plots the sum of the coefficients on Exposure
to epidemic (18-25) and its interaction with bottom quartile government strength dummy.
Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

43

Figure 6: COVID-19 Related Developments in South Korea
ICRG Government Strength score: 8.25

Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis)
and the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in
South Korea. Source: Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).

44

Figure 7: COVID-19 Related Developments in France
ICRG Government Strength score: 7.5

Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis)
and the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in
France. Source: Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).

45

Figure 8: COVID-19 Related Developments in the United Kingdom
ICRG Government Strength score: 6

Note: This figure shows daily measures of public attention to COVID-19 measured as the share of Google searchers (left axis)
and the number of COVID-19 cases and deaths (right axis), as well as the dates of the first case, first death, and first policy in
the United Kingdom. Source: Google Trends (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), JHCRC (1/1/2020-31/3/2010), and ICRG (2018).

46

Table 1: Sample Characteristics
(1)
Mean (Standard deviation)

Variables
Main dependent variables
Confidence in national government
Confidence in honestly of elections
Approval of the leader
Have confidence in the health system

0.50 (0.50) N: 760099
0.51(0.49) N: 736679
0.51 (0.49) N: 719742
0.62 (0.49) N: 98283

Placebo outcomes
Have confidence in the military
Have confidence in the banks
Have confidence in the media

0.72 (0.45)
0.59 (0.49)
0.54 (0.50)

Individual-level characteristics
Age
Male
Tertiary education
Secondary education
Married
Urban
Christian
Muslim

N: 730156
N: 809972
N: 190167

41.58 (10.41)
0.47 (0.49)
0.18 (0.38)
0.50 (0.50)
0.63 (0.48)
0.40 (0.49)
0.57 (0.49)
0.20 (0.40)

Country-level characteristics
Exposure to epidemic
0.002 (0.0015)
Government strength
7.33 (1.26)
Notes: Means (standard deviations). This table provides individual and aggregate level
variables averaged across the 13 years (2006-2018) used in the analysis. The sample sizes for
some variables are different either due to missing data or because they were not asked in every
year.

47

-3.734*
(2.203)

(1)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-1.643**
(0.794)
-3.582
(2.187)

(2)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-1.481*
(0.811)

-3.645*
(2.195)

(3)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-2.226***
(0.341)

-3.625*
(2.182)

(4)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-2.258***
(0.339)

--

(5)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-1.181***
(0.273)

Table 2: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in Elections
Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
736679
736679
736679
736679
736679
R2
0.137
0.144
0.146
0.146
0.178
Mean of outcome
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significan a 1%. O come i a d mm a iable indica ing ha he e ponden ha confidence in hone
of elec ion . Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from
family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup con e local income o In e na ional Dolla
ing he Wo ld Bank indi id al
consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

48

0.548
(3.478)

(1)
Have confidence in
national government
-1.073*
(0.594)
0.739
(3.484)

(2)
Have confidence in
national government
-0.924
(0.576)
0.733
(3.457)

(3)
Have confidence in
national government
-1.614***
(0.265)

0.740
(3.452)

(4)
Have confidence in
national government
-1.592***
(0.262)

--

(5)
Have confidence in
national government
-0.508**
(0.219)

Table 3: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Confidence in National Government
Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
760099
760099
760099
760099
760099
R2
0.138
0.144
0.145
0.145
0.182
Mean of outcome
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
0.50
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that he e ponden ha confidence in national
government . Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from
family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using he Wo ld Bank indi id al
consumption PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are
clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

49

0.201
(2.696)

(1)
Approval of the
leader
-1.521***
(0.380)
0.184
(2.735)

(2)
Approval of the
leader
-1.501***
(0.369)
0.141
(2.710)

(3)
Approval of the
leader
-1.916***
(0.326)

0.120
(2.712)

(4)
Approval of the
leader
-1.957***
(0.330)

--

(5)
Approval of the
leader
-0.583***
(0.118)

Table 4: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) on Approval of the Leader
Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
719742
719742
719742
719742
719742
R2
0.127
0.132
0.133
0.133
0.182
Mean of outcome
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
0.51
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating that the respondent approves the job performance
of the leader . Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their
impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring
basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy
for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies
(Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area
and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their
income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family
members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World Bank indi id al con mp ion
PPP conversion factor, which makes it comparable across all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the
country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

50

Rural
Urban

Less than degree level
Degree level education

Low-income countries
High-income countries

Males
Females

-2.527*** (0.485)
-2.207** (0.869)
-1.559*** (0.389)

-1.967*** (0.357)
-4.049*** (0.893) A

-2.249*** (0.330)
-1.071 (0.816) A

-11.753*** (4.145)
-1.773*** (0.343) A

-2.014*** (0.379)
-2.551*** (0.413)

(1)
Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic
(18-25)
(standard error)
Have confidence in honesty of elections
-2.258*** (0.339)

-1.884*** (0.249)
3.097 (2.497) A

-0.226 (0.341)
-3.015*** (0.781)
-0.854* (0.457)

-1.518*** (0.268)
-3.015*** (0.781)A

-1.657*** (0.285)
0.658 (1.242) A

-11.181 (7.577)
-1.212*** (0.262)

-1.153** (0.470)
-2.042*** (0.416) A

(2)
Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic
(18-25)
(standard error)
Have confidence in national government
-1.592*** (0.262)

-1.587*** (0.301)
2.061 (2.529) A

-0.112 (0.339)
-3.140*** (1.008)
-3.572*** (0.455)

-1.377*** (0.265)
-6.195*** (1.452) A

-1.753*** (0.295)
-5.120*** (1.328) A

-20.701* (11.546)
-1.503*** (0.260) A

-1.351** (0.528)
-2.516*** (0.545) A

(3)
Coefficient on Exposure to Epidemic
(18-25)
(standard error)
Approval of the leader
-1.957*** (0.330)

Table 5: Heterogeneity

Low-income HH
Middle-income HH
High-income HH

-2.514*** (0.287)
0.880 (3.480) A

Outcome
Full sample

Democratic countries
Non-democratic countries

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. A indicates statistically significant
difference in each pair of means at p<.05. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

51

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomTercileGov.Strength

MedianGov.Strength

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

0.002
(0.007)

-1.183*
(0.698)

-4.863***
(0.559)

-0.000
(0.007)

-1.901**
(0.833)

(1)
Have confidence in honesty
of elections
-2.987***
(0.618)

-3.578***
(0.748)

0.013*
(0.008)

-1.048
(0.808)

-3.919***
(0.719)

0.014*
(0.008)

-0.235
(1.038)

(2)
Have confidence in national
government
-4.033***
(0.876)

-2.657***
(0.640)

-2.027***
(0.542)

0.023***
(0.008)

-2.514***
(0.693)

-2.230***
(0.629)

0.015*
(0.009)

-3.018***
(1.044)

-1.092
(0.849)

Table 6: The Role of Government Strength

BottomTercileGov.Strength

-4.643***
(0.521)

-1.289
(0.889)

0.010
(0.010)

(3)
Approval of the leader

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomQuartileGov.Strength

-1.373*
(0.800)

-0.000
(0.008)

Outcome

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

-0.002
(0.008)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*MedianGov.Strength

BottomQuartileGov.Strength

Observations
412051
422523
394323
R2
0.136
0.136
0.115
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results reported
in each panel come from separate models. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and the
International Country Risk Guide.

52

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomQuar.Gov.Strength

BottomTercileGov.Strength

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*BottomTerc.Gov.Strength

MedianGov.Strength

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)*MedianGov.Strength

8.549
(20.633)

-49.140**
(23.329)

0.001
(0.009)

-3.716
(26.485)

-19.117
(27.583)

0.023**
(0.011)

1.071
(35.099)

-16.783
(29.181)

(1)
Have confidence in
healthcare

0.005
(0.007)

-1.057
(0.740)

-2.142***
(0.723)

-0.004
(0.007)

-0.921
(1.046)

-1.815**
(0.762)

-0.013*
(0.007)

-3.112***
(0.824)

0.862
(0.981)

(2)
Vaccines are
effective

-0.002
(0.008)

-0.776
(1.722)

-5.987***
(2.099)

-0.006
(0.008)

-1.090
(1.510)

-5.386***
(1.585)

-0.011
(0.009)

-2.033
(1.843)

-3.554**
(1.772)

(3)
Vaccines are safe

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.350
(0.703)

-1.926***
(0.529)

-0.005
(0.005)

-0.577
(0.586)

-1.526***
(0.405)

-0.005
(0.004)

0.855
(0.810)

-3.253***
(0.610)

(4)
Children received a
vaccine

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.179
(0.776)

-2.058**
(1.024)

-0.007
(0.006)

0.056
(0.585)

-2.337***
(0.797)

-0.003
(0.005)

0.806
(0.777)

(5)
Vaccines are
important for children
to have
-3.084***
(0.777)

Table 7: The Role of Government Strength and Attitudes toward Healthcare and Vaccination

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

0.004
(0.010)

Outcome

BottomQuartileGov.Strength

Observations
49517
49799
49779
38702
50791
R2
0.110
0.078
0.133
0.048
0.091
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. The specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Results reported in each panel come from
separate models. Source: EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, the Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018, and International Country Risk Guide.

53

Table 8: Impact of Exposure (Ages 18-25) on Attitudes towards Healthcare
Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
Observations

R2

Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
Observations

R

2

Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
Observations

R2

Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
Observations

R2

Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)

(1)
Full-sample
Confidence in healthcare

(2)
Democratic countries
Confidence in healthcare

(3)
Non-democratic counties
Confidence in healthcare

-6.760***
(1.270)

-6.543***
(1.649)

-5.964
(4.084)

95732
0.092
Vaccines are effective

72793
0.098
Vaccines are effective

22939
0.172
Vaccines are effective

-1.178**
(0.564)

-1.699***
(0.554)

-0.596
(0.470)

81930
0.092
Vaccines are safe

52638
0.072
Vaccines are safe

25258
0.139
Vaccines are safe

-1.685
(1.039)

-2.703***
(0.672)

-0.618*
(0.341)

81847
0.142
Children received a
vaccine

52612
0.117
Children received a
vaccine

25195
0.202
Children received a
vaccine

-0.339
(0.847)

-1.432***
(0.417)

0.941
(0.650)

67125
0.049
Vaccines are important
for children to have

42415
0.056
Vaccines are important
for children to have

21477
0.038
Vaccines are important
for children to have

-0.525
(0.566)

-1.037*
(0.549)

-0.009
(0.295)

Observations

83666
53623
25928
0.091
0.084
0.110
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating
ha : he e ponden ag ee o
ongl ag ee ha accine a e effec i e in he op panel; he respondent agrees or
ongl ag ee ha
accine a e afe in he econd panel; he e ponden epo
ha hei child en ecei ed a
accine ha a
ppo ed o p e en hem f om ge ing childhood di ea e
ch a ( uch as polio, measles or
mumps), in he hi d panel; he e ponden ag ee o
ongl ag ee ha
accine a e impo an fo child en o
ha e in he bo om panel. E po e o epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected
by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected
refers to people requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs
such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Each specification includes country-fixed
effects, year-fixed effects, demographic (a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for
educational attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other
religions), and labor market (full-time employed, part-time employed, unemployed) characteristics, within-country
income-deciles, dummy variables for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child
under 15). Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level.
Source: the Wellcome Global Monitor, 2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and Polity5.

R2

54

Sample

(1)
Full-sample

-5.357** A
(2.560)
[-4.231]

(2)
Above Median Polity Score

-.0837
(2.077)
[-0.062]

(3)
Below Median Polity Score

Table 9: Government Strength and Policy Response Time to COVID-19

Government strength

-3.611**
(1.731)
[-2.764]

Continent fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Average Google search volume one week before the policy
Yes
Yes
Yes
(log) cumulative own country cases one week before the policy
Yes
Yes
Yes
(log) cumulative own country deaths one week before the policy
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
78
39
39
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. OLS regressions. Outcome variable is the number of days between the date of
the first confirmed case and the date of the first COVID-19 policy (i.e. non-pharmaceutical intervention: school closure, workplace closure, public event
cancellation, public transport closure, or restrictions on within-country movement) in the own country. Government strength is an assessment of both the
go e nmen ability to carry out its declared programs and its ability to stay in office. It ranges between 12 (maximum score) and 0 (minimum score) with
higher scores indicating better quality. Country characteristics include (log) GDP per capita, (log) urbanization rate, (log) total population, (log) share of
population age 65 and above, Polity Score, and a dummy variable indicating whether a country experienced any epidemic since 2000. We add 1 to every
country observation and then apply a logarithmic transformation. Brackets report point estimates for one standard deviation (0.765) increase in government
strength index. Robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. A indicates statistically significant differences between the pair estimates. The
sample consists of 78 countries that ever-adopted non-pharmaceutical policy between 1/1/2020 and 31/03/2012. Source: EM-DAT, European Centre for
Disease Prevention Control, Google, Polity V, Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker, the International Country Risk Guide, World Bank.

55

Appendix A: Additional Data and Sources
International Country Risk Guide
Our data on institutional quality are from the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). This
measures 12 political and social attributes for approximately 140 countries from 1984 to the
present. We focus on government strength, which is an assessment both of he go e nmen
ability to carry out its declared programs and its ability to stay in office.49 Specifically, the
index score is the sum of three subcomponents: (i) Government Unity; (ii) Legislative Strength;
and (iii) Popular Support. In the original ICRG dataset, this measure is called as government
stability. Throughout the paper, we refer to government stability as government strength as it
captures the policy-making strength of the incumbent government. Scores for government
strength range from a maximum of 12 and a minimum of 0.
Wellcome Global Monitor
The Wellcome Global Monitor (WGM) is a nationally representative survey fielded in some
160 countries in 2018. It is the first global survey of how people think and feel about key health
and science challenges, including attitudes towards vaccines; trust in doctors, nurses and
scientists. WGM al o p o ide info ma ion on e ponden

demog aphic and labor market

characteristics. We use the Wellcome Global Monitor (WGM) to explore the mechanisms
underlying our findings, and specifically whether these run through attitudes and feeling about
the public health response to epidemics.
Google Trends
We use Google Trends data on searches to measure public attention paid to the COVID-19
pandemic. Mo e pecificall , e collec ed da a on he ol me of Google ea che fo
korona; Wuhan virus; COVID; COVID-19,

co ona;

an la ing he e ea ch e m in o he official

language of each country. We assemble these data on a daily basis at the country level for the
period from January 1 through March 31, 2020. Observations are scaled from 0 (lowest
attention) to 100 (highest attention). We exclude 21 countries where the internet is classified
a

no f ee acco ding to Freedom House (2019).

Other institutional quality index measures cover democratic accountability, socioeconomic conditions,
investment profile, internal conflict, external conflict, corruption, military in politics, religious tensions, law and
order, ethnic tensions, and bureaucracy quality.
49

56

Covid-19 Related Cases and Deaths
We obtain daily data on the coronavirus related cases and deaths by country from the European
Center for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) and the Johns Hopkins Coronavirus
Resource Center (JHCRC). There are minor reporting differences between the two sources. We
use both datasets and create our measures of cases and deaths using the maximum value
reported in either dataset.
Government Policy Responses
We rely on the Oxford COVID-19 Government Response Tracker (OxCGRT) for information
on public policy responses to the outbreak (Thomas et al., 2020). Specifically, we use the
information on the following responses: (i) closing of schools and universities; (ii) workplace
closures; (iii) public event cancellations; (iv) closing of public transport; (v) restrictions on
internal movement. We again gather these data for the period between January 1, and March
31, 2020.
Communicable and Non-communicable Diseases
We distinguish communicable diseases (diarrhea, lower respiratory, other common infectious
diseases, malaria and neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, other
communicable diseases) from non-communicable diseases (cardiovascular diseases, cancers,
respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and endocrine diseases, mental and substance use disorders,
liver diseases, digestive diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, neurological disorders, other noncommunicable diseases) using data from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. These
data are at the country-level data and cover the period 1990-2016. These measures are
population-adjusted and expressed in Disability Adjusted Life Years Lost (DALYs), which is
a standardized metric allowing for direct comparison and summing of burdens of different
diseases (Roser and Ritchie, 2020). Conceptually, one DALY is the equivalent of one year in
good health lost to premature mortality or disability (Murray et al. 2015).
Country Characteristics
Data on GDP per capita and urbanization rate come from the World Bank. We obtain the data
on the total population and population by age from the United Nations. Data on political regime
characteristics are from the Polity5 Series, with scores ranging from -10 to +10. We define 5
and above democracies.

57

Appendix B: Additional Evidence and Analysis
Appendix Figure B.1: Share of Respondents Who Have Confidence in Honesty of Elections

Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who have confidence in honesty of elections, averaged across
all available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.

Appendix Figure B.2: Share of Respondents Who Have Confidence in National Government

Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who have confidence in national government, averaged across
all available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.

58

Appendix Figure B.3: Share of Respondents Who Approve the Performance of the Leader

Notes: This figure shows the share of respondents who approve the performance of the leader, averaged across
all available years. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018.

59

Appendix Figure B.4: Effects of Epidemics in Alternative Treatment Years
Panel A: Dependent variable is the average of all three outcome variables

Panel B: Dependent variable is the 1st principal component of responses

Notes: This figure shows the treatment effect for various age bands. That is, we calculate for
each individual the number of people affected by an epidemic as a share of the population,
averaged over the 8 years when the individual was 2-9 years old, 10-17 years old, 18-25
years old, and 26-33 years old. Each point estimate comes from four separate models.
Specification is Column 5 of Table 2. Confidence intervals are at 95% significance level.
Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database,
1970-2017.

60

Appendix Figure B.5: Short-term Effect of Epidemics on Political Trust

Note: Epidemic year corresponds to the year in which World Health Organisation
(WHO) declared one of the following pandemic/epidemic outbreaks for the country in
which Gallup respondent resides: SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, or Zika. Specification
is the same as in Equation 2. Confidence intervals are at 90% significance level. Source:
Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and Ma et al., 2020.

61

Appendix Table B.1: Placebo Outcomes
Outcome
Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

(1)
Have confidence in the
military
-0.542
(0.442)

(2)
Have confidence in
banks
0.147
(0.193)

(3)
Have confidence in
media
-0.652
(0.610)

2.210
(3.284)

0.118
(2.038)

-10.208**
(4.817)

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
730156
809972
190167
R2
0.141
0.136
0.104
Mean of outcome
072
0.59
0.54
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is a dummy variable indicating
ha he e ponden ha confidence in mili a ; bank and financial in i ion ; media f eedom . The
specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

62

-0.854
(3.086)

(1)
Average of all three
outcome variables
-1.365**
(0.565)
-0.779
(3.065)

(2)
Average of all three
outcome variables
-1.248**
(0.539)
-0.801
(3.056)

(3)
Average of all three
outcome variables
-1.855***
(0.264)

-0.803
(3.051)

(4)
Average of all three
outcome variables
-1.867***
(0.264)

--

(5)
Average of all three
outcome variables
-0.705***
(0.155)

Appendix Table B.2: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on the Average of All Three Outcome Variables
Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
636156
636156
636156
636156
636156
R2
0.169
0.178
0.180
0.180
0.230
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is an average of all three main dependent variables: hone of elec ion ;
confidence in na ional go e nmen ; app o al of he leade . Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number of people affected by an
epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring immediate assistance
during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical assistance). Demographic
characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment (tertiary
education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are
constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes
all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to
International Dollars using the World Bank indi id al con mp ion PPP con e ion fac o , hich make i compa able ac o all co n ie . Re l
e he
Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster
Database, 1970-2017.

63

-2.619
(10.804)

(1)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-4.672**
(1.932)
-2.353
(10.730)

(2)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-4.269**
(1.841)
-2.424
(10.694)

(3)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-6.361***
(0.914)

-2.431
(10.677)

(4)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-6.400***
(0.913)

--

(5)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-2.378***
(0.531)

Appendix Table B.3: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on the 1st Principal Component of Responses
Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
No
No
No
No
Yes
Observations
636156
636156
636156
636156
636156
R2
0.169
0.178
0.180
0.180
0.230
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Outcome is the 1st Principal Component of responses to the main dependent variables:
hone of elec ion ; confidence in na ional go e nmen ; app o al of he leade . Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per capita number
of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people requiring
immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational
attainment (tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, parttime employed, unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixedeffects are constructed by grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual
income includes all wages and salaries in the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts
local income to International Dollars using the World Bank indi id al con mp ion PPP con e ion fac o , hich make i compa able across all countries.
Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT
International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

64

-0.041**A
(0.017)

(1)
Coefficient on Exposure
to Epidemic (18-25)
(standard error)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections

106530
0.137

-0.022
(0.020)

(2)
Coefficient on Exposure
to Epidemic (18-25)
(standard error)
Have confidence in
national government

0.029*
(0.016)

102838
0.108

-0.044*A
(0.024)

(3)
Coefficient on Exposure
to Epidemic (18-25)
(standard error)
Approval of the leader

0.030*
(0.016)

94695
0.171

-0.038**
(0.019)

(4)
Coefficient on Exposure
to Epidemic (18-25)
(standard error)
Average of all three
outcome variables

0.104*
(0.056)

94695
0.171

(5)
Coefficient on Exposure
to Epidemic (18-25)
(standard error)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-0.132**
(0.066)

Appendix Table B.4: Robustness to Alternative Epidemic Exposure Measure - Exposure to SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, or Zika

103551
0.135

0.029
(0.021)

Outcome

R2
0.022
(0.022)

Observations

Sample: Democratic countries

Sample: Non-democratic
countries

Observations
45566
47796
44273
37849
37849
0.192
0.187
0.183
0.254
0.253
R2
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced SARS, H1N1, MERS,
Ebola, or Zika when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. A indicates statistically
significant difference in each pair of means at p<.05. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and Ma et al., 2020.

65

Appendix Table B.5: Impact of Communicable and Non-Communicable Diseases on the Political Trust
(1)
(2)
(3)
Sample
Full-sample
Democratic countries
Non-democratic
counties
Outcome
Have confidence in
Have confidence in
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
honesty of elections
honesty of elections
Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)

-0.515***
(0.176)

-0.533**
(0.243)

-0.032
(0.207)

0.553*
(0.305)

0.525
(0.379)

0.191
(0.373)

377838
0.147
Have confidence in
national government

259328
0.130
Have confidence in
national government

106387
0.194
Have confidence in
national government

-0.368**
(0.152)

-0.426**
(0.213)

-0.054
(0.209)

0.175
(0.303)

0.132
(0.407)

0.037
(0.373)

389882
0.157
Approval of the
leader

267544
0.125
Approval of the
leader

109651
0.182
Approval of the
leader

Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)

-0.111
(0.179)

-0.152
(0.263)

-0.043
(0.252)

Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)

0.123
(0.336)

0.125
(0.545)

0.184
(0.369)

Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)
Observations

R

2

Outcome
Exposure to communicable dis. (18-25)
Exposure to non-communicable dis. (18-25)
Observations

R2

Outcome

Observations

370749
256154
100751
0.140
0.099
0.177
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Exposure to communicable diseases (18-25)
takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced communicable diseases (diarrhea, lower respiratory, other common
infectious diseases, malaria & neglected tropical diseases, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, other communicable diseases).
Exposure to non-communicable diseases (18-25) takes a value of 1 if the respondent experienced non-communicable
diseases (cardiovascular diseases, cancers, respiratory disease, diabetes, blood and endocrine diseases, mental and
substance use disorders, liver diseases, digestive diseases, musculoskeletal disorders, neurological disorders, other noncommunicable diseases). Both measures are population-adjusted and expressed in terms of Disability Adjusted Life
Years Lost (DALYs), which is a standardized metric allowing for direct comparison and summing of burdens of
different diseases. Conceptually, one DALY is the equivalent of one year in good health lost due to premature mortality
or disability. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. A indicates statistically significant difference
in each pair of means at p<.05. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation,
1990-2016

R2

66

Baseline - Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)
-0.147***
(0.054)

-2.258***
(0.339)

-0.097**
(0.038)

-0.144***
(0.041)

(2)
Coefficient on
Dummy Variable
(standard error)
Have confidence in
national
government
-1.592***
(0.262)

-0.051**
(0.023)

-0.084**
(0.040)

-0.131***
(0.038)

-1.957***
(0.330)

Appendix Table B.6: The Impact of Exposure to Epidemic (Ages 18-25) on Political Trust by Exposure Thresholds

Top 0.5 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)
-0.112***
(0.034)

-0.054**
(0.024)

-0.007
(0.021)

(3)
Coefficient on
Dummy Variable
(standard error)
Approval of the leader

Top 1 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)

-0.061***
(0.023)

0.001
(0.016)

(1)
Coefficient on
Dummy Variable
(standard error)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections

Top 2 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)

-0.014
(0.014)

Outcome

Top 5 per cent (exposure to epidemic, 18-25)

Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Results reported in each panel
come from separate models. Threshold dummies in each row are defined based on the continuous treatment variable (Exposure to Epidemic, 1825). See notes to Table 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

67

-3.241***
(0.735)

-3.574
(2.182)

(4)
Extensive margin
Have confidence
in honesty of
elections
0.001
(0.003)

0.773
(3.457)

(5)
Extensive margin
Have confidence
in national
government
-0.001
(0.003)

0.138
(2.718)

-0.009***
(0.003)

Intensive and Extensive Margins

(2)
Intensive margin
Have confidence
in national
government
-2.779***
(0.519)
-0.450
(4.043)

(6)
Extensive margin
Approval of the
leader

(1)
Intensive margin
Have confidence
in honesty of
elections
-3.329***
(0.505)
-0.004
(4.959)

(3)
Intensive margin
Approval of the
leader

-3.463
(2.779)

Appendix Table B.7: Impact of Exposure to Epidemics (Ages 18-25) on Political Trust
Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)
The number of people affected t-1

Observations
342209
351733
340226
736679
760099
719742
R2
0.133
0.138
0.119
0.146
0.145
0.133
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. For intensive margin, the sample is restricted to respondents with any epidemic
experience in their impressionable years, and models are re-estimated as in Column 4 of Table 2. For extensive margin, Exposure to Epidemic (18-25) is redefined as a dummy taking the value of 1 when the continuous version is positive and zero otherwise; and models are re-estimated over the full sample as in
Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to Table 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

68

Appendix Table B.8: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks
(1)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-4.219***
(0.849)

(2)
Have confidence in
national government
-3.417***
(0.787)

(3)
Approval of the leader

The number of people affected t-1

-3.354*
(1.701)

0.876
(3.019)

0.698
(2.218)

Government strength (18-25)

0.006
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.005)

-0.012*
(0.007)

-0.018***
(0.006)

-0.018***
(0.006)

-0.007
(0.007)

Investment profile (18-25)

0.002
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

0.010*
(0.006)

Internal conflict (18-25)

-0.002
(0.005)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.013**
(0.006)

External conflict (18-25)

0.006
(0.004)

0.002
(0.005)

-0.001
(0.006)

Corruption (18-25)

-0.005
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.010)

-0.010
(0.010)

Military in politics (18-25)

0.010
(0.009)

0.021**
(0.009)

0.019*
(0.011)

Religious tensions (18-25)

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.003
(0.011)

-0.005
(0.014)

Law and order (18-25)

0.041***
(0.014)

0.030**
(0.015)

0.045**
(0.017)

Ethnic tensions (18-25)

0.005
(0.007)

0.011
(0.008)

0.013
(0.010)

Democratic accountability (18-25)

-0.016**
(0.006)

-0.005
(0.007)

-0.009
(0.010)

Bureaucracy quality (18-25)

-0.022
(0.014)

-0.017
(0.016)

-0.024
(0.021)

Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)

Socioeconomic conditions (18-25)

-3.944***
(0.746)

Observations
412051
422523
408564
R2
0.137
0.137
0.140
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to
Table 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1984-2017, and ICRG 19842017.

69

Appendix Table B.9: Robustness to Controlling for Other Economic and Political Shocks
(1)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-2.387***
(0.539)

(2)
Have confidence in
national government
-1.979***
(0.649)

(3)
Approval of the leader

The number of people affected t-1

-1.890**
(0.786)

3.050**
(1.393)

1.455
(1.511)

Inflation (18-25)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

0.000
(0.000)

GDP Growth (18-25)

0.001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

GDP Per Capita (18-25)

-0.000
(0.000)

-0.000
(0.000)

0.000*
(0.000)

Polity (18-25)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.002)

-0.001
(0.002)

Outcome
Exposure to Epidemic (18-25)

-2.396***
(0.584)

Observations
423121
437366
405430
R2
0.158
0.133
0.122
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. See notes to
Table 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018, EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017, and IMF, 19702017, the World Bank, 1970-2017 and Polity5, 1970-2017.

70

(1)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections
-0.919
(2.100)

(2)
Have confidence in
national government

-13.867
(15.535)

-5.915
(3.601)

(3)
Approval of the leader

-6.929
(11.686)

-1.475
(1.688)

(4)
Average of all three
outcome variables

-24.679
(41.658)

(5)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-5.229
(5.994)

Exposure on Immigrants Poli ical T

-0.205
(2.639)
-10.238
(15.302)

Appendix Table B.10: Impact of Made-

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
-13.788
(16.258)

Outcome

The number of people affected t-1

Observations
4118
4639
4306
3611
3611
R2
0.282
0.229
0.229
0.322
0.321
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per
capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people
requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment
(tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by
grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in
the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World
Bank indi id al con mp ion PPP con e ion fac o , hich make i compa able ac o all countries. Results use the Gallup sampling weights and robust standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

71

-0.238
(0.439)

(1)
Have confidence in
honesty of elections

0.734
(3.450)

0.210
(0.390)

(2)
Have confidence in
national government

0.320
(2.660)

-0.250
(0.488)

(3)
Approval of the leader

-0.625
(2.996)

-0.040
(0.389)

(4)
Average of all three
outcome variables

-1.802
(10.483)

(5)
the 1st Principal
Component of
Responses
-0.109
(1.348)

Appendix Table B.11: Impact of Randoml -A igned Exposure on Political Trust

Exposure to epidemic (18-25)
-3.609*
(2.157)

Outcome

The number of people affected t-1

Observations
647417
668022
632661
559274
559274
R2
0.145
0.146
0.133
0.180
0.180
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Column 4 of Table 2. Exposure to epidemic (18-25) defined as the average per
capita number of people affected by an epidemic when the respondent was in their impressionable years (18-25 years). The number of people affected refers to people
requiring immediate assistance during a period of emergency (that is, requiring basic survival needs such as food, water, shelter, sanitation, and immediate medical
assistance). Demographic characteristics include: a male dummy, a dummy for each age group, dummy variables for marital status (single, married), educational attainment
(tertiary education, secondary education), religion dummies (Christian, Muslim, and other religions), employment status (full-time employed, part-time employed,
unemployed), a dummy variable for living in an urban area and presence of children in the household (any child under 15). Income decile fixed-effects are constructed by
grouping individuals into deciles based on their income relative to other individuals within the same country and year. Individual income includes all wages and salaries in
the household, remittances from family members living elsewhere, and all other sources before taxes. Gallup converts local income to International Dollars using the World
Bank indi id al con mp ion PPP con e ion fac o , hich make i compa able ac o all co n ie . Re l
e he Gall p ampling weights and robust standard errors
are clustered at the country level. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018 and EM-DAT International Disaster Database, 1970-2017.

72

(1)
Have confidence in honesty of
elections
-0.015
(0.018)

(2)
Have confidence in national
government
-0.028*
(0.016)

Appendix Table B.12: Contemporaneous Effects of Pandemic on Political Trust
Outcome
Lagged pandemic

(3)
Approval of the leader
-0.037**
(0.018)

Country fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Age group fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Individual income
Yes
Yes
Yes
Demographic characteristics
Yes
Yes
Yes
Income decile fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Labor market controls
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Age trends
Yes
Yes
Yes
Cohort fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Country*Year fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
950827
987864
931469
R2
0.147
0.142
0.131
Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%. Specification is Equation 2. Source: Gallup World Polls, 2006-2018
and Ma et al., 2020

73

