"x"
"1" "More than   a COVID-19 response: Sustaining mutual aid groups during and beyond the pandemic"
"2" "Maria Fernandes-Jesus 1* ,   Guanlan  Mao 1 ,  Evangelos  Ntontis 2 ,   Chris Cocking 3 ,  Michael McTague 4 ,  Anna Schwarz 5 ,  Joanna Semlyen 6   7 , John D r ury 1"
"3" "1 School of Psychology ,  University of Sussex, Brighton, United Kingdom"
"4" "2   School of Psychology and Life Sciences ,  Canterbury Christ Church University ,  Canterbury, United Kingdom"
"5" "3   School of Health Sciences, University of Brighton, Brighton, United Kingdom"
"6" "4  Overton Emergency Group , Lancaster, United Kingdom"
"7" "5 The World Food Project ,  Hot Food for  Hollingdean , Brighton, United Kingdom"
"8" "6   Norwich Medical School, Faculty of Medicine and Health, University of East Anglia ,  Norwich,  United Kingdom"
"9" "7   Nr2 Covid Community Response"
"10" "* Correspondence:  Corresponding Author m.fernandes-jesus@sussex.ac.uk"
"11" "Keywords:  mutual aid, COVID-19, Sars-Cov-2, community solidarity,  volunteering , community support,  social identity, pandemic"
"12" "Abstract"
"13" "Mutual aid groups have been an indispensable part of the public response to the COVID-19 pandemic. They have provided many forms of support, in particular grocery shopping which has enabled people to self-isolate if required. While community solidarity during emergencies and disasters is common, previous studies  have  show n  that such solidarity behaviours tend to decline over time, even when needs remain high. In this study, we address how mutual aid groups can be sustained over time in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.   We conducted 32 interviews with organisers of COVID-19 mutual aid and community support groups in the UK between September 2020 and January 2021.  Our reflexive  thematic analysis  shows   that  several community and group level  experiences and  strategies   were related to sustained participation in COVID-19 mutual aid  groups . Meeting community needs over time with localised action and resources and building trust and community-based alliances were foundation al  elements in  the  COVID-19 mutual aid  groups . Group processes   strategies, such as  a   culture of care and support or regular group meetings, were  key  strategies that helped to sustain involvement.  The e xperiences resulting from participation in COVID-19 mutual aid groups were also related to sustained participation , as they led to  positive emotions ( e.g.,  joy,  pride), well-being and  efficacy.  Finally, p articipation in COVID-19 mutual aid was also related to an increasing sense of local community belonging and cohesion."
"14" "Based  on these findings, we propose four practical recommendations for sustaining mutual aid groups in order to assist public engagement with protective behaviours in the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.  We  recommend   provid ing   practical and financial support to COVID-19 mutual aid groups; to mobilise the knowledge and the experiences acquired by COVID-19 mutual aid groups for developing programmes and interventions for addressing the medium and long-term impacts of COVID-19; to prioritise community-level interventions; and to recognise the role of group processes  as  they have the potential to lead to long-term community responses . These approaches  will be key for ensuring that communities effectively recover from the COVID-19 pandemic."
"15" "Introduction"
"16" "Community engagement is vital in strategies to combat disease outbreaks ( 1,   2, 3 ). This has been the case in the COVID-19 pandemic where in many countries mutual aid groups and other community support groups have been crucial in enabling self-isolation and shielding, in sharing information, and in encouraging vaccine take up ( 4,   5,   6, 7,   8 ). Community solidarity is common after disasters ( 9, 10 , 11 , 12, 13 ,  14 ), but these  “ disaster communities ”  typically decline over time as participants run out of energy and resources ( 15 ,   16 ,   17 ). At the time of writing the COVID-19 pandemic has lasted over 1 5  months, which means that there has been a prolonged need for community support and solidarity.  Understanding  “ what works ”  in sustaining mutual aid and community solidarity groups is likely to have practical benefits in supporting public adherence to non-pharmaceutical interventions that  are  demanding  ( such as self-isolation )  and will be useful for future crises. Yet ,  while there has now been considerable research on what COVID-19 mutual aid groups do ( 5 ) and on the predictors of participation ( 18, 19 ), there is a lack of research on the  experiences  and strategies that help sustain these groups. Therefore, in this paper we describe a study in which we interview organisers of mutual aid and other community support groups across the UK to address two questions. First, what are the strategies employed by COVID-19 mutual aid groups to keep participants involved over time? Second, what are the experiences of participation and the consequences of involvement in the groups that have served to sustain participation? By addressing the question of sustained participation from the perspective of community organisers, this study aim ed  to contribute to a better understanding of the micro-processes involved in mutual aid groups during and beyond pandemic situations to help these groups endure in the long term."
"17" "1.1  C ommunity  S olidarity in the COVID-19  P andemic"
"18" "In March 2020, increasing reported cases of  a novel  coronavirus (COVID-19)  led  the United Kingdom to implement several protective measures to contain community contamination , including  a national  ‘ lockdown ’  and self-isolation for those exposed to infection risk ( 20 ). Self-isolation  can be extremely difficult   and require   proper practical  and  financial support ( 21,   22,   23 ) . Levels of adherence to  self- isolation of any considerable length tend to be low ( 24 ), with financial constraints being one of the main reasons for failure to self-isolate (e.g., people who cannot afford to stop working).  T he most recent and comprehensive study of self-isolation in the UK (data from 53,880 people across 37 representative survey waves) found that shopping for food and other groceries was one of the main reasons why people broke self-isolation ( 24 ). Support for self-isolation has been considered particularly critical among ethnic minority groups and/or low-income and vulnerable populations ( 25, 26 ), with evidence showing that the access to social support increases adherence to self-isolation measures ( 26 )."
"19" "While in some countries the state offers wrap-around support ( 22 ), in other countries, most of the practical support to help people self-isolate has been provided by members of the community who self-organised in groups to help their neighbours ( 6, 8 , 27 ). In the UK, in the early days of the pandemic, more than 4,000 mutual aid groups were created across the country ( 28 ). Additionally, many new community support groups sprang up that did not call themselves “mutual aid”, and many existing community organisations changed their focus to provide COVID-19 support. In this paper, we use the term “COVID-19 mutual aid groups” to refer to all of these groups, recognising this diversity and including both emergent and pre-existing community support groups."
"20" "Mutual aid groups   helped to  create   hope in times of coronavirus ( 29 ) and   the support they provided was   an es sential part of the public response to the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK ( 7 ).   These groups focused on building bottom-up   structures of cooperation and horizontal networks of solidarity ( 30 ), which represents a radical divergence from traditional public services and forms of volunteerism ( 31 ).  Many different acts of solidarity during the COVID-19 crisis have been reported, including grocery shopping and delivery, food parcel deliveries, collection of prescriptions, dog walking, postcard and library services, emotional support by telephone/email helpline, informational support on existing public services, community gardening, and more ( 5 , 7, 32, 33 )."
"21" "Most of the published research on COVID -19  mutual aid groups  has  been descriptive (see  5  for a review). However, some recent work has started to examine psychological processes ( 19, 32, 34 ), which is useful for addressing our questions of how such groups can be sustained."
"22" "1.2  The  D ynamics of  S olidarity in  E xtreme  E vents"
"23" "An extensive body of research evidence has shown that cooperative and solidaristic behaviours are common among those affected in the immediate aftermath of disasters and extreme events ( 9 , 10,   14 ).   Two types of explanations have been offered for solidarity behaviours among those affected by disasters: social capital (in which people draw upon existing connections with others) and emergent groups (in which connections are created in and through the disaster). In each case, shared social identity – seeing others involved as an  “ us ”  or  “ we ”  motivat es  and enabl es  cooperation and support and allow s  people to act as one ( 35 )."
"24" "In the COVID-19 pandemic, initial research looked at the emergence of mutual aid through a social capital lens ( 36 ), in which solidarity in affected communities is explained based on social networks, trust and reciprocity ( 37 ). Indeed, a rapid review of the literature available up to October 2020 showed that social networks and connections, local knowledge and social trust were key dimensions associated with COVID-19 community organising and volunteering ( 5 ). Further recent studies have  examined  soci al  psychological processes  in  COVID-19 community solidarity groups, by looking for instance at participants’ representations of citizenship ( 33 ), and the role of community identity as a predictor of providing COVID-19 help among volunteers ( 19 ). Cocking  and colleagues  ( 38 ) concluded that mutual aid groups were based on a mixture of social capital and new emergent groups that evolved in response to participants' desire to create new forms of identification with one's own neighbourhood or street."
"25" "Although there are some examples of long-term community solidarity in recovery processes (see for example Occupy Sandy , 39 ), there is a tendency for a decline in community support in recovering and rebuilding phases  of disasters  (e.g.,  12, 13,  14, 15 ). Among other aspects, this  deterioration path has been explained in terms of the disruption of social networks after the disaster (e.g., death, relocation), a decline in terms of resources available, which decreases expectations of support, and the possibility of experiencing long term stress  that  may lead to fatigue and saturation of support networks ( 1 6, 17 ). In  Ntontis  et al. ’s study of people 15 months after they were affected by a flood, those no longer participating in the solidarity group described how the social identity associated with the flood had become less important to them over time, compared to their other identities. But while the common fate that brought people together declined as the memory of the flood receded, many were still struggling with secondary stressors such as rebuilding their homes and in need of support ( 14 )."
"26" "Considering the expected long term-social impacts of COVID-19 ( 40 ), particularly for vulnerable groups and communities, understanding the  psychological processes  that  can  help sustain community solidarity post-COVID is critical ( 27 )."
"27" "1.3  Understanding  S ustained  P articipation in  C OVID-19  M utual aid  G roups"
"28" "Only a small number of existing studies have examined the strategies used by groups to sustain solidarity after a disaster . These  studies  provide suggestive evidence that the following strategies may be important to sustain emergent mutual aid groups: invoking the group identity in discussions ;  commemorations and  other public  events ;  support from allies ;  and group meetings ( 14 , 41 )."
"29" "R esearch on collective action and psychological effects of participation in volunteering provide some further suggestions on factors that could be important in sustaining solidarity over time .  The literature on collective action suggests that perceptions of success and efficacy can motivate continued involvement ( 42, 43, 44 ). Collective efficacy in the context of collective action often encompasses not merely the feeling that something can be done ,  but that  one’s own  group can do it ( 45 ). Recent experimental studies have shown that collective efficacy affected collective action intentions only when hope was high ( 46 ). Previous field studies have been also showing that positive  emotions, such as hope, play a crucial role in mobili s ing individuals to take part in collective action (e.g.,  47 )."
"30" "Furthermore,  Vestergren  and colleagues  ( 48 ), based on interviews with environmental campaign er s, found that participation in collective action led to several sustained psychological changes such as feelings of empowerment, self-confidence, personal relationships, and changes in consumer behaviour. In addition, the study showed that stronger and continued relationships  among  the campaigners facilitated these psychological changes over time ( 48 ). Other literature has found that sustained collective action is also influenced by interpersonal relationships and organi s ational mechanisms, suggesting the need for developing collective coping strategies, collaborative relationships, and to allow some flexibility in terms of roles and procedures within the organisation ( 49 ).  Recent literature on activism burnout similar ly  propos es  a community-care burnout orientation , which   suggests  looking at burnout as a part of activism and as influenced by the organisational context ,  rather than as something that individual activists experience outside of activism ( 50 )."
"31" "Previous studies also suggest that positive emotions arising from the experiences of participation in COVID-19 mutual aid groups may be particularly important for understanding sustaining participation. In this regard, a recent study with people involved in COVID-19 mutual aid in the UK showed that the experience of participation may have affected participants’ wellbeing through positive emotional experiences, improved social relationships, increasing sense of purpose in life, and greater sense of control ( 32 ).  The l iterature on volunteering supports the need to look at the positive outcomes of participation, with a meta-analysis showing that volunteering has favourable effects on well-being, life satisfaction and depression ( 51 ). Additionally, increasing social ties is often a benefit not only for long-term volunteers, but also for short-term and/or occasional volunteers ( 52 ). Similar outcomes have been found in the COVID-19 context, with a  recent  study showing that community helping predicts community identification and unity during the pandemic, which in turn seems to increase well-being ( 34 )."
"32" "2  The  P resent  S tudy"
"33" "In this study, we interviewed coordinators or organisers of COVID-19 mutual aid groups in different areas of the UK. First, we aimed to examine  any  strategies  employed  by the groups for sustaining  participation among volunteers . Secondly, we aimed to understand how the experiences of participation  in  community solidarity were related to sustained participation. We spoke to organisers as these are the people in groups who would consciously take decisions and actions to recruit volunteers and attempt to encourage sustained participation.   We expected that they would also be able to describe other  experiences   that might be important  to  explain how COVID-19 community responses can be sustained over time. Based on previous findings   ( 14 , 41 )  we expected that strategies such as facilitating and invoking a sense of identification,  group  events, collaborations and alliances, and group meetings would help to sustain COVID-19 mutual aid groups. In addition, we  anticipated  that positive emotions related to participation, feelings of efficacy, empowerment and sense of belonging would be key factors in sustaining participation ( 32 , 46 , 48 )."
"34" "3  Materials and Methods"
"35" "3.1 Participants and Recruitment"
"36" "Thirty-two semi-structured interviews were conducted between September 2020 and January 2021.  Participants were approximately between 20 and 75 years old, 17  were  female   and 15  male . The average length of interviews was 60 minutes.  24  interviewees were coordinators of mutual aid or community support groups in England,  four  in  Wales,  three  in  Scotland ,  and  one  in  North Ireland. Participants were recruited through multiple channels. A call for participants was disseminated through diverse networks (e.g.,  the  Communities Prepared  programme ) and social media accounts (e.g., professional and personal Twitter accounts). We also directly contacted mutual aid groups across the country with an invitation to participate in the study. These groups had their email addresses publicly available and were identified through searches on Facebook and national networks of mutual aid groups (e.g., Covid-19 Mutual Aid UK). We  approached  both pre-existing and emergent groups and we  sough t  variability in terms of geographic location, areas of intervention (e.g., shopping groceries; helpline support) and socio-demographic characteristics of the participants ."
"37" "Mutual aid groups were  invited to share their experiences and views on the  factors that enable mutual aid groups to endure. If groups showed interest in participating, more details about the study were provided in a detailed participant information sheet. We interviewed one participant per group, except for three groups for which two  organisers  were interviewed from each. Therefore, we spoke to organisers from 29 different groups. Potential participants were asked to give written informed consent. We offered a £20 voucher as compensation for participants’ time and interviews were conducted on  Microsoft  Teams and Zoom."
"38" "3.2   Interview schedule"
"39" "Interviews covered questions on the mutual aid group ’s  story, the participant’s own experience, activities carried out by the groups, issues related to organising, motivations for participation, changes and problems in the group, strategies that have helped keep the group going, and lessons from coordinating the group .   S ee the full  interview schedule  in the supplementary material ."
"40" "Twenty-eight  interviews were conducted by the first author  and four by the second author . The interviews were transcribed verbatim by a single professional transcriber. All personal data collected was kept strictly confidential in accordance with the Data Protection Act 2018. Any reference to individuals or specific locations were anonymised and participants’ names were replaced by pseudonyms."
"41" "3.3. Analytic procedure"
"42" "We followed a reflexive approach to our thematic analysis ( 53 ). The first author led the analysis process, but all stages were discussed with co-authors who also engaged with the material. The analysis was guided by our research questions, and the themes were developed mostly inductively from the data. Our initial analysis generated several superordinate codes, with many subcodes, addressing topics such as group emergence and development of the group, coordination approaches  and tools used for the provision of help, motivations for individual participation, group changes over time, strategies for keeping the group going, and consequences of participation. After this initial generation of themes, all extracted codes were re-analysed, and some reformulations and reorganisations were made. Relating to our overarching research question on how to sustain participation in mutual aid groups five interlinked themes were generated. These themes represent patterns of shared meaning that apply to the entire data set ( 53, 54 ). Overall, the generated themes allow us to identify and discuss interviewees’ views on the factors and strategies perceived as key for sustaining mutual aid groups over time; and the importance of positive experiences of participation to sustained community solidarity."
"43" "4  Results"
"44" "Most of the groups in this study were created at the beginning of the first UK national “lockdown”, in March 2020. As in other countries (6, 8), people from existing activist or volunteering circles played an important role in some groups; and in some communities previous and current local authority councillors took a lead.  Other groups were created by people without any previous experience of participation. In fact, while several participants mentioned previous experience of volunteering, activism or community organising, nine participants did not have any previous experience of participation before the pandemic. Despite  these  differences in  background , our participants shared a common orientation towards  local  community needs and were  all  involved in organising and providing multiple forms of COVID related support.   They offered many activities and services, including practical support (e.g., grocery shopping, collecting prescriptions), information support in different languages (e.g., development and distribution of pamphlets), emotional support (e.g., telephone/email helpline), and financial support (e.g., solidarity funds, foodbanks). Ultimately, groups organised help based on what was perceived as necessary in their  local  community at a given time. Pre-existing groups reorganised their activities and services to respond to current needs. Emergent groups, in turn, organised around needs perceived as not being addressed by charities, existing community groups, or local authority services. Based on the accounts of organisers, the five generated themes presented below (Table 1) report the most prevalent strategies or experiences sustaining COVID-19 mutual aid activity.  Themes 1 and 2 address foundational  elements in COVID-19 mutual aid groups’ approach es .  Theme 3 is essentially about  the   group  processes  strat egies that  help  to  sustain involvement  within the group. Themes 4 and 5 are about the experiences resulting from such involvement that  help ed to  bring about efficacy , positive  emotions and  sense of  belonging."
"45" "Table 1 – Overview of the generated themes"
"46" "Name"
"47" "Description"
"48" "Theme 1: Meeting community needs over time with localised action and resources"
"49" "The first generated theme focuses on the localised dimension of practical and human resources that were mobilised by mutual aid and community support groups. It includes details on how groups organised locally around community needs and how  the mobilisation of local resources was a key aspect for sustaining the group."
"50" "Theme 2: Building trust and community-based alliances"
"51" "This theme includes references relating to the strategic alliances between groups, institutions and charities. Participants’ views on the need and importance of building trust and alliances within the local community are represented in this theme."
"52" "Theme 3: Employing group processes strategies"
"53" "The focus in this theme is on the intentional and conscious things done by organisers to sustain the groups. These strategies involve invoking identification, group care, facilitating communication, an informal but organised leadership structure, and group’s meetings and events."
"54" "Theme 4: Experiencing enjoyment and efficacy in collective coping"
"55" "This theme addresses the positive experiences and benefits for those who were involved in organised community solidarity during the COVID-19 pandemic."
"56" "Theme 5: Increasing sense of local community belonging and cohesion"
"57" "The focus in this theme is on the impact of COVID-19 community solidarity for dimensions related with the community, namely sense of belonging and cohesion. These dimensions appear related to ideas of group continuity beyond the pandemic"
"58" "4.1  Theme 1: Meeting community needs over time with localised action and resources"
"59" "Mutual aid groups participating in our study were highly dependent on small donations and local volunteers. According to  all  participants, most donations came from existing structures within the community. Local businesses and companies donated food and other grocery items. Pre-existing charities and food banks offered donations or made their resources (e.g., vans) available to recently formed groups. Existing community centres opened their kitchens so newly created groups could cook and distribute hot meals to those who needed them. Local printers donated leaflets and posters that were then distributed by local volunteers.   Volunteers used their own vehicles, laptops, phones and other personal resources. Some groups were also able to receive funding from the city or/and town councils, churches, or local rotary clubs. A few participants mentioned that they had received grants from national foundations (e.g., Scotland Foundation) or other national lottery funds, but most groups relied only on local and small grants."
"60" "Despite the recognition that  access to  local  resources  such as funds, vans, and venues was important, many participants argued that the most valuable resource  was  the volunteers: “Us! We have us”  (Karen, South East England). All participants stressed that providing community support was possible because many people were willing to help, had the time and the resources to actively engage in mutual aid groups or to donate goods or money to support fundraising events:"
"61" "I mean, well, it depends what you mean by resources, if you mean funding and finance no. But we do have a lot of social capital in this area. So, there were a lot of kind of willing and capable people that wanted to help their community and people who were happy to use their own resources in terms of like printing out leaflets and delivering them around and that kind of stuff, donating food to the food bank, that kind of thing. So, I think if we’d have lived in a different area it wouldn’t have been possible without some external funding. (Aurora, East of England)."
"62" "Aurora’s comment suggests the role of pre-existing social capital in explaining support and help in her community, which aligns with early analysis of the emergence of COVID-19 mutual aid groups in the UK ( 36 ). However, she also point ed  to the importance of external funding for groups working in more deprived areas. In fact, participants from groups working with minority groups and/or in deprived areas mentioned the need for fundraising and were more concerned with access to funding. When discussing existing  resources  such as funding and access to venues, a few participants also stressed that the COVID-19 lockdowns created an exceptional time where resources were available free of charge:  “ venues are going to be back in use, and we’ve been using a venue for free, and that will change. I don’t suppose that’s sustainable for the venue, and the funding’s going too ”.  (Evelyn, South East, England)."
"63" "As with Evelyn’s comment, other participants mentioned losing access to venues and storage spaces and recogni s ed that accessing to funding and resources would be more complicated after the pandemic, even if the need to provide support   will  continue   to exist. Interviewees also expressed concern over a decline in  the  number of people with time and resources to volunteer due to the end of  furlough  ( i.e. ,  the  government support scheme  in the UK  that provided employers with the option to keep employees on the payroll without them having to work  during the pandemic ) ."
"64" "Interviewees emphasi s ed the  profile of the volunteers  involved in COVID-19 mutual support as a factor in sustaining the group, as highly skilled people had time to volunteer in the community, in some cases for the first time in their lives. Among others, participants mentioned the key role of specific experiences and skills such as: organisational and  team work ; experience in applying for funding; experience in public health and social services (e.g., ex-social workers); experience in community organising and project management; IT and digital skills;  leadership and communication  skills . In general, participants mentioned several of these skills simultaneously and considered them as key factors in explaining how the group responded to the pandemic. Importantly,  most  participants describe their communities as having the necessary skills and resources to provide community support during the pandemic. According to Lisa, the local context and the  access to local resources  motivated community members to engage in mutual aid and community support:"
"65" "I think what I have learnt is that it is easier to ask or to invite people to volunteer in their own neighbourhood where they live . (...) .  Because it’s time limited, they know that it’s how long it’s going to take them to get there, they know how long it’s going to take them to get back they kno w  (...). Local volunteering initiatives are easier to keep going and to operate than something which stretches over a wider field and where travelling is required. (Lisa, South East England)."
"66" "COVID-19 groups participating in our study followed a  localised approach ,  which was perceived as the best level of action to respond to communities’ needs. Our analysis suggests that the  local dimension of resources, including the human resources  (i.e., volunteers), had an  essential  role in mobilising and sustaining COVID-19 mutual aid groups over time."
"67" "4.2  Theme 2: Building trust and community-based alliances"
"68" "Twenty-three interviewees mentioned that  building alliances  within the community was a key aspect facilitating the organisation and the provision of help. These collaborations involved other mutual aid groups, foodbanks, community centres, youth groups, charities, as well as local pharmacies, local public bodies, among others. The cooperation involved sharing resources and knowledge. For some groups, this was a key strategy for keeping the group going over time:"
"69" "I think there was a strategy in even forming groups to bring them together. So, there was a strategy, right from top to bottom of bringing things together. So, if there was a strategy, that was it. (Arthur, South West England)."
"70" "As with Arthur, many other participants mentioned  cooperation between organisations and groups  as key for organising and distributing services within the community and to ensure that all people, streets and neighbourhoods were covered. In some cases, the collaborative approach between groups and organisations facilitated access to venues and storage spaces. In other groups, access to funds by new and emergent mutual aid groups was only possible through pre-existing registered groups who had formal recognition. Indeed, some groups applied for funds through pre-existing community interest organisations, who acted as intermediaries between funds agencies and informal mutual aid groups."
"71" "Moreover,  alliances with pre-existing organisations  also facilitated the relationship with marginalised groups and communities. Ivy, whose group was working with migrant and refugee people, explained:"
"72" "The way that we reached the people [migrants’ communities]  that we were trying to work with was through these well-established projects and charities (…), and organisations, these long-established projects and rightly so they were very, very protective, because of the real kind of sensitivity around these people’s situations. So, it was really difficult because really you needed to be, we needed to have, they needed to foster a sense of trust of who we are and  what our intentions were before they were ready to hand over you know their clients. So, it took a long time. (Ivy, Greater London, England)."
"73" "The importance of  building  trust  between the group and the community  was expressed by 13 participants who agreed that trust has been one of the most important aspects  in the  endur ance of  mutual aid groups over time: “I guess the main thing is just trust and relationship with the community” (Logan, Scotland). The emphasis in building trust was particularly evident in participants whose groups were working directly with migrants, refugees, and Roma people:"
"74" "We, from the very beginning, we were very clear that we were a community organisation; we’re not a local government led organisation. (…). We don’t share it [people’s information] with anybody, we don’t act as border police, we’re not here to judge people’s needs, or make assumptions about their backgrounds, or why they are or why they, they need help. I think if we had gone down the line of registering ourselves as a company and doing it in that sort of charity or whatever and doing it in that sort of official way, there are loads of things that we would not have been able to do. And also, with a lot of communities, especially migrants and refugees, you lose the trust as well. (Theo, Greater London, England)."
"75" "By stressing the importance of  trust when working with marginalised communities ,  this participant also expresses a fundamental difference between charity and solidarity. Overall, COVID-19 mutual aid groups offered help without defining any criteria of eligibility. Any person could receive support if they asked, and this was perceived as particularly important to reach people in need that may have been considered not eligible for receiving social benefits or support from charities in the past."
"76" "Overall, participants expressed the importance of building trust  between the mutual aid group and the community, and in particular trust with established organisations and bodies; other support groups; and the sections of the community most in need . Our analysis also suggests that alliances with other groups facilitated continuity of the group activity. In some cases, mutual aid groups shared knowledge, resources (e.g., donations), including human resources. Some participants mentioned being involved in other groups and community organisations, and that other volunteers in their group have also started to provide support to other local organisations (e.g., foodbanks). This suggests that community alliances facilitated sustained community solidarity through the group, but also beyond it."
"77" "4.3  Theme 3:  Employing group  processes strategies"
"78" "COVID-19 mutual aid groups each comprised a small number of people organising and coordinating local support and help. Groups were organised at the village, ward, neighbourhood, or street levels. Our interviewees were, in some cases, part of a subgroup composed of coordinators, and for some participants there was a clear distinction between the coordinators and the volunteers. In any case,  shared identification and sense of belonging  to the COVID-19 mutual aid group  were explicitly mentioned by 17 participants as an important part of the experience and as a strategy for sustaining involvement:"
"79" "Yeah, definitely, definitely, and a lot of people were very reflective about being part of the group, there were, there wasn’t just a lot of comments about how they would help people or  say they would put things on there [WhatsApp, Facebook] about how happy, pleased they were about being part of a group of people who were doing this. Who were, were, such a nice group of people. There were a lot of reflective statements. (Denis, South East England)."
"80" "As we can see from Denis’s comments, this sense of belonging was perceived as valued by the members of the group. Furthermore, engagement involved high commitment, with 22 participants explicitly mentioned an immense amount of work, particularly during the first national “lockdown” (between March and July 2020). In many cases, a structure for providing help was non-existent, and participants had to create everything themselves. While this worked as motivating factor for some participants who felt the need to set up the group and keep going, some participants explicitly mentioned feeling extremely tired: “to be honest I feel absolutely worn out which is probably why my health isn’t great. It’s hard.” (Olivia, South East England). Some groups were starting to implement measures to avoid personal burnout, such as delegating work:"
"81" "The second-best thing we ever did, was Noah got a deputy and so did I, because we were doing this for seven days a week. Probably for the first six or seven weeks, and it was hard, because it was twelve-hour days. (Sophie, East of England)."
"82" "However, there were not many references to strategies of personal care, although participants stressed many times the importance of avoiding burnout. Participants assumed the “exceptionality” involved in the times they were living in ,  and argued that once the organi s ational structure (e.g., procedures for task allocation) was implemented the amount of work became more manageable."
"83" "Moreover, the  importance of  caring and supporting group members  was explicitly mentioned by 22 participants. Interviewees  stated  they  ha d   made strenuous  effort s  in preparing and elaborating clear guidelines to protect volunteers and avoid the risk of spreading the virus when providing support to others. Simultaneously, interviewees also mentioned the importance of ensuring that no volunteer would get overloaded ,   of  distribut ing  the workload fairly ,  and  of   providing emotional support to volunteers when necessary: “a lot of the time it’s just been giving people time and a listening ear, so I think that’s been really important for folks” (Logan, Scotland). This kind of emotional support within the group was mentioned by several participants as a key aspect helping to maintain members active and motivated:"
"84" "I think support, support and teamwork [explains] a lot of it. I think doing this kind of thing, and especially doing it now and working from home, now you’re back in and stuff like that, you need a good team around  you,  and you need that support and that motivation and that encouragement  (...) . So, I think, because we’ve had that, it supported us, it supported the volunteers and gave them reassurance as well. (Emma, North West England)."
"85" "As part of this culture of group care and support, 20 interviewees  mentioned  that they  actively tried to keep the   communication regular within the group , including by asking volunteers about their needs regularly, and trying to respond to the se  needs. To facilitate internal communication, participants used WhatsApp and Facebook groups, and regular telephone calls. Other groups organised regular meetings (e.g., weekly, fortnight, monthly). While most meetings were online, some groups had the opportunity to meet outdoors:"
"86" "For example, the helpline people who probably were the busiest of the volunteers, we [the organisers] would have a weekly get together with them, on Zoom, not physically. And let them share experiences, so they had a really high degree of camaraderie. We also had a group called the communications group which was, a cross-village group, that we put together to try to get over this lack of communication problem that we have in the village. And that sort of became more a cross-village advisory group. And I think that level of communication, bringing people together and just letting them share the good and the bad, helped keep people together. (Karen, South East, England). "
"87" "Karen’s excerpt introduces the importance of communication at different levels, within the group, but also within the community. Moreover, she also makes a clear distinction between the group’s coordinators and (“we would meet with them”) and the volunteers’ group. This approach was shared by other participants, who mentioned separate meetings with the group of coordinators and with the volunteers.  The few p articipants who were involved in superordinate mutual aid groups in urban settings highlighted their effort to support street coordinators, and mentioned regular meetings with the coordinators, who were then responsible for liaising with the volunteers at the street and neighbour level:"
"88" "I think the main thing I do to help sustain the group is to support the coordinators. The coordinators are the ones that are in direct contact with our volunteers. We hold fortnightly meetings with the coordinators so we're able to, you know, talk about the various things that are happening or have happened within the group over the last two weeks. It’s all about communication. I think that’s why our volunteers, they feel part of the organisation. We update them regularly on things that are happening within the organisation. (Lucy, Scotland). "
"89" "Lucy, like other interviewees, reinforced the importance of communication so volunteers feel part of the organisation. She did that by highlighting the importance of supporting the coordinators who would in turn support the volunteers."
"90" "Additionally,  g etting together for socialising  was considered important for sustaining the group over time, and some groups were able to organise outdoor meetings or planned to do so as soon as possible. Other groups created socialising online spaces (e.g., WhatsApp group, Facebook group). Many participants recognised the importance of socialising moments and expressed their intention to organise events in the future, when the pandemic is over, so volunteers could a ll meet each other face - to - face, some for the first time, and celebrate their achievements."
"91" "Most groups involved in our study did not have legal status nor formal chairs, but there was, in most cases, a structure of coordination involved.  Shared leadership  by a small group of people was, in most cases, assumed informally and spontaneously. But it was considered an important aspect for sustaining engagement over time: “I noticed that the groups that do have that kind of central organising ... they’re much more coordinated in terms of reaching out for help and so on”. (Theo, Greater London, England).  However , participants seemed to value sharing responsibilities in terms of decision making and the lack of formal rules (e.g., chair) involved in the idea of mutual aid. Ultimately, even in groups that had a clear distinction between coordinators and volunteers ,  participants claimed to have approached things as a group, and that there was a shared goal that  helped to sustain group activity over time: “I think we worked well because it was about the community, it wasn’t about us, for most of us anyway.” (Rose, Wales)."
"92" "In summary, interviews referred to many conscious and intentional ingroup strategies as important for sustaining participation in the groups participating in our study. Essentially these strategies revolved around promoting a shared identity, effective communication between groups members, a culture of care and support  within the group , group meetings  and events , and an informal but organised leadership structure."
"93" "4.4  Theme 4:  Experiencing  en joyment and efficacy in collective coping"
"94" "Most participants expressed positive emotions associated with their and others’ participation in mutual aid groups during the pandemic , such  as joy, pride, and happiness:"
"95" "I think there’s a hard core of people who really enjoy just helping and supporting. For no other reason, you know, I enjoy what I do in my other activities, it means sometimes two hundred mile a day driving patients, but I know they’ve had their radiotherapy – it’s very rewarding. (Ryan, East Midlands, England)."
"96" "Like Ryan, other participants use d  expressions of  joy  to describe their and others’ experiences. Expressions such as “there was a lot of enjoyment” or “they [volunteers] were quite pleased” were used by several participants. Additionally, there was a strong sense of accomplishment and pride among some participants: “So, I think quite a lot of the members who were quite involved in it did feel quite proud” (Oscar, South East England). Importantly, participation was also considered a form of coping with lockdown measures and volunteering was considered  “ win-win ”  situation with benefits for volunteers and for the whole community:"
"97" "Yeah, it was very important to get the message out that it wasn’t just for people in difficulty, it was for everybody, it was to help stop food wastage. It was, it was for everybody in the village (...) it was also about social contact as well for people’s mental health. Because yes, we couldn’t socialise but actually you were allowed to go out for food, so people could actually have a chat whilst wearing the masks, being safe, keeping themselves two metres apart but actually for some people it was the only people that they saw in the week. So, it was really good for mental health as well. (Amelia, South East England)."
"98" "Amelia particularly valued the  coping role  of the mutual aid group, arguing for the importance of these groups even for those who felt they did not need help with basic needs but needed the emotional support from the group."
"99" "Furthermore, when referring to positive benefits, some participants also stressed benefits related to their own  development of personal skills . Among other things, some felt to have gained practical knowledge on community organising, on how to deal with people in group settings, and how to assume leadership roles. They have also improved their communication skills and learned how to listen to people’s needs. In this sense, participants perceived the group as a space for personal growth and learning, which in some cases led them to become more aware of their own role and impact  within the local community: “I’ve learnt the positive impact you can have on your community if you’re willing to give up some of yourself to your community (Amelia, North East England)."
"100" "The positive emotions and other psychological benefits were also related to a  strong sense of contribution  to the community. There was a strong sense of achievement explicitly stated by 22 participants: “So, you know, there’s some adjustments that we know need to be made. But it didn’t diminish the success of the thing at all.” (Arthur, South West England). The support provided to the community as well as specific events and activities organised by the group were perceived as successful. The sense of being able to contribute appears in different levels, and i t was  directly associated with positive emotions, as we can see in the following excerpt:"
"101" "And when you see that journey and you know that you’ve helped that person and you see that person change and be able to, be more proud of who they are, feel more connected, can't access other services, it’s a massive, massive motivation. And I think the work that we do, even though we’re one of the poorest areas, we’re really, really blessed to see that difference that our work makes as well. And that gives you your passion, you’re driven when you know you’re making that difference, it comes naturally to want to continue to make that impact and have that positive impact on people and their families. (Emma, North West England)."
"102" "Emma’s comment clearly shows how interviewees perceived their group’s ability to effectively contribute to improve the lives of people within their community. While some participants focused on the ability of the group to mobili s e help, several participants focused on the ability of the community as whole to come together when necessary."
"103" "Our analysis suggests that practices of solidarity involved in mutual aid groups were valued by all participants, who described   their experience of participation   positively . Positive emotions such as pride, joy and happiness were considered factors sustaining mutual aid groups over time. The shared sense that the group and the community itself responded effectively and promptly to community needs, as well as the perception that participating in mutual aid groups help ed to  provide well-being   and new skills,  also seem to be important factors for sustaining long-term participation."
"104" "4.5  Theme 5: Increasing sense of local community belonging and cohesion"
"105" "Twenty-six participants described several positive effects on the  sense of  community  resulting from participation in COVID-19 mutual aid groups. These participants tended to describe the  local  community as more connected and cohesive  in relation to  the pandemic, and that mutual aid groups experienced during the pandemic have shown that it is possible to “to bring everyone together” (Amelia, North East, England). Other participants pointed to the positive benefits of finally getting to know their neighbours: “A lot of the neighbours actually know the people who are living beside them, whereas before we didn’t. That’s one of the positive things.” (Zoe, North West, England). Many participants described how the COVID-19 situation has allowed them to build relationships with others in the local community:"
"106" "So, I have made some very good friends through this group (...) and I wanted that, I wanted to know people in my community, I wanted to feel like I could contribute something (...).   So  even though it took a terrible pandemic to do it, we now feel that people know that we’re reliable and that we can help out in an emergency. So, I’ve learnt that we chose well in picking this place to live. (Rose, Wales)."
"107" "As with Rose,  for other participants the  idea of  building relationships  appears related to the idea of relying on others within the communit y .  “ Community spirit ”  was an expression used by some participants, who believe that the local community had become much friendlier after COVID-19, and there was an increase in the   sense of  community, despite the challenging situation. Importantly, interviewees not only perceived the community as more connected, they described their own relationship with the community as stronger. For some groups these experiences within the community would have a future impact locally, and they talked about continuity and  “ legacy ”  to describe the experience:"
"108" "I expect we’ll continue to engage folks because I do think in terms of their values most of the volunteers really want to help people, they really wanted to, you know, make connections in their community, and this is a way for a lot of people to maybe not lived long to make new friends and maybe get involved in the life of the community, and I think that that will be a real legacy. You know the fact that, the kind of, it’s a really cheesy term but the kind of community-cohesion I think has really improved. (...). I don’t ever get a sense that we’re going to go back to the way exactly that things were, you know I think the volunteers and the people who have been involved in mutual aid led activities will be central to that  [recovering]  and we’re started to see that who have volunteered, you know, applying for jobs, maybe in things that they wouldn’t have done before. Or getting involved in projects and things like that as well, which is really interesting. (Logan, Scotland) ."
"109" "This rich  extract  from Logan  suggests  how participation during the pandemic may have  strengthened the  local   community spirit and led to more engagement . Importantly, other references to group continuity once the pandemic is over were evident in almost every interview. Views around the future of the group beyond the pandemic were very much related to the perceived needs of the community, with interviewees who perceived high and continued needs in the community feeling that they were prepared to meet community needs even when the pandemic is over:"
"110" "I think this is going to be morphed into that, and they are going to continue this service, forever now.  (…) . This is no longer a COVID response, this a community response. So, if anybody at any point in next month, in a year or in two years, needs their shopping down, needs a prescription, needs taking to the doctors, the group will do it.   Because we will now have the volunteers - this is the big thing that’s come out of this, because we found all these volunteers, they all want to continue to help, a lot want to continue to help, they’re able to sustain that, and continue to provide the service. (Sophie, East of England)."
"111" "Sophie’s comments clearly express ed  a commitment with the community beyond COVID-19 and suggested that her community ha s  irreversibly changed.  O n this matter,  interviewees’ comments  suggest ed  that even those participants who  were not involved  pre-pandemic expressed a  desire  to continue to be involved in the recently created group  when the pandemic was over . Additionally, five participants from pre-existing groups also pointed to an effect on their own organisations, namely in  terms of having more volunteers, and more knowledge on community needs and services. Five interviewees from pre-existing groups mentioned that COVID-19 has shown the importance of community organising while others argued that their activity and services have grown since COVID-19 and they feel more prepared to respond to community needs. Other interviewees said they believed that COVID-19 has raised awareness of the group:  “ I think, I hate to say this, but I think that COVID-19 has raised the awareness of the group. So, I actually think that certainly in the next, certainly for the next year, so it will definitely flourish . ”  (Lisa, South East England) ."
"112" "In addition , while some mutual aid groups may have stopped provid ing  help in the community, participants continued their  own  commitment to community action, by engaging in other groups and projects."
"113" "In summary,  increasing  local sense of community and cohesion were related to willingness to keep involved in the future. Participants' accounts showed that COVID-19 mutual aid groups were perceived not only as an effective tool for addressing the COVID-19 crisis, but also as a way to increas ing  bonds within the community, which may lead to post-COVID participation and solidarity. In turn, for some participants, group continuity  after the pandemic  is a n   expected  progression of creating COVID-19 community response in the first place. Participants’ accounts o f  group continuity suggested that there is a willingness to maintain support in the community in the future, either as continuous response or temporary in emergency situations."
"114" "5  Discussion"
"115" "Drawing on 32 interviews with community organisers of COVID-19 mutual aid groups  in the UK ,  the present study  identified several strategies sustaining COVID-19 mutual aid groups,  as well as  practical and soci al  psychological  experiences that were important .  Overall, our findings suggested that meetings  community needs  with  localised action and resources and building trust and community-based alliances were foundational elements in COVID-19 mutual aid. The group process strategies employed by mutual aid groups, which revolved around promoting a shared identity, effective communication between groups members, a culture of care and support within the group, group meetings and events, and an informal but organised leadership structure, helped to sustain involvement within the group.   The experiences resulting from participation in the group led to positive emotions, such as joy, and efficacy. Participation in COVID-19 mutual aid was also related to an increasing sense of local community belonging and cohesion."
"116" "Despite their diversity, all groups were organised based on their local community, which seems to have facilitated access to human resources (e.g., volunteers) and practical resources (e.g., venues, vans, donations), that were then related to the endurance of mutual aid groups over time. As previous studies found in disaster communities ( 14 , 41 ),  alliances were  a key strategy for ensuring the endurance of the groups over time. Besides, the collaborative and cooperative approach between people, groups, and organisations has created future opportunities for participation. The alliances built during the pandemic also facilitated the integration of other community initiatives and projects that were not necessarily COVID-19 related, which suggests the importance of community alliances in sustaining future participation."
"117" "Relating to the strategies employed by COVID-19 mutual aid groups, our findings suggest that groups focused on several strategies, at both group and community levels.   At a community level, our analysis aligns with previous studies   of COVID-19   mutual aid groups  suggesting a high diversity  in terms  of activities realised, pre-existing nature, and the characteristics of the people involved in   mutual support during the pandemic (e.g.,  5,   6, 8 )."
"118" "Our findings also align with previous research  suggesting  that group processes are key for sustaining solidarity over time ( 14 , 35 ). We found that evoking a shared identification was a deliberate strategy used by COVID-19 mutual aid groups.  There was an overall commitment to increasing the sense of belonging among groups’ members, often through regular communication and feedback, shared meetings and events, clear rules, structure and guidelines, and a strong focus on the idea of caring for the well-being of group members. "
"119" "Taking care of each other was considered to be vital for sustaining COVID-19 mutual aid groups. Participants described taking care of each other, making sure that the needs of all the members were taken into consideration, and that no volunteer was placed in a risky situation or was working too many hours for the group. Past research has shown that while long-term activists benefit from using personalised strategies of personal care to avoid burnout  ( 50, 55 ),   burnout should be approached from a group perspective, i.e., through a community-care burnout orientation ( 50 ). Interestingly, our analysis suggests an orientation towards a group care approach, which may have the potential to help sustain long-term participation. Simultaneously, our findings also show that there is a perception of the need to recognise and celebrate the groups’ achievements, and that many groups were planning to do this when it is  COVID-19  safe.  Celebration events are vital for enduring participation over time ( 14 ), with these events expected to have a crucial role in sustaining  community  solidarity."
"120" "Moreover, the sustainability of mutual aid groups and the participation in these groups were also related to a set of practical and soci al  psychological factors. In terms of practical factors, it worth considering that mutual aid groups sustained themselves because they had access to resources needed to perform their tasks, namely in terms of people’s availability to participate and access to goods and funds. A local community-based approach facilitated the coordination and distribution of help, the mobilisation of volunteers and the access to resources. There were, however, several concerns with the lack of stability in accessing key resources (e.g., vans, storage spaces, grants, skilled volunteers) after the pandemic. The ability to mobilise resources in the long term  was  a challenge faced by many groups, especially those working with marginalised groups and in a socio-economic deprived area. The decline in terms of resources and the saturation of supportive networks are also factors that have been found to influence the decline of disaster emergent groups ( 16, 17 )."
"121" "Importantly, our findings suggest that the experience of participation in COVID-19 mutual aid groups was empowering in several ways. There was a general sense of being able to contribute and effectively respond to community needs during and even after the pandemic. Such perceptions were, in general, followed by descriptions of the power of mobilising the communities and expressions of positive emotions associated with participation, such as joy and pride.  In addition , our findings suggest that participating in COVID-19 community solidarity  enhanced   participants’  well-being and sense of being able to contribute to the local community, as previously found in other studies and contexts ( 32 , 56 ). Since one way of looking at sustained engagement is through the consequences of  participation ( 57 ), it can be argued that COVID-19 mutual aid and community support have the potential to  translate into  long-term community responses. Positive emotional responses, in particular, have the potential to shape people’s motivation to future engagement ( 43 )."
"122" "Finally, for those participating in organised help, new community bonds and ties have been created, which is in line with previous arguments that practices of solidarity often involve the construction of different and new social relations (6, 35). We found that people involved in the COVID-19 mutual aid groups increased their sense of belonging, by increasing the number of social connections and bonds with others in their local communities. Additionally, COVID-19 mutual aid groups acted as a platform for building such connections and a context facilitating the emergence of new community shared identities. Specifically, participants described an increase in terms of community identification and, simultaneously, increased identification with the cause and the goals of the COVID-19 mutual aid groups. Considering that sense of community has a positive and strong influence in diverse forms of participation (58), sense of community and cohesion are likely to be important factors for sustaining mutual aid groups over time."
"123" "5.1  Limitations and future research"
"124" "W hile we tried to reach diverse groups and participants, our sample still overrepresented groups located in England. It is also possible that there was a self-selection bias, leading more engaged groups and participants to respond to our call for participants. Besides, several groups did not have their contact addresses available,  and  others were contacted but did not answer our invitation. It was particularly difficult to reach politicised groups and groups working in deprived and marginalised areas. The diversity of groups should be the focus of further research, as it is likely that the level of politicisation may influence the future of mutual aid and their ability to sustain participation over time. In particular and considering that marginalised and deprived groups are those being most affected by COVID-19, it is crucial to look at how community groups and activists respond to social inequities in the recovery and rebuilding processes."
"125" "It worth noting that at the time of the interviews, most participants had been involved in mutual aid for more than six months. In most cases, such participation has involved a high level of commitment in a situation of crisis. Our findings show that groups were able to implement strategies for sustaining participation over time, and that some groups were highly committed to   providing organi s ed help after the pandemic. It would be important to follow these groups over time, as well as interviewing people who dropped out, to examine how the strategies and factors identified in our study are related to long-term and sustained participation and solidarity."
"126" "5.2  Conclusion s  and  recommendations"
"127" "Previous research demonstrates that post disaster solidarity tends to decline over time ( 11, 14,  15 ,  16 ). A key strength of our study is that it extends previous literature by focusing on the strategies and factors that may sustain COVID-19 mutual aid groups over time. Our analysis shows that several community and group level strategies  and experiences  were related to sustained participation  in  COVID-19 mutual aid groups , including  meeting community needs over time with localised action and resources, building trust and community-based alliances, employing group processes strategies, experiencing enjoyment and efficacy in collective coping, and increasing sense of local community of local community belonging and cohesion."
"128" "Based on  these  findings,  some  practical and important implications can be drawn.   First  of all ,  given the importance of resources in sustaining COVID-19 mutual aid groups (theme 1)  t here is a need to  provide  practical and financial support to COVID-19 mutual aid groups. However, this should be done without constraining or interfering in their actions, decisions or activities ( 7 ).   It should also be combined with a broader strategy of supporting social infrastructures in critical areas such as education, housing, and transport ( 59 ) ."
"129" "Second,  COVID-19 has  disproportionately  affected ethnic minority communitie s ( 25 ) , and it is   now urgent that we understand and take steps to mitigate the wider social and economic impacts within these communities, to best prepare to address the expected long term-social impacts of COVID-19 ( 40 ). COVID-19 mutual aid groups have acquired extensive knowledge on the local needs , resources and potentialities of their communities  (theme 2) . This knowledge should be mobilised for developing programmes and interventions for addressing the medium and long-term impacts of COVID-19."
"130" "Third, f ollowing a   local community -based  approach facilitated the coordination and distribution of help, the mobilisation of volunteers and resources, leading to a sense of being part and able to contribute to the local community  (themes 1, 4 and 5) .  Governments should prioritise community-level interventions, as they have the potential to benefit individuals and communities ."
"131" "Finally, our study supports previous  suggestions   for the need to recognise the role of group processes ( 14, 35 ). There are several strategies that can be employed by mutual aid groups and that have the potential to sustain participation over time. For example, community organisers, activists and coordinators can actively  in voke shared identities, taking care of each other, organise socialising meetings, facilitate open communication between group members  ( t heme 3) . As our study show s , these  group  strategies may have the potential to lead to long-term community responses, which will  be  key for ensuring that communities  effectively  recover   from the COVID-19 pandemic ."
"132" "6  Conflict of Interest"
"133" "The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest."
"134" "7  Author Contributions"
"135" "JD, EN, MFJ, and GM  contributed to the conception and design of the  study. MFJ and  GM  conducted data collection. MFJ  analysed the material.  JD, EN, GM, CC, MM,  AS,  and JS revised and discussed the first draft of the analysis.  MFJ wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors  contributed to the interpretation of data, reviewed, wrote and approved the final version of the manuscript."
"136" "8  Funding"
"137" "This work was supported by the UK Research and Innovation/ Economic and Social Research Council (grant reference number ES/V005383/1)."
"138" "9  Acknowledgments"
"139" "The authors would like to thank all participants for sharing their time, experiences and time.   The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of UK Research and Innovation/ Economic and Social Research Council."
"140" "10  Data Availability Statement"
"141" "The datasets analysed for this study can be found  o n  F igshare   https://figshare.com/s/25c1521f547a84e00f7c .   This study and the interview schedule for the interviews were approved by the  University of Sussex  Cross-Schools Research Ethics Committee  (reference number   ER/HAFC1/8)."
"142" "11   References"
"143" "1  Costello, A. (2020). A Social Vaccine for Ebola. A Lesson for the Democratic Republic of Congo 2018. Retrieved from  https://www.anthonycostello.net/2018/05/20/a-social-vaccine-for-ebola-a-lesson-for-the-democratic-republic-of-congo/"
"144" "2 Gilmore, B.,  Ndejjo  R.,  Tchetchia  A., de Claro V, Mago E., Lopes C., &  Bhattacharyya  S. (2020).  Community engagement for COVID-19 prevention and control: A Rapid Evidence Synthesis.  BMJ Global Health .  http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmjgh-2020-003188"
"145" "3  Laverack , G, &  Manoncourt , E. (2015). Key experiences of community engagement and social mobilization in the Ebola response.  Global Health Promotion ,  23(1), 79-82 .   https://doi.org/10.1177/1757975915606674"
"146" "4 Costello, A., (2021). Remember those NHS volunteers? We need them now in the fight against  Covid . Retrieved from  https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/mar/06/nhs-volunteers-fight-covid-community-health-workers-asia-contact-tracing-vaccine"
"147" "5  Mao , G., Fernandes-Jesus, M.,  Ntontis , E., &  Drury , J. (2020a).  What have we learned about COVID-19 volunteering in the UK? A rapid review of the literature.  MedRxiv .   https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.22.20236059"
"148" "6  Pleyers , G. (2020). The Pandemic is a battlefield. Social movements in the COVID-19 lockdown.  Journal of Civil Society ,  16 (4), 295–312.  https://doi.org/10.1080/17448689.2020.1794398"
"149" "7  Tiratelli , L., & Kaye, S. (2020).  Communities vs. Coronavirus - The rise of  mutual  aid . New local government network. Retrieved from  https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195336450.001.0001"
"150" "8  Sitrin , M. &  Sembrar , C. (2020).  Pandemic Solidarity: Mutual Aid during the Covid-19 Crisis . London: Pluto Press."
"151" "9  Beverlein , K. &  Sikkink , D., (2005). Sorrow and Solidarity: Why Americans Volunteered for 9/11 Relief Efforts.  Social Problems , 55(2),190–215.  https://doi.org/10.1525/sp.2008.55.2.190"
"152" "10 Drury, J., Brown, R., González, R., & Miranda, D. (2016). Emergent social identity and observing social support predict social support provided by survivors in a disaster: Solidarity in the 2010 Chile earthquake.  European Journal of Social Psychology , 46(2), 209–223.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2146"
"153" "11  Kaniasty , K. & Norris, F.H., (1993). A test of the social support deterioration model in the context of natural disaster.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.  64(3), 395– 408.  https://doi.org/10.1037//0022-3514.64.3.395"
"154" "12  Kaniasty , K. & Norris, F.H., (1999). The experience of disaster: individuals and communities sharing trauma’. In R. Gist & B.  Lubin  (Eds.),  Response to Disaster: Psychosocial, Community, and Ecological Approaches  (pp. 25–61). Brunner/Maze: Philadelphia, PA ."
"155" "13  Kaniasty , K. & Norris, F.H., (2009). Distinctions that matter: received social support, perceived social support, and social embeddedness after disasters. In Y.  Neria , S. Galea, & F.H. Norris (eds.),  Mental Health and Disasters  (pp. 175–200). Cambridge University Press, New York, NY."
"156" "14  Ntontis , E., Drury, J.  Amlôt , G. R.,  Rubind , J., & Williams, R. (2020). Endurance or decline of emergent groups following a flood disaster: Implications for community resilience.  International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction , 45, 101493.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101493"
"157" "15  Kaniasty , K., de  Terte , I.,  Guilaran , J., & Bennett, S. (2019). A scoping review of post‐disaster social support investigations conducted after disasters that struck the Australia and Oceania continent.  Disasters , 44(2), 336-366. https://doi.org/ 10.1111/disa.12390"
"158" "16  Norris, F. &  Kaniasty , K. (1996). Received and perceived social support in times of stress: A test of the social support deterioration deterrence model.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71 (3), 498–511."
"159" "17  Kaniasty , K., & Norris, F. (2004). Social support in the aftermath of disasters, catastrophes, and acts of terrorism: Altruistic, overwhelmed, uncertain, antagonistic, and patriotic communities.  In R.   Ursano , A.  Norwood, & C. Fullerton (Eds.),  Bioterrorism: Psychological and public health interventions . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.71.3.49817"
"160" "18  Mak , H. W., Fluharty, M., &  Fancourt , D. (2020). Predictors and impact of arts engagement during the COVID-19 pandemic: analyses of data from 19,384 adults in the COVID-19 Social Study.  Frontiers in Psychology .  https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.626263"
"161" "19  Wakefield, J., Bowe, M., &  Kellezi , B. (2021). Who helps and why? A longitudinal exploration of volunteer role identity, intergroup closeness, and community identification as predictors of coordinated helping during the COVID-19 pandemic.  PsyArXiv .  https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/8kcyj"
"162" "20  Public Health England (2021). Guidance on shielding and protecting people who are clinically extremely vulnerable from COVID-19. Retrieved from  https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/guidance-on-shielding-and-protecting-extremely-vulnerable-persons-from-covid-19"
"163" "21  SPI-B - Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies. (2020). The impact of financial and other targeted support on rates of self-isolation or quarantine. Retrieved from https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/spi-b-impact-of-financial-and-other-targeted-support-on-rates-of-self-isolation-or-quarantine-16-september-2020"
"164" "22  Patel, J., Fernandes, G., &  Sridhar , D. (2021).  How can we improve self-isolation and quarantine for Covid- 19.   BMJ , 372.  https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n625"
"165" "23  Reicher, S., Drury, J., & ,  Michie, S.   (2021). Why contrasting figures on adherence to self-isolation show that support to self-isolate is even more important than we previously realised.  BMJ Opinion.  Retrieved from   https://blogs.bmj.com/bmj/2021/04/05/why-contrasting-figures-on-adherence-to-self-isolation-show-that-support-to-self-isolate-is-even-more-important-than-we-previously-realised/"
"166" "24  Smith, L.E., Potts H.W.W.,  Amlôt , R., Fear, N. T., Michie, S., & Rub, G. J., (2021).   Adherence to the test, trace and isolate system: results from a time series of 21 nationally representative surveys in the UK.  BMJ ,  372:n 608 .  https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.n608"
"167" "25  Hooper , M., Nápoles, A., & Pérez- Stable , E. (2020).  COVID-19 and Racial/Ethnic Disparities.  JAMA Network , 23/30, 323(24), 2466–2467.   https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2020.8598"
"168" "26  Kerkhoff , A.D, Sachdev D.,  Mizany  S., Rojas S., Gandhi, M., Peng, J., Black, D., Jones, D., Rojas S,  Jacobo , J.,  Tulier-Laiwa , V., Petersen, M., Martinez, J.,  Chamie , G.,  Havlir , D.V., Marquez, C. (2020). Evaluation of a novel community-based COVID-19 'Test-to-Care' model for low-income populations.  PLoS   One , 9,15(10), e0239400.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0239400"
"169" "27 Al- Mandhari , A.,  Kodama , C.,  Abubakar , A., &  Brennan , R. (2020).  Solidarity in response to COVID-19 outbreak in the eastern Mediterranean Region.  Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal , 26(5) ,  492-496.  https://doi.org/10.26719/2020.26.5.492"
"170" "28 Booth, R. (2020). Community aid groups set up across UK amid coronavirus crisis.  The Guardian . Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/mar/16/community-aid-groups- set-up-across- uk -amid-coronavirus-crisis"
"171" "29  Mahanty , S., &  Phillipps , N. (2020). The community-led movement creating hope in the time of coronavirus. Retrieved from  https://theconversation.com/the-community-led-movement-creating-hope-in-the-time-of-coronavirus-134391"
"172" "30 Whitley, M. (2020). Why 'Mutual Aid'? – social solidarity, not charity. Retrieved from  https://www.opendemocracy.net/en/can-europe-make-it/why-mutual-aid-social-solidarity-not-charity/"
"173" "31 Spade, D. (2020). Solidarity Not Charity: Mutual Aid for Mobilization and Survival.  Social  Text , 38,   1(142), 131-151.  https://read.dukeupress.edu/social-text/article/38/1"
"174" "32  Mao , G.,  Drury , J., Fernandes-Jesus, M., &  Ntontis , E. (2020b).  Therapeutic alliance: How participation in Covid-19 mutual aid groups affects subjective wellbeing and how political identity moderates these effects.  SocArXiv .  https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/x9csf"
"175" "33  O'Dwyer , E. J.,  Beascoechea-Seguí , N., & Souza, L. S. (2020).  Rehearsing post-Covid-19 citizenship: Social representations and social practices in UK mutual aid groups.  PsyArXiv .  https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/v84mr"
"176" "34 Bowe, M., Wakefield, J.,  Kellezi , B., Stevenson, C.,  Mcnamara , N., Jones, B.,  Sumich , A., &  Heym , N., (2021). The mental health benefits of community helping during crisis: coordinated helping, community identification and sense of unity during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology , 1, 1– 15.  https://doi.org/10.1002/casp.2520"
"177" "35 Drury, J., Carter, H., Cocking, C.,  Ntontis , E.,  Tekin   Guven , S., &  Amlôt , R. (2019). Facilitating Collective Psychosocial Resilience in the Public in Emergencies: Twelve Recommendations Based on the Social Identity Approach.  Frontiers in Public Health , 7, 141,   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00141"
"178" "36  Felici , M. (2020). Social capital and the response to Covid-19. Retrieved from  https://www.bennettinstitute.cam.ac.uk/about-us/team/marco-felici/"
"179" "37 Jovita, H. D.,  Nashir , H.,  Mutiarin , D.,  Moner , Y., &  Nurmandi , A., (2019): Social capital and disasters: How does social capital shape post-disaster conditions in the Philippines? Journal of  Human  Behavior  in the Social Environment ,  29(4),   519-534.  https://doi.org/10.1080/10911359.2018.1556143"
"180" "38  Cocking, C.,  Ntontis , E.,  Vestergern , S., &  Luzynska  K., (Under review). Engagement in mutual aid and community support in South East England during the first COVID-19 lockdown: ‘All together now’."
"181" "39  Bondesson , S. (2020) Dealing with Background Inequality in Post-Disaster Participatory Spaces.  Representatio n. https://doi.org/10.1080/00344893.2020.1754891"
"182" "40 Bedford, J.,  Berglof , E.,  Buckee , C., Farrar, J., Grenfell, B., Holmes, E. C., Metcalf, C.J. E., Sridhar, D., & Thompson, B. (2020).  COVID-19 Futures: A Framework for Exploring Medium and Long-Term Impacts.  Retrieved from  http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3678593"
"183" "41  Tekin , S., & Drury, J. (2020). How do those affected by a disaster organize to meet their needs for justice? Campaign strategies and partial victories following the Grenfell Tower fire.  SocArXiv .  https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/xrcfq"
"184" "42 Saab, R., Spears, R.,  Tausch , N., &  Sasse , J. (2016). Predicting aggressive collective action based on the efficacy of peaceful and aggressive actions.  European Journal of Social Psychology,  46, 529– 543.  https://doi.org/10.1002/ejsp.2193 ."
"185" "43 Becker, J.C., &  Tausch , N. (2015). A dynamic model of engagement in normative and non-normative collective action: Psychological antecedents, consequences, and barriers.  European Journal of Social Psychology , 26(1), 43-92.  https://doi.org/10.1080/10463283.2015.1094265"
"186" "44 Van  Zomeren , M.,  Postmes , T., & Spears, R. (2008). Toward an integrative social identity model of collective action: A quantitative research synthesis of three socio-psychological perspectives.  Psychological Bulletin , 134 (4), 504-535. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.134.4.504"
"187" "45  Gamson , W. A., (2013). Injustice Frames. In Snow, D. A.,  D ella Porta, D.,  Klandermans , B. & McAdam, D. (Eds.). The Wiley-Blackwell  Encyclopedia  of Social and Political Movements. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470674871.wbespm110"
"188" "46 Cohen-Chen, S., & Van  Zomeren , M. (2018).  Yes  we can? Group efficacy beliefs predict collective action, but only when hope is high.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 77,  50–59.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2018.03.016"
"189" "47  Wlodarczyk , A.,  Basabe , N.,  Páez , D., &  Zumeta , L. (2017).  Hope and anger as mediators between collective action frames and participation in collective mobilization: The case of 15-M.  Journal of Social and Political Psychology, 5 (1), 200–223.  https://doi.org/10.5964/jspp.v5i1.471"
"190" "48  Vestergren , S., Drury, J.,  Chiriac , E. H. (2018). How collective action can  produces  psychological change and how that change endures over time: A case study of an environmental campaign.  British Journal of Social Psychology , 57, 855–877. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjso.12270"
"191" "49  Mannarini , T., &  Fedi , A. (2012). Persisting or Withdrawing? An Insight into the Psychosocial Processes Underlying Sustained Engagement.  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology ,  22 (4), 300–315.  https://doi.org/10.1002/casp.1113"
"192" "50  Gorski, P. C., (2019). Fighting racism, battling burnout: causes of activist burnout in US racial justice activists.  Ethnic and Racial Studies , 42(5), 667–687. https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2018.1439981"
"193" "51  Jenkinson, C. E., Dickens, A. P., Jones, K., Thompson-Coon, J., Taylor, R. S., Rogers, M., … Richards, S. H. (2013). Is volunteering a public health intervention? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the health and survival of volunteers.  BMC Public Health , 13(1), 1–10.  https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-13-773"
"194" "52 Hyde, M. K., Dunn, J.,  Scuffham , P. A., & Chambers, S. K. (2014). A systematic review of episodic volunteering in public health and other contexts.  BMC Public Health ,  14 (1).  https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-14-992"
"195" "53 Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2019). Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis.  Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health ,  11 (4), 589–597. https://doi.org/10.1080/2159676X.2019.1628806"
"196" "54 Braun, V. & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology.  Qualitative Research in Psychology ,  3 (2), 77–101.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa"
"197" "55 Driscoll, D. (2020). When Ignoring the News and Going Hiking Can Help You Save the World: Environmental Activist Strategies for Persistence.  Sociological Forum ,  35 (1), 189–206. https://doi.org/10.1111/socf.12573"
"198" "56  Alfadhli , K.,  Güler , M.,  Cakal , H., & Drury, J. (2019). The Role of Emergent Shared Identity in Psychosocial Support among Refugees of Conflict in Developing Countries.  International Review of Social Psychology ,  32 (1), 2, 1-16.  http://doi.org/10.5334/irsp.176"
"199" "57  Selvanathan , H. P., &  Jetten , J. (2020). From marches to movements building and sustaining a social movement following collective action.  Current Opinion in Psychology ,  35 , 81–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2020.04.004."
"200" "58  Talò , C.,  Mannarini , T. &  Rochira , A. (2020). Sense of Community and Community Participation: A Meta-Analytic Review.  Social Indicators Research,  117, 1–2.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-013-0347-2"
"201" "59 Power, A. & Benton, E. (2021). Where next for Britain’s 4,300 mutual aid groups? Retrieved from https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/covid19/2021/05/06/where-next-for-britains-4300-mutual-aid-groups/"
