Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Validity of energy social research during
and after COVID-19: challenges,
considerations, and responses
Michael J. Fell​, UCL Energy Institute, University College London, UK.
michael.fell@ucl.ac.uk
Laura Pagel​, Swiss Center for Affective Sciences, University of Geneva, Switzerland.
Laura.Pagel@etu.unige.ch
Chien-fei Chen​, Center for Ultra-wide-area Resilient Electrical Energy Transmission
Networks (CURENT), University of Tennessee, USA. ​cchen26@utk.edu
Matthew H. Goldberg​, Yale Program on Climate Change Communication, Yale University,
USA. ​matthew.goldberg@yale.edu
Mario Herberz​, Department of Psychology and Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, Switzerland. ​mario.herberz@unige.ch
Gesche M. Huebner​, UCL Energy Institute and Institute for Environmental Design &
Engineering, University College London, UK. ​g.huebner@ucl.ac.uk
Siddharth Sareen​, Department of Geography & Centre for Climate and Energy
Transformation, University of Bergen, Norway. ​Siddharth.Sareen@uib.no
Ulf J. J. Hahnel​, Department of Psychology and Swiss Center for Affective Sciences,
University of Geneva, Switzerland. ​Ulf.Hahnel@unige.ch
PLEASE NOTE: This manuscript version has not been peer reviewed
Date of upload: 6 May 2020

Abstract
Measures to control the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are having
unprecedented impacts on people’s lives around the world. In this paper, we argue that
those conducting social research in the energy domain should give special consideration to
the internal and external validity of their work conducted during this pandemic period. We set
out a number of principles that researchers can consider to give themselves and research
users greater confidence that findings and recommendations will still be applicable in years
to come. Largely grounded in existing good practice guidance, our recommendations include
collecting and reporting additional supporting contextual data, reviewing aspects of research
design for vulnerability to validity challenges, and building in longitudinal elements where
feasible. We suggest that these approaches also bring a number of opportunities to generate
new insights. However, we caution that a more systemic challenge to validity of knowledge
produced during this period may result from changes in the kinds of social research that it is
practicable to pursue.
Keywords:​ Social science, energy, validity, COVID-19

1

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Introduction
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic is having tragic health consequences
around the world, and measures to combat it are impacting people’s lives in unprecedented
ways. There is, as yet, no clarity on when and how measures such as suspension of certain
businesses and physical distancing might end, but the timescales required to develop a
vaccine and deploy it globally suggest it could be well into 2021 and possibly later.
During this time, the validity of current and future energy social science research faces
additional threats.​ Validity generally refers to the truth of a knowledge claim or inference
(Shadish et al., 2002)​. National and global events continuously shape social worlds. But the
magnitude, speed, and reach of the changes to our lives are of a different order to anything
that most people alive today have experienced. Given the scale and rapidity of change, how
can we ensure that conclusions drawn from data collected during the pandemic are valid,
representative, and generalisable to a post-pandemic world?
While the answer is inherently unknowable ​(Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1994)​, there are a number
of principles that we believe energy social science researchers can take to help mitigate this
uncertainty, and ease future interpretation of research findings in the context of the
progressing pandemic. Broadly speaking, these principles involve giving consideration to
possible impacts of the pandemic and associated response measures on findings; adjusting
research design and data collection to reflect this; and reporting extra contextual detail. We
argue that researchers who take reasonable steps in these areas will be able to ensure
greater confidence in the validity of the work they conduct during this period. Through
consciously enhanced transparency for the ‘extended peer community’ that post-normal
science scholars have long espoused ​(Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1994​; ​Healy, 1999)​, their
contributions will be better positioned to help address future challenges on the validity of
findings by reviewers and users.
We co-produced these principles as energy researchers who represent a variety of relevant
disciplinary perspectives and subject interests, and are based in a range of institutions and
countries. This allowed us to balance the will to draw on a breadth of input across the field,
with the need to share these principles in a timely fashion. We set them out in the hope that
researchers will find them helpful, but recognise variance in like deployment across energy
social science research. Our recommendations are likely to be most applicable to
researchers employing quantitative research methods that are often restricted in the amount
of contextual data they are able to collect ​(Sareen et al., 2020)​. However, we hope that as a
set of considerations they will be helpful to a broad range of energy social science scholars
to employ as they see fit.
The next section of this paper sets out the key challenges we identify for validity during the
COVID-19 pandemic, and justifies our focus on social science research in energy. We then
expand on steps that researchers can take to address these challenges, and provide a
simple checklist that can be applied by scholars in order to address the impacts of the

2

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

pandemic on their research. We finally highlight additional opportunities these steps can
yield, but also point out important potential implications for the nature of knowledge
generated by contemporary research.

Challenges to validity
Decisions about validity inherently concern tradeoffs and priorities of a given research study
(Shadish et al., 2002)​. For instance, a researcher might prioritize internal validity (or “the
degree to which a study establishes the cause-and-effect relationship”; ​Slack & Draugalis,
2001, ​2173) by conducting a randomized controlled laboratory experiment. Artificial
laboratory conditions enable strong experimental control, but limit generalizability across
diverse, complex real-world situations. A field study, in contrast, might prioritize external
validity (or “the generalization of research findings [...] to settings and populations other than
those studied”; ​Lucas, 2003​, 236), but surrenders some ability to control and measure
variables.
Both these forms of validity are important. If we cannot trust the findings of a study because
of methodological problems or unaccounted-for variables, generalisability is irrelevant. And
findings that only apply in exceptionally narrow circumstances offer very limited value in
applied research settings. External validity tends to be given special weight in applied
research, including most energy research, where the generalisability of findings, and
therefore any resulting conclusions and recommendations for action, often has primacy.
Our point of departure here is the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated
response measures on internal, external, and subsidiary forms of validity. We argue that the
pandemic merits explicit consideration for validity for a number of reasons. First, the
response to COVID-19 represents a departure from ordinary circumstances that is
unprecedented in terms of its global nature, rapidity, diversity, and severity of impacts. At the
time of writing in May 2020, over 100 countries and several billion people were under some
form of lockdown, with restricted rights to movement and public assembly. In many cases,
schools, non-essential businesses and hospitality venues were closed. Evidence of
prevalent psychological distress and anxiety had begun to emerge ​(Qiu et al., 2020​; ​Ballew
et al., 2020)​. Such a situation is far removed from the conditions under which knowledge is
ordinarily produced and applied, and questions around the validity of findings generated
during this circumstance are inevitable.
Second, an important consideration for external validity is how stable findings are over time.
While there is always uncertainty about how closely the future will resemble the present, we
argue that this uncertainty is now especially high. Movement restrictions have already left
millions of people unemployed, with millions more at risk of losing their jobs as businesses
contract or close ​(OECD, 2020)​. Governmental support packages are building up
unprecedented levels of national debt that will have to be paid for, with little clarity around
the effect this will have for public services and taxes. Taken together with the scale of
current impacts, we believe this increased uncertainty justifies special consideration of
validity of social research and, furthermore, a higher burden of proof on claims to such
validity.
3

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Why is a particular focus on energy studies important? Energy use plays a prominent role in
many aspects of human life. Any changes on the scale being experienced during the
pandemic have significant impacts not only on patterns of interaction with energy systems,
but also on how people relate to and prioritise those systems. Much energy research
conducted today aims to inform transitions to clean, low-carbon energy systems that work for
people and society. Although research conducted now can shed light on how the
extraordinary measures in place might impact energy use (such as evidence of reduced
weekday electricity use (​IEA, 2020)​ and changing usage patterns ​(MEINRENKEN et al.,
2020)​ , it is challenging to disentangle these impacts from those that result from measures
deployable absent a pandemic. Moreover, the impact of such a drastic, globally shared
experience impacts discursive and normative registers, with undetermined implications for
public commitment to low-carbon energy transitions that become interwoven with other
drivers of change pathways.
Although many of the principles we set out next could simply be viewed as good research
practice, we think that they merit explicit attention at this pressing moment. We argue that
they are especially important for those domains of energy social research that claim broad
generalisability to their findings and insights, with limited focus on context. For example, we
think the points raised here are generally more applicable to survey-based than
ethnographic research.

Principles to consider for validity
We have argued that challenges to the validity of social science energy research presented
by the COVID-19 pandemic warrant special recognition. We now lay out a set of principles
for researchers to consider bringing to their practice for the duration of the pandemic period
to help bolster the validity of their work, and to ensure that future use of their findings and
recommendations is facilitated by requisite information to aid correct interpretation. Our
recommendations address data collection and the reporting of study conditions and context,
as well as considerations for study designs in order to ensure high validity of energy social
science research conducted during the pandemic. ​Given the large number of possible new
factors to be taken into account, we propose a ‘​core and consider​’ approach, allowing
researchers in the field to prioritise and justify the measures they want to take to account for
pandemic-related influences.
Where possible we have drawn on existing good practice guidance, which itself has
developed through conventional processes of cross-field engagement ​(Sovacool et al.,
2018)​. While we think the validity challenges we have raised here are important, we also
recognise that any responses to them must fit within existing research plans, budgets,
timelines, labour constraints, and the heightened need for affective care, including
researchers’ own wellbeing under personal stress-inducing conditions. Any response must
be both proportionate to the anticipated vulnerability to validity challenges of the kind set out
in the previous section.

4

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Ethical and data protection concerns, while not directly related to validity, must be borne
prominently in mind. Any changes to planned research should not, unless it is explicitly
justified, introduce collection of categories of data that are more sensitive than those that
were originally (or would ordinarily be) planned and/or approved. This means, for example,
that researchers should not (without careful thought and justification) begin to collect data on
physical or mental health unless this was intended anyway. Researchers should be mindful
of the extra burden to participants that introducing additional data collection could bring.
Extra sensitivity is called for on the part of researchers to the potential impacts of collecting
data on topics which may be more upsetting now than would ordinarily be the case.

Capture and report on extra relevant data
We suggest that additional and/or modified variables may need to be collected and reported
for studies carried out during or after the COVID-19 pandemic in order to account for the
impact of the pandemic on research validity. Already, researchers should – and many do –
report contextual factors of any study, and consider how these might impact the study
findings. ​Given the large number of possible new factors to be taken into account, we
suggest researchers take a ‘​core and consider​’ approach. Government restrictions and
relevant ​demographic variables at the level of the unit of analysis (e.g. individuals or
households) are ​core additional variables​ that should be reported and discussed. Other
factors should​ be ​considered​ for additional reporting depending on the precise topic of
research.
As in all studies, reporting of contextual factors should encompass date(s), place(s), and
duration of data collection. As a core concern, we suggest that this should now be
supplemented with information on pandemic-related national and local policies that were in
force at the time and place of data collection. This could include factors such as levels of
restriction of people’s freedom to move around outside the home, including self-imposed
precautionary behaviour, and the open/closed status of specific relevant services such as
schools and certain businesses. Significant changes in any of these measures during data
collection should also be reported. Researchers may consider it to be important for context
to give a sense of the severity of the pandemic (including health, social and economic
impacts, as relevant). We suggest using official government references for a description of
such policies where possible, in ways that are cognizant of their rapid temporal evolution.
A further core consideration is that local and national pandemic response measures affect
individuals and households in diverse ways; specifying the national policies during data
collection alone does not explain effects at the individual (or other analytical) level. More
specific effects can be captured by measuring application of and compliance with response
measures on the respective analytical level, and/or through collection of additional
demographic variables from which application could be inferred. The nature and detail of
measures will differ by locality, but could include whether someone is considered a ‘key
worker’ (and hence still regularly leaves the home during lockdown) or comes under a
high-risk category and has to observe stricter measures. Other standard demographic
variables may need amendment depending on the study aims. For instance, employment

5

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

status can include categories such as being placed on government-subsidised furlough,
working reduced hours, or working fully from home.
Other variables that might ordinarily have been judged as having limited importance, might
gain relevance. Impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic are thought to be exacerbating existing
inequalities in many societies, such as energy poverty issues ​(Mastropietro et al., 2020)​. A
key variable in many studies will likely be the financial situation of the individual, household,
or other unit of interest. Capturing information on recent (and risk of future) changes in
factors such as income (including transfer payments), changes in employment status,
increased receipt of benefits, or self-reported financial satisfaction may take on greater
importance. Unexpected deprivation from work income may have differential effects on
energy-related measures, relative to foreseeable prolonged unemployment periods; while
this is a consideration in samples at any time, it is likely to be especially common now.
Factors such as gender and ethnicity are also associated with differential impacts ​(Pareek et
al., 2020)​.
At the individual level, we anticipate that COVID-19 response measures will be associated
with important changes in behaviour, as well as cognitive, affective, and other social and
material dimensions ​(WHO Europe, 2020)​. Changes in energy-related behaviours and
decision-making due to changes in daily routines, work and mobility might be more apparent
and measurable, but changes in decisions and actions triggered by pandemic-related shifts
in ​energy-related beliefs, attitudes, emotions, and judgments may be just as important to
apprehend. For energy social science research focusing on the aforementioned dimensions
it is important to assess to what extent these variables are different from a “normal”
scenario and whether potential changes are durable or ephemeral.
Where additional measures are included, we suggest the use of standardized approaches to
the extent possible, such as widely used and validated scales employed in regular national
surveys. This will allow commensurability with pre-COVID-19 levels, while minimising
construct and instrument validity challenges and the resource-intensive efforts associated
with developing new measures (which require substantial testing to ensure scale reliability
and validity).
We show an initial mapping of variables as ‘core’ and ‘consider’ , in Table 1. We also provide
a checklist (see Appendix) suggesting where and how to report those additional variables
(and other considerations) in studies.

6

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Table 1. ​Core dimensions affected by the pandemic and measures to address them,
distinguished between core and consider variables.
Dimension

Related concepts

Research design
measures

Core or Consider (and
possible field(s) of
application)

Contextual:
Response
measures and
impacts

- Details of of national and
local pandemic-related
policies (e.g. measures of
lockdown at the time of data
collection)
- Changes in national and
local context (e.g. economic,
social, health)

- Add objective data from
media, governmental
sources, databases

Core for all research.

Demographic

- Level of restrictions
applying to individual
participant (eg. categories
such as key worker)
- Changes in household
situation (e.g., income,
employment, household
size)
- Differentiated effects (e.g.
gender, ethnicity)

-Collect and report
additional demographic
variables if needed
- Add subjective measure of
level of restrictions applying
to individual
- Adapt or add in questions
to capture self-reported
changes in household
situation
- Add control variables to
capture differentiated
effects

- Some likely core for all
research.

Behavioral

- Changes in
(energy-relevant) behaviours
and daily routines as a result
of COVID-19 restrictions.
- Changes in appliance use,
travel behaviours, energy
related purchase
behaviours, etc.
- Changes in other activities
such as caring, volunteering,
etc.

- Add standardized control
questions to assess
self-reported changes in
behaviour on the individual
level
- Add objective measures
such as energy
consumption and mobility
- Add qualitative measures
to assess changes in daily
routines on the individual
level
- Compare, if possible, data
with pre-pandemic data

Consider, especially for:
- Research on household,
work and mobility energy
consumption
- Research on energy
investment decisions

Cognitive and
Affective

- Perceived personal impact
of pandemic and measures
- Perceived personal
constraints vs. benefits due
to the pandemic and
measures
- Perceived uncertainty

- Add standardized control
questions to assess
subjective cognitive and
affective experiences of the
crisis on the individual level
- Compare, if possible, data
with pre-pandemic data

Consider, especially for:
- Research on
energy-related
judgements and decisions

7

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

- Changes in goal and
priorities
- Positive vs. negative affect
towards personal and
societal impacts of the
pandemic/measures
- Distinct emotions toward
personal and societal
impacts (Worried, hopeful,
sad, scared, guilty, stressed,
relaxed)
Social

- Changes in social
connection/identity/norms
- Perceived need for social
proximity
- Changes in energy burden,
energy technology
accessibility for underserved
community
- Changes in community
environmental impact or
climate change concerns
- Perceived fairness of social
distancing policy
- Changes in clean energy
industry & market

- Add standardised control
questions to assess
subjective changes in social
relationships of the crisis on
the individual and group
level
- Add qualitative measures
to assess changes in social
relationships on the group
level
- Compare, if possible, data
with pre-pandemic data

Consider, especially for:
- Research on social
networks and community
schemes and energy
behavior
-Research on energy
burden, technology
accessibility, and
affordability.
-Research on impacts on
underserved communities
(e.g, seniors, low-income,
minority, physical disable
people)

Material/
technical

- Material changes in
homes, workplaces
connected with the
pandemic (e.g. IT equipment
for home working, clothing)
- Digital changes such as
service subscriptions (e.g.
for video conferencing),
cyber security issues

- Add standardised
questions.

Consider, especially for:
- Research on household,
work and mobility energy
consumption
- Research on energy
investment decisions

8

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Consider implications for design, conduct and interpretation of
research
When thinking about the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the validity of
research findings, it is also important to consider how it might affect research design. In this
section, we briefly introduce issues relating to study design, sample selection and
recruitment, and data collection methodology, as well as implications for interpretation of
findings. Suggestions on ways to report such considerations are also provided in t​he
checklist (see Appendix).
Study design
It is likely that the pandemic will affect ​non-experimental research​ in different ways than it will
affect ​experimental research.​ Research focused on identifying associations is potentially
vulnerable to threats to internal and external validity. More specifically, if the pandemic
affects both the independent and dependent variables of interest, it can induce a spurious
correlation (confounding; ​Pearl, 2009)​. For instance, the pandemic might harm mental health
and​ increase energy usage, making it appear as though the variables are related when they
might not be, absent the pandemic. Researchers can address this concern in the way that is
typically recommended for addressing confounding: anticipate how the pandemic might
affect your variables of interest, measure this set of variables, and test whether they affect
the study’s primary results ​(Cook et al., 2008​; ​Shadish et al., 2008)​.
Experimental designs are still vulnerable to other pandemic-induced issues. Experiments, by
design, manipulate a specific variable of interest. For example, an experiment aiming to
improve people’s motivation to purchase or support renewable energy by means of
messaging strategies might focus on the harm caused by fossil fuels to increase people’s
fossil fuel risk perceptions. However, the salience of such risks, and therefore their
malleability, may be substantially decreased if people are preoccupied with other worries
related to COVID-19. Thus, researchers should consider such influences and, if possible,
take measures to ensure that they can indeed manipulate the causal variable of interest in
an effective and meaningful way. This is an empirical question for each manipulated
variable, but we advise that researchers attempt to anticipate such issues and design their
research accordingly.
A clear consequence of the pandemic is that it will make it more difficult to conduct betweenand within-country comparisons where COVID-19 impacts and restrictions are different. For
example, home energy usage will be higher in places where people are required to stay at
home. A useful rule of thumb is, wherever reasonably possible, researchers should
contextualize their research by considering how political and cultural circumstances might
affect their results ​(see section “​Capture and report on extra relevant data”​; Goldberg & van
der Linden, 2020)​. It would be even better to anticipate how such factors might affect results
and design the study to mitigate them, such as collecting a sample that is relatively
homogeneous in orders to stay at home, limit travel, or any variable that might substantively
affect the results. If substantial heterogeneity of restrictions is anticipated within a sample,
increasing sample size to maintain statistical power should be considered.

9

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Independent of study type, a powerful way to get a measure of stability and validity of
findings over time is to build ​longitudinal elements​ into the research design. First,
researchers could consider building replications into their research plan. This can be done
by intentionally splitting data collection over waves separated by a period of time. This allows
for comparison of the variables of interest over the two waves. Variables that remain
constant over this period are likely to be relatively less affected by pandemic response
measures than those which show variation. This approach lends itself particularly well to
collaborations between research groups, which could consider teaming up to add variables
of interest reciprocally onto the end of each other’s studies, saving on budget and potentially
introducing opportunities for new analyses. Please refer to the section “Capture and report
extra relevant data” for more information on variable dimensions to consider.
Another possible approach to demonstrate the robustness of research findings over time
could be through attempting to reproduce previous research findings -- either of related
research by the researcher themselves, or of previously well-reproduced effects. The extent
to which previous findings are reproduced, or change, could help ‘calibrate’ the more recent
research and give some insight into whether or not the domain of interest is more or less
impacted by the pandemic and the corresponding response (also accepting that failure to
reproduce findings is not an unusual occurrence even under normal circumstances ​(Open
Science Collaboration, 2015)​.
Data collection methodology
Data collection with a given research method could produce different findings now compared
to before pandemic-related restriction measures were put into place. For example, research
conducted online could be more heavily influenced by distracting factors of the participant’s
environment. Where people are confined to their homes, completing a survey or conducting
an interview in a standardized way might be more difficult than before. This consideration is
especially important, since persisting restrictions of contact might result in a shift towards
more research being conducted online versus in person. It is thus recommended ​to e
​ xplore
the possibility of using more than one method to investigate the same research question,
and to record potential limitations specific to a data collection method to account for their
influence on the validity of the findings​.​ This is another area where collaboration between
research groups with complementary interests could bring significant additional value by
allowing testing of the same research question through different approaches and in different
settings (​Klein et al., 2018​; ​Landy et al., 2020​; ​Uhlmann et al., 2019)​.
Interpreting findings and making recommendations
In the previous subsection we already highlighted the importance of giving due consideration
to contextual factors. In respect of COVID-19, this means paying particular attention to the
extent to which pandemic response measures (and changes in them across time and the
sample) might have contributed to the observation of particular results. If possible,
researchers should attempt to communicate and justify their best estimate as to the impact
such factors could have had on findings. For example, if little systematic difference is
observed in an outcome variable across groups who were substantially differently impacted
by pandemic response measures, this could be offered in support of a case that the impact

10

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

of COVID-19 of that particular variable could be small. As in many areas of research,
transparency is likely to be key in allowing users to make informed judgements of their own.
Any recommendations for policy, practice, or further research should be similarly transparent
and include appropriate caveats on the context of the findings to which they relate.

Opportunities for research
Employing the principles set out above presents a number of opportunities that go beyond
simply mitigating threats to validity, and could help generate new insights or improve
research practice in general. The introduction of longitudinal elements can provide important
insights on stable and dynamic determinants of energy-relevant outcomes, especially if
combined with new contextual, behavioural, and other data that may not previously have
been collected. Moreover, where collected data suggests that different groups of people
have been (or will be) systematically exposed to different conditions as a result of the
pandemic, natural experiments could be possible. Natural experiments provide a powerful
opportunity to investigate causal associations which may otherwise be difficult or impossible
to control for (for an example see: ​M. Goldberg et al., 2020)​. These fleeting windows of
opportunity can provide novel research opportunities and should be considered by energy
researchers. The same window of opportunity will likely extend to policy interventions
introduced in the wake of the pandemic to aid economic recovery.
We already highlighted the possible benefits that could accrue from collaboration with other
groups to facilitate replication and support validity, but there is also a wider convergence
research opportunity in energy social studies during and after COVID-19. Convergence
research is a way of addressing complex problems through highly integrated interdisciplinary
approaches ​(Sui & Coleman, 2019)​. Given the range and scale of current and anticipated
impacts of the pandemic, such an approach is likely to be especially valuable, and
opportunities to build inter- and transdisciplinary collaborations should be proactively sought.
Such collaboration may also provide a route to adding in important contextual data, for
example through matching datasets.
Finally, we suggest that responding to validity challenges presented by the COVID-19 crisis
is an opportunity for the energy research field to step up and embrace practices around
transparency and reproducibility that are now seen as standard practice in other areas of
research. For reasons likely connected with the multidisciplinary and applied nature of most
energy research, tools such as reporting guidelines and pre-registration of analysis plans are
still rarely employed ​(Huebner & Fell, 2020)​. It is possible that the particularly pressing need
to demonstrate validity at present will result in familiarity with, and adoption of, tools that
subsequently become standard practice for an increasing number of energy researchers,
potentially enhancing the overall validity of research in the field.

Body of knowledge validity
In much of the social sciences, knowledge on the most severe and pressing problems is
often difficult to create and therefore constitutes a smaller proportion of thematic scholarship

11

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

than its implications merit. The flip side of this is that ‘low-hanging fruits’ can suffer from
excessive coverage. This impacts the ‘body of knowledge’ validity, which we define as the
representativeness of research in a field relative to the real-world problems the field is
concerned with (​Worren et al., 2002)​. Energy social science research, with its diverse
methodologies, spatial and scalar foci, and associated differences of requisite time and
effort, is no stranger to these tendencies. Consider, for instance, the wealth of scholarship
on local and urban energy initiatives in the UK, home to many energy research scholars,
versus the relatively thin body of work on energy practices in rural Sub-Saharan Africa. Both
issues merit attention and are generative for conceptual insight, but the latter affects over a
billion people, many of whom experience relatively severe degrees of energy poverty, and
yet hardly registers in terms of volume in relevant energy social science research. We detect
a risk that curtailment of field-based empirical research, especially in regions that face
severe energy challenges and may be heavily impacted by the epidemic, will exacerbate
existing biases in representation in terms of volume (more desk study over ethnographic
research than usual), methodology (more conceptual work over evidence-based research)
and regional coverage (less pandemic-impacted areas over more pandemic-impacted
areas).
To some extent, this is a perennial problem in any interdisciplinary or transdisciplinary field
of study: ethnographic work in challenging regions with marginalised populations takes time
and the classics on such topics that have accumulated over the years (in quite large
numbers) consequently receive considerable attention. Yet research today is heavily
metricised, and most scholars with access to most global peer-reviewed scholarship are
based in Global North institutions and typically urban contexts, often with pressure to publish
frequently. This leads to the double jeopardy of being pressed for time to focus on short-term
impact, and of being far more likely to access highly-cited and high-volume segments of the
scholarship one engages with. Since the pace of research outputs has escalated, few
scholars are positioned to navigate a body of knowledge with adequate care to balance its
in-built biases of representation.
Already, we see moves to run online surveys and study social perceptions; even with all the
appropriate caveats and the best of informed intentions, these contribute to a likely
disbalance by volume of the sort of concerns that will get platformed in energy research
journals in the short- to medium-term. How much coverage of marginalised, hard-to-access
concerns - such as migrants cast adrift with little energy access, subsistence farmers with
crop loss and inability to pay for fuel costs - will be lost and substituted by low-hanging fruit?
Such exacerbation of an existing bias can cloud future accounts and understandings of the
true effects of a pandemic on the subject of energy research, i.e., on the global lived
experience of energy. But it is not inevitable - it is an artefact of choices we make as an
epistemic community. Informed by recognition of likely biases, our choices (and those of
funders, who can prioritise research on marginalised research areas) can embody normative
commitment to more even coverage based on relevance to real-world problems. We can
productively draw on approaches such as convergence research highlighted above. This
drive captures the essence of our contribution, which is to work toward a reflexive
understanding of our role as a scholarly community at this time of crisis and opportunity.

12

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Conclusion
In this paper we have set out what we see as important challenges to the validity -- internal,
external, and of other forms -- of social research in energy associated with the COVID-19
pandemic and measures put in place to control it. We have suggested a number of principles
we think researchers should consider applying to give themselves and the users of their
work confidence that the findings and recommendations they present will still be valid in the
years to come. These focus mainly on the collecting and reporting of additional contextual
data, and the review of research design elements to ensure they are as robust as possible to
pandemic-related impacts.
We think that these principles can be employed with relatively minimal impact on resources
and timescales required for research. They even present some opportunities both to enrich
insight into social aspects of energy, and draw attention to measures to improve research
transparency that are still as-yet under-used in the energy field. However, we also need to
be mindful that due to limits on the kind of research approaches that can be employed during
the pandemic, there are likely to be important gaps in the knowledge generated during this
period. We all hope that the period of direct applicability of this paper will be as short as
possible, and that measures to control the spread of COVID-19 will soon no longer be
needed. Nonetheless, we also think that the considerations we raise here have enduring
relevance for energy social science in general, and the potential to contribute to more
widespread use of transparent, contextually aware and valid research practices in the
long-term.

Acknowledgements
While this work did not receive any dedicated funding in its own right, the individual authors
gratefully acknowledge funding as follows. Michael Fell: UK Research and Innovation
through the Centre for Research into Energy Demand Solutions (EP/R 035288/1) and the
Energy Revolution Research Consortium (EP/S031863/1). Chien-fei Chen: the Engineering
Research Center Program of the U.S. National Science Foundation ( NSF) and the
Department of Energy under NSF award EEC-1041877 and the CURENT Industry
Partnership Program. Gesche Huebner: UK Research and Innovation through the Centre for
Research into Energy Demand Solutions (EP/R 035288/1). Siddharth Sareen: Trond Mohn
Foundation project ‘European cities as actors in climate and energy transformation’. Ulf J. J.
Hahnel: SCCER CREST (Swiss Competence Center for Energy Research), supported by
the Swiss Innovation Agency (Innosuisse). The authors declare no competing interests.

13

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Author contributions
All the authors contributed to the development of the ideas and principles set out in the
paper, and to writing it. Author names are listed alphabetically except in the case of Michael
Fell, Ulf Hahnel, and Laura Pagel, who conceived the idea for the paper and coordinated the
overall writing process.

14

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Appendix
Table 2: Checklist of items to report or consider reporting in relation to COVID-19 pandemic
validity challenges.
Checklist item

Section

Example

Methods

“At the time of data collection, public movement in the
UK was severely restricted by government measures
to combat the COVID-19 pandemic. People were
instructed to stay at home at all times, except for
doing essential shopping, one period of daily exercise,
working outside the home if work at home was
impossible, and providing support to vulnerable
people. All schools, hospitality venues and
non-essential shops were closed.”

Results

“In our sample, 65% of participants reported staying at
home at all times except for when conducting
essential shopping and exercise. A further 25% also
reported leaving home to undertake work or
volunteering.10% of the sample reported staying at
home at all times.”

Research design

Methods

“In response to the rapidly changing circumstances
connected with the response to the COVID-19
pandemic, we introduced a longitudinal element to our
data collection. The survey was administered over two
waves separated by two months, allowing us to check
whether any of the key independent variables
changed over this time, and whether this was
associated with any change in the outcome.”

Sample

Methods

“We anticipated that childcare responsibilities could
play a role in [variable of interest]. We therefore
selected to draw our sample for [region A], where
schools were open as normal.”

Data collected (see Table 1 for
suggested dimensions)

Methods

“In addition to employment status, we also collected
data on the extent to which those in employment were
working from home.”

Findings

Discussion

“We found a strong association between altruism and
stated willingness to participate over both waves of
the study. However, the association was weaker in the
second wave, which, combined with the change in
reported application of COVID-19 response measures
(while other variables remained stable), suggests that
conditions surrounding the COVID-19 pandemic could
have affected this finding.”

Recommendations

Conclusion

“Our findings suggest that policymakers should
prioritise energy saving messaging framed in terms of

Report:
Main details of COVID-19
response measures in action at the
time/place of data collection, at
least including: level of freedom to
move around in public; degree to
which schools and businesses are
open.
Consider reporting:
How COVID-19 restrictions are
applying to individual participants.

Consider tailoring of the following
aspects of the research:

Consider possible implications for:

15

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

benefits to the local environment. However, our
participants reported spending more time in their local
area as a result of COVID-19 control measures which
could have influenced our result. We therefore
recommend that the effectiveness of such messaging
be carefully monitored.”

16

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

References
Ballew, M., Bergquist, P., Goldberg, M., Gustafson, A., Kotcher, J., Marlon, J., Roess, A.,
Maibach, E., & Leiserowitz, A. (2020). ​Americans’ Risk Perceptions and Emotional
Responses to COVID-19 – April 2020.​ Yale University and George Mason University.
New Haven, CT: yale program on Climate Change Communication,.
Cook, T. D., Shadish, W. R., & Wong, V. C. (2008). Three conditions under which
experiments and observational studies produce comparable causal estimates: New
findings from within-study comparisons. ​Journal of Policy Analysis and Management:
The Journal of the Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management​, ​27(​ 4),
724–750.
Funtowicz, S. O., & Ravetz, J. R. (1994). Uncertainty, complexity and post-normal science.
Environmental Toxicology and Chemistry: An International Journal​, ​13(​ 12),
1881–1885.
Goldberg, M., Gustafson, A., Maibach, E., Ballew, M. T., Bergquist, P., Kotcher, J., Marlon,
J. R., Rosenthal, S., & Leiserowitz, A. (2020). ​Mask-wearing increases after a
government recommendation: A natural experiment in the US during the COVID-19
pandemic.​ https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/uc8nz
Goldberg, M. H., & van der Linden, S. (2020). The Importance of Heterogeneity in
Large-Scale Replications. ​Journal of Social and Political Psychology​, ​8(​ 1), 25–29.
Healy, S. (1999). Extended peer communities and the ascendance of post-normal politics.
Futures​, ​31​(7), 655–669.
Huebner, G., & Fell, M. (2020). ​TReQ Tools: How to Improve Transparency, Reproducibility
and Quality in Energy Research.​ https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.11663466.v1
IEA. (2020). ​Global Energy Review 2020​. IEA. Retrieved from
https://www.iea.org/reports/global-energy-review-2020

17

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Klein, R. A., Vianello, M., Hasselman, F., Adams, B. G., Adams Jr, R. B., Alper, S., Aveyard,
M., Axt, J. R., Babalola, M. T., & Bahník, Š. (2018). Many Labs 2: Investigating
variation in replicability across samples and settings. ​Advances in Methods and
Practices in Psychological Science​, 1
​ ​(4), 443–490.
Landy, J. F., Jia, M. L., Ding, I. L., Viganola, D., Tierney, W., Dreber, A., Johannesson, M.,
Pfeiffer, T., Ebersole, C. R., & Gronau, Q. F. (2020). Crowdsourcing hypothesis tests:
Making transparent how design choices shape research results. ​Psychological
Bulletin​.
Lucas, J. W. (2003). Theory-Testing, Generalization, and the Problem of External Validity.
Sociological Theory​, ​21​(3), 236–253. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9558.00187
Mastropietro, P., Rodilla, P., & Batlle, C. (2020). ​Measures to tackle the Covid-19 outbreak
impact on energy poverty: Preliminary analysis based on the Italian and Spanish
experiences​.
https://fsr.eui.eu/measures-to-tackle-the-covid-19-outbreak-impact-on-energy-poverty
/
MEINRENKEN, C. J., MODI, V., MCKEOWN, K. R., & CULLIGAN, P. J. (2020, April 21).
New Data Suggest COVID-19 Is Shifting the Burden of Energy Costs to Households​.
Retrieved from
https://blogs.ei.columbia.edu/2020/04/21/covid-19-energy-costs-households/
OECD. (2020). ​Coronavirus (COVID-19) From pandemic to recovery: Local employment and
economic development​ (Tackling Coronavirus (COVID-19), Contributing to a Global
Effort). OECD. Retrieved from
https://read.oecd-ilibrary.org/view/?ref=130_130810-m60ml0s4wf&title=From-pande
mic-to-recovery-Local-employment-and-economic-development
Open Science Collaboration. (2015). Estimating the reproducibility of psychological science.
Science​, ​349(​ 6251), aac4716.

18

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

Pareek, M., Bangash, M. N., Pareek, N., Pan, D., Sze, S., Minhas, J. S., Hanif, W., & Khunti,
K. (2020). Ethnicity and COVID-19: An urgent public health research priority. ​The
Lancet​.
Pearl, J. (2009). ​Causality.​ Cambridge university press.
Qiu, J., Shen, B., Zhao, M., Wang, Z., Xie, B., & Xu, Y. (2020). A nationwide survey of
psychological distress among Chinese people in the COVID-19 epidemic:
Implications and policy recommendations. ​General Psychiatry,​ ​33(​ 2).
Sareen, S., Thomson, H., Herrero, S. T., Gouveia, J. P., Lippert, I., & Lis, A. (2020).
European energy poverty metrics: Scales, prospects and limits. ​Global Transitions​, ​2​,
26–36.
Shadish, W. R., Clark, M. H., & Steiner, P. M. (2008). Can nonrandomized experiments yield
accurate answers? A randomized experiment comparing random and nonrandom
assignments. ​Journal of the American Statistical Association,​ ​103​(484), 1334–1344.
Shadish, W. R., Cook, T. D., & Campbell, D. T. (2002). ​Experimental and quasi-experimental
designs for generalized causal inference/William R. Shedish, Thomas D. Cook,
Donald T. Campbell.​ Boston: Houghton Mifflin,.
Slack, M. K., & Draugalis, J. R., Jr. (2001). Establishing the internal and external validity of
experimental studies. ​American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy,​ ​58(​ 22),
2173–2181. https://doi.org/10.1093/ajhp/58.22.2173
Sovacool, B. K., Axsen, J., & Sorrell, S. (2018). Promoting novelty, rigor, and style in energy
social science: Towards codes of practice for appropriate methods and research
design. ​Energy Research & Social Science,​ ​45,​ 12–42.
Sui, D., & Coleman, J. (2019). Convergence Research in the Age of Big Data: Team
Science, Institutional Strategies, and Beyond. ​Merrill Series on The Research
Mission of Public Universities​, 23–35.
Uhlmann, E. L., Ebersole, C. R., Chartier, C. R., Errington, T. M., Kidwell, M. C., Lai, C. K.,

19

Validity of energy social research during and after COVID-19 (preprint 6 May 2020)

McCarthy, R. J., Riegelman, A., Silberzahn, R., & Nosek, B. A. (2019). Scientific
utopia III: Crowdsourcing science. ​Perspectives on Psychological Science​, ​14(​ 5),
711–733.
WHO Europe. (2020). ​Survey tool and guidance: Behavioural insights on COVID-19​. WHO.
Worren, N. A., Moore, K., & Elliott, R. (2002). When theories become tools: Toward a
framework for pragmatic validity. ​Human Relations,​ ​55​(10), 1227–1250.
https://doi.org/10.1177/a028082

20

