"x"
"1" "How  the  ‘ plates ’  of a health system  can shift , chang e  and adjust during economic recession s . A qualitative interview study of public and private health providers in  Brazil’s  São Paulo and  Maranhão  states"
"2" "Giuliano Russo ,  Maria Luiza Levi ,  Maria  Teresa Seabra  Soares de Britto e Alves ,  Bruno  Luciano  Carneiro  Alves de Oliveira ,  Ruth Helena de Sou z a Britto  Ferreira de Carvalho   3 ,  Lucas  Andrietta , Jonathan Fili p pon 1 ,   Mário  Scheffer   5"
"3" "10th July 2020"
"4" "Abstract"
"5" "Background .   E conomic  recessions   carry an impact on population health and access to  care ; l ess is known on how health systems adapt to  the  conditions  brought by  a  downturn. This  particularly  matters  now that   the COVID-19 epidemic is putting  health systems under stress. Brazil is one of the  world’s  most affected  countries , and its health system  was  already  living the aftermath of  the 2015 recession."
"6" "Methods .   Between  2018  and  2019  we conducted 46 semi-structured interviews with health practitioners, managers and policy-makers to explore the impact of the 2015 recession on public and private providers  in  prosperous  (São Paulo) and  impoverished  ( Maranhão ) states in  Brazil .  T hematic analysis  was  employed to identify  drivers and consequences   of  system adaptation and coping strategies .   Nvivo  software was used to aid  data collection and  analysis. We followed the  Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research to  provide an account of  the findings."
"7" "Results .   We found  the concept of ‘health sector crisis’  to be   politically charged among  healthcare providers in  São Paulo  and  Maranhão .  Contrary to expectations, the public sector  was reported to have   found ways to compensate for  diminishing   federal  funding ,  having   outsourced  services and  adopted  flexible – if insecure – working  arrangements .  Following  a   drop   in   employment and  health plans, private health insurance companies streamline d  their offer, at times at the expenses of coverage. Low-cost walk-in clinics were hit hard by the recession ,  but  also  credited  for having moved  to cater for higher-income customers in  Maranhão ."
"8" "Conclusions .  The  ‘ plates ’   of  a  health system  may  shift and adjust   in  unexpected  ways  in response to recession s , and some of  the se  changes  might  outlast the  crisis . As  low-income countries  enter post-COVID  recession s , it will be important to monitor  the  adjustments   taking place  in health systems,  to ensure that past gains in access to care and job security are not eroded."
"9" "Key words :  Brazil and health services; health systems in LMICs; economic recession and health; COVID-19 and health systems ."
"10" "Introduction and background"
"11" "It is well - established in the international literature that economic recessions can  severely  impact population health by  increasing  poverty and   the burden of  the  diseases associated with scarcity   [1] .  Losing   the  job   during a crisis  is believed  to play a role, as  rising unemployment has been linked to increase in suicides  [2] , deterioration of mental health  [3]  and  overall  healthcare utilization  [4] .  Recent evidence  from the Great Depression in Europe  [5]   shows that economic recessions carry long-lasting effects health systems , as health and social care spending are squeezed to balance budgets  at the time when  they are needed the most. Many scholars have in fact pointed out that  government  policy responses would have more profound effects on health systems than the economic recession itself  [6] , as  in the past  shrinking  funding  and  rationing  measures   pushed health systems to the brink of collapse in recession-hit countries like  Greece  [7] , Ireland  [8] , Spain  [9]  or Portugal   [10] ."
"12" "However, l ess is  known on what happens to health systems during the testing times of an economic recession, and how their key institutions and providers adjust to austerity  or react to  attempts to re- structure  services .   The nascent literature  on post-conflict and fragile countries  [11]   suggests that the ‘ plates’  of a health system do not disintegrate under stress  [12] , but rather shift to occupy the space left by old  actors  and  lack of regulation   [13] . These adjustments  to the new conditions  at times  penalize  the weakest, and often outlast the crisis  [14] ."
"13" "After over a decade of sustained growth,  between 2014 and 2016  an  economic recession  hit Brazil hard,  in connection to   the  slump  in  the  world  demand for  export commodities and  to  the country’s  own  political instability  [15] .  Mortality and morbidity increased  in the country  during that recession, mostly on the back of rising unemployment  [16] . As a policy response,  t he right-wing government introduced economic measures  as part of its  programme  to  reduce public spending (the so-called Constitutional Amendment n. 95 - EC95/2016),  hitting  particularly   hard  the health sector  [17] ."
"14" "Brazil’s healthcare system comprises a publicly funded  U nified   H ealth  S ystem  (SUS , in its Portuguese acronym ), comprehensive and free at the point of delivery, and a privately financed health insurance system ( planos  de  sa ú de , or  healthcare plans ) ,  providing access to private services  to  its  subscribers .  Established in 1990, the SUS is  widely  credited to have  improved the health of Brazilian s  by  implementing a national primary care programme  [18]  and  making a wide range of services available and affordable  to the  country ’s large and diverse population   [19] . Nonetheless, after 30 years the SUS is marred by health inequalities across its diverse states, insufficient funding, and unclear private sector-public sector collaborations   [20] .  I n  the last decades ,   SUS policies intended to improve access , have  increased number of doctors  as well as  care structures, but were not able change the concentration of more complex care in a limited number of cities   [21,22] ."
"15" "Social Health Organizations (OSS) are private entities providing health services within SUS . This form of public-private partnership was introduced as part of the New Public Management reforms, with the objective of providing more  administrative flexibility  for the health sector, and allow the public sector to specialise on functions of control , stewardship  and regulation, rather than  on  direct provision of services  [23] .  Despite  their  ubiquity  in all Brazil’s states, no  firm  evidence exist of their effectiveness and efficiency in comparison to direct  public  provision of services  [24] ."
"16" "Private funds account for more than half  (54%)  of total health spending, including out-of-pocket  medicines  and private insurance  premiums   [25] .  Private providers fill  several  sectors of healthcare provision, from medical practices to hospitals and laboratories, providing services to  both  healthcare plans and  SUS . Access to such private services is mostly granted through health insurance  plans, often connected with employment; 24.2% of Brazil’s population owned a private health insurance plan  in 2018   [26] . In the last 20 years, low-cost walk-in clinics  ( Clínicas   Populares , or People’s Clinics) have  started to provide out-of-pocket private services, mostly of outpatient nature  [27,28] .  T hese People’s Clinics represent an alternative for those who  cannot afford   a  private health plan,  aspire at seeing a specialist,  but want to avoid SUS ’ waiting lists   [29] .  D espite their growth   in most of Brazil’s capital cities,  these low-cost clinics  have attracted criticism for adopting a mercantilist approach to provision of  care ,  and for offering poor quality services disconnected from any healthcare reference system  [30] ."
"17" "Within the country,  São Paulo and  Maranhão   represent  two extremes  with  regards of  economic development and  regional health inequalities.   São Paulo state has one of the country’s highest per capita income ,   and 38%   of its population is covered by private health schemes.  At US$ 650,  the state’s  public  health  expenditure s  per capita   are  also among   the highest . In  Maranhão , the  per capita income is   one third of S ão  Paulo’s , public health expenditure per capita is US$407, and only  7% of the   population  is covered by private health plans  [26] ."
"18" "The recent COVID-19 pandemic has also hit Brazil hard, with the country recording the world’s second largest number of infections and deaths  [31] .  Before the epidemic t here  were   already  signs that Brazil’s health system  was  buckling under the austerity measures introduced in the aftermath of the recession, and regional health disparities  were   widening  between rich and poor states  [32] .   It is unclear how an already weakened system will face the burden of the epidemic,  or what  the repercussions  will be  of the  ensuing  economic recession."
"19" "We set out to explore  the changes  in provision of public and private services  that took place  in S ã o Paulo and  Maranhão   as  response to the 2014-2016 economic crisis. Drawing from  key  informants’  perceptions, we aim  to  uncover how the  d ifferent  components  of Brazil’s health system – the  ‘ plates ’   – changed and adjusted in response to the pressures brought in by the recession.  I t is hoped the  results from this study   will  offer an insight  on  how health system s   may  react  and cope  to the COVID-19 crisis,  and form  an evidence  base  for  policies  to  mitigate the effects in Brazil and  other low-and middle-income countries ."
"20" "M aterials and m ethods"
"21" "The methodological approach"
"22" "We used qualitative semi-structured interviews with key informants  from  São Paulo and  Maranhão  states to explore the reactions of public and private health players to the 2015 economic recession. This qualitative investigation  is  part of a wider study on the effects of the economic crisis on Brazil’s health system and medical workforce  [33] ,  and the two states were selected in representation of high- and low-income settings in the country."
"23" "We drew from the literature on economic recessions, health systems and human resources for health  [34] , as well as from our  project’s  conceptualization  of the links between crises and health systems  to identify relevant questions   [26] . Our starting hypotheses were that the macro effects of  a recession   transmit  to health sector s  via  austerity measures, impacts on the demand for services , and changes in the labour market ; these are felt unevenly across  the  different parts of a  health  system ,  as they are mediated by pre-existing conditions (poverty and epidemiological profile) ,  as well as  role and degree of development of the private sector.  The  theoretical  aspects   of our assumption s   are  published elsewhere   [26] ."
"24" "The interview guide comprised sections  on: (a) broad challenges for the health system and labour market; (b) the impact on the demand for health services; (c) the key health policies introduced in response to the crisis as well as the so-called austerity measures; (d) the strategies the public and private players adopted to cope with the challenges posed by the recession, and; (e) the impact of the recession on the livelihoods and professions of those interviewed. It was first drafted during a research workshop of the wider project in June 2018, refined through iterative meetings in the following months, and piloted in São Luís do  Maranhão  in December 2018 (see the Interview Guide  in  the supplementary material )."
"25" "The 21 items checklist from the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research  (SRQR)  was used to inform the qualitative approach of the research and report on the  interview  findings  [35] .   Ethic al  approvals were obtained from the Research Ethics Committees of the Federal University of  Maranhão  (CEP UFMA 3.051.875), and of the Faculty of Medicine  of the  University of São Paulo (C EP FMUSP 3.136.269 )."
"26" "Data collection"
"27" "To capture  different views of  the recession’s effects in São Paulo and  Maranhão  states, a sampling framework was elaborated to identify key informants among health managers, finance officers, physicians and other health workers. These professional profiles were stratified by public and private sector, as well as capital cities Vs hinterland  locations (Table 1) . Lists of suitable representatives  for the two states were drawn  for each professional category among policy-makers and health practitioners of the public health system, Social Health Organisations,  p rivate hospitals,  p rivate health  i nsurance companies, and People’s Clinics in the two states (Table 1). At least three attempts were conducted to contact and set up interviews with the identified informants."
"28" "Table  1 : List of people interviewed by profession and state"
"29" "Professional category"
"30" "States"
"31" "Total"
"32" "São Paulo"
"33" "Maranhão"
"34" "Public"
"35" "Private"
"36" "Public"
"37" "Private"
"38" "Public health manager"
"39" "4"
"40" "-"
"41" "3"
"42" "-"
"43" "7"
"44" "Public finance officer"
"45" "2"
"46" "-"
"47" "2"
"48" "-"
"49" "4"
"50" "Health manager"
"51" "3"
"52" "6"
"53" "4"
"54" "4"
"55" "1 7"
"56" "Physicians"
"57" "4"
"58" "3"
"59" "3"
"60" "3"
"61" "1 3"
"62" "Other health professionals"
"63" "2"
"64" "-"
"65" "2"
"66" "1"
"67" "5"
"68" "Total"
"69" "15"
"70" "9"
"71" "1 4"
"72" "8"
"73" "4 6"
"74" "A total of 46 informants were interviewed in São Paulo and  Maranhão  states between December 2018 and December 2019. The interviews were conducted by two teams of four local researchers, integrated by a UK researcher for the pilot and subsequent interviews in São Luís do  Maranhão . The researchers visited the informants in their place of work (hospitals, clinics of offices) upon telephone appointment. All the interviewees were explained the objectives of the research beforehand and signed an informed consent form. The interviews lasted approximately 1 hour (minimum 53 minutes, maximum 1.35 hour)."
"75" "Data analysis"
"76" "All the interviews were recorded, transcribed and analysed with the support of NVivo software version 10   [36] . Content analysis was used to identify emerging themes and categories  [37] . A workshop was organised in São Paulo in June 2018 to train the researchers and data collectors in qualitative analysis and on the use of the NVivo software. A preliminary coding tree (or tree map) was drafted drawing from the interview guide and the first interviews, and each team proceeded to add themes and case nodes as they emerged from the interviews in the two states  [38]  ( Figure 1 )."
"77" "The coding tree comprised eight broad nodes,  ranging  from the interviewee’s reflections on the recent health sector’s developments at the country and state level, to the demand for health services, and supply-side bottlenecks during the recession. Specific nodes were created to retrieve and analyse the informants’ perceptions on the changes and coping strategies adopted by the public and private providers. Quotes were grouped by  nodes  and  sources , leading to  the  identification of categories, patterns and themes.  Findings were triangulated across different categories of informants and sources of information  [39] .  Deviant cases were examined to test and corroborate specific interpretations   [38] . In a number of cases, indigenous concepts were identified in the transcripts and contributed to the definition of codes to investigate.   All the interviews were coded in Portuguese; relevant quotes and passages were then translated into English."
"78" "Results"
"79" "In this section we  first  present  the interviews  findings  on   how the economic  crisis   is  perceived  by different actors  in  Maranhão  and São Paulo , followed by  the changes  and coping strategies  observed by  our informants in the public and private sectors as a response to the crisis ."
"80" "Figure  1 : Coding tree (tree map) for thematic analysis of the interviews"
"81" "Conflicting perceptions of crisis"
"82" "Although  it was  acknowledged  that the country had recently been affected by  an economic recession ,  our informants often struggled to  give a specific definition for  the  term ‘crisis’ : D ifferent perceptions  instead  emerged  of what  the   recession   represented  in the two states in relation to: (a) the  interpretation  of ‘crisis’  and of its determinants ; (b) its reverberations in the health sector, and; (c) its intensity, timing and specific effects for the health sector.  We offer below  a typology of   the  interpretations   of ‘crisis’  given by our interviewees ."
"83" "Crisis as a predominantly economic phenomenon.  Many interviewees  identified  the word ‘crisis’ as  an  economic recession or slowdown, exemplified in terms of the poorest sections of the population  “ having less money in their pockets ” ,  “ people losing their employment and being pushed into poverty ”  or not being able to  “ afford food, transport or basic health services ” .  Such phenomenon was  often  linked to  the austerity measures   adopted by the government during such period,  and to their impact on  provision of public services,  budget cuts , closure of  hospitals  and expenditure freezes for the public sector."
"84" "Some informants explicitly referred to the  SUS crisis, with reference to the   pre-existing  shortage of resources and political support  for the public system .  The  public healthcare  system   was also seen as having  been  unfairly  singled out  for cuts, and  not  to enjoy the support of the current government  [32,40]"
"85" "“…this is how we live here, in perennial crisis! And maybe the health sector is not even being affected as much as other sectors, as this is a social sector, like the education sector; money will always be found for such areas”.  ( Policy-maker from MA-00 4)"
"86" "Crisis as a political phenomenon. For the last decade, the country and the individual states have gone through years of political instability,  with  intensification of diverse popular protests with multiple agendas  and  healthcare demands   [41] . After  thirt een  years of left-wing government, the most recent period represent s  a  marked  shift  to the right of the political centre , culminat ed  in a shady impeachment process ,  and  in  the election of Bolsonaro in 2018   [42] . When prompted with the word  'crisis', some informants  directly  referred to the consequences of  such  political instability  or  to some  controversial  health financing policies  taken these years  [43] ,  better  known as austerity measures ;"
"87" "Politicization of  the   term ‘ crisis ’ .   Depending on their political affiliation,  some of  our informants spoke of the current  crisis  as  “ inherited from past  policies or  management ” . Since the impeachment of Brazil’s last president, every aspect of the public life in Brazil  is considered to have   been  politicised  and  attributed to the shortcomings of either the current  right-wing  or past left-wing governments  – what was called  as the  “polarization of the Brazilian society ”  in our interviews.   In  Maranhão ,  the word  ‘crisis’ was also associated with the  State’s old  political leadership ,  in power for the last 30 years , and only recently voted out in the aftermath of multiple scandals  [44] ."
"88" "The i mpact  of economic recession  on SUS"
"89" "For most of our informants, the impact of the recession was  particularly  visible on SUS, because  of : (a) the cuts in public spending; (b) the impact on the poorer section of the population, traditionally SUS’ main customers; (c)  the changes in case-mix of patients, now affected by diseases linked to poverty and unemployment; (d)  the increasing use of private  Social  Health Organisations (O S S, in its Brazilian acronym , )  reportedly  for  the flexibility offered to hire and fire , and; ( e ) the new trend of contracting health personnel in the public service in increasingly casual employment."
"90" "There were few doubts for our informants that the federal funding was slashed in both states in connection to the EC95 decree introduced in 2016. However,  some  managers suggested that decentralised state and municipal funds were used to fill the financing gaps for social sectors such as education and health. Such findings were triangulated across different sources and supported by our analysis of the evolution of health financing between 20 10  and 2018  [26] ."
"91" "“We lost the federal funds, but we managed to compensate – not replace at 100%, but somehow compensate... with the local revenues, and I would add with [savings from] better management of public resources” (Public manager MA 001)"
"92" "The impact of the recession seemed to have been particularly visible among SUS’ traditional patients, the changing case-mix of patients seen in public hospitals, and the prevalence of the poverty-related diseases treated particularly in A&E departments. While malnutrition, intestinal worms, accidental burns from use of open fires, and mental health cases were reported to have been more frequent in SUS facilities, the latter in connection to loss of employment."
"93" "[...] so this is like planning the budget for your own household; when you lose your job or get your salary halved because of the crisis, the first thing you cut down is the supplementary care and the (private) health insurance. And this spills on the (financing of) public health, as even those who have health insurance stop seeking private services as they cannot afford (the co-payments), and come and seek care here in the public service, which implies increasing the demand for us… (Public Finance Manager, MA 003)"
"94" "“ […]  the appearance of our waiting room in SUS has changed. These days you get there the people [who can afford] three meals a day. The tone of the complaints to our Ombudsman service has changed ;  it’s visible that these are now written by people with a higher education level”.  ( O S S Public sector manager, São Paulo 001 )"
"95" "Many interviewees reported that SUS is, in these days, overwhelmed by patients who initially sought outpatient care and medical tests in low-cost private clinics in the private sector, only to be re-directed to public hospitals in case their treatment required hospitalisation or complex tests."
"96" "Provision of care in SUS was also reported to have changed substantially to cut costs and increase the role of the private sector during the recession. Outsourcing services to private social health organisations – OSS – for individual hospitals, health trusts, or networks of health facilities for whole geographical areas, seem to have become the norm; these are seen as more  flexible  and administratively leaner than the traditional public sector management options, relieving public managers of the workload and responsibilities of direct management."
"97" "“ [...]  so the public management units are losing their personnel, and trying to find less staff-intensive ways of managing – they too are outsourcing their own areas of work. Intensive Care Units, A&E, private companies are being used to manage those services too. It is a major  trend , not only because of the losses in public sector staff, it is the direct administration model that is being completely overhauled”.  ( Public Finance Manager, São Paulo 002 )"
"98" "In  Maranhão , because of a corruption scandal during a past state administration   [44] ,  which involved the local OSS, a different model of public sector management  has been  adopted. It uses a public enterprise – EMSERH  –   that enjoys  private law status and prerogatives to manage  4 5 hospitals in the state of  Maranhão , while still leaving market space to OSS from other states."
"99" "“ So  when we were appointed, we came up with a public enterprise from  Maranhão , called EMSERH ( Maranhão  Enterprise for Hospital Services). Such enterprise already controls half the hospital network, which means, in three years we went from 0 to 50%. We believe that in 3-4 years we will no longer have private companies managing public hospitals”.  ( Public-private health manager, MA 003 )"
"100" "In São Paulo, all the  new hospital  services have been outsourced since 1998, and their management left to OSS . P ublic management of health services is becoming rare,  and the OSS model is preferred as it allows managers to by-pass cumbersome regulation and budget ceilings when contracting health personnel."
"101" "“ Direct public management of clinical units has proved to be unsustainable. Laws such as those of fiscal responsibility, the complexity of Direct Management regulation, the pension contributions, the overall instability … all this made Public Direct Management impossible, in my opinion ” .  ( OSSC1 Public Manager, São Paulo 001 ) ."
"102" "In S ã o Paulo,  some of our  private sector informants implied that  the flexible nature of the OSS model has helped improve efficiency;  and that in some  circumstances, OSS were still able to make a surplus from public sector contracts by  changing the way physicians and nurses are contracted .  Some of  our OSS  informants  confirmed that during  the  recession, their organisations  actually  managed to expand their business."
"103" "“ […]  you have now easier ways to review your [public sector] contract, you can now change your workforce, using the PJ  [ pessoa   jurídica ]  mechanism [hiring employees as sole trader companies]; this helped reduce the cost of labour […]. Our budget increased. We went from 220 [million R$] to 360. We are still in a position to attract further business, but we live under the constant danger of dramatic budget cuts. I am (my company is) still sheltered because our area has little competition. Any government that wants to enter in these areas will have to negotiate with (the providers)  [of our districts] ”.  ( Public sector Manager, São Paulo OSSC2 )"
"104" "Following this pattern of  contracting-out  services, new medical staff are mostly outsourced,  losing the benefits of long-term contracts such as paid holidays, bonuses and some pension contributions.   Our interviewees informed us that doctors in both states are now hired through third party companies or associations (physicians  associations and  recruitment agencies providing medical services to public hospitals or to the OSS managing such hospitals. The phenomenon of ‘ pejotização ’ – literally, turning a public employee into a private/civil law entity ( pe s soa   jurídica , PJ ) to be contracted as a company -  was credited with saving costs and making hiring and firing easier, by-passing the public sector  employment  red tape, but also increasing casualisation, making vacancies   less secure across the sector."
"105" "“Before , the ‘ pejotização ’ [hire  individual  employees as private companies] was only common for night shifts. From 2016-2017 onwards, we have recorded many issues caused by municipalities that are turning public sector physicians to private law entities, which sounds strange. Because this [professional profile] should be a type of physician with a much stronger link with the community and the public sector, but even these are now been offered PJ contracts”.  ( Public sector physicians, São Paulo 001 )"
"106" "“ At the beginning there were certain categories of physicians who did not want to be treated as PJ – since the 70s there has always been this institution for physicians like the anaesthetists. But now this phenomenon [ pejotização ] happens in all areas, even for teams of physicians. You can no longer use different forms of contract! ”   ( Public sector manager, São Paulo 001 )"
"107" "The impact on the private health sector"
"108" "The reduction of the  demand  for private health insurance plans and the development of  low-cost  People’s  C linics  ( Clínicas   Populares ) , were the two  main  impacts  reported  on the private health sector in the two states.  According to some of our informants, the recent economic downturn  decreased customers for the  health private sector ; t his was considered to have triggered different coping strategies  in the industry ,  which demonstrated  an ability to deal with the crisis or even to take advantage of it. Leading private health insurances and plans were able to sustain their income by increasing prices, even after losing clients  [26] .  Being pitched to lower-income patients,  People's clinics faced diverse scenarios in the studied states ; i n  Maranhão , they could benefit of the demand from people who lost health insurance. But in São Paulo,  the People’s  C linics’  market  was  reported  to have  shrunk ,  as the crisis affected  those  low-income consumers favoured by the  previous  2004-2010 economic growth."
"109" "As a result of the recession, unemployment increased from 6.5 to 1 1.6 % in Brazil in 2018; many workers lost health insurance coverage   linked  to  job packages, particularly in São Paulo state. It has been estimated  [26]  that  in the aftermath of the recession,  50.4% of people in São Paulo owned a private health insurance, down from a peak of 57.4% the  previous  year.  In the less  prosperous   Maranhão , only 7% of the population owns a private health insurance plan, but the drop of subscribers was still  noticeable,  particularly for its capital city, São Luís.  According to our informants, such a drop of demand forced the  insurance  industry to introduce substantial changes in its business model, integrating its services and operations, reducing the breadth of coverage offered, cutting its cost base, and focusing on less regulated products."
"110" "In order to cuts costs, health insurance companies (or ‘ Planos ’ , in Portuguese) appear to have adopted a vertical integration strategy  [45] , and started to own and run the hospitals and the services health insurance patients were entitled to. Paying health providers less was another example of the strategies to cut the cost base.  To this regard, m anagers reported that doctors were now paid less per medical act, and the contracts signed with insurance companies were mostly for short-term and causal employment, as the  Pejotização  phenomenon seems now to be the favoured form of labour hiring in this area (see Table  2 )."
"111" "In São Paulo, t he type of coverage offered, as well as type of customer, was also suggested to have changed to streamline the portfolio, cut costs and drop the least lucrative parts off the market. Coverage  was  said to have been reduced to guarantee predominantly diagnosis, outpatient services, tests and some in patient care.  Co-payments and cheaper healthcare providers have been brought in to reduce costs for the private insurance companies (see Table 2 below).  The geographical areas of coverage were reported to have been reduced  in São Paulo , with customers forced to seek care only with providers of the Greater São Paulo area, in the attempt of reducing travelling costs ,  increas e  volume of services ,  and generat e  economies of scale for specific hospitals.  ( T able 2)."
"112" "Individual plans in particular were reported to  be now  discouraged , as these  are   less flexible and  strictly regulated by the law .   Instead, l arger, collective plans  would be   strongly  favoured by insurance companies, as  these  not only offer larger pools of customers, but are also less regulated,  giving insurance companies  the possibility of  offering a more  convenient  range of services (Table  2 )."
"113" "Table  2 : Strategies and quotes on the changing health insurance market  in São Paulo  and  Maranhão"
"114" "Strategy"
"115" "Rationale"
"116" "Supporting quotes"
"117" "Vertical integration and changes in the business model"
"118" "Business strategies aim at cutting costs and promoting efficiency"
"119" "“ I think who is winning  are those  who  are  doing it... managing populations that do not depend on external providers and do not depend on hospitals. That increasingly depends on ambulatory care. There are people who call primary care, care coordination, the name does not make much difference. ... [I am not just talking about] of own network. I can have a care management agency without the network being mine. I can hire someone to do this ... If I do just that, I do not think it will survive, because setting up primary care clinics ... There are people who get more expensive ... So, I think whoever manages to build this structure and put the appropriate patients there and the patients who need to be monitored remotely ... ” .  (OSS Manager in SP 003)"
"120" "“…  so  the health plans companies, when they lose their demand and start searching for diversification, they do like  Hapvida  did, they  start  working with their own clinics. This is how they manage to  survive ”. (Owner and manager of CP MA002)"
"121" "“ This is one of the ways (setting up primary care clinics). If you do just that, I do not think you will survive. I have already demonstrated that not everyone benefits from this. There are people who get more expensive if you go to a primary care clinic. Who benefits? So, I think whoever manages to build this structure and put the appropriate patients there and the patients who need to be monitored remotely ... because we can monitor remotely, that is the question. This is a set of things that have to do with primary care, who you place directly, who you monitor from a distance ” .  (CP Manager, SP 002)"
"122" "“ I think it is relative (the own network). What is important is that you have management over the outcome, about the team and the outcome. Whether hired or own. I do not need a hospital ... I will give you an example. I return to  [the market leading company]  because it is an example that I am experiencing. We have a product that is in the south of Brazil, in Santa Catarina, which is nothing of its own, it is a hundred per cent contracted. But I do not pay a fee for service, I do not pay for procedures, I pay for the outcome. I pay per capita and then per outcome. So, I pay for a primary care clinic, let us say, forty  R eais per capita per month for them to take care of that population. That clinic, it is not mine, I did not put brick, I did not hire anyone, I did not spend a penny of labour resources and that is someone who does it for me. And I pay for that person to do it. So, it is not own there, and I have, on the other hand, here in São Paulo, thirty own clinics that I built, I put brick, I put wallpaper, I painted, I put a table, I put a computer. Everything is my cost. So, I have both examples. Neither is right or wrong.  Both can be right, each within its own scope. ”   (OSS Manager in SP 003)"
"123" "Differentiations  in the range of plans to attract different clients"
"124" "Offer of different coverage packages to attract different customers and extract surplus"
"125" "[Talking about popular plans and the possibility of expanding beyond the \"ceiling\" of 25% of the population]  “ When people buy health insurance today in Brazil, until recently, we sold the thickness of the booklet. What did people want? Do I want a thousand doctors, two thousand doctors, three thousand hospitals? You just go to a doctor, hey. How many cardiologists do you need? One, a good one. If this guy does not have it available, I need another good one. You do not need four hundred cardiologists. So, when we start to change what we are changing, I am no longer selling the volume of cardiologists, I am selling care for your health needs. I know, you do not know your needs. So, when we start to understand this, and to format a system suitable for these needs, I think we expand, yes, maybe thirty, thirty-two per cent of the population. What we used to sell in the past, twenty-five per cent is a lot. I think eighteen per cent, twenty per cent was more than I was capable of ” .  (Private plans manager, SP 001)"
"126" "Changes in the provider payment system"
"127" "Use of different payment systems to create an incentive to provide less costly services"
"128" "When we said, “I do not pay more ICU daily, I will pay you a global package for this hospital to work. If I take the patient to the ICU or not, I will pay you the same thing”, what happened? There are thirty-four beds left, today the Pasteur Hospital CTI has eight beds. And an observational unit was opened in the emergency room, where the patient can stay twelve, up to eighteen hours in observation and go home. (Private plans manager, SP 002)"
"129" "“Insisting on a model that pays for the procedure is something that makes us unsustainable ... our need is an outcome, it does not matter how many procedures you are doing, I need to know if the patient had a stroke and the hospital took fifteen hours to identify this and to treat it and the patient was full of sequelae, [or] if he had three hours of entry and managed to save the patient's life ..... We sit down to discuss, for example, what is the protocol for treating stage three breast cancer ... I do not want to know how much it will cost ... it is a per capita, it is already included in the cost of oncology ... How much chemotherapy or medicine will cost, that is your problem. If you buy better, you will earn better. .... The fact is that we had a double-digit rising cost trend, eighteen per cent, fourteen per cent, twelve per cent, for three, four years in a row. Models help us to expose this fat”.  (Private plans manager, SP 001)"
"130" "“The [traditional] doctor asks for a volume of totally unnecessary exams without any evidence-based criteria ... We are doing this in some niches with some specialities, with extremely high success ... These doctors start to receive this way ... [it is] a capitation modulated by clinical indicators ... a group of vascular ... that will be paid by the population that they will take care of ... make the consultation of this entire population as these patients needed it, attend hospital emergencies in that region, perform all surgeries [with] clinical evidence ... We reduced [it] by forty per cent. Oncology. I do not pay more for sessions. As they are paid in a fixed way for treatment, the more women are diagnosed with cancer in smaller stages, the greater ... the margin they will have, because a woman with stage one or two spends less than three and four”.  (Private plans manager, SP 001)"
"131" "“[…] it is no longer enough saying: “no, my cost base is too high, and I need to pass this on and charge a higher cost to the health plan company”. The health plan company is not going to be able to pay me [such a higher cost], and I need to manage to do the same procedure at a lower cost, so that I can sell it to her [the company]”. (Private hospital manager, MA001)"
"132" "Customers skimming"
"133" "Scrapping the least profitable clients from the insurance portfolio (elderlies, high-use  customers, chronic disease patients)"
"134" "“ In absolute numbers, the portfolio decreased ... essentially due to the reduction in the number of clients, legal entities. ....  [the market leading company] , in addition to reducing because of the crisis, reduced because it gave up many contracts that were considered loss-making ....  [the market leading company]  of the present, ... managed much more by accountants than by doctors ... has a lesser tolerance for these contracts. ... leveraged by the entry of United ... the Americans understood that they had to reverse a negative result faster .... Most likely the deficit [of contracts] did not come from overuse ... It came from the normal use of the inadequate price ... the price adequacy [was] to match what was expected to be used with what had to be paid ” .  (Private plans manager, SP 002)"
"135" "Restrictions in the coverage of plans"
"136" "Reduction of range of services and providers available"
"137" "[commenting on Prevent Senior plans, individual marketing, health plans specialized in the elderly] ... “you can only go to these doctors here. If you need to intern, you will need to go through this place here. If you go to an emergency ... you buy a stream, you do not buy a network, you do not buy a book, you do not buy unrestricted access”. (Private plans manager, SP 001)"
"138" "“The private health network is changing strategy to offer access to primary services there, and avoid direct access to the whole range of services. In principle, they are blocking access… patients may still go directly to the hospital, but this will end up filtering access for the whole health plan. He [the patient] will have to go thought their own health team, as there are already health plans that has an assessment team for chronic diseases management”. (Public and private physician, MA003)"
"139" "Integrating the costs of judicial sues into regular accounting"
"140" "Rising prices to cover for perspective  lawsuits"
"141" "“ We reserve money for that. This is a point of attention, much more than the direct cost, it is the cost of the brand. This is a cost that we highly value ... One of the strategies was, of course, to improve the service so that that beneficiary does not go to court. The other thing was to use evidence-based medicine to demonstrate that certain things that were required via court order had to be paid for right away ” .   (Private plans manager, SP 002)"
"142" "Evolution of People’s Clinics during the economic recession"
"143" "People’s  C linics ( clínicas   populares  in Portuguese) are low-cost, mostly outpatient care services  popularised at  the beginning of the millennium  [27,28] , aimed at providing basic out-of-pocket consultations to lower -middle  class patients who want to avoid  SUS’  long waiting list s . People’s clinics are not specific to  the  recession years, but it was suggested in our interviews that they have  critically  transformed during the  lastn economic  slow-down, and they have now come to represent a key player  in the provision of healthcare services in Brazil."
"144" "According to our informants, these clinics  became popular  during Brazil’s economic expansion, when the country’s lower-middle class (class C) became wealthy enough to afford all sorts of commodities, including private healthcare  [46] .   Despite being  private sector players, such clinics are not connected to any form of health insurance  plans , and their business model focuses on outpatient specialist visits, services that do not require an overwhelming initial investment, and for which there seems to be an unmet demand in Brazil."
"145" "“70% of medical act in healthcare is outpatient visit. And outpatient visit is also the cheapest of all acts; but from this consultation [the private clinic] generates a string of parallel incomes: contracts with labs, with X-ray services etc.”.  ( CP manager,  São Paulo  001 )"
"146" "“ That’s right, I think the problem with People’s Clinics is that they do not resolve health issues. I mean, they solve the problem of lack of access to primary care and a few basic tests, but if the patient has  any  serious proble ms , they would not know where to send him. That is when they send him back to SUS. This is why I am no fan of those clinics that only offer basic primary care”.  ( Private sector physician, São Paulo 001 )"
"147" "The clinic s  occupy the space between SUS patients (mostly lower-class, or class D), and those covered by private health insurance and private hospitals (the upper-middle class B and  upper class   A). During the economic recession, because of the drop in disposable income for Class C patients, a squeeze of the demand for People’s Clinics’ demand was expected. But our informants  in  Maranhão   suggested that although a drop in Class C patients was observed  during the recession , such clinics also benefitted from the formerly  middle-class  patients who lost their employment, and consequently their health insurance plan."
"148" "It was suggested that the People’s Clinics also benefitted from the increase in the  availability  of physicians, as  newly opened  private medical schools arrived at increas ing  by  13%  the national supply of physicians  [47] . The vast majority of the physicians in People’s Clinics hold a primary job in the public service  [48] . Since the clinics do not offer inpatient or surgical care beyond the outpatient visit,  it was suggested by  one  informant  in  Maranhão   that such physicians are able to ‘ease through’ their private patients into the SUS circuit of reference,  therefore  enabling them to access more advanced levels of care in the public system."
"149" "Despite the similarities, key differences were identified in the evolution of People’s Clinics in  Maranhão  and São Paulo  during the crisis , namely in the  different market  niche  in the two states , in the  differential effects  of the recession, and on the stage of development of  the institutions .   These clinics were reported to have been around in São Paulo since the 19 7 0es ;  their market has attracted much competition and can now be considered mature and saturated . While in  the  North East region of Brazil  the  clinics developed later   [49] ,  and  happen to be  still in their phase of expansion, with one market leader occupying a large share of the market, and a fringe of smaller competitors.  According to our interviewees, the different stage of development implied that in São Paulo new forms of  cut-cost  competition are beginning to emerge, particularly  App-based Consulting Room, where private specialists offer outpatient visits in their own facilities, further eroding the space for organised People’s Clinics."
"150" "“ Now  as a doctor  you can advertise your availability in an app, just like  Air BnB . Customers select the specialist according to proximity and availability, and go and see them in their own clinic or even at home”. CP manager, SP 001"
"151" "In  Maranhão ,  Telemedicine was reported to be People’s Clinics next frontier of development, as well as agreeing contract with the public sector to relieve some of the pressure on SUS and on the long waiting lists."
"152" "“ For me  Telemedicina  is the next step for us if we want to capture the market in the rural areas. The technology is already there, and I even started a conversation with a firm  to provide  the technology […] we know it would not be as good as having a doctor  making  the diagnos is , but if the alternative is not having  any  visit at all, I think people may go for it”. CP manager, MA 001."
"153" "While t he private health insurance market (and respective high-end private clinics that feed off health insurances) is very consolidated in São Paulo State  ( with over  5 0% of people covered ), this  is small and incipient in  Maranhão , with a coverage of  just  6.8% in 2018 . As a consequence, the space People’s Clinics occupy  in the richer state  is rather narrow ,  and specifically targeting lower-middle-income (C-class) patients without insurance.  Conversely,  People’s Clinics’  market space in  Maranhão   include s  that section of  the middle class  that lost  their   health  plan s  during the crisis."
"154" "“[…] we were lucky here in  Maranhão , because we were able to go after the class B patient who lost his health insurance plan. Class C is still our core business, but these new, richer patients helped off-set the drop  of  patients in connection to the crisis”. CP Man a ger, MA-001"
"155" "Discussion"
"156" "Our interviews revealed  the concept of ‘health sector crisis’  to be  far from consensual ,   meaning  different things to different  healthcare providers  in  São Paulo  and  Maranhão .  Reductions  in health funding  or  chronic scarcity of resources  for  the National Healthcare Service  are considered as parts of a crisis ,  with the term  often charged with political undertones. Despite the cuts in federal funding, the public sector  was reported to have  found ways to compensate  by increasing  local state and municipal resource s , but also by outsourcing services and adopting flexible – if insecure – working contracts . W ithin SUS,  a marked increase  in the   use of private companies  and casualisation of contracts  for health professionals  were  reported  to reduce risk s  and administrative costs. Following the drop  of  employment and  the  associated health plans,  private  health insurance companies appear to have adapted their business model  to streamline their offer of products, at times at the expenses of population coverage. Low-cost walk-in clinics were reported to have been hit hard by the recession in São Paulo, while they  were credited  to have moved to cater for higher-income customers in  Maranhão , partly because of the  limited coverage of private health plans in the latter state ."
"157" "We acknowledge that o ur study  is   shaped  by  local  specificities  that limit the external validity of  the  findings. First of all, São Paulo and  Maranhão  states represent extreme   cases  in Brazil ,  with the former sporting a very developed private health sector and abundance of resources, and the second  characterised by  an underdeveloped network,  and  a mostly low-income population .   Secondly,  interviews and content analysis were carried out by different researchers  and assistants ; despite  using  the same interview guide and coding tree, this may have introduced  unwanted  heterogeneity  [50]   in the investigation in the two states.   Finally, our results are based on the views expressed by  purposely  selected informants; although these were triangulated across  interviewees and documental sources, it is still possible these may not have capture the  entire  complexit y  of the phenomenon under investigation   [51] ."
"158" "The  three  interpretations of crisis  identified above  were often used interchangeably in the interviews, to  refer to  the dire circumstances in which the country has found itself for the last decade,  as well as to   the  effects  on  the health system. There was a sense  often  that effects and causes of the different crises were overlapping, making it all too difficult to identify what causes what in such muddled context.  Noticeably, the word ‘crisis’ seemed to be charged of political undertones for  some of  São Paulo’s informants,  who saw the reference to the country’s poor economic performance as an attack to the approach adopted by the current president.  This politicization of any debate and polarization of the Brazilian society has been noticed already in the literature  [52] , and warned it may put at risk the very existence of democratic institutions.   Whilst this finding is consistent with  the  fluidity in  interpretation of  ‘ context ’  in  the health policy analysis literature  [53] , such  blurred   interpretations  of the phenomenon  make it  difficult to  find  common  grounds of analysis  of the effects recession s ,  as well as  the search for solutions ."
"159" "C ounterint uitively,  it emerged that  some parts of the private health sector have adapted and thrived during the  201 5 -2016  economic recession  in Brazil . While  this countercyclical effect has been observed before in  North America  [54] , articulat ing  a comprehensive explanation  for  Brazil’s case  is not straightforward .  In Portugal, t he  negative  impact of austerity measure s  on  the public healthcare  was one of the reason why patients started seeking care elsewhere   [55] .  But there  was  little evidence  in our interviews  that Brazil’s SUS deteriorated during the latest recession.  A  possible  explanation  for the private sector’s growth  may be that demand for healthcare services  does  not really  decreas e  during economic recession s , despite the contraction in  patients’  disposable income .  As many  workers  lost their health plans, s uch a  stable  demand for healthcare services would  open up spaces  for People’s Clinics and private hospitals .  How the private sector reacts during a recession is  particularly relevant for the  expected  post COVID-19 economic recession,  as  there are already reports of empty beds and lay-offs in private hospitals  [56] ."
"160" "It is  doubtful  whether  the  growth of the private sector  observed in Brazil  during  the last  recession  has  truly  contribute d  to  expand the offer  of   quality health services accessible for everyone . Many scholars consider that the private sector is an integral part of a health system  [57] ,  and if harnessed properly it can help expand  universal health coverage   [58] . However,  such notion is heavily contested in  many quarters in  Brazil   [59] , as  access to healthcare is enshrined in the country’s Constitutions as a human right  [32] , and  relying on the private sector to provide health coverage would offer a more limited and diminished version of  a  universal health systems . O ur interview  accounts on  Brazil’s  People’ Clinics  and Private Health Insurance plans during recession  suggest  that the private sector’s provision of care would be less than ideal , as: (a)  some of the services offered by low-cost clinics would not be integrated with in-patient and higher-complexity care; (b) less wealthy   patients may get skimmed  off   by comprehensive   insurance  coverage  to keep private operations profitable during a recession , and; (c) the  rest of the  population would be left with no choice but to seek care in crowded and underfunded public facilities. Such findings lend support to the view s  that  in health systems in low- and  middle-income  countries  the growth of the private cannot come at the expenses of the public sector   [60] , and  that a good-quality and accessible public sector will lead to a private health system with  these same features   [61] ."
"161" "As  the  world   enter s  a period of economic uncertainty in the aftermath of  the COVID-19 epidemic, it is crucial to ponder what the relevant lessons are from this study in  rich and poor states in  Brazil.  In line with what observed in other countries  [10,62] , we  show that economic recessions have  nuanced  impact s  on the provision of health services , as  the key plates of health systems shift, opportunities open up, and some players are likely to benefit  more than others  from the new  conditions .  Despite the squeeze in resources, not all  adjustments taking place   during an economic recession  will be for the worse ;  many  of these  will outlast the recession , and  are likely to have  consequences for the sustainability of a  national  health system .  I t will be   crucial   for governments  to  keep  a finger on  the pulse of  health  markets,  monitor  the  changes  as they take place ,  and   guarantee  that population’s access to quality services is not penalised  by the new equilibria."
"162" "Conclusions"
"163" "It is  well established  that economic recessions and associated austerity measures have an impact on  health expenditures and population health. Less is known on  the consequences for  health systems ’  public and private components, particularly in low- and middle-income countries. This is particularly relevant  given the present  COVID-19 crisis that will put at risk the  health  gains of the last decades, particularly for Latin American countries.   Brazil has a complex public and private health system, and  during the latest  economic recession radical measures were taken to balance budgets and improve productivity. Signs are that  equilibria   between the  macro-components of its health system –  the plates  – have shifted in response to recession and associated austerity measures."
"164" "As part of a larger research project on recession, health systems and workforce in Brazil, between 2018 and 2019 we conducted semi structured interviews with health practitioners, managers and policy-makers to understand the system effects of the recession in one affluent and one  low-income state. We drew from the literature and from the project’s own previous conceptualisation to explore the effects the last economic crisis produced on the health systems of the two states, and the  adaptation  strategies by  their  health workers. We  used the Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research to analyse, triangulate and report our qualitative findings."
"165" "We found that the concept  or nature  of ‘health sector crisis’ is far from consensual in  Brazil ,  and  charged with political undertones. Local state and municipal resources may have compensated for the cuts in  public  federal transfers, but outsourcing of services and more flexible and insecure working conditions have become the norm in the public  sector.  It was suggested that p rivate health insurance companies streamlined their business, and low-cost walk-in clinics  moved to occupy the space left by the loss of health plans,  at times at the expenses of population coverage.  We pondered what the  consequences  are o f  such changes  for  the  population’s access   to  a quality , universal health system ."
"166" "It is hoped that o ur findings  will  help anticipate the changes that a likely COVID recession may bring to health systems in  LMICs and  identify policies to mitigate its effects on population access to quality services."
"167" "Acknowledgments"
"168" "Prof.  Liberata  Coimbra , Judith Pinheiro, Cris tiane de Jesus  Almeida,   Amanda  Villalba , and  Regimarina   Soares Reis  for their help in  the  collection  and analysis of the interview  data,  and participation in the discussions."
"169" "All  those  people  who  gave their time to be interviewed  and help ed  piece together the narrative of the crisis in São Paulo and  Maranhão ."
"170" "References"
"171" "1.  Suhrcke M, Stuckler D, Suk JE, Desai M, Senek M, McKee M, et al. The impact of economic crises on communicable disease transmission and control: a systematic review of the evidence. PloS One. 2011;6: e20724. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020724"
"172" "2.  Norström T, Grönqvist H. The Great Recession, unemployment and suicide. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2015;69: 110–116. doi:10.1136/jech-2014-204602"
"173" "3.  Frasquilho D, Matos MG, Salonna F, Guerreiro D, Storti CC, Gaspar T, et al. Mental health outcomes in times of economic recession: a systematic literature review. BMC Public Health. 2016;16: 115. doi:10.1186/s12889-016-2720-y"
"174" "4.  Kraut A, Mustard C, Walld R, Tate R. Unemployment and Health Care Utilization. In: Isaksson K, Hogstedt C, Eriksson C, Theorell T, editors. Health Effects of the New Labour Market. Boston, MA: Springer US; 2002. pp. 25–42. doi:10.1007/0-306-47181-7_4"
"175" "5.  Karanikolos M, Mladovsky P, Cylus J, Thomson S, Basu S, Stuckler D, et al. Financial crisis, austerity, and health in Europe. The Lancet. 2013;381: 1323–1331. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60102-6"
"176" "6.  Stuckler D, Basu S, Suhrcke M, Coutts A, McKee M. The public health effect of economic crises and alternative policy responses in Europe: an empirical analysis. The Lancet. 2009;374: 315–323. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61124-7"
"177" "7.  Kentikelenis A, Karanikolos M, Reeves A, McKee M, Stuckler D. Greece’s health crisis: from austerity to denialism. The Lancet. 2014;383: 748–753. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62291-6"
"178" "8.  Burke SA, Normand C, Barry S, Thomas S. From universal health insurance to universal healthcare? The shifting health policy landscape in Ireland since the economic crisis. Health Policy. 2016;120: 235–240. doi:10.1016/j.healthpol.2015.12.001"
"179" "9.  Legido-Quigley H, Otero L, Parra D la, Alvarez-Dardet C, Martin-Moreno JM, McKee M. Will austerity cuts dismantle the Spanish healthcare system? BMJ. 2013;346. doi:10.1136/bmj.f2363"
"180" "10.  Russo G, Rego I, Barros PP, Perelman J. A tale of loss of privilege, change and resilience: the impact of the economic crisis on physicians and medical services in Portugal. Health Policy. 2016."
"181" "11.  Ager A, Saleh S, Wurie H, Witter S. Health systems research in fragile settings. Bull World Health Organ. 2019;97: 378-378A. doi:10.2471/BLT.19.233965"
"182" "12.  Pavignani E, Colombo S. Analysing disrupted health sectors. A modular manual. Geneva: WHO - Department of recovery and Transition Programmes; 2009."
"183" "13.  Hill PS, Pavignani E, Michael M, Murru M, Beesley ME. The “empty void” is a crowded space: health service provision at the margins of fragile and conflict affected states. Confl Health. 2014;8: 20. doi:10.1186/1752-1505-8-20"
"184" "14.  Russo G, Pavignani E, Guerreiro CS, Neves C. Can we halt health workforce deterioration in failed states? Insights from Guinea-Bissau on the nature, persistence and evolution of its HRH crisis. Hum Resour Health. 2017;15: 12. doi:10.1186/s12960-017-0189-0"
"185" "15.  Serrano F, Summa R, Serrano F, Summa R. Aggregate demand and the slowdown of Brazilian economic growth in 2011-2014. Nova Econ. 2015;25: 803–833. doi:10.1590/0103-6351/3549"
"186" "16.  Hone T, Mirelman AJ, Rasella D, Paes-Sousa R, Barreto ML, Rocha R, et al. Effect of economic recession and impact of health and social protection expenditures on adult mortality: a longitudinal analysis of 5565 Brazilian municipalities. Lancet Glob Health. 2019;7: e1575–e1583. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(19)30409-7"
"187" "17.  Doniec K, Dall’Alba R, King L. Austerity threatens universal health coverage in Brazil. The Lancet. 2016;388: 867–868. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31428-3"
"188" "18.  Macinko J, Harris MJ. Brazil’s Family Health Strategy — Delivering Community-Based Primary Care in a Universal Health System. N Engl J Med. 2015;372: 2177–2181. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1501140"
"189" "19.  Barreto ML, Teixeira MG, Bastos FI, Ximenes RAA, Barata RB, Rodrigues LC. Successes and failures in the control of infectious diseases in Brazil: social and environmental context, policies, interventions, and research needs. Lancet. 2011;377: 1877–1889. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)60202-X"
"190" "20.  Castro MC, Massuda A, Almeida G, Menezes-Filho NA, Andrade MV, de Souza Noronha KVM, et al. Brazil’s unified health system: the first 30 years and prospects for the future. The Lancet. 2019;394: 345–356. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(19)31243-7"
"191" "21.  Viacava F, Oliveira RAD de, Carvalho C de C, Laguardia J, Bellido JG. SUS: oferta, acesso e utilização de serviços de saúde nos últimos 30 anos. Ciênc Amp Saúde Coletiva. 2018;23: 1751–1762. doi:10.1590/1413-81232018236.06022018"
"192" "22.  Albuquerque MV de, Viana AL d’Ávila, Lima LD de, Ferreira MP, Fusaro ER, Iozzi FL. Regional health inequalities: changes observed in Brazil from 2000-2016. Ciênc Amp Saúde Coletiva. 2017;22: 1055–1064. doi:10.1590/1413-81232017224.26862016"
"193" "23.  Silva VC e, Barbosa PR, Hortale VA. Partnerships in Health Systems: Social Organization as limits and possibilities in the Family Health Strategy Management. Ciênc Saúde Coletiva. 2016;21: 1365–1376. doi:10.1590/1413-81232015215.23912015"
"194" "24.  Ravioli AF, Soárez PCD, Scheffer MC. Modalidades de gestão de serviços no Sistema Único de Saúde: revisão narrativa da produção científica da Saúde Coletiva no Brasil (2005-2016). Cad Saúde Pública. 2018;34. doi:10.1590/0102-311x00114217"
"195" "25.  Gragnolati M, Lindelow M, Couttolenc B. Twenty Years of Health System Reform in Brazil. An Assessment of the Sistema Único de Saúde. Washington, DC: The World Bank; 2013. Report No.: http://dx.doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-9843-2."
"196" "26.  Andrietta LS, Levi ML, Scheffer MC, Alves MTSS de B e, Carneiro Alves de Oliveira BL, Russo G. The differential impact of economic recessions on health systems in middle-income settings: a comparative case study of unequal states in Brazil. BMJ Glob Health. 2020;5. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2019-002122"
"197" "27.  Godoy CV, Silva JB. O Fenômeno de expansão das “clínicas médicas populares” no bairro Centro de Fortaleza/Ceará/Brasil. XIV Colóquio Ibérico de Geografia. Fotaleza, Ceará; 2014. Available: http://www.lasics.uminho.pt/conferences/index.php/CEGOT/XIV_ColoquioIbericoGeografia/paper/view/1963"
"198" "28.  Lapa MR. As clínicas populares como uma alternativa à saúde no Brasil: um estudo de caso em uma clínica popular. 2014 [cited 8 May 2020]. Available: http://www.repositorio.ufc.br/handle/riufc/33277"
"199" "29.  Lopes Batista E. Clínicas populares surgiram de deficiências do SUS e dos planos, diz médico. Folha de SPaulo. BRA. 5 Dec 2018. Available: https://www1.folha.uol.com.br/seminariosfolha/2018/12/clinicas-populares-surgiram-de-deficiencias-do-sus-e-dos-planos-diz-medico.shtml. Accessed 16 Jun 2020."
"200" "30.  Redação RBA. Clínicas populares sobrecarregam SUS e mercantilizam saúde. In: Rede Brasil Atual [Internet]. 18 Jul 2018 [cited 16 Jun 2020]. Available: https://www.redebrasilatual.com.br/saude-e-ciencia/2018/07/clinicas-populares-sobrecarregam-sus-e-mercantilizam-saude/"
"201" "31.  John Hopkins University. COVID-19 Map. In: Johns Hopkins Coronavirus Resource Center [Internet]. 2020 [cited 23 May 2020]. Available: https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html"
"202" "32.  Massuda A, Hone T, Leles FAG, Castro MC de, Atun R. The Brazilian health system at crossroads: progress, crisis and resilience. BMJ Glob Health. 2018;3: e000829. doi:10.1136/bmjgh-2018-000829"
"203" "33.  MRC. How is the current crisis reshaping Brazil’s health system? Strengthening health workforce and provision of services in São Paulo and Maranhão. In: UK Research and Innovation [Internet]. 2018 [cited 26 Jun 2019]. Available: https://gtr.ukri.org/projects?ref=MR%2FR022747%2F1"
"204" "34.  Jesus TS, Kondilis E, Filippon J, Russo G. Impact of economic recessions on healthcare workers and their crises’ responses: study protocol for a systematic review of the qualitative and quantitative evidence for the development of an  evidence-based conceptual framework. BMJ Open. 2019;9. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2019-032972"
"205" "35.  O’Brien BC, Harris IB, Beckman TJ, Reed DA, Cook DA. Standards for Reporting Qualitative Research: A Synthesis of Recommendations. Acad Med. 2014;89: 1245–1251. doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000000388"
"206" "36.  QSR International. NVivo for Mac. Getting started guide. QSR International; 2015."
"207" "37.  Patton MQ. Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods. 3rd edition. Thousand Oaks, Calif: SAGE Publications, Inc; 2001."
"208" "38.  Maher C, Hadfield M, Hutchings M, de Eyto A. Ensuring Rigor in Qualitative Data Analysis: A Design Research Approach to Coding Combining NVivo With Traditional Material Methods. Int J Qual Methods. 2018;17: 1609406918786362. doi:10.1177/1609406918786362"
"209" "39.  Jonsen K, Jehn KA. Using triangulation to validate themes in qualitative studies. Qual Res Organ Manag Int J. 2009;4: 123–150. doi:10.1108/17465640910978391"
"210" "40.  Doniec K, Dall’Alba R, King L. Brazil’s health catastrophe in the making. The Lancet. 2018;392: 731–732. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30853-5"
"211" "41.  Nobre M, Nobre M. 1988 + 30. Novos Estud CEBRAP. 2016;35: 135–149. doi:10.25091/s0101-3300201600020008"
"212" "42.  Amaral OE do, Amaral OE do. The Victory of Jair Bolsonaro According to the Brazilian Electoral Study of 2018. Braz Polit Sci Rev. 2020;14. doi:10.1590/1981-3821202000010004"
"213" "43.  Domingues JM, Domingues JM. Crise da república e possibilidades de futuro. Ciênc Amp Saúde Coletiva. 2017;22: 1747–1758. doi:10.1590/1413-81232017226.02472017"
"214" "44.  Romero S. Decline of a Political Family Opens the Way for a Shift in Brazil. The New York Times. 25 Dec 2014. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/26/world/decline-of-a-political-family-opens-the-way-for-a-shift-in-brazil.html. Accessed 13 Apr 2020."
"215" "45.  Robinson JC, Casalino LP. Vertical Integration and Organizational Networks in Health Care. Health Aff (Millwood). 1996;15: 7–22. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.15.1.7"
"216" "46.  Wogart JP. Global booms and busts: how is Brazil’s middle class faring? Braz J Polit Econ. 2010;30: 381–400. doi:10.1590/S0101-31572010000300002"
"217" "47.  Scheffer MC, Dal Poz MR. The privatization of medical education in Brazil: trends and challenges. Hum Resour Health. 2015;13: 96. doi:10.1186/s12960-015-0095-2"
"218" "48.  Miotto BA, Guilloux AGA, Cassenote AJF, Mainardi GM, Russo G, Scheffer MC. Physician’s sociodemographic profile and distribution across public and private  health care: an insight into physicians’ dual practice in Brazil. BMC Health Serv Res. 2018;18: 299. doi:10.1186/s12913-018-3076-z"
"219" "49.  Godoy CV, Silva JB da. O FENÔMENO DE EXPANSÃO DAS CLÍNICAS MÉDICAS POPULARES: RESSIGNIFICAÇÃO DO BAIRRO CENTRO EM FORTALEZA - CEARÁ. Hygeia - Rev Bras Geogr Médica E Saúde. 2018;14: 32–49. doi:10.14393/Hygeia142803"
"220" "50.  Deane K, Stevano S. Towards a political economy of the use of research assistants: reflections from fieldwork in Tanzania and Mozambique. Qual Res. 2016;16: 213–228. doi:10.1177/1468794115578776"
"221" "51.  Leung L. Validity, reliability, and generalizability in qualitative research. J Fam Med Prim Care. 2015;4: 324. doi:10.4103/2249-4863.161306"
"222" "52.  Fish MS, Abrams NA. The Polarization Paradox. J Democr. 2020;31: 182–185. doi:10.1353/jod.2020.0030"
"223" "53.  Collins C, Green A, Hunter D. Health sector reform and the interpretation of policy context. Health Policy. 1999;47: 69–83. doi:10.1016/S0168-8510(99)00003-2"
"224" "54.  Wood CA. Employment in health care: a crutch for the ailing economy during the 2007–09 recession. Mon Labor Rev. 2011; 13–18."
"225" "55.  Stuckler D, Reeves A, Loopstra R, Karanikolos M, McKee M. Austerity and health: the impact in the UK and Europe. Eur J Public Health. 2017;27: 18–21. doi:10.1093/eurpub/ckx167"
"226" "56.  O Globo. Hospitais privados perdem R$ 18 bi na pandemia e podem demitir 350 mil. 2020 [cited 24 Jun 2020]. Available: https://noticias.uol.com.br/saude/ultimas-noticias/redacao/2020/06/18/hospitais-privados-perdem-r-6-bi-ao-mes-na-pandemia-e-devem-demitir-350.htm"
"227" "57.  Clarke D, Doerr S, Hunter M, Schmets G, Soucat A, Paviza A. The private sector and universal health coverage. Bull World Health Organ. 2019;97: 434–435. doi:10.2471/BLT.18.225540"
"228" "58.  McPake B, Hanson K. Managing the public–private mix to achieve universal health coverage. The Lancet. 2016;388: 622–630. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00344-5"
"229" "59.  Giovanella L, Mendoza-Ruiz A, Pilar A de CA, Rosa MC da, Martins GB, Santos IS, et al. Sistema universal de saúde e cobertura universal: desvendando pressupostos e estratégias. Ciênc Amp Saúde Coletiva. 2018;23: 1763–1776. doi:10.1590/1413-81232018236.05562018"
"230" "60.  Mackintosh M, Channon A, Karan A, Selvaraj S, Cavagnero E, Zhao H. What is the private sector? Understanding private provision in the health systems of low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet. 2016;388: 596–605. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)00342-1"
"231" "61.  Horton R, Clark S. The perils and possibilities of the private health sector. The Lancet. 2016;388: 540–541. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30774-7"
"232" "62.  McRae IS, Paolucci F. The global financial crisis and Australian general practice. Aust Health Rev Publ Aust Hosp Assoc. 2011;35: 32–35. doi:10.1071/AH09830"
