Popular Reactions to Coordination Problems under External Threats
Sandra León∗
Amuitz Garmendia Madariaga‡†
February 19, 2021

Working Paper (Version 4)

Abstract

Exogenous threats pose a formidable challenge to federations, as they compel governments at all levels to cooperate to prevent a collective risk. As the vertical fragmentation of powers complicates a coordinated response,
we here argue that the central government becomes the focal point of the solution. In search of a more effective
response against the threat, citizens coordinate their preferences around the centralization of authority boundaries in the federation. We test this argument first using an on-line survey experiment in Spain, a country
where the threat caused by COVID-19 has operated on top of non-negligible centrifugal threats. The empirical
analyses show that, in the context of the pandemic, exposure to vertical coordination failures prompt citizens
to support a centralized redrawing of authority boundaries, though this effect is importantly conditioned by
respondents’ partisanship and territorial preferences. We repeat the same experiment in a comparative sample
of 12 federations, quasi-federations and decentralized unitary countries. Our findings suggest that external
shocks may represent turning points for the stability of federations, as citizens’ demands for a response might
encounter elite level strategic adjustments of authority.

∗ Associate

Professor, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (sandra.leon@uc3m.es)

† Assistant

Professor, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid (amuitz.garmendia@uc3m.es)

‡ This

research is part of the Project Federalism in Polarized Times, 2019-00029-001, funded by the regional government of
Madrid through the Senior Talento Research Program.

“The most important forces of a political, or psychological, order which serve as efficient agents in the creation
of federation are fear, a calculated expectation of advantage, and a response to some unifying ideal or myth. Of
these three, the most important motivation is probably fear. Fear may develop from direct attempts at
intimidation, or from a sustained and profound feeling of insecurity.”
– Maddox (1941, 1122)

I.

Introduction

The outbreak of the COVID-19 in 2020 shook federal governance around the world.1 Some governments temporarily chose to re-centralize certain powers, such as Switzerland or Spain, and in most
federations, intergovernmental conflict on when and how to emerge after the shutdowns ensued. In
the midst of the crisis, the President of the United States, Donald Trump, claimed “total authority over
state decisions” in the pandemic,2 whereas in Brazil, state governors rose up against Jair Bolsonaro’s
inactivity by imposing their own measures to close businesses, schools and public spaces.3 Even in the
quintessential model of cooperative federalism, the German chancellor Angela Merkel warned early
on in the pandemic against a “passing the buck” dynamic: “Federalism is not there so people can push
away responsibility. It is there so that everyone takes responsibility in their area.” Coronavirus represents
the greatest threat to states since the World War II and the most formidable coordination challenge
for federal structures. Yet threat lies at the core of the federal momentum, as fear has been the most
powerful driving force of federalism.
Federal entities have emerged out of different types of perils, but all of them have prompted political elites to consider that giving authority up, either upwards (to a centralized government) or
downwards (to new regional units) was less costly than the realization of the specific threat. For instance, in coming-together federations, the centralization of authority into a federal union is explained
by the existence of an external military (Riker, 1964) or economic (Dikshit, 1971; Garrett and Rodden,
2006) threat; whereas in holding-together federations (Stepan, 1999), the devolution of powers to subcentral units is the result of internal ethno-regional heterogeneity (Birch, 1966) or even ethnic conflict
or secessionist challenges (Amoretti and Bermeo, 2004).
1 See

OECD’s “The Territorial Impact of COVID-19: Managing the Crisis across levels of Government”
2020/04/13: “Trump claims total authority over state decisions”
3 The Guardian, 2020/04/01: “Bolsonaro ignored by state governors”
2 POLITICO,

2

Ideally, federal contracts aim to be ‘robust’ Bednar (2008); that is, to show a balance between a
federal government powerful enough to ensure redistribution and macroeconomic stability but not
too powerful to encroach upon subcentral authority, and a set of subcentral units with sufficient authority to accrue the benefits of decentralized governance but not too independent to free-ride on
the collective goods (Riker, 1964). However, once established, federal contracts do not remain stable
over time. Centripetal or centrifugal dynamics may develop, challenging the equilibrium in which the
stability of a federation is grounded. Changes in the distribution of powers within federations have
been mostly accounted for in the literature as the result of political dynamics where party systems,
coordination among elites and electoral strategies play a fundamental role (Filippov, Ordeshook and
Shvetsova, 2004). Yet the study of the impact of external shocks either of a short-term (economic crisis)
or long-term nature (globalization) has lagged behind (Beramendi and Rogers, 2019; Beramendi and
Stegmueller, 2020; Garrett and Rodden, 2006; Jurado and León, 2020). The literature also exhibits a bias
towards elite bargaining and party competition when accounting for adjustment in the distribution of
authority between central and state governments, whereas, with the exception of secessionist popular
movements (Muñoz and Tormos, 2020), the role of public preferences and demands for changes in
authority boundaries have been overlooked.
This paper purports to fill this literature gap by providing a better understanding of the impact of
an external shock - the sanitary threat caused by the COVID-19 - upon citizens’ preferences towards
vertical distribution of authority in federations. We argue that the pandemic pose a formidable coordination challenge in federations. By signaling cooperation as a crucial mechanism to prevent collective
risk, threats turn intergovernmental relations into a salient issue for citizens. As the vertical fragmentation of powers complicates a coordinated response, the central government becomes the focal point
of the solution. In search of a more effective response against the threat, individuals will demand a
stronger role of the central government, that is, an entity that is organizationally able to coordinate
smaller autonomous jurisdictions to avoid “anarchy” (Madison, Federalist Papers n. 51). We also
expect this centralizing drift to be moderated by the existing dimensions of political competition in a
federation.
We explore this question in one of the most affected countries during this crisis: Spain. In this quasi-

3

federation,4 the external threat caused by the pandemic has operated on top of the internal threats
posed by the various regional level incumbent pro-independence parties, for instance, in the Basque
Country and Catalonia. In this sense, Spain represents a least likely case scenario for our theoretical
argument, as the potential centralizing drift associated to an external shock might be moderated by
internal threats that push the distribution of authority in the opposite direction. We also test for the
existence of the explained effect in a comparative sample of institutionally diverse countries. Drawing
on several online survey experiment analyses, our paper shows that exposure to vertical coordination
failures in the context of a particularly salient external threat prompts citizens to support a centralized
redrawing of authority boundaries. Moreover, it demonstrates that this effect survives in time, as long
as the threat continues to be salient.
Accordingly, our results speak to what probably represents the most important theoretical question
in the area of federal studies: federal stability and its main drivers. One of the most important
challenges in this sense is a poor match between the distribution of authority in a federation and its
needs and potential (Bednar, 2008); a shortcoming that might become particularly evident when the
federation is exposed to an external threat. The distribution of authority might adapt after the shock,
but little is known about whether these changes are prompted by (or aligned with) a change in citizens’
preferences over authority boundaries. In fact, we demonstrate that the mentioned average treatment
effect in our experiment is significantly conditioned by respondents’ political preferences regarding
ideology and their overall territorial preferences. This paper contributes to shed some light on this
question by theorizing on popular reactions to external threats in federations and showing that shocks
open an opportunity for a centralizing drift. Our findings suggest that shocks may represent turning
points for the stability of a federation and, ultimately, a test for its safeguards if citizens demands for
a redrawing of authority are followed by opportunistic adjustments of authority.
4 According to (Bednar, 2008, 18), a country is quasi-federal if it meets two of the following three structural criteria: “1.
Geopolitical Division: The territory is divided into mutually exclusive units, and their existence, is constitutionally recognized and may
not be unilaterally abolished. 2. Independence: The state and national governments have independent bases of authority. In general, this
independence is established constitutionally through electoral independence, where each government is held accountable to its constituents,
although nondemocratic forms of independence may be available. 3. Direct Governance: Authority is shared between the state and the
national governments: each governs its citizens directly, so that each citizen is governed by at least two authorities. Each level of government
is sovereign in at least one policy realm. This policy sovereignty is constitutionally declared.” Spain fails to meet requirement 1, since
the structure of its regional geopolitical divisions are absent of the constitutional text.

4

II.

Exogenous Threats and Federal Centralization

External threats have often been deemed as one of the most “efficient agents in the creation of a federation” (Maddox, 1941, 1122). According to Riker (1964, 12), two necessary conditions have always
been present in all the empirical cases of federal bargains since 1786, including the United States: 1)
the expansion condition and 2) the military condition. The first one refers to those politicians offering
the federal bargain and speaks to their willingness to exchange concessions to constituent units for
territorial expansion, “usually either to meet an external military or diplomatic threat or to prepare for military
or diplomatic aggression and aggrandizement.” The second one characterizes the behavior of those politicians accepting the bargain; that is, their willingness to “give up some independence for the sake of union
and they do so because of some external military-diplomatic threat or opportunity.” Dikshit (1971, 189) questions Riker’s military interpretation of federal constitutions by suggesting that rather than necessary,
the mentioned predispositions are absent in the origin of modern examples of centralized federations.
Yet, he does not deny the power of external challenges in the origin of federal bargains. On the
contrary, he praises modern centralized federations as complex structures born to deliver centralized
national planning in the new global context of large-scale industrialized economies.
The First Generation of Fiscal Federalism (FGFF) developed this idea thoroughly: federalism was
thought to combine the different advantages which result “from the magnitude and the littleness of nations” (Tocqueville, 1835). Oates’ (1972) ‘Decentralization Theorem’ is based on two assumptions
(Oates, 1999, 1121): on the one hand, decentralized levels of government have a unique capacity
to tailor the provision of goods and services to the particular preferences and circumstances of their
constituencies; on the other hand, central governments have a basic macroeconomic stabilization responsibility, which, in the presence of highly open economies, implies redistributing income to avoid
horizontal fiscal imbalances, controlling monetary and exchange rate prerogatives and their fiscal stimuli, and providing those public goods, like national defense, that become efficient under the economies
of scale or greater coordination. Public Choice scholars re-examined the normative conception of
governments as ‘benevolent planners’ underlying FGFF theories. Authors under this approach emphasized instead that governments had a natural tendency towards excess, capture and overspending
and correspondingly, supported decentralized decision-making in federations, as a small jurisdiction-

5

based competition for fiscally efficient policy delivery (Brennan and Buchanan, 1980). However, none
of these critics challenge the potential stabilizing power of centralized federations when facing external
threats.
Quite the contrary, there seems to be an agreement on the fact that globalization has made countries more vulnerable to external shocks and thus that macroeconomic stabilization and interregional
risk sharing via the enhancement of central government’s fiscal authority continue to be the most
suitable choices for federations under the mentioned circumstances (Garrett and Rodden, 2006, 278).
For instance, a recent study in 21 OECD countries finds that, in the years following the Great Recession, fiscally decentralized nations, given their weaker redistributive mechanisms, saw increased
interpersonal inequality and lower redistribution, while preserving market-driven declines in high
productivity areas that increased regional convergence (Beramendi and Rogers, 2019). Probably as a
way of preemptively tackling this empirical regularity, in the aftermath of the Great Recession, several economically advanced federations and quasi-federations went through reforms that led to the
establishment of limits to subnational units’ debt5 , the recentralization of certain policy areas6 or the
rationalization of the number of jurisdictions in a certain territory7 . Moreover, the literature on the
breakup of nations (Alesina and Spolaore, 1997; Alesina, Spolaore and Wacziarg, 2000) has established
that growing international trade provides regions or constitutive units with a substitute for the scale
benefits of being part of a large country, lowering their exit costs and thus increasing their likelihood of
secession. This potential effect seems particularly challenging for those federations that are subject to
large centrifugal forces (Bakke and Wibbels, 2006; Kymlicka, 2005; Sambanis and Milanovic, 2014). In
fact, as a way of buying out powerful regions against their exit options (de Figueiredo Jr and Weingast,
2005), another recent study shows that there is a strong and positive empirical relationship between
economic globalization and decentralization in countries with a high presence of regionalist parties
(Jurado and León, 2020).
Birch (1966) was the first to present internal threats as equally relevant necessary conditions in
the origin of some federal bargains. He identified instances in which the divisive characteristics of
5 In the summer of 2011, the two major political parties in Spain (PSOE and PP) agreed on an express reform of the Constitution that limited de jure Spanish debt, by linking it to its GDP, and that had direct consequences for the borrowing autonomy
of its regions.
6 See Beramendi and Stegmueller (2020) for more on this issue.
7 For instance, while France went through a territorial transformation that reduced the number of regions from 22 to 13 in
2016, a similar reform was rejected in Renzi’s Constitutional Reform Referendum that same year in Italy.

6

the political and ethno-religious geographic makeup of a territory make federations alternative institutional choices to unions (Amoretti and Bermeo, 2004; Ziblatt, 2006). As Stepan (1999) emphasizes,
top-down or holding-together federations include much of the twentieth century trend towards decentralization of authority worldwide. These federations or quasi-federations (Bednar, 2008) are different
in terms of who holds the agenda-setting power. In bottom-up or coming-together federations, “the
constituent states design the federation and will attempt to choose institutions that capture the rents for themselves”, whereas, in top-down or holding-together federalism, “the central government controls the design
and will bias institutions in its favor” (de Figueiredo Jr and Weingast, 2005, 128). Interestingly, the latter
federations coexist with both types of potential threats, which represent centripetal and centrifugal
sources of stress for the system, resulting in a more unstable federal contract.

III.

The Popular Roots of Federations

As it appears, most of the academic research on the origin and evolution of federal bargains is largely
elite focused and has revolved around federal institutional design, change and derived outcomes.
To the extent to which elites are partisan in democracies, federal institutions alone do not have a
significant impact on the stability of the federal bargain, and it is the structure of the political parties
and their interests the ones shaping the statu quo (Filippov, Ordeshook and Shvetsova, 2004; Riker,
1964). Consequently, the Second Generation of Fiscal Federalism (SGFF) has taken more seriously than
previous approaches the role of preference aggregation through voting and lobbying in accounting for
the stability and change in federations (Amat and Falcó-Gimeno, 2014; Beramendi, 2012; Dixit and
Londregan, 1996; Gibson, Calvo and Falleti, 2004; Inman and Rubinfeld, 1997; Oates, 2005; Qian and
Weingast, 1997; Rodden, 2006; Rodden and Wibbels, 2002; Wibbels, 2005).
Still, studies on the role of public’s preferred vertical distribution of authority in the stability and
change of federations are scarce in the literature (Kincaid and Cole, 2011, 2015) and they have been
typically indirectly approximated through the analysis of party strategies in a second (territorial) dimension of electoral competition (Toubeau and Wagner, 2015)8 , particularly in countries where this
8 Toubeau and Wagner’s (2015) findings suggest that parties on the economic right are more supportive of decentralization
than parties on the economic left, while culturally liberal parties favor decentralization more than culturally conservative parties, although contextual factors such as interregional economic inequality, the degree of regional self-rule, or the presence of
regionalist parties, all shape the position of these parties when determining the territorial distribution of power.

7

second dimension is relatively salient (Alonso, 2012; Dandoy and Schakel, 2013; Elias, Szöcsik and
Zuber, 2015)9 . Federations with a salient territorial dimension have electorates that show an active
and politized position about the statu quo form of the state and the potential alternative vertical distributions of authority (Pardos-Prado and Sagarzazu, 2019).
The scant literature on citizens’ attitudes towards the federal bargain contrasts with Madison’s
concerns on public approval. In Federalist 46, he wondered which level of government “will have the
advantage with regard to the predilection and support of the people”. Wheare (1946, 36) also emphasized
that federal polity’s constituent political communities must have “the capacity as well as the desire to
form an independent general government and to form independent regional governments”. More generally, a
large part of the existing contemporary theories on the promise of federalism are democratic, and thus
rest in the assumption of politics representing citizens’ preferences. According to Bednar, the role of
citizens’ attitudes towards federal and state authority boundaries should be especially relevant when
federations experience shifts in the distribution of authority, as they often do. Should centripetal or
centrifugal dynamics ensue in a federation, we should expect popular support to play a significant
role in accounting for the changing nature of the federal bargain, either as a specific driver of the
reforms, or as a safeguard preventing authority adjustments to result in opportunistic transgressions
(2008, 107).
Then, exploring the role of citizens’ attitudes towards the federal bargain becomes particularly
intriguing when federations are exposed to a threat.10 Even the most resilient federation might not be
immune to an external shock; the latter may uncover flaws in federal design or a mismatch between
the existing distribution of authority and the federation’s needs. Federations may react by adapting
authority distribution, but tackling the challenges posed by an external threat should count on the
popular awareness of the threat, as well as on the awareness of the benefits of redrawing authority
boundaries to better respond to the threat. Yet little is known on popular reactions to these threats.
We ignore whether federal adjustment is prompted by – or at least aligned with – a change in citizens’
9 Drawing on the increasing trend towards decentralization in several holding-together federations and quasi-federations, a
corpus of studies on territorial politics has identified the centrifugal stress to which state-wide parties are exposed when competing against especially strong, electorally successful, regional parties (Amat and Falcó-Gimeno, 2014; Massetti and Schakel,
2013; Meguid, 2008; Swenden and Maddens, 2009).
10 After the Sonderbundskrieg, the last civil war among the cantons in 1847, Switzerland became a federal republic in 1848. Yet,
there were non-negligible centrifugal forces still active in the system. Consequently, in the autumn of 1868, after widespread
floods in the Swiss Alps, federal officials launched an aid campaign under the slogan of Unus pro omnibus, omnes pro uno – the
Dumasian ”One for all, all for one” which is nowadays considered the motto of the country – deliberately using this external
threat to evoke a sense of duty and solidarity and national unity in the population.

8

preferences over authority boundaries in the context of the shock.
Coordination problems are inherent to the day to day elite level functioning of a federation. Scharpf
(1997) has extensively studied the dynamics of intergovernmental cooperation and its impact on
policy-making. A particularly interesting instance for coordination problems is ‘joint decision-making’
(Scharpf, 1988; Benz, 2011) in federations. Joint decision-making systematically generates sub-optimal
policy solutions, while preventing politicians from tackling coordination problems effectively. As no
single actor is able to unilaterally exit the decision-making process, and veto points systematically
benefit those actors who support or defend the statu quo, such institutional settings are likely to end
up in a ‘joint-decision trap’ (Benz and Broschek, 2013). Then, in a context like this, the singularity
of an external threat rests upon the fact that governments face an unexpected coordination challenge
that, rather than being oblivious to citizens, as it regularly happens in federations, suddenly, it becomes salient to them, making general agreement upon the necessity of a solution apparent. Given
our genuine interest in the popular side of the reactions to an external threat, the obvious question
here is: how will the public move from considering there is a problem in the response to the threat to
a consensus on a specific solution?11
In the case of a sanitary threat such as the one posed by COVID-19, curbing the spread of the
virus in a federation poses a particularly salient collective action problem that can only be overcome
with intergovernmental cooperation. A coordinated response to prevent a collective risk is logically
more difficult where authority is vertically fragmented, as difficulties in coordination increase with
the number of bargaining actors.12 The sanitary threat requires an urgent and coordinated response
that is hampered by the vertical fragmentation of powers. We here argue that as the threat uncovers
problems for coordinated action, central governments in federations become a focal point for citizens
(Schelling, 1980).13 Consensus with the solution is facilitated by the specific nature of the commonly
11 In Bednar’s theoretical model, this would entail moving from stage (III), where there is general agreement on how to solve
the problem, but this general agreement is not commonly known, to (IV), where the public agrees with both the problem and
the solution and this general concurrence is publicly known (2008, 190).
12 Due to the importance of successful coordination for the functioning of firms, organizations, or industries (Camerer and
Knez, 1997; Friedman, 2012; Schelling, 1980), there is a large body of research in economics on coordination games. Since the
determinants for coordination failure or success can be more easily controlled for and identified in laboratory studies than in
field studies, most of the work on coordination has relied on controlled experiments (Cooper et al., 1990, 1992; Van Huyck,
Battalio and Beil, 1990, 1991). While first studies demonstrated that coordination failure among participants was frequent,
subsequent research has identified structural factors that facilitate efficient coordination in firms and organizations; among
others, financial incentives, communication, and groups’ size (Devetag and Ortmann, 2007).
13 Under normal circumstances, constitutions provide a guide to acceptable behavior; a focal point that coordinates citizens
regularly (Hardin, 1989)

9

acknowledged problem: because the fragmentation of authority causes a suboptimal response to the
threat, citizens coordinate their preferences around a prominent and more efficient decision-maker,
even if this might require redrawing the statu quo authority boundaries.
In fact, we now know that threats might influence perceptions about who should lead the way
out of a crisis. A recent literature trend has connected stealth democracy attitudes (Hibbing and
Theiss-Morse, 2002), that is, the idea that people prefer political decisions to be made via expert-based
governing arrangements to promote higher levels of efficiency and effectiveness, with the economic reforms and political transformations in the aftermath of the Great Recession (Alexiadou and Gunaydin,
2019; Lavezzolo and Ramiro, 2018; Lavezzolo, Ramiro and Fernández-Vazquez, 2020). These studies
suggest that when facing particularly negative and salient economic contexts, in the search of efficient
and effective governing solutions, voters’ resort to technocratic types of profiles in government. An
even more recent group of, mostly experimental, pieces on the political consequences of COVID-19
crisis find that the pandemic has been associated, at least in the short term, with greater support for the
incumbent government (Blais et al., 2020; Leininger and Schaub, 2020; Merkley et al., 2020), a strong
activation of selective evaluation – with partisanship very relevantly determining support – (Gadarian,
Goodman and Pepinsky, 2020; Grossman et al., 2020) and a strong national bias coupled with higher
demands for techno-authoritarian decision-making (Amat et al., 2020).
We believe all of the findings above, which present paradigmatic shifts in public attitudes in times
of crisis, as well as the still ongoing pandemic, present a unique opportunity to investigate, for the
first time in the literature, the effect of external threats on preferences towards vertical distributions of
authority in federations. To that end, we develop an online survey experiment to explicitly model this
causal relationship by randomly assigning information to participants and measuring their reactions
to these stimuli in the context of COVID-19. Below we outline three sets of testable hypotheses. The
first one examines the main average effect of interest in the paper. The rest delve into heterogeneous
treatment effects, trying to uncover the conditional effect of the main dimensions of party competition
for respondents in the sample and thus capture those individual-level perception biases that might
be conditioning the described main effect. Particularly, given our focus is on federations and quasifederations, two specific moderators are taken into account: center-periphery territorial preferences
and partisanship. The argument underpinning the first one is that the hypothesized consensus around

10

the coordinated solution might depend on individuals’ preferences towards a more centralized or
decentralized form of the state (Alonso, 2012; Pardos-Prado and Sagarzazu, 2019). As for the second
one, if partisanship colors attitudes, the idea is to understand to what extent individuals might adjust
their view of which level of government should be in charge of managing the crisis depending on the
partisan label of multilevel incumbents (Tilley and Hobolt, 2011).

H1. In a context of a particularly salient external threat, giving people in a federation information about
multilevel coordination failures will affect how they think vertical authority should be distributed, favoring
centralizing reforms.

H2. In a context of a particularly salient external threat, giving people in a federation information about
multilevel coordination failures will affect how they think vertical authority should be distributed, dependent on
their territorial preferences.
Specifically:

• Exposure to the treatment will have a higher effect on centralization among those with centripetal
preferences than among those with centrifugal preferences.

H3. In a context of a particularly salient external threat, giving people in a federation information about
multilevel coordination failures will affect how they think vertical authority should be distributed, dependent on
their partisanship.
Specifically:

• Exposure to the treatment will have a higher effect on centralization among federal incumbent
partisans than among opposition parties’ partisans.

IV.

Experimental Design

Federations and quasi-federations with a salient territorial dimension of competition represent particularly interesting cases in which to study popular reactions to an external threat, whether this is
military, economic or sanitary. First, as countries with multilevel governments, they face the same
11

coordination and scale problems previously identified in the literature. Second, unlike in federations
where the territorial dimension is uncontested or subsumed in a broader all-encompassing left-right
dimension, these are countries where there are various alternative coalitions of voters across dimensions.
In this sense, the Spanish case represents a particularly good example. As a centrifugal holdingtogether quasi-federation, in the last decade it has suffered an exceptional process of conflict extension
(Layman and Carsey, 2002). There has been an extreme process of first ideological, and then territorial
preference polarization, particularly after the interconnected consequences of the Great Recession (Vidal, 2018), the secessionist crisis in Catalonia (Simon Cosano, 2020), and the electoral success of VOX
(Turnbull-Dugarte, 2019), the first radical right party in the recent democratic history of the country.
Consequently, the case gives us the opportunity to identify the popular reactions to a particularly
devastating external shock as the one of COVID-19, in a country characterized by frequent internal
threats.14
We test our hypotheses using a series of online survey experiments with a priming manipulation.
Our focus in the Spanish case is short-term (April 2020) and long-term (November 2020). Additionally,
with the aim of exploring the external validity of the hypothesized effect, we develop a cross-sectional
study in 12 federations, quasi-federations and decentralized unitary systems worldwide (June 2020).
Working with such a heterogeneous group of countries may introduce large doses of noise in our analyses. Yet, we believe the coordination problems that motivate this study might actually be common to
countries with decentralized decision-making, being federations and their particular multilevel power
distribution arrangements, the epitome of the contexts we are interested in further exploring here.
Accordingly, regardless of the probable differences in the baseline or magnitude of the effect across
countries, we expect to see our first hypothesis confirmed virtually in all of the selected cases.
Our treatment consists of a statement in which we expose a randomly selected group of participants to information about World Health Organization’s (WHO) recommendations with respect to
governmental coordination and the difficulties of multilevel cooperation in each of the 13 selected
14 For instance, in the autumn of 2019, as a reaction to the Spanish Supreme Court’s ruling in the case against the secessionist
leaders that promoted a unilateral referendum and independence declaration in 2017, Catalonia experienced days of protests
and riots: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/10/18/world/europe/catalonia-separatist-belgium.html

12

countries.15
The exact wordings are as below:

Treatment group. The World Health Organization has warned countries about the importance of collaboration
and coordination between governments in the fight against the COVID-19. However, experts have pointed out
that the management of the crisis is being particularly difficult in Spain due to the collaboration and cooperation
problems between the central government and the regions. Which should be the actual power distribution between
the central government and the regions?
[0-10 scale provided to respondents where 0 means “Grant more power to the regions”, 5 “Statu quo” and
10 “Grant more power to the central government”]

Control group. Which should be the actual power distribution between the central government and the regions?
[0-10 scale provided to respondents where 0 means “Grant more power to the regions”, 5 “Statu quo” and
10 “Grant more power to the central government”]

In order to study the effect of exposure to multilevel coordination failures on public preferences
towards vertical distribution of power, we estimate a set of OLS models, with standard errors clustered at the regional level, that include individual controls as well as a set of regional fixed effects.
The inclusion of individual controls and regional fixed effects is important for several reasons. First,
because individuals’ reaction to the virus might be driven by individual characteristics. Specifically,
we control for age, gender, education, being unemployed, being affected by a lay-off as a consequence
of the pandemic, as well as individual exposure to the COVID-19 shock (it takes the value 1 if someone
in the personal network of the respondent dies after infection).16 Second, because the intensity of the
virus outbreak in Spain had significant variation across the regions. Third, there might be a compound
treatment effect between the outbreak and the slightly varying political and institutional responses to
fight it across regions.
15 The

experiment was pre-registered at Evidence in Governance and Politics, EGAP.
A1 in the Appendix reports covariate balance tests across our treatment and control groups in our first Spanish
sample. Because of randomization, there are almost no statistical differences across groups. This also shows up across models
in this manuscript and in the Appendix: the estimates are very stable after including a number of additional covariates.
16 Table

13

V.

Study 1. Short-Term Effect in Spain

For the first study, we use a representative sample of the Spanish voting-age population (N=2,600).17
The survey experiment was developed in mid-April, when Spain had been locked down for a month,
and was ranking second in the world regarding the total number of contagions and first regarding
number of per capita deaths. In order to make the lock down effective, Spain adopted the state of alarm,
a constitutional measure that allowed central government to suspend regional powers temporarily.

i.

Average Treatment Effects

In Figure 1, we show the average treatment effect of the priming manipulation experiment we present
above for the whole sample, with control variables. The mean of the reported preferred vertical
distribution of power is around 5.5 in a scale from 0 to 10 for the whole sample, which suggests that,
on average, our respondents located themselves around the territorial statu quo in Spain. Moreover,
the ATE is around 0.7, which also confirms that, in the particular context of the pandemic, those who
were exposed to multilevel coordination failures significantly chose to grant more power to the central
government.

4

4.5

Linear Prediction
5
5.5
6

6.5

7

Figure 1: Average Treatment Effect on Preferred Territorial Distribution

Control Group

Treatment Group

17 The online survey was implemented by Netquest between April 15th and 18th . Respondents were recruited using age,
gender and region quotas in order to mirror the actual distribution of these variables

14

Likewise, in Table 1 we consider the validity of the effect by linking the treatment to specific policy
domains. Particularly, right after the general question on preferred vertical distribution of power,
we asked respondents about their preferred multilevel distribution of power on Health Care, Taxes
and Security. We believe that these results should be connected to the nature of the external threat.
The treatment seems to have a particularly significant effect on policy domains that are managerial
and sanitary in essence. The treatment shows a marginally significant effect on the centralization of
security competences, but when estimated with a more conservative specification in the Appendix
loses its significance. This policy domain seems to be perceived by respondents as less necessary in
the fight against the COVID-19. This result becomes particularly relevant in light of the previous
theoretical discussion on the necessary conditions for a centralized federal bargain to happen when
facing an external threat. In the context of the pandemic, respondents seem to favor some particular
measures over others.
Table 1: The Effect Across Policy Domains

Treatment

Health Care
0.358**
(0.146)

Taxes
0.443***
(0.139)

Control Variables
Region Fixed-Effects
Mean Dep. Var.
5.490
5.186
N
2,176
2,145
*** p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

ii.

Security
0.256*
(0.138)

4.874
2,181

The Moderating Effect of Territorial Preferences and Identity

Our second hypothesis explores the extent to which the existence of a second dimension of competition in Spain conditions the treatment. In Figure 2, we use a five point ordinal variable that categorizes
respondents’ preferred territorial distribution of power, using the actual statu quo as a baseline. Respondents are asked to choose a position from a range of options along a single dimension whose
extreme points are “I prefer a state where regions have the right to secession” and “I prefer a unitary state
without regions”.
Contrary to our expectation, the effect of the treatment is not only restricted to centripetal territorial
preferences but is extensible to the whole range of positions. That is, randomly treated respondents

15

favored centralizing positions regardless of their previous territorial preferences. In fact, paradoxically,
the magnitude of the effect is relatively larger among respondents with centrifugal positions than
among those with centripetal ones (from a 1.3 point jump among those that favor secession to barely
0.3 among those that want a unitary country). Two relevant observations should be made here. First,
we are not dealing with any ceiling effect; the mean of this independent variable is 3.23 (1-5) and
its distribution, if something, is skewed to the left. Second, given the steep increase in centralizing
preferences as territorial preferences become more centripetal, we might be just facing the fact that
pro-centralization positions are reaching a saturation point in the scale.

0

2

Linear Prediction
4
6

8

10

Figure 2: The Effect Across Respondents’ Previous Territorial Preferences

Secession

+ Decentralization

Status Quo

Control group

+ Centralization

Unitary

Treatment group

In Figure 3 we try to delve deeper into the identity side of this dimension by using the so-called
Linz-Moreno question. This question, first developed by Linz in the context of Spain (1981, 519–48),
asks respondents to choose a position from a range of options along a single dimension whose extreme
points are “I feel only [regional]” and “I feel only [national]”.18 The results in Figure 3 present interesting
caveats that deserve further comment. Mainly, we see a similar effect to the one in the previous
figure. That is, the treatment increases pro-centralization preferences across alternative identities,
18 Despite its widespread use, the measure has been the focus of some validity oriented criticism lately (Guinjoan and Rodon,
2015; Sinnot, 2006). While we recognize the pertinence of most of these remarks, given its tradition in Spain and the absence
of a widespread used alternative, we believe it still presents a necessary complement to the previous purely distributional
moderator.

16

especially, again, among those with moderate identities. Interestingly, for those with extreme identities
the treatment loses its significance, suggesting that a different, and non-territorial, logic might be in
place. For instance, the fact that those individuals with single territorial identities have historically
been mainly identified with political parties other than those holding the incumbency at the federal
level (particularly, regionalist, secessionist, and right-wing nationalist parties). Next section explores
some of these partisan dynamics.

0

2

Linear Prediction
4
6

8

10

Figure 3: The Effect Across Respondents’ Territorial Identities

Regional

Regional >

Regional = National

Control group

iii.

National >

National

Treatment group

The Moderating Effect of Partisanship

Our third hypothesis investigates respondents’ potentially selective process of distributing authority
to different levels of government. Particularly, we are interested in testing for the role of partisanship
when shaping the treatment. To that end, we asked respondents to report the party to which they
would be willing to vote at that specific moment. In Figures 4 to 6, we present the results for government left-wing coalition partners’ voters (PSOE and Podemos), statewide right-wing opposition
parties’ voters (PP, VOX and Ciudadanos), and regionalist parties’ voters. Specifically, we compare the
behavior of voters in each of these groups to the rest of the respondents’ in the sample.
The results strongly support our expectation. Treated PSOE and Podemos voters significantly differ
17

in their pro-centralizing preferences from non-treated ones. These findings provide an extremely neat
graphical evidence of the way in which partisanship and, in this case, willingness to vote to federal
incumbent parties, influences the way in which people distribute vertical authority when exposed to a
coordination failure. Centralization becomes a suitable measure for individuals when those elites that
are closer to their preferences are in charge of delivering a coordinated solution.19

2

3

Linear Prediction
4
5
6

7

8

Figure 4: The Effect among Federal Coalition Parties’ Voters

No

Incumbent Parties' Voters
Control Group

Yes

Treatment Group

Figure 5 presents an additional proof of this behavior. On average, PP, Vox and Ciudadanos voters
in the control group show a more centralizing position than the rest of the respondents in the control
group, showing a position that very much mirrors that among the rest of the treated in the sample.
Interestingly, the graph shows that among the treated statewide opposition parties’ voters, learning
about multilevel coordination failures doesn’t show any significant difference in their preferences. In
fact, this generally, on average, more pro-centralization group of voters is the one with the smallest
treatment effect in our sample.

Yet, as a highly polarized quasi-federation with prominent internal threats, the presence of regional
and secessionist political parties in the Spanish Lower Chamber was exceptionally high at the time of
19 The latter issue becomes particularly relevant in the case of Podemos, a party that, on average, has voters that are more
pro-decentralization than the rest of the respondents. Even if this is the case, in the Appendix we show that the effect of the
treatment on Podemos voters follows the same positive and significant path that the one found among PSOE voters: indeed,
there is a 1.8 point difference between treated and non-treated Podemos voters.

18

2

3

Linear Prediction
4
5
6

7

8

Figure 5: The Effect among Federal Statewide Opposition Parties’ Voters

No

Statewide Opposition Parties' Voters

Yes

Treatment Group

Control Group

the pandemic. Five out of the ten parliamentary groups were of this kind, that is sixteen out of the
twenty-three political parties with representation. In order to capture the conditional effect of regional
and secessionist partisanship on the treatment, we group all of these voters together in Figure 6. The
effects in the graph necessarily complement the previous two. As observable, this group of voters
shows a much more pro-decentralization position than the rest (the average difference between both
control groups is of 3 points in our dependent variable’s 0 to 10 scale). Moreover, even if it fails to
reach significance, the treatment effect among regionalist voters is of around 1 point.

iv.

The Territorial Patterns of the Heterogeneous Effects

Do these moderating effects follow a territorial pattern? If, as demonstrated, the individual level
vertical distribution of authority follows a highly selective pattern, we should expect this effect to vary
depending on the particular partisan label of regional incumbents too. In Spain, 14 out of the 17 total
regions had a premier that belonged to PSOE (9) or to PP (5), alone or in coalition, at the time of the
survey. The other 3 (Basque Country, Cantabria, and Catalonia) had premiers belonging to regional
parties, though the PSOE was part of the incumbent coalition in the first two. In order to capture
some of these dynamics, in Figure 7 we have separated the previous heterogeneous treatment effects

19

2

3

Linear Prediction
4
5
6

7

8

Figure 6: The Effect among Regiona Parties’ Voters

0

Regionalist Parties' Voters
Control Group

1

Treatment Group

depending on the color of the regional government. In the first column, there are two scenarios of
indifference; that is, being a PSOE voter in a region governed by PSOE and being a PP voter in a region
governed by PSOE, both represent two scenarios in which, for different reasons, we shouldn’t expect
to see significant differences between treated and controlled groups. PSOE voters in these regions live
in jurisdictions not only aligned with their preferences, but also with those of the central government,
and thus, as we find, there shouldn’t be particular reasons to select one level of government upon the
other one. As for the PP voters in regions governed by the PSOE, given their distance to both federal
and regional incumbents, it wouldn’t be unfair to say that these are voters trapped in unfavorable
contexts, and thus, as we find, they do not have a particular reason to select one level of government
upon the other one.
The incentives change in the second column, where voters of each party have the possibility of
assigning more authority to the one level governed by their party. This is the case of those PSOE voters
living in regions governed by the PP. As observable, among those who learned about coordination
failures, the centripetal effect is extraordinary, with levels of authority distribution of around 8 points
in the scale of reference. As for those PP voters living in regions governed by the PP, the effect
among the treated is negative and marginally non-significant. Taken together, both graphs neatly

20

exemplify the extent to which the Spanish multilevel political scenario interacts with our treatment
effect, showing how even in times of the pandemic, there are important territorial dynamics that
shape the way in which perceptions about coordination failures interact with individual level partisan
biases.
Figure 7: Aligned and Non-Aligned Regions

Regional Incumbent: PP

7

7

6

6

4

5

5
4

Linear Prediction

8

8

Regional Incumbent: PSOE

No

PSOE voters

Yes

No

8
7
6

7

5

6
4

4

5

Linear Prediction

Yes

Regional Incumbent: PP

8

Regional Incumbent: PSOE

PSOE voters

No

PP voters

VI.

Yes

No

PP voters

Yes

Study 2. Long-Term Effect in Spain

For the second study, we use a smaller but still representative sample of the Spanish voting-age population (N=1,200).20 The survey experiment was developed between October and November, in the
midst of the second wave of the pandemic. However, unlike in April, Autonomous Communities
were in charge again of the management of the crisis, this time coordinated via a federal multilateral
Council composed by the central government’s Minister of Health and his regional counterparts. In
the beginning of June, once the first wave of the pandemic started to be under control, the central govonline survey was implemented by Netquest between October 29th and November 4th . As in the previous survey,
respondents were recruited using age, gender and region quotas in order to mirror the actual distribution of these variables.
20 The

21

ernment devolved the health service management back to the regions, which hold the decentralized
power in this regard, and remained like that ever since then. To prove that the changes between both
moments were popularly perceived at the time of the survey, Table 2 presents the average responses
to the question “Who do you think is the main responsible of how the pandemic has been managed in your
region”?
Table 2: Main Responsible Level of Government
Spring (%)
5.90
57.22
27.19
0.46
2.26
6.97
100

European Union
Central government
Regional government
Local government
Don’t know
Don’t answer
Total

Fall (%)
2.58
47.88
39.63
0.83
2.41
6.66
100

In the second moment, there is a clear decrease among those respondents choosing the central
government, and a clear increase among those choosing their regional governments; the rest of the
categories remain, more or less, the same. This is relevant descriptive evidence motivating the purpose
of investigating the effect in the long-term: that is, the possibility of replicating our experiment and
comparing our results in moments in which the main responsible level of government was different but
the severity of the pandemic was otherwise similar and thus comparable. Table 3 compares the ATE
in both moments and confirms, once again, its positive direction and significance.21 Interestingly, the
baseline in the control group is higher during the fall than during the spring, though the magnitude
of the effect is practically the same. As it appears, in the absence of an effective solution, six months
later of the appearance of the COVID-19, the persistence of the threat continued to increase procentralization tendencies in Spain, even under an alternative territorial model of crisis management
and with a public that had already experienced a pro-centralization drift.

VII.

Study 3. The Effect in a Comparative Sample

As important as understanding the duration of the identified effect is to be able to relate it to comparable trends in institutionally similar contexts. Decentralized decision-making is an extended territorial
21 The model controls for respondents’ sex, age, employment situation, being affected by a lay-off, having a fatal covid
experience and regional fixed-effects. Standard errors are also clustered by region.

22

Table 3: Comparing the ATE in both moments
Time

Control Group

Treatment Group

Difference

Spring 2020 (N=2,199)

5.18

5.90

0.72***

Fall 2020 (N=1,033)

5.47

6.15

0.68**

Predicted values are reported.

*** p

< 0.01, ** p < 0.05, * p < 0.1

model of government organization across all world latitudes that, theoretically, in the presence of an
external threat, should face the same challenges that have been identified in this paper. To properly
test for the comparative dimension of the identified effect, we repeated our experiment our priming
experiment in June 2020, in a sample of federations, quasi-federations and decentralized unitary countries worldwide:22 Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Poland,
Sweden, United Kingdom and United States of America.
Having such an institutionally diverse set of countries presents a unique comparative opportunity for our study. The sample represents some of the most affected democracies by the COVID-19
pandemic at the time – a group of countries where the external threat was clear and widespread.
Moreover, the debate about the centralized versus decentralized management of the crisis has been a
salient one, even among decentralized unitary countries in our sample. For instance, on September 24,
French Prime Minister Jean Castex called for a regionalized approach, defending that “most of the measures should not be decided from Paris”.23 Furthermore, countries like Sweden have a fully decentralized
healthcare system, with responsibility lying within regional councils and, in some cases, within municipalities and local governments. We pool all of these countries together, and, besides the individual
level controls used in previous models, we also control for respondents’ ideology, central government
incumbent party voters, and the Regional Authority Index scores (Hooghe et al., 2016).24 Given the
existing institutional heterogeneity among the countries in our sample, introducing the RAI gives us
the possibility of controlling for the part of the variation in individual level expectations that depends
on the actual decision-making authority of each of these territorial levels.
As shown in Figure 8, the effect is positive in every single country, reaching significance in Australia, Austria, Brazil, France, Germany, New Zealand, and Poland (N=9,324). Results confirm that
22 We

use Bednar (2008) to classify them according to their territorial structures.
24, 2020/09/13: “Covid-19: Fearing a second wave, the French government is relying on a local strategy”
24 In the Appendix, we also introduce regional level deviations from country average per capita deaths at the time of the
survey to control for regional level incidence of the virus. Results hold although they lose some magnitude and significance.
23 France

23

learning about coordination problems activates the same underlying solution mechanism among the
different audiences of this varied group of countries. Interestingly though, while all of the average
power distributions by country are located around 5, that is, the status quo, five out of six of the federations in the sample show pro-centralization average positions among the control and the treatment
groups. On the contrary, it is among unitary and quasi-federal countries, such as, France, Poland or
the United Kingdom, were we find the most pro-decentralization average positions. These countries
seem to depart from slightly different baselines, which might be related to their territorial structures
and the existing, country specific, average political expectations in this regard.

VIII.

(U
SW )
E
(U
)
U
K
(Q
F)
U
SA
(F
)

)

Control Group

PO
L

(U
Z
N

(Q
F)

(F
)

IT
A

G
ER

FR

A

(U

)

(F
)
AN

C

A

(F
)

(F
)
BR

AT

AU

S

(F
)

3

Linear Prediction
4
5
6

7

Figure 8: Comparative Analysis of the Effect

Treatment Group

Conclusion

The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic has presented a unique opportunity to understand whether
citizens’ preferences over multilevel authority boundaries change as a result of an external threat like
this. Our main argument is that external threats turn intergovernmental coordination into a salient
issue for citizens because they compel governments to provide a rapid coordinated response. As citizens acknowledge that coordination represents a problem to tackle the threat, the central government

24

emerges as a focal point in the solution. Citizens coordinate their preferences around a more efficient
decision-making process that consists in the centralization of authority and thus the reduction of the
number of decision-makers.
Using several survey experiment analyses based on on-line samples in Spain, and 12 other countries, we have shown that citizens that are primed on problems of intergovernmental cooperation in
fighting the COVID-19 are more likely to support centralization. Results also show that this centralizing drift is moderated by territorial preferences and ideology, that it survives in time as long as the
threat is salient, and that the effect on popular preferences has a comparative nature and thus travels
across decentralized but institutionally heterogeneous countries.
These empirical findings have some implications regarding one of the most important theoretical
questions in the area of federal studies: the stability of the federation and its drivers. Although shifts
in citizens’ preferences over authority boundaries may fade away when the exposure to a shock ends,
popular reactions to external threats may have an impact over the federal bargain that outlasts them.
Once popular preferences for a redrawing of authority boundaries are publicly acknowledged, changes
in the distribution of authority may follow in the form of beneficial adjustments but also in the form of
opportunistic transgressions. As Bednar (2008, 8) states “distributing authority requires rules, and rules
may be broken”.

25

References
Alesina, Alberto and Enrico Spolaore. 1997. “On the number and size of nations.” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics 112(4):1027–1056.
Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. 2000. “Economic integration and political
disintegration.” American Economic Review 90(5):1276–1296.
Alexiadou, Despina and Hakan Gunaydin. 2019. “Commitment or expertise? Technocratic appointments as political responses to economic crises.” European Journal of Political Research 58(3):845–865.
Alonso, Sonia. 2012. Challenging the State: Devolution and the Battle for Partisan Credibility: A Comparison
of Belgium, Italy, Spain, and the United Kingdom. Oxford University Press.
Amat, Francesc and Albert Falcó-Gimeno. 2014. “The legislative dynamics of political decentralization
in parliamentary democracies.” Comparative Political Studies 47(6):820–850.
Amat, Francesc, Andreu Arenas, Albert Falcó-Gimeno and Jordi Muñoz. 2020. “Pandemics meet
democracy. Experimental evidence from the COVID-19 crisis in Spain.”.
Amoretti, Ugo M. and Nancy G. Bermeo. 2004. Federalism and territorial cleavages. JHU Press.
Bakke, Kristin M and Erik Wibbels. 2006. “Diversity, disparity, and civil conflict in federal states.”
World Politics 59(1):1–50.
Bednar, Jenna. 2008. The robust federation: Principles of design. Cambridge University Press.
Benz, Arthur. 2011. Escaping joint-decision traps: National and supranational experiences compared.
In The EU’s Decision Traps: Comparing Policies. Oxford University Press, UK pp. 199–216.
Benz, Arthur and Jörg Broschek. 2013. Federal Dynamics: Introduction. In Federal Dynamics: Continuity,
Change, and the Varieties of Federalism. Oxford University Press, UK pp. 1–26.
Beramendi, Pablo. 2012. The political geography of inequality: regions and redistribution. Cambridge
University Press.
Beramendi, Pablo and Daniel Stegmueller. 2020. “The Political Geography Of The Eurocrisis.” World
Politics .
26

Beramendi, Pablo and Melissa Rogers. 2019. “Fiscal decentralization and the distributive incidence of
the Great Recession.” Regional Studies pp. 1–16.
Birch, Anthony H. 1966. “Approaches to the Study of Federalism.” Political Studies 14(1):15–33.
Blais, André, Damien Bol, Marco Giani and Peter John Loewen. 2020. “The effect of COVID-19 lockdowns on political support: Some good news for democracy?” European Journal of Political Research
(https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12401).
Brennan, Geoffrey and James M. Buchanan. 1980. The power to tax: Analytic foundations of a fiscal
constitution. Cambridge University Press.
Camerer, Colin and Marc Knez. 1997. Organizational decision making. In Coordination in organizations:
A game-theoretic perspective. Cambridge University Press Cambridge, UK pp. 158–188.
Cooper, Russell, Douglas V De Jong, Robert Forsythe and Thomas W Ross. 1992. “Forward induction
in coordination games.” Economics Letters 40(2):167–172.
Cooper, Russell W, Douglas V DeJong, Robert Forsythe and Thomas W Ross. 1990. “Selection criteria
in coordination games: Some experimental results.” The American Economic Review 80(1):218–233.
Dandoy, Régis and Arjan Schakel. 2013. Regional and national elections in Western Europe: territoriality of
the vote in thirteen countries. Springer.
de Figueiredo Jr, Rui JP and Barry R Weingast. 2005. “Self-enforcing federalism.” Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 21(1):103–135.
Devetag, Giovanna and Andreas Ortmann. 2007. “When and why? A critical survey on coordination
failure in the laboratory.” Experimental economics 10(3):331–344.
Dikshit, Ramesh Dutta. 1971. “Military Interpretation of Federal Constitutions: A Critique.” The Journal
of Politics 33(1):180–189.
Dixit, Avinash and John Londregan. 1996. “The determinants of success of special interests in redistributive politics.” the Journal of Politics 58(4):1132–1155.
Elias, Anwen, Edina Szöcsik and Christina Isabel Zuber. 2015. “Position, selective emphasis and
framing: How parties deal with a second dimension in competition.” Party Politics 21(6):839–850.
27

Filippov, Mikhail, Peter C Ordeshook and Olga Shvetsova. 2004. Designing federalism: A theory of selfsustainable federal institutions. Cambridge University Press.
Friedman, James W. 2012. Problems of coordination in economic activity. Springer Science & Business
Media.
Gadarian, Shana Kushner, Sara Wallace Goodman and Thomas B Pepinsky. 2020. “Partisanship, health
behavior, and policy attitudes in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic.” SSRN (preprint), Posted
March 27.
Garrett, Geoffrey and Jonathan Rodden. 2006. Globalization and fiscal decentralization. In Globalization
and Self-Determination: Is the Nation-State Under Siege? Routledge pp. 87–109.
Gibson, Edward L, Ernesto Calvo and Tulia Falleti. 2004. Reallocative federalism: territorial overrepresentation and public spending in the Western Hemisphere. In Federalism and democracy in Latin
America. Johns Hopkins University Press pp. 173–196.
Grossman, Guy, Soojong Kim, Jonah Rexer and Harsha Thirumurthy. 2020. “Political partisanship
influences behavioral responses to governors’ recommendations for COVID-19 prevention in the
United States.” Available at SSRN 3578695 .
Guinjoan, Marc and Toni Rodon. 2015. “A scrutiny of the Linz-Moreno question.” Publius: The Journal
of Federalism 46(1):207–219.
Hardin, Russell. 1989. Why a Constitution? In The Federalist Papers and the New Institutionalism. New
York: Agathon.
Hibbing, John R and Elizabeth Theiss-Morse. 2002. Stealth democracy: Americans’ beliefs about how
government should work. Cambridge University Press.
Hooghe, Liesbet, Gary Marks, Arjan H Schakel, Sandra Chapman Osterkatz, Sara Niedzwiecki and
Sarah Shair-Rosenfield. 2016. Measuring regional authority: A postfunctionalist theory of governance.
Vol. 1 Oxford University Press.
Inman, Robert P and Daniel L Rubinfeld. 1997. “Rethinking federalism.” Journal of economic perspectives
11(4):43–64.

28

Jurado, Ignacio and Sandra León. 2020. “Economic globalization and decentralization: A centrifugal
or centripetal relationship?” Governance .
Kincaid, John and Richard L Cole. 2011. “Citizen attitudes toward issues of federalism in Canada,
Mexico, and the United States.” Publius: The Journal of Federalism 41(1):53–75.
Kincaid, John and Richard L Cole. 2015. “Citizen evaluations of federalism and the importance of trust
in the federation government for opinions on regional equity and subordination in four countries.”
Publius: The Journal of Federalism 46(1):51–76.
Kymlicka, Will. 2005. Is federalism a viable alternative to secession? In Theories of secession. Routledge
pp. 121–160.
Lavezzolo, Sebastián and Luis Ramiro. 2018. “Stealth democracy and the support for new and challenger parties.” European Political Science Review 10(2):267–289.
Lavezzolo, Sebastian, Luis Ramiro and Pablo Fernández-Vazquez. 2020. “The Will for Reason: Voter
Demand for Experts in Office.” Manuscript 11.
Layman, Geoffrey C and Thomas M Carsey. 2002. “Party polarization and" conflict extension" in the
American electorate.” American Journal of Political Science pp. 786–802.
Leininger, Arndt and Max Schaub. 2020. “Voting at the dawn of a global pandemic.”.
Maddox, William P. 1941.

“The political basis of federation.” American Political Science Review

35(6):1120–1127.
Massetti, Emanuele and Arjan H Schakel. 2013. “Ideology matters: Why decentralisation has a differentiated effect on regionalist parties’ fortunes in W estern democracies.” European Journal of Political
Research 52(6):797–821.
Meguid, Bonnie. 2008. Party competition between unequals.
Merkley, Eric, Aengus Bridgman, Peter John Loewen, Taylor Owen, Derek Ruths and Oleg Zhilin.
2020. “A Rare Moment of Cross-Partisan Consensus: Elite and Public Response to the COVID-19
Pandemic in Canada.” Canadian Journal of Political Science/Revue canadienne de science politique pp. 1–
12.
29

Muñoz, Jordi and Raul Tormos. 2020. “Economic expectations and support for secession in Catalonia:
between causality and rationalization.” European Political Science Review 7(2):315–341.
Oates, Wallace E. 1972. Fiscal federalism. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Oates, Wallace E. 1999. “An essay on fiscal federalism.” Journal of Economic Literature 37(3):1120–1149.
Oates, Wallace E. 2005. “Toward a second-generation theory of fiscal federalism.” International tax and
public finance 12(4):349–373.
Pardos-Prado, Sergi and Inaki Sagarzazu. 2019. “Economic performance and center-periphery conflicts
in party competition.” Party Politics 25(1):50–62.
Qian, Yingyi and Barry R Weingast. 1997. “Federalism as a commitment to reserving market incentives.” Journal of Economic perspectives 11(4):83–92.
Riker, William H. 1964. Federalism: Origin, operation, significance. Little, Brown.
Rodden, Jonathan. 2006. Hamilton’s paradox: the promise and peril of fiscal federalism. Cambridge University Press.
Rodden, Jonathan and Erik Wibbels. 2002. “Beyond the fiction of federalism: Macroeconomic management in multitiered systems.” World Politics 54(4):494–531.
Sambanis, Nicholas and Branko Milanovic. 2014. “Explaining Regional Autonomy Differences in Decentralized Countries.” Comparative Political Studies 47(13):1830–1855.
Scharpf, Fritz W. 1988. “The joint decision trap: Lessons from German federalism and European
integration.” Public Administration 66(3):239–278.
Scharpf, Fritz W. 1997. Games Real Actors Play: Actor-Centered Institutionalism in Policy Research. Boulder:
Westview Press.
Schelling, Thomas C. 1980. The strategy of conflict. Harvard University Press.
Simon Cosano, Pablo. 2020. “The Multiple Spanish Elections of April and May 2019: The Impact of
Territorial and Left-right Polarisation.” South European Society and Politics .

30

Sinnot. 2006. “An evaluation of the measurement of national, subnational and supranational identity
in crossnational surveys.” International Journal of Public Opinion Research 18(2):211–223.
Stepan, Alfred C. 1999. “Federalism and democracy: Beyond the US model.” Journal of Democracy
10(4):19–34.
Swenden, Wilfried and Bart Maddens. 2009. Territorial party politics in Western Europe. Springer.
Tilley, James and Sara B Hobolt. 2011. “Is the Government to Blame? An Experimental Test of How
Partisanship Shapes Perceptions of Performance and Responsibility.” The Journal of Politics 73(2):1–
15.
Tocqueville, Alexis de. 1835. Democracy in America. Saunders and Otley (London).
Toubeau, Simon and Markus Wagner. 2015. “Explaining party positions on decentralization.” British
Journal of Political Science 45(1):97–119.
Turnbull-Dugarte, Stuart J. 2019. “Explaining the end of Spanish exceptionalism and electoral support
for Vox.” Research & Politics 6(2):1–8.
Van Huyck, John B, Raymond C Battalio and Richard O Beil. 1990. “Tacit coordination games, strategic
uncertainty, and coordination failure.” The American Economic Review 80(1):234–248.
Van Huyck, John B, Raymond C Battalio and Richard O Beil. 1991. “Strategic uncertainty, equilibrium
selection, and coordination failure in average opinion games.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
106(3):885–910.
Vidal, Guillem. 2018. “Challenging business as usual? The rise of new parties in Spain in times of
crisis.” West European Politics 41(2):261–286.
Wheare, Kenneth Clinton. 1946. Federal government/KC Wheare. London; New York: H. Milford; Oxford
University Press, 1946.
Wibbels, Erik. 2005. Federalism and the market: Intergovernmental conflict and economic reform in the developing world. Cambridge University Press.
Ziblatt, Daniel. 2006. Structuring the state: The formation of Italy and Germany and the puzzle of federalism.
Princeton University Press.
31

