Ivermectin and the odds of hospitalization due to COVID-19: evidence from a quasi-experimental
analysis based on a public intervention in Mexico City

José Merino i (i Digital Agency for Public Innovation, Mexico City)
Victor Hugo Borja ii (ii, Mexican Social Security Institute)
Oliva López, José Alfredo Ochoa iii (iii, Ministry of Health, Mexico City)
Eduardo Clark, Lila Petersen, Saul Caballero iv (iv Digital Agency for Public Innovation, Mexico
City)
Code: https://github.com/nasaul/paper_ivermectina
Data:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1VtXKW1IuCm4qRowlotXnTWZlhLoQYYmEsZp7ERUIeAQ
Summary
Objective
To measure the effect of Mexico City’s population-level intervention –an ivermectin-based Medical Kit –
– in hospitalizations during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Methods
A quasi-experimental research design with a Coarsened Exact Matching method using administrative data
from hospitals and phone-call monitoring. We estimated logistic-regression models with matched
observations adjusting by age, sex, COVID severity, and comorbidities. For robustness checks separated
the effect of the kit from phone medical monitoring; changed the comparison period; and subsetted the
sample by hospitalization occupancy,
Results
We found a significant reduction in hospitalizations among patients who received the ivermectin-based
medical kit; the range of the effect is 52%- 76% depending on model specification.
Conclusions
The study supports ivermectin-based interventions to assuage the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on
the health system.

1. Introduction: State of the evidence and discussion on ivermectin and COVID-19
Once COVID-19 cases are identified, early home interventions can reduce hospitalizations by
treating patients in early stages. However, there is no standardized pharmacological treatment for
COVID-19, nor a medical consensus about how to prevent those with mild or moderate symptoms from
developing severe symptoms (Siemieniuk, R. A, 2020); mainly among patients who have not been
hospitalized (Katherine J. Et Al, 2020).
Uncertainty about the best way to treat infected patients translates into difficulty in designing
population-based interventions. Ivermectin is a Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved broad
spectrum antiparasitic drug used in the control of several tropical diseases (Navarro. M. et al, 2019). It
was associated with COVID-19 treatment because in vitro lab studies showed that it can diminish SARSCoV-2 viral load (See Caly, et al 2020). The proposed antiviral action on coronavirus suggests that it
inhibits the binding capacity of the virus to a protein that would lead it into the nucleus. This would avoid
an exaggerated immune response, leading to a normal and efficient antiviral response, suggesting that
“ivermectin’s nuclear transport inhibitory activity may be effective against SARS-CoV-2” (Caly, et al.,
2020, 1). Some remarks against the use of ivermectin state that, in order to have effects similar to those
shown in the in vitro test, doses higher than those usually administered would be necessary.
Administration without medical follow up can have adverse effects in immunosuppressed people, and
could cause negative interactions with other medical treatments (Chaccour, C. 2021).
On the other hand, in an ongoing meta-analysis, so far having included 18 clinical trials in 21
countries, a total of 2,282 patients have been studied. Results here show: i. a reduction in the time taken to
eliminate the virus and a reduction in inflammation markers: ii. a decrease of the hospitalization time; iii.
an increase of 43% in the recovery rate; iv. a 75% increase in survival rates. However, the authors
consider continued clinical trials at higher scales necessary (Hill, A. et. al, 2021), as the studies have
different outcome variables, the number of participants is still very small and the ivermectin doses differs
among studies.
Another body of evidence consists of quasi-experimental studies in which comparisons are made
retrospectively between patients who had ivermectin as part of their COVID-19 treatment and patients
who didn’t. In a Florida hospital, ivermectin use was associated with lower mortality rates, mainly in
patients with severe pulmonary symptoms (Rajter, J. C. et al, 2021). In Bangladesh, a study indicated that
among those patients who received ivermectin, lower rates of supplemental oxygen were reported (9.6%
vs 45.9%), respiratory difficulties were reduced (2.6% vs 15.8%), as was the need for antibiotics (15.7%
vs 60.2%), and the need for intensive care (0.09% vs 8.3%). The length of stay in hospital was nine days
for the ivermectin patients vs 15 days for the control patients (Khan, M. 2020).

2.

Case study: Policy intervention in Mexico City
Facing an accelerated increase in COVID-19 cases and with critical levels of hospital saturation

during December 2020, the Mexico City Government decided to expand population-based health
interventions. This expansion consisted in the implementation of a prehospital home-care program that
combines early detection with antigen tests, a phone-based followup for positive patients, and the
provision of a medical kit containing ivermectin.
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommended the early detection of COVID-19 cases.
The Mexico City Government therefore extended the testing program, from health centers and hospitals
into a massive testing program in 230 temporary mobile units called “kiosks”. These were opened in areas
based on priority determined by COVID-19 incidence, sociodemographic characteristics, and due to ease
of access1. The objective of the program is to reduce access barriers to identifying the infection at early
stages, cut transmission chains through home isolation, and to promptly attend positive cases. Some
kiosks are rotated each week based on selection criteria fluctuations, and such that access is not restricted
based on place of residence. The mass testing program began on July 8th, 2020 with 3,000 tests
administered daily. By mid-November, capacity was expanded to 24,000 daily tests.
The early detection of cases is complemented with a follow-up system for positive patients
through Locatel (the Mexico City Government call center). Locatel contacts all patients who have tested
positive for SARS-CoV-2 by telephone and by Whatsapp text message. In the call, patients who’ve not
learned their test results are informed of the results, and referred to a doctor through another phone call
where appropriate. All positive patients are asked if they are in isolation. Alarming symptoms are
monitored and a follow up every two days is offered. If alarming symptoms are identified, the patient is
referred to a doctor who evaluates the case through breathing exercises, and if necessary, the patient may
be contacted by video-call to assess other symptoms. Serious cases are immediately transferred to 911.
Since 28 December, 2020, medical kits have been provided to positive mild to moderate
symptomatic patients. The health care algorithm consists in the following process: Patients with or
without respiratory symptoms2 receive medical attention in the triage zone at the kiosks. After a clinical
evaluation, an antigen test is taken. If the test is negative but the person has symptoms, they get a PCR
test. When the antigen test is positive and the patient has had cough, fever, headache or covid related

1

Priority zones: total active cases, deaths, hospitalized patients, outpatients, positivity rate, and active cases per
100,000 inhabitants, population density, establishments with requests for disability, average number of households
per dwelling, average number of persons per household, people with symptoms detected in the house-to-house
program, and the proportion of the sample of follow-up patients.

2

Cough, fever, diarrhea, polypnea, arterial pain or abdominal pain, dyspnea, chest pain or cyanosis.

symptoms within the past 10 days, they are referred to a doctor for a prescription, a medical kit, and
guidance on prevention, as well as instructions on handling any alarming symptoms. If alarming
symptoms are presented, among them, dyspnea, chest pain or cyanosis, the patient is referred to a
hospital. The medical kit contains ivermectin (four six mg. tablets, two pills for two days), paracetamol
(ten 500 mg tablets, one tablet every eight hours, if symptoms are present) and acetylsalicylic acid (30
100 mg tablets, one pill daily for 14 days)3. After one month and the delivery of 83,000 medical kits,
detailed data was collected on the evolution of patient illnesses including among those whose symptoms
required hospital admission.
The present study consists of a quasi-experimental evaluation of the effects of the medical kits on
hospitalization for COVID-19 in Mexico City based on all of this and a matching methodology to identify
the effect of ivermectin on the odds of hospitalization. Additionally, we ran a series of robustness checks
to verify that the effect found holds with multiple sets of population groups and is not driven by other
causes, such as patient monitoring.
3.

Methodology

a.

Research design

To assess the effect of ivermectin on hospitalizations in Mexico City, we used a quasi-experimental
research design. We make use of statistical methods that match cases based on observable co-variants,
reducing the possible imbalance on those variables, and allowing us to estimate systematic differences in
the dependent variable (i.e. hospitalization); between those who received the medical kit and those who
did not. This method recreates the randomization of treatment by statistically making those treated and
untreated indistinguishable on all relevant co-variants except the existence of the treatment (i.e.; got the
medical kit with ivermectin or did not). We used the Coarsened Exact Matching method to match
observations. This method belongs to the class of Monotonic Imbalance Bounding methods, in which
balance between the control and treatment groups is chosen by the user and not by the continuous reestimation process (Blackwell, M., 2009).
b. Data sources and analytical sample
The sample used for this study was built through the merger of three data sources. First, all of the records
of positive tests for COVID-19 registered in the SISVER system (Epidemiological Surveillance of
Respiratory Diseases System), from 23 November, 2020 to 28 January, 2021. We selected individuals
who were positive outpatients, both from tests performed at the kiosks and from Family Medical Units
3

The kit contained azithromycin, but this treatment was discontinued on January 25, 2020.

(FMU). From this database we used comorbidities, symptoms, and some sociodemographic variables.
Second, a database which integrates hospitalization data collected in Mexico City by public hospitals
(such as SEDESA, IMSS, ISSSTE, CCINSHAE, and SEMAR4), from 24 November, 2020 to 8 February,
2021. Third, the Locatel telephone follow-up system, which takes advantage of the SISVER records to
contact positive cases. The three data sources are merged using the Unique Population Registry Code
(CURP), a national identifier unique to each Mexican citizen and legal residents. This allowed for the
matching by this ID variable to the records of the three databases.
From these sources, we generated two databases for the analytical sample based on how the
treatment variable was built. The first option was built by an administrative rule under which we assumed
that all cases with a positive antigen test and symptoms received the medical kit after the program began
(treatment). The control group came from people who were tested between 28 November and the
beginning of the program on 28 December, and of course, who did not receive the kit (control). The
second data source was built by assigning the treatment to people identified by Locatel in their follow up
as having received the kit vs those reported as not receiving the kit, and then observing whether or not
they were later admitted to a hospital.
We analyzed a total of 156,468 patients with COVID-19 infection before implementing the
ivermectin program (controls), and 77,381 after the implementation. Similarly, from the telephonic
follow-up, 57,598 did not receive the kit (controls) and 18,074 received the kit (treated).
The data and variables were coded as follows:
c. Measures
Dependent/outcome variable: Hospitalized, dichotomous variable that identifies whether or not the
person was hospitalized.
Independent/Treatment Variable: I. Medical Kit: Dichotomous variable of each person who received
the medical kit including ivermectin is assigned a 1 and those who do not receive it a 0. II. Locatel
follow-up: A dichotomous variable in which 1 was assigned to people who agreed to receive telephone
and medical follow-up via Locatel.
Covariates
1. Sex: Dichotomous variable (1 is male and 0 is female).
2. Serious comorbidities: Additive scale in which 1 is added for each comorbidities reported by the
patient (1 - 6): diabetes, obesity, immunosuppression, COPD, heart disease, or kidney failure.

4

The Mexico City Health Minister (SEDESA); Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS); Institute for Social
Security and Services for State Workers (ISSSTE); Coordinating Commission of National Health Institutes and
Hospitals of High Specialization (CCINSHAE); Marine Ministry (SEMAR).

3. Serious symptoms: Additive scale in which 1 is added for each of the following symptoms (1-3):
dyspnea, chest pain or cyanosis
4. Moderate symptoms: Additive scale in which 1 is added for each of the following symptoms (17): cough, fever, diarrhea, polypnea, arterial pain, or abdominal pain.
5. Age groups: These following are 5 dichotomous variables in which 1 is assigned if the patient is
in any of the following age groups and 0 if it is in any other age range (<30, 31-40, 41-50, 51-60,
61-70, >70).

Table 1: Mean, standard deviation and proportion of variables by treatment and control group.

d. Identification Strategy
After balancing the observations over the covariates with CEM, we run a robust binomial logistic
regression to estimate the probability of being hospitalized, conditional on controls, and on delivery of the
medical kit. This guarantees that cases are identical in all factors but the presence or absence of the
treatment.
Given the data sources and distribution, there are some legitimate criticisms to be made on the
potential confounding: 1. We can’t separate time periods from treatment in the administrative data; 2.
Along with the medical kit, patients are also subject to telephone medical monitoring, so we need to
disentangle the effect of medication from attention; 3. Related to the first point, in the later period when
the kit program began, the percentage of occupied beds was visibly higher, thus, we need to show that the
effect of the medical kit with ivermectin holds at similar levels of hospitalizations. We perform some

robustness checks and sub-sampling specifications to confirm that the effect of the ivermectin-based kit
on the probability of hospitalization holds regardless of time, hospital saturation, and medical follow-up.
Model 1: General model, with administrative rule
We used administrative data from Hospitals and SISVER and assigned treatment to all patients
who met the criteria for receiving the medical kit after the beginning of the program on 28 December and
continuing through 28 January. The control group are positive symptomatic patients, from 23 November
to 28 December, and the treated group are positive symptomatic patients from 28 December to 28
January. The match was made with the following variables: comorbidities, male, severe symptoms,
moderate symptoms, and age ranges: older than 70 years, between 61 - 70 years, 51 - 60 years , 41 - 50
years, and 31 - 40 years.
Robustness Checks
We performed a robustness test to assess if the effect of the medical kit on hospitalization was not
due the following biases or confounding:
1. We isolated the effect of the medical kit from the Locatel follow-up. For that we tested the
general model (model 1) in sub-samples: i. Effect of the medical kit on hospitalization, subsample without Locatel follow-up (Model 2); ii. Effect of the medical kit on hospitalization, subsample with Locatel follow-up (Model 3); iii. Effect of locatel follow-up on hospitalization, subsample of people who received a medical kit (Model 4); iv. Effect of Locatel follow-up on
hospitalization, sub-sample of people who did not receive a medical kit (Model 5).
2. We controlled for hospitalization occupancy in a shorter period of time, with a subsample where
hospital occupancy was between 80% y 85%, to confirm that the effect found in the general
model is not due to a lower probability of finding a hospital in the treated group. The treated
group are positive symptomatic patients between 28 December and 28 January and the control
group are positive symptomatic patients between 15 and 28 December (Model 6).
3. To control for possible confounders we used a different database to determine the treatment group
and control group. With the administrative records of Locatel follow-up treatment, all persons
who confirmed they'd received the medical kit were assigned to the treatment group, and to the
control group, those who confirmed they hadn’t received it.
4. Finally, we stratified the effect of the control variables with decision trees to estimate the
heterogeneity in the causal effects to observe differences in the treatment effects between subsamples of the population (Athey, S., & Imbens, G. , 2016).

5. Results
In all the specifications, we found a negative and significant effect of the ivermectin-based medical kit on
the probability of hospitalization among the patients who received it vis-a-vis those who did not.
Depending on the subsampling, the effect ranges from 50% to 76% difference in hospitalization odds
between treated and untreated patients, statistically significant in all cases.
Model 1:
As shown in Figure 1, the use of the ivermectin kit was associated with a 68.4% (0.316***) lower
probability of being hospitalized after matching the observations over covariates (see Appendix 1 for full
details on the balancing and results). As expected, the covariant show positive and significant effects on
the odds of hospitalization.

Figure 1: Marginal effects of ivermectin on hospitalization with administrative rule database.
Models 2 to 5: Disentangling the effect of the ivermectin-based kit from medical follow-up
The intervention consisted in providing the ivermectin kit, but also in offering a patients follow up
implemented by the Locatel call center. To isolate the effect of the ivermectin kit from the Locatel
tracking.
As shown in figure 2, the effect of the medical kit on hospitalization was negative in both, with
and without, Locatel tracking subsets. Where a person has 76% (0.234***) lower probability of being
hospitalized when receiving the medical kit in the Locatel tracking subset, and 50% (0.5***) in the subset
without Locatel tracking. Additionally, in the subset of people who received the kit, the effect of Locatel
tracking shows that there is 29.5% (0.705***) less probability of being hospitalized. In opposition, the

subset without the medical kit, the relationship between Locatel tracking and hospitalizations turned out
to be positive (43.9%, (1.439***)). (see appendix 1)

Figure 2: Marginal effects of ivermectin on hospitalization with administrative rule database. Subsetswith & without the medical kit and Locatel tracking (Models 1-5).
Model 6: Disentangling the effect of the medical kit from hospital occupancy
When controlling for hospital occupancy (between 80-85%) the use of the medical kit was
associated with a 68.6% (0.314***) lower probability of being hospitalized. As expected, at this level of
hospital occupancy, all variables lose explanatory value.

Figure 3: Marginal effects of ivermectin on hospitalization with administrative rule database. Subsets at
between 80 y 85% of hospital occupancy (6).
Model 7: Disentangling the effect of the medical kit from time periods
In order to compare treated and untreated populations during the same periods of time, we use the
data from self-reported access to the kit. The results for the Locatel follow up treatment assignment
option show a similar trend. The use of the medical kit was associated with a 74.4% (0.256***) lower
probability of being hospitalized between 28 December 2020 and 28 January 2021. This was very similar
to the effect found in model 1, under the administrative rule.

Figure 4: Marginal effects of ivermectin on hospitalization with Locatel follow up database.

Subpopulation effects:
Using the administrative data from the hospitals, we can evaluate the effect of the treatment to
various populations according to the risk of worsening symptoms. As expected, the effect of the medical
kits is higher and stronger among males, in older patients, and in cases without severe symptoms (See
appendix 1 for details of the analysis).
5. Discussion and limitations
This research adds to the discussion by testing the hypothesis in a quasi-experimental evaluation
that ivermectin has a negative relation to the odds of being hospitalized. The results add up to the body of
research previously discussed.
In a large non-randomized intervention trial, we observed a reduction in the risk (from 55 to 70%)
of hospitalization in those receiving a kit including Ivermectin, compared with those not receiving it.
Lacking randomization, is expected that the comparison groups have differences in measured variables
but also in unmeasured variables. In fact, treated and untreated groups we found that the medical kit given
en masse to patients who’d tested positive in Mexico City had a negative, significant, and robust effect on
their odds of being hospitalized. Specifically, we showed that the effect holds independently of the
medical telephone follow up by Locatel, the level of hospital occupancy, and the specific period of time.
Adjusting by available variables including some of the most powerful predictors of adverse
outcomes such as age, gender and comorbidities, or matching by propensity scores based on the same
variables, the beneficial effect of receiving the kit with ivermectin is sustained. A variety of other
contributors to the risk of hospitalization could be mentioned and only some of them studied. For example
in the weeks of highest incidence of disease, hospital occupation was very high wih poor availability of
beds, and this could explain the lack of hospitalization in some patients requiring it. When this was taken
into account, the benefit of the kit treatment was still observed.
Although in the literature there are not many examples of population studies, our results show a
similar trend as the only other population case study, that found a reduction in mortality rates in Perú
(Chamie-Quintero Et Al, 2021). Also, in this study we are not testing for the causal mechanisms of the
relation between the ivermectin and the reduction in probability of being hospitalized, however, many
studies show that one of the principal mechanisms is the reduction of te viral load, in the patients that take
ivermectin in early stages of the disease, which leads to lower levels of inflammatory reaction and
therefore reduces the need of being hospitalized (Hill, A. et. al, 2021, Khan, M. 2020).
There are some limitations to this analysis. First, as in any observational study, there is no
random assignment of the treatment on the treated, which limits the identification strategy, specifically
considering unobservable covariants, since the matching method only considers observable covariants.

Second, our dependent variable is a dummy as to whether a patient was or was not eventually
hospitalized. The main problem is that being hospitalized is not an objective observation removed from
individual medical assessments. That is, patients with similar symptoms might or might not be admitted
to a hospital based purely on the individual judgment of a medical professional. However, we do not find
any reason to relate this judgement to the receipt or non-receipt of the medical kit. Third, it may be said
that using the odds of death is a more objective measure, however in the period between a positive
diagnosis and death, there is also a sequence of subjective decisions made by the patient and medical
personnel. An extension of this analysis to identify the effect of the medical kit on the odds of dying from
COVID-19, in a hospital or at home, should be performed in the future. Finally, it may be argued that the
treated population has a self-selection bias given that they voluntarily choose to go to a kiosk to find out
their status and to ask for a medical assessment. These are patients already concerned with their status and
health, and this reduces their risk of worsening symptoms and hospitalization. We agree with this
argument, however, both treated and untreated groups attended a kiosk seeking the same answers, and
then showed similar levels of self-care.

7. Bibliography
Athey, S., & Imbens, G. (2016). Recursive partitioning for heterogeneous causal effects.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27), 7353-7360.
Blackwell, M., Iacus, S., King, G., & Porro, G. (2009). cem: Coarsened exact matching in Stata.
The Stata Journal, 9(4), 524-546.
Caly, L., Druce, J. D., Catton, M. G., Jans, D. A., & Wagstaff, K. M. (2020). The FDA-approved
drug ivermectin inhibits the replication of SARS-CoV-2 in vitro. Antiviral research, 178, 104787.
Chamie-Quintero, J. J., Hibberd, J., & Scheim, D. (2021). Sharp Reductions in COVID-19 Case
Fatalities and Excess Deaths in Peru in Close Time Conjunction, State-By-State, with Ivermectin
Treatments. State-By-State, with Ivermectin Treatments (January 12, 2021).
Chang, G. A. Inclusión de la ivermectina en La primera línea de acción terapéutica para COVID19 (2020)
Chaccour, C., Hammann, F., Ramón-García, S., & Rabinovich, N. R. (2020). Ivermectin and
COVID-19: keeping rigor in times of urgency. The American journal of tropical medicine and hygiene,
102(6), 1156.
Chaccour, C., Casellas, A., Blanco-Di Matteo, A., Pineda, I., Fernandez-Montero, A., RuizCastillo, P., ... & Fernández-Alonso, M. (2021). The effect of early treatment with ivermectin on viral
load, symptoms and humoral response in patients with non-severe COVID-19: A pilot, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, randomized clinical trial. EClinicalMedicine, 100720.
Hill, A., Abdulamir, A., Ahmed, S., Asghar, A., Babalola, O. E., Basri, R., ... & Wentzel, H.
(2021). Meta-analysis of randomized trials of ivermectin to treat SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Katherine J. Wu, Carl Zimmer y Jonathan Corum: Tratamientos y medicamentos para el
coronavirus: monitoreo de efectividad. New York Times. 27/10/2020.
https://www.nytimes.com/es/interactive/2020/science/coronavirus-tratamientos-curas.html.
Khan, M. S. I., Khan, M. S. I., Debnath, C. R., Nath, P. N., Al Mahtab, M., Nabeka, H., ... &
Akbar, S. M. F. (2020). Ivermectin treatment may improve the prognosis of patients with COVID-19.
Archivos de bronconeumologia, 56(12), 828.
Navarro, M., Camprubí, D., Requena-Méndez, A., Buonfrate, D., Giorli, G., Kamgno, J.,
... & Krolewiecki, A. (2020). Safety of high-dose ivermectin: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 75(4), 827-834.
Rajter, J. C., Sherman, M. S., Fatteh, N., Vogel, F., Sacks, J., & Rajter, J. J. (2021). Use of
Ivermectin Is Associated With Lower Mortality in Hospitalized Patients With Coronavirus Disease 2019:
The Ivermectin in COVID Nineteen Study. Chest, 159(1), 85-92.

Siemieniuk, R. A., Bartoszko, J. J., Ge, L., Zeraatkar, D., Izcovich, A., Kum, E., ... &
Brignardello-Petersen, R. (2020). Drug treatments for COVID-19: living systematic review and network
meta-analysis. Bmj, 370.

Appendix 1: Analysis
Sample Size

Table 1: Analytic sample size, by administrative rule

Table 2: Analytic sample size, by Locatel follow-up

Table 3. Sub-set, with Locatel follow up

Table 4: Sub-set, without Locatel follow up

Table 5: Sub-set, with medical kit

Table 6: Sub-set, without medical Kit

Table 7: Sample size, administrative rule database, hospital occupancy subset

Descriptive statistics

Table 8: Mean, standard deviation and proportion of variables by treatment and control group.
Models summary tables:
Model

Data

Period

Matched by

Effect of Kit on
hospitalization

Pvalue

Model 1
General model administrative
rule

SISVER,
Hospitals

Control
group: 23
Nov - 28
Dec
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years.

•

68.4%

0.000

Model 2
General modelsubsample:
Locatel follow
up, effect of
medical kit

SISVER,
Hospitals

Control
group: 23
Nov- 28
Dec
Treated
group: 28
Dec-28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years

•

76%

0.000

Model 3
general model subsample:
without Locatel
followup, effect
of medical kit

SISVER,
Hospitales

Control
group: 23
Nov- 28
Dec
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years

•

50%

0.000

Model 4
general model subsample:
received medical
kit, effect of
follow up

SISVER,
Hospitales

Control
group.:
23 Nov 28 Dec
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years

•

29.5%

0.005

Model 5
general model subsample:
didn't receive
medical kit,
effect of follow
up

SISVER,
Hospitales

Control
group: 23
Nov - 28
Dec
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years

•

43.9%

0.000

Modelo 6
general model subsample:
80-85% of
hospital
occupancy

SISVER,
Hospitales

Control
group: 15
- 28 Dec.
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan

Comorbidities, male, severe
symptoms, moderate
symptoms and age ranges
older than 70 years, between
61-70 years, 51 - 60 years,
41- 50 years, and 31 - 40
years

•

68.6%

0.000

Model 7
Locatel model

SISVER,
Hospitales
Locatel

Control
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan
Treated
group: 28
Dec - 28
Jan.

Comorbidities, male, age
ranges older than 70 years,
between 61-70 years, 51 - 60
years, 41- 50 years, and 31 40 years

•

74.4%

0.000

Table 09: Model´s summary tables

Table 10: Model’s summary table
Stratification tree analysis:

Figure 5: Stratified effect of control variables, administrative rule sample.

