Track recommendation procedures and the cancellation of
the school leavers’ test during the COVID-19 pandemic in
the Netherlands
Sara Geven 1
University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands

Abstract: Dutch students are allocated to different tracks in secondary school on the basis of
teacher track recommendations in primary school. Usually, teachers form an initial track
recommendation, and can upwardly adjust this recommendation on the basis of a final
standardized test. Due to the COVID-19 outbreak, this test was cancelled. During the
outbreak, I collected data among Dutch teachers involved in the track recommendation
procedure. Teachers varied in how they dealt with the cancellation of the final test: 50% did
not consider adjustments in their track recommendations, while 40% did. Moreover,
respondents mentioned different reasons for considering possible adjustments, including
parental wishes and students’ school development during the school shutdown. School SES
was unrelated to teachers’ considerations for making adjustments. However - given the
criteria that teachers mentioned for making adjustments - within schools, students from
advantaged backgrounds were potentially more likely to receive an upward adjustment in
their recommendation.
*******

PREPRINT, PLEASE DO NOT CITE OR REDISTRIBUTE WITHOUT
PERMISSION FROM THE AUTHOR *****

1. Introduction
In almost all educational systems, students are sorted into different educational programs (i.e.,
tracks) on the basis of their academic ability at some point in their academic career. Countries
differ in how students are allocated to different ability tracks. In some countries track allocations
are determined by a student’s standardized test performance (e.g., Great Britain), yet in various
other countries they are based on teacher track recommendations (e.g., Belgium, France) or a
combination of the two (e.g., the Netherlands) (Boone and Van Houtte 2013).

1 Nieuwe Achtergracht 166; 1018 WV Amsterdam, The Netherlands; s.a.j.geven@uva.nl. This
study was supported by the Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) through a
Veni grant (#016.Veni.195.125) and by ZonMW through grant number 10430032010003.
1

Past research has found social inequality in teacher 2 track recommendations: teachers tend to
give higher recommendations to students from advantaged socio-economic backgrounds than to
their similarly achieving peers from disadvantaged backgrounds (Batruch et al. 2018; Geven,
Batruch, and van de Werfhorst 2018; Timmermans et al. 2018). This inequality seems at least
partly due to teacher biases (Geven et al. 2018), yet may also stem from the fact that students
from advantaged backgrounds score more positively on other characteristics – such as their work
habits, social-behavioral skills or home environment – that teachers take into account when
forming track recommendations (Bonizzoni, Romito, and Cavallo 2016; Vanlommel and
Schildkamp 2018).
Theoretically, scholars agree that, compared to teacher-based track allocations, track allocations
that are (partly) based on standardized school tests reduce the role of teacher biases and therefore
have the potential to decrease socio-economic inequality in track allocations (Bol et al. 2014; van
Leest et al. 2020; Luyten and Bosker 2004). In light of this, it is pressing that during the COVID19 pandemic, countries such as England and the Netherlands decided to cancel standardized tests
that are usually used to allocate students to different educational programs. In this research note I
investigate the cancellation of the final standardized test in primary school in the Netherlands
and its potential impact on socio-economic inequality in educational outcomes.
In the Netherlands, students are sorted into ability tracks when they are 12 years old, and this
allocation is primarily based on teacher track recommendations. Teachers are required to
formulate an initial track recommendation before the first of March. After that, students make a
final standardized test, the school leavers’ test. In case students score higher on the school
leavers’ test than their initial track recommendation, teachers are allowed to upwardly adjust
their initial track recommendation. About 20% of all students receive such an upward adjustment
(Inspectie van het Onderwijs 2019). Downward adjustments are not possible.
Empirical studies on how the school leavers’ test impacts inequality in track allocations are still
limited in number and their findings are inconsistent (CPB 2020; van Leest et al. 2020; Luyten
2

For readability, I refer to all school staff members that are involved in the track
recommendation procedure as ‘teachers’. In practice, it may also involve other staff members,
such as the school principal.
2

and Bosker 2004). Nevertheless, upward adjustments occur more frequently among students
from disadvantaged backgrounds (CPB 2020), as this group is more often eligible for an upward
adjustment (i.e., their test score more often exceeds their initial track recommendation) (CPB
2019).
In March 2020, the Dutch government decided to cancel the school leavers’ test. At this stage
schools had already formulated their initial track recommendation, and were officially not
allowed to adjust this recommendation anymore. However, schools could still fix ‘mistakes’ in
their track recommendations. Moreover, they could request secondary schools to enroll students
in a higher level than their track recommendation. The Dutch government recommended ‘warm
transfers’ 3, which implies that primary and secondary schools were advised to discuss students
and their enrollment levels. The government also developed a special form in which primary
schools could share additional information about a child, including an expectation that the child
would have scored higher on the school leavers’ test than the initial track recommendation, yet
schools were not required to use the form.
In this research note, I examine how Dutch teachers tends to perceive the role of the school
leavers’ test in the track recommendation procedure, and how they dealt with its cancelation.
Moreover, I study variations in teacher responses by the socio-economic composition of the
school. I use newly collected data among Dutch primary school teachers involved in the track
recommendation procedure in the school year of 2019-2020 (86 teachers in 52 schools) (Geven
2020a; Geven 2020b). Information was collected before (October 2019 – February 2020) and
after the cancellation of the school leavers’ test (April 2020).
Findings show that, before the cancellation of the school leavers’ test, about 30% of the
respondents indicated that they (very) often adjust their track recommendations on the basis of
the school leavers’ test. After the test was cancelled, teachers varied in how they were planning
to deal with the track recommendation procedure: about 50% of the respondents indicated that
they would not consider adjustments in the track recommendations anymore, while 40% did

3

https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/documenten/brieven/2020/04/17/brief-aan-po-en-vo-scholenover-overstap-van-primair-naar-voortgezet-onderwijs-in-2020
3

consider such adjustments. Respondents who considered adaptations also varied in the reasons
they provided for making adjustments. The most frequently mentioned reasons included: (1) the
development of student work habits and performance in the past period (during school closure),
(2) parental requests or wishes, and (3) requests or wishes from secondary schools.
I find that teacher responses hardly varied by the socio-economic composition of their school. In
schools with a higher share of disadvantaged students, respondents were more likely to think that
the cancellation of the test would affect students’ educational trajectories. However, the socioeconomic composition of the school was unrelated to whether respondents considered
adjustments in their track recommendations and the reasons for making such adjustments.

2. Data
I collected two waves of data: one just before the outbreak of COVID-19 in the Netherlands
(between October 2019 and February 2020) (Geven 2020a), and one during the school shutdown
(April 2020) (Geven 2020b). Data were collected among school staff members who were
involved in the track recommendation procedure in the school year of 2019-2020. Respondents
were mostly upper-grade teachers, but also included (among others) principals and support
coordinators. Some respondents were not involved in formulating track recommendations in the
final school year (sixth grade), yet were involved in formulating preliminary track
recommendations in fifth or fourth grade 4.
225 teachers in 70 schools participated in the first wave before the COVID-19 outbreak. During
the school shutdown, a subgroup of these respondents – those that had indicated that they were
willing to participate in a follow-up study – were invited for a second survey. In total, 94
teachers from 56 primary schools participated in both surveys. In both waves the school sample
was representative of primary schools in the Netherlands with respect to denomination, urbanity,
region, socio-economic student composition, and the track recommendations of students in the
school year of 2018-2019 (for more information see Geven, 2020a and Geven 2020b). Eight

4

All schools provide track recommendations when students are in their final grade of primary
school, yet some schools also provide preliminary track recommendations one or two years in
advance.
4

respondents were excluded from the analyses due to missing observations (final N = 86).

3. Variables
I examine different outcomes. First I study the extent to which respondents usually rely on the
school leavers’ test in their track recommendation procedure (as indicated before the cancellation
of the test). Second, I study respondents’ opinion about the impact of the cancellation of the test
on students’ educational trajectories. Third, I examine whether respondents considered
adjustment in the initial track recommendations after the cancellation of the school leavers’ test,
and their reasons for making such adjustments.
To measure the extent to which respondents usually rely on the school leavers’ test, I use a
question from the first wave in which respondents were asked about the extent to which they
upwardly adjust track recommendations when the school leavers’ test is higher than the initial
track recommendation. Respondents could answer on a five-point scale ranging from never to
very often.
Respondents’ opinion about the impact of the cancellation of the school leavers’ test was
measured in the second wave with a scale consisting of three items. Respondents indicated the
extent to which they agreed with the following statements (5-point-scale ranging from
completely disagree to completely agree): “the cancellation of the test hardly affects the
secondary school entrance level of my own students”, “the cancellation of the test hardly affects
the school entrance level of students in the Netherlands”, “the cancellation of the test enhances
inequality in track recommendations”. These items loaded on one factor (CA 0.62). I calculated a
respondent’s average score on these three items.
I rely on various questions to measure whether respondents considered making adjustments in
their track recommendations after the cancellation of the school leavers’ test. After the
cancellation of the test, respondents were asked about the extent to which they agreed with two
statements: “the track recommendations that students received before the Corona crisis are final”
and “the track recommendations for some students can (possibly) still be adjusted”. Both
questions were included, as the exact procedure at the time of the fieldwork was ambiguous. For
example, it was possible that respondents adopted the narrative of the Dutch government and

5

would indicate that track recommendations were final, yet, at the same time, would still make
exceptions for some students. Respondents answered on a five-point scale.
When respondents did not fully agree that track recommendations were final, or did not fully
disagree that track recommendations could still be adjusted, they received a follow-up openended question in which they were asked to write down under which circumstances they would
(possibly) adjust the track recommendations of some students. In this question some respondents
indicated that they would not change any track recommendation this year due to the cancellation
of the school leavers’ test.
I combined the information from these three questions into one variable that indicated whether a
respondent considered an adjustment in (some of) the track recommendations this year. Only
respondents who were directed to the follow-up question and who provided clear reasons for a
possible adjustment scored “yes” on this questions. Respondents who were not directed to the
follow-up question or indicated in the open answer question that they would not make
adjustments to their track recommendations scored “no”, and respondents who provided unclear
answers to the open answer question were coded as “unclear”. When analyzing respondents’
(reasons for) adjustments in the track recommendations, this latter category was coded to missing
(n=7).
Finally, I analyzed the three most frequently mentioned reasons for making track adjustments:
(1) the work habits of the student in the past period, (2) influence of the parents (e.g., parental
requests), and (3) influence of the secondary school (e.g., requests made by the secondary
school). Some teachers mentioned multiple reasons, so these outcomes are not mutually
exclusive.
I measure the socio-economic composition of the student population in school by using so-called
‘weights’. In the Netherlands, Dutch students receive a ‘weight’ on the basis of the educational
level of a student’s parents. Based on these weights, schools used to receive additional funding 5.
A pupil receives a weight of 0.3 if both parents obtained a lower secondary degree, and a weight
of 1.2 if one parent completed primary education, and the other parent obtained a lower
secondary degree or less. All other students receive a weight of 0 (i.e., school receives basic

5

This procedure changed as of the 2020-2021 school year
6

funding for this pupil). I calculated the average student weight 6 to get an indication of the share
of students in school from socio-economically disadvantaged backgrounds.
As control variables, I included whether the respondent was a teacher in the school year of 20192020, whether the respondent was only involved in the formation of preliminary track
recommendations (for students < grade 6) and whether the respondent experienced upward
educational mobility him- or herself (i.e., the respondent enrolled in a vocational track directly
after primary school, or the respondent enrolled in a vocational/intermediate track after primary
school). Moreover, I account for the respondent’s educational degree (i.e., college Bachelor or
College Master / University degree), years of work experience in this or another school, age,
gender, and highest level of parental education. Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for all
variables.

4. Analytical Strategy
I first examine all the dependent variables descriptively. Subsequently I conduct multi-level
models with teachers nested in schools. In these models I include all control variables. I use
linear regression models for continuous outcomes, and linear probability models for dichotomous
outcomes. 7

5. Results
5.1 Descriptive findings
Before the cancellation of the school leavers’ test, almost 30% of the respondents indicated that
they (very) often adjust their track recommendation on the basis of the school leavers’ test. None
of the respondents indicated that they never rely on the test (table 1). However, after the test was

6

(total number of pupils with weight_03*0.3 + total number of pupils with weight_12*1.2) /
total number of pupils in school).
7
I also estimated Heckman selection models to analyze the reasons that teachers provided for
making adjustments in track recommendations. In these models I analyzed whether respondents
consider adjustments in track recommendations in a first step, and the reason for this adjustment
in a second step. These findings led to the same conclusion as the ones described in the main
text.
7

cancelled, respondents generally seemed to think that the cancellation of the test would hardly
affect student entrance levels/track recommendations (average of 3.7 on a 5-point scale, table 1).
Interestingly, there was quite some variation across respondents in whether they considered
possible adjustments in their track recommendations after the cancellation of the school leavers’
test. About half of the respondents indicated that the initial track recommendation that students
received would not be adjusted anymore (table 1). According to this group, adjustments would
not be possible anymore after the cancellation of the test. However, about 40% of the
respondents provided clear reasons for why they would consider (possible) adjustments in their
initial track recommendations. The reasons this group provided differed: 16% of all respondents
would consider a possible adjustment if a student’s work habits or performance had improved in
the past period (during the school closure), 11% of all respondents took into account parental
wishes and requests, and 14% of all respondents considered the opinion or requests of secondary
schools 8 (table 1). Bivariately, none of these variables were statistically significantly related to
the share of disadvantaged students in school.

8

These are the three most frequently mentioned reasons. Some respondents also provided other
reasons, such as student test score on additional (IQ) tests.
8

Table 1: Descriptives
Mean / %
(s.d)
Dependent variables
Respondent adjusts track recommendation based on school leavers’ test
(asked before school shutdown)
Never
Seldom
Sometimes
Often
Very often
Opinion ‘cancellation of school leavers’ test hardly affects students’
Respondent considers (possible) adjustment in track recommendation
this school year
No
Yes
Unclear
Frequently mentioned reasons for (possible) adjustment in track recommendation
Work habits students past period
Influence parents
Influence secondary school
Independent variable
Share socio-economically disadvantaged students in school (avg. school
weight students)
Control variables
Teaches this school year
Only involved in formation of preliminary track recommendations
Respondent experienced upward educational mobility
No
Yes, enrolled in vocational track directly after primary school
Yes, enrolled in vocational/intermediate track directly after primary
school
Educational degree
College Bachelor
College Master / University degree
Years of work experience in this or another school
Age

0%
16%
56%
21%
7%
3.7
(0.7)

49%
43%
8%
16%
11%
14%
0.06
(0.06)
70%
10%
72%
14%
10%

79%
21%
9.2
(7.9)
43.5
(10.9)

Highest level of parental education
< upper secondary school
34%
Upper secondary, postsecondary non-tertiary
33%
University BA or higher
34%
Gender (ref. = female)
26%
N schools2
52
N teachers2
86
1
N teachers is 79 and N schools is 50 for ‘(Reasons for) (possible) adjustment in track recommendations’

9

5.2 Relationship with the socio-economic composition of the school
Figure 1 and 2 summarize the findings from the multilevel regression models. Figure 1 shows
that there is no statistically significant relationship between the share of disadvantaged students
in school and the extent to which teachers usually adjust their track recommendations on the
basis of the school leaver’s test (as indicated before the test was cancelled). I do find that in
schools with a higher share of students from disadvantaged socio-economic backgrounds,
respondents are more likely to think that the cancellation of the school leaver’s test affects
students’ educational trajectories. A one-standard-deviation increase in the share of students
from disadvantaged backgrounds in school is related to a 0.2 decrease in believing that the
cancellation hardly affects students (i.e., 0.2/0.7=0.3 of a standard deviation in the outcome
variable).

-.3

-.2
-.1
0
Estimate of share of disadvantaged students in school [x-std]
Adapts track
recommendation based on
test [before shutdown]

.1

Opinion: abolishment
test hardly
affects students

Figure 1: Average Marginal Effect of the share of socio-economically disadvantaged students in shcool
(standardized) on the extent to which teachers adjust their track recommendation on the basis of the
school leaver’s test (before the school shutdown) and their opinion about the cancellation of the school
leavers’ test. Estimates are based on multilevel regression models with teachers nested in schools. The
model includes all control variables. N schools = 52, N teachers = 86.

10

I find no relationship between the share of students from socio-economically disadvantaged
backgrounds in school and the likelihood that respondents considered possible adjustments in
their final track recommendations after the school leaver’s test was cancelled (figure 2). Neither
do I find relationships between the share of students from socio-economically disadvantaged
backgrounds in school and the likelihood that respondents mentioned (1) student work habits
during the school shutdown, (2) parental wishes and request, and (3) wishes and requests from
secondary schools as a reason for making such adjustments (figure 2).

-.2

-.1
0
Estimate of share of disadvantaged students in school [x-std]

Considers
adaptation
recommendation

Reason:
student work
habits

Reason:
request/wishes
parents

.1

Reason:
request/wishes
sec. sch

Figure 2: Average Marginal Effect of the share of socio-economically disadvantaged students in school
(standardized) on the likelihood that teachers consider (possible) adjustments in student track
recommendations (after the cancellation of the school leavers’ test) and the likelihood they, respectively,
mention student work habits, parental request/wishes and secondary school request/wishes as a reason
for such adjustments. Estimates are based on multilevel regression models with teachers nested in
schools. The model includes all control variables. N schools = 50, N teachers = 79.

6. Discussion
In the Netherlands students are allocated to different tracks when children are 12 years old.
Teachers provide an initial track recommendation and can upwardly adjust this recommendation
11

if a student’s score on the school leaver’s test – i.e., the final standardized test in primary school
- exceeds the initial track recommendation. In the school year of 2019-2020, this test was
cancelled as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak.
The findings of this research note suggest that teachers tended to vary in how they dealt with the
cancellation of the school leavers’ test. From the teacher perspective, it might have been evident
that some track recommendations had to be adjusted. For example, it is likely that some teachers
had given prudent track recommendations under the assumption that students would still make a
test that would allow them to ‘upgrade’ their recommendation. While adjustments might have
been reasonable in some cases, it is important to be aware of differences across teachers and
schools in the likelihood to make adjustments, and in their reasons for doing so.
I did not find that teachers’ considerations for making adjustments in their track
recommendations were related to the socio-economic composition of their school. However, it is
possible that, within schools, students from advantaged socio-economic backgrounds were more
likely to receive an upward adjustment in their track recommendation in the school year of 20192020. Future research should examine this, especially since the criteria that teachers considered
for making adjustments may have led to such inequalities in educational opportunities.
More specifically, some teachers indicated that they were considering to take into account the
work habits and school development of students during the school shutdown. A prior study
showed that Dutch students from advantaged socio-economic backgrounds received more school
support during the school shutdown, partly because their parents were better equipped to help
(Bol 2020). Relatedly, Dutch students from advantaged socio-economic backgrounds
experienced a smaller learning loss during the shutdown (Engzell, Frey, and Verhagen 2020).
Some teachers also indicated that they were considering to take into account parental wishes and
request when making possible adjustments in their track recommendations. Past research
indicated that parents from advantaged socio-economic backgrounds are better equipped to
communicate with school and to navigate educational institutions (Lareau 2015). Hence, they are
possibly also more successful in negotiating track recommendations. Related to this, the Dutch
Inspectorate of Education showed that in school years prior to the COVID-19 outbreak, parents
with a higher socio-economic status were more likely to request adjustments in the track
recommendation (Onderwijsinspectie 2020). Given the complexity and ambiguity of the track
12

recommendation procedure during the COVID-19 pandemic, being informed about educational
institutions and equipped to navigate them, was probably even more important in the school year
of 2019-2020.
All in all, teachers’ consideration to take into account (1) students’ school development during
the school shutdown and (2) parental requests and wishes may have enhanced inequalities in
track recommendations in the school year of 2019-2020. Students from disadvantaged
backgrounds are generally more likely to receive an upward adjustment in their track
recommendation on the basis of the school leavers’ test (CPB 2020), yet the cancellation of the
test may have led to more upward adjustments among students from advantaged backgrounds. It
is important that secondary schools are aware of this potential inequality, and to create additional
opportunities for this cohort of students who did not have the chance to upgrade their
recommendation via a test.

7. References
Batruch, Anatolia, Frédérique Autin, Fabienne Bataillard, and Fabrizio Butera. 2018. “School
Selection and the Social Class Divide: How Tracking Contributes to the Reproduction of
Inequalities.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 0146167218791804.
Bol, Thijs. 2020. “Inequality in Homeschooling during the Corona Crisis in the Netherlands.
First Results from the LISS Panel. (Working Paper).”
Bol, Thijs, Jacqueline Witschge, Herman G. Van de Werfhorst, and Jaap Dronkers. 2014.
“Curricular Tracking and Central Examinations: Counterbalancing the Impact of Social
Background on Student Achievement in 36 Countries.” Social Forces 92(4):1545–1572.
Bonizzoni, Paola, Marco Romito, and Cristina Cavallo. 2016. “Teachers’ Guidance, Family
Participation and Track Choice: The Educational Disadvantage of Immigrant Students in
Italy.” British Journal of Sociology of Education 37(5):702–720.

13

Boone, Simon, and Mieke Van Houtte. 2013. “Why Are Teacher Recommendations at the
Transition from Primary to Secondary Education Socially Biased? A Mixed-Methods
Research.” British Journal of Sociology of Education 34(1):20–38.
CPB. 2019. De Waarde van Eindtoetsen in Het Primair Onderwijs. CPB.
CPB. 2020. Schrappen Eindtoets Groep 8 Kan Ongelijkheid Vergroten. CPB.
Engzell, Per, Arun Frey, and Mark D. Verhagen. 2020. “Learning Inequality during the COVID19 Pandemic.”
Geven, Sara. 2020a. Education in Dutch Primary Schools during the Corona-Crisis [Report and
Dataset]. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Geven, Sara. 2020b. Track Recommendation Procedures in Dutch Primary Schools [Report and
Dataset]. Amsterdam: University of Amsterdam.
Geven, Sara, Anatolia Batruch, and Herman van de Werfhorst. 2018. Inequality in Teacher
Judgements, Expectations and Track Recommendations: A Review Study. Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: University of Amsterdam.
Inspectie van het Onderwijs. 2019. Staat van Het Onderwijs 2019: Technisch Rapport Hoofdstuk
Primair Onderwijs. Inspectie van het Onderwijs.
Lareau, Annette. 2015. “Cultural Knowledge and Social Inequality.” American Sociological
Review 80(1):1–27.
van Leest, Anne, Lisette Hornstra, Jan van Tartwijk, and Janneke van de Pol. 2020. “Test-or
Judgement-Based School Track Recommendations: Equal Opportunities for Students
with Different Socio-Economic Backgrounds?” British Journal of Educational
Psychology.
Luyten, H., and R. J. Bosker. 2004. “Hoe Meritocratisch Zijn Schooladviezen? [How
Meritocratic Are the Primary School Recommendations for Secondary Education?].”
Pedagogische Studiën 81(2):89–103.
14

Onderwijsinspectie. 2020. “Welke Factoren Bij Het Basisschooladvies Meewegen?” Retrieved
(https://www.onderwijsinspectie.nl/onderwerpen/overgang/welke-factoren-meewegen).
Timmermans, A. C., H. de Boer, H. T. A. Amsing, and M. P. C. van der Werf. 2018. “Track
Recommendation Bias: Gender, Migration Background and SES Bias over a 20-Year
Period in the Dutch Context.” British Educational Research Journal 44(5):847–874.
Vanlommel, Kristin, and Kim Schildkamp. 2018. “How Do Teachers Make Sense of Data in the
Context of High-Stakes Decision Making?” American Educational Research Journal
0002831218803891.

15

