Racial Disparities in COVID-19 and Excess Mortality in Minnesota
Forthcoming, Socius

Authors:

Elizabeth Wrigley-Field

Department of Sociology and Minnesota Population Center, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

Sarah Garcia

Department of Sociology, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

Jonathon P. Leider

Department of Health Policy and Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and
Division of Health Policy and Management, University of Minnesota School of Public Health

Christopher Robertson

Department of Sociology, University of Minnesota, Twin Cities

Rebecca Wurtz

Division of Health Policy and Management, University of Minnesota School of Public Health

Abstract

The COVID-19 pandemic has produced vastly disproportionate deaths for communities
of color in the United States. Minnesota seemingly stands out as an exception to this
national pattern, with white Minnesotans accounting for 80% of the population and 82%
of COVID-19 deaths. We examine confirmed COVID mortality alongside deaths
indirectly attributable to the pandemic – ‘excess mortality’ -- in Minnesota. This analysis
reveals profound racial disparities: age-adjusted excess mortality rates for whites are
exceeded by a factor of 2.8-5.3 for all other racial groups, with the highest rates among
Black, Latino, and Native Minnesotans. The seemingly small disparities in COVID
deaths in Minnesota reflect the interaction of three factors: the natural history of the
disease whose early toll was heavily concentrated in nursing homes; an exceptionally
divergent age distribution in the state; and a greatly different proportion of excess
mortality captured in confirmed-COVID rates for white Minnesotans compared with
most other groups.
Keywords: COVID-19, excess mortality, racial disparities

Acknowledgements:

This research was supported by a Sustainable Development Goals Rapid Response
Grant at the University of Minnesota, the University of Minnesota’s Fesler-Lampert
Chair in Aging Studies, and the Minnesota Population Center, which is funded by the
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development
(P2C HD041023).

COVID-19 has disproportionately impacted groups disadvantaged by structural racism
in the United States (Pirtle 2020). African Americans, in particular, are dying at higher
than expected rates across the country (Yancy 2020, Rossen et al. 2020). At first glance,
Minnesota appears to be an exception. Non-Hispanic white Minnesotans account for
about 80 percent of the state’s population and about 82 percent of its COVID-19 deaths.
This seeming lack of disparity may be surprising, especially at a time when Minnesota
has received national attention for its deep racial divide following the police killing of
George Floyd.
Yet this superficial lack of racial disparity in COVID-19 mortality reflects three
key facts about Minnesota’s experience of the pandemic, which we illustrate below: an
unusually disparate age distribution, a natural history of the disease that exacerbates
the consequences of that age divergence, and differences in the extent to which racial
groups’ mortality during the pandemic is captured in official statistics. Despite this
surface equality, measures that best capture unequal risk in the pandemic reveal
extremely large disparities in Minnesota.
Figure 1 portrays mortality in the COVID-19 pandemic in Minnesota for five
racial/ethnic groups using four different mortality measures. The panels in the left
column show “crude” mortality, unadjusted for differences in groups’ age distributions,
while the panels on the right reflect measures that are statistically adjusted for these age
differences. Because the racial groups have substantially different age distributions and

2

age is a profound risk factor for COVID-19 and other mortality, the age-adjusted
measures are superior measures for comparing mortality risk across groups (Dowd et
al. 2020). The panels in the top row portray confirmed COVID-19 mortality, reflecting
the deaths used in the state’s official COVID-19 statistics. The panels on the bottom take
a broader view of the pandemic’s death toll by capturing “excess” mortality in 2020
compared to the average mortality in the same months during the previous three years.
Excess mortality reflects the full set of COVID-19 deaths, including those that are never
diagnosed as such, as well as deaths indirectly attributable to the pandemic through
pathways like averted medical care (Lange et al. 2020). Age-adjusted excess mortality,
shown in the bottom right panel, reflects the overall best measure of mortality risk
during the pandemic. (Details of the data, excess mortality estimation, and age
adjustment are given in the Methods Appendix.)
The early stages of the Minnesota pandemic reflected high mortality in long-term
care facilities, which interacted with an unusual age divergence to concentrate COVID19 deaths early in the pandemic among older white populations. Through October,
more than half of all confirmed COVID-19 deaths in the state have occurred in longterm care facilities, and such facilities accounted for 59% of the state’s COVID deaths
through May. The state’s nursing homes are overwhelmingly white (Shippee et al. 2016:
206), which partly reflects that Minnesota’s white population is substantially older than
its populations of color: in Minnesota, respective mean age is 41 for white, 29 for Black,

3

24 for Latino, 31 for Asian-American, and 32 for Native populations. Minnesota’s
difference in white vs. Black mean age is the fifth largest across U.S. states, driven in
part by young ages among the state’s large Black immigrant population. The resulting
heavy death toll among older white residents early in the pandemic is reflected in
Figure 1 in the high COVID-19 crude death mortality among whites in March-May, and
the dramatically smaller COVID-19 mortality rates among whites compared to all other
racial groups once age is accounted for.
Figure 1 also shows that excess mortality rates are far more unequal across racial
groups than confirmed COVID-19 mortality rates: 84% of cumulative age-adjusted
excess mortality through October 2020 is accounted for by COVID-19 deaths in the
white population, but only 67%, 71%, and 53% in the Black, Latino, and Native
populations, respectively. (The Asian-American and Pacific Islander population is
similar to the white population, at 83%.) This divergence between COVID-19 rates and
excess mortality rates for Black, Latino, and Native populations reflects some
combination of two factors: selective diagnosis of COVID-19, such that deaths to the
coronavirus in these populations are less likely to be counted in the official statistics,
and deaths indirectly attributable to the pandemic (such as deaths associated with
averted medical care or material deprivation following loss of work). These results
suggest an urgent need to disentangle these factors and also illustrate that the official
COVID-19 mortality statistics fail to reflect the inequality in pandemic-associated

4

mortality in Minnesota.
Three dynamics deserve special mention. First, in the first four months of the
pandemic, excess mortality was particularly high among Minnesota’s Native Americans
and little of that excess mortality is captured in confirmed COVID-19 statistics. An
exclusive focus on confirmed COVID-19 mortality has hidden the substantial death toll
for this population in particular. Excess mortality in the Native population was notably
lower in July-August (and, to a lesser extent, in September-October); further research
should examine whether this reflects a true reduction in mortality risk, which may
reveal protective contexts that can be built upon, or alternatively, if it partially reflects
the aftereffects of selective mortality given the extremely high mortality rates in MarchJune.
Second, as the pandemic has continued, racial groups whose excess mortality
was extremely small in March and April—Latinos and Asian-Americans—have
experienced substantially greater mortality. The very high COVID-19 and excess
mortality among Latinos in the most recent period is especially concerning.
And third, high COVID-19 and excess mortality has been sustained throughout
the pandemic among Black Minnesotans.
In summary, for deaths through October 2020, cumulative age-adjusted excess
mortality is far higher for all populations of color than for white populations, by a factor
5

ranging from 2.8 (for the Asian-American and Pacific Islander population) to 5.3 (for the
Black population). The large racial disparities revealed in this analysis illustrate that an
exclusive focus on official COVID-19 deaths leaves much of the unequal mortality
burden of the pandemic hidden.

6

References
Dowd, J. B., Andriano, L., Brazel, D. M., Rotondi, V., Block, P., Ding, X., ... & Mills, M. C.
(2020). Demographic science aids in understanding the spread and fatality rates of
COVID-19. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117(18), 9696-9698.
Lange, S. J., Ritchey, M. D., Goodman, A. B., Dias, T., Twentyman, E., Fuld, J., ... & Stein,
Z. (2020). Potential indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on use of emergency
departments for acute life-threatening conditions—United States, January–May 2020.
American Journal of Transplantation, 20(9).
Pirtle, W. N. L. (2020). Racial capitalism: A fundamental cause of novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) pandemic inequities in the United States. Health Education & Behavior.
doi: 10.1177/1090198120922942.
Rossen, L. M., Branum, A. M., Ahmad, F. B., Sutton, P., and Anderson, R. N. (2020).
Excess Deaths Associated with COVID-19, by Age and Race and Ethnicity — United
States, January 26–October 3, 2020. Mortality and Morbidity Weekly Report 69(42):
1522-1527.
Shippee, T. P., Henning-Smith, C., Rhee, T. G., Held, R. N., & Kane, R. L. (2016). Racial
differences in Minnesota nursing home residents’ quality of life: The importance of
looking beyond individual predictors. Journal of Aging and Health, 28(2), 199-224.
Yancy, C. W. (2020). COVID-19 and African Americans. JAMA. 323(19):1891-1892.

7

COVID 19 Mortality (Crude)
White
Black
Latino
Asian & PI
Native

COVID 19 Mortality (Age Adjusted)
White
Black
Latino
Asian & PI
Native

0

20

40
60
80 100
Deaths per 100,000

120

0

Excess Mortality (Crude)
White
Black
Latino
Asian & PI
Native

50

100
150
200
Deaths per 100,000

250

Excess Mortality (Age Adjusted)
White
Black
Latino
Asian & PI
Native

0

20

40
60
80 100
Deaths per 100,000

March April

120

May June

0

July Aug.

50

100
150
200
Deaths per 100,000

250

Sept. Oct.

Figure 1. Mortality during the COVID-19 pandemic in Minnesota, by type of mortality,
race/ethnicity, and time period. COVID-19 mortality is confirmed by lab test or other official
diagnosis. Excess mortality is mortality above and beyond average mortality for the same group
in the same months during 2017-2019. Excess mortality excludes external causes of mortality
(e.g., accidents and violence) because many of those deaths have delayed reporting, preventing
their inclusion for recent time periods. Crude rates are unadjusted for age. Age-adjusted rates
are adjusted by re-weighting age-specific mortality using the age distribution of the state of
Minnesota. Further details on the data and measurement are given in the Methods Appendix.

8

Methods Appendix for
“Racial disparities in COVID-19 and excess mortality in Minnesota”
Death count data
Our data are based on a complete set of death certificates for deaths occurring in
Minnesota from January 1, 2017 to the present. These were obtained from the Minnesota
Department of Health (MDH) Office of Vital Records.
Causes of death are derived from International Classification of Disease (ICD) codes
assigned by the National Center for Health Statistics based on the four lines of text
assigning multiple causes on the original death certificates. Deaths are recorded as
COVID-19 deaths if the ICD-10 code “U07.1 COVID-19, virus identified,” appeared in
the death record in any cause of death line. This indicates confirmation of COVID by a
diagnostic test. These are the same deaths included in MDH’s official COVID-19
mortality statistics for the state of Minnesota.
The death certificates also include information on place of death, which we use to
calculate the proportion of confirmed COVID-19 deaths that occurred in long-term care
facilities.
The time period covered by this study is March 1, 2020 – October 31, 2020 (and the
same dates in the 2017-2019 reference years). Death certificate data are updated weekly;
those included here are current as of the November 18, 2020 data release. In general, our
examination of the data over time suggests that the data are close to complete for deaths
occurring at least two weeks before the data release date (in this case, complete up to
about November 4), except for deaths that ultimately are assigned external causes of
death, as we discuss below. An informal examination of the data as they are updated
weekly also suggests that deaths occurring on some Native American reservations are
added to the data slightly later, potentially producing some undercount in Native
American deaths occurring near the end of our study window.
Population denominators
To generate population denominators, we use the single-year American Community
Survey (ACS) (Ruggles et al. 2019) for 2015-2019, a relatively large number of years
designed to create stable population estimates even for small cells. We use the same
denominators for all years in the excess mortality calculations, which assumes that the
9

population size and composition has been largely stable for the last three years.
In producing the population denominators, we employ race-bridging algorithms
developed by Liebler and Halpern-Manners (2008) to assign multi-racial individuals to
a single racial category. This attempts to create a “best guess” about the racial
categorizations that are likely to be assigned on death certificates. In both the numerator
and denominator, individuals identified as Latino are included in the Latino category;
other racial groups are limited to non-Latinos. (We omitted from the analysis records
whose race was categorized as Other/Unknown; this included four COVID-19 deaths
out of 2,710 total COVID-19 deaths.)
Excess mortality estimation
Excess mortality is measured as the difference between mortality occurring in a period
of time in 2020 and the average mortality occurring in the same period in 2017-2019.
The 2017-2019 average is an unweighted average over years.
Time intervals are defined by calendar dates. Because 2020 is a Leap Year, and the
time periods considered here occur after February 28, this means that the 2020 intervals
occur one day later (as time since January 1) than the comparison 2017-2019 intervals,
while including the same number of days. Note that our two-month units reflect 61
days for March-April and September-October, 60 days for May-June, and 62 days for
July-August.
External mortality estimates exclude external causes of death—deaths due to causes
such as accidents, violence, and suicide—which we define as causes of death with ICD
codes V01–Y98 in any of cause of death lines 1-3. Many such deaths require
investigation before a final cause of death determination is made, which delays them
from appearing in our dataset. We therefore exclude external causes from the excess
mortality estimation to ensure that these estimates are not biased by the exclusion (due
to delay) of deaths for 2020 that are recorded for 2017-2019.
Twenty deaths in our dataset were both COVID-19 deaths and deaths attributed to
external causes by our definition. Thirteen of these 20 had a primary cause of death
assignment that was some kind of fall (e.g., falling out of bed). These 20 deaths are
included in the COVID-19 rates but excluded from the external mortality rates for
consistency. Of these deaths, 18 decedents were white and two were Black; the 18
deaths to white decedents are less than one percent of the total white deaths attributed
10

to COVID-19.
Age adjustment
We conduct a “direct” age standardization (Preston et al. 2001: 24-25) that re-weights
each racial group’s age-specific death rates using a standard set of weights. We use 10year age intervals top-coded at age 80 (so that the oldest age category is ages 80+). The
standard population weights reflect the age composition of Minnesota as a whole, as
derived from the ACS.
Age standardization is useful as a way to make populations with different age
distributions comparable to one another, to make an “apples to apples” comparison of
mortality risk. The absolute differences in magnitude between age-adjusted and crude
measures are less meaningful, since the magnitude of age-adjusted rates reflects the
somewhat arbitrary choice of age standard. For this reason, we present Figure 1 using
the same horizontal axis scale for COVID-19 and excess mortality measures within, but
not across, the crude vs. age-adjusted mortality divide. Reading Figure 1 from top to
bottom, both the absolute magnitudes and the relative shapes across racial groups are
meaningful; reading from left to right, what is most meaningful is how the relative sizes
of the bars change across racial groups, rather than their absolute size.
The result that Minnesota has the fifth-largest difference between mean ages for
white and Black residents is based on 2019 ACS data for all states.

11

References to the Appendix
Liebler, Carolyn and Halpern-Manners, Andrew. 2008. A practical approach to using
multiple-race response data: A bridging method for public-use microdata.
Demography 45:143–155.
Preston, Samuel H.; Heuveline, Patrick; and Guillot, Michel. 2001. Demography:
Measuring and Modeling Population Processes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ruggles, Steven; Flood, Sarah; Goeken, Ronald; Grover, Josiah; Meyer, Erin; Pacas, Jose;
and Sobek, Matthew. 2020. IPUMS USA: Version 10.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN:
IPUMS. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V10.0

12

