"x"
"1" "Title: E–Mentoring female underrepresented public health student researchers: Supporting a more diverse post–pandemic workforce"
"2" "Author Information:"
"3" "Corresponding author: Ponn P. Mahayosnand, MPH, Ronin Institute, Montclair, NJ ponn.mahayosnand@ronininstitute.org"
"4" "Lavezza Zanders, International University of Health Sciences, Atlanta, GA, lavezzaz@iuhs.edu"
"5" "ZM Sabra, Islamic University of Gaza, Faculty of Medicine, Gaza, Palestine,  zsabra@students.iugaza.edu.ps"
"6" "Saman Essa, BA, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,  sessa2@central.uh.edu"
"7" "Samiha Ahmed, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland, sahmed15@umd.edu"
"8" "Diana Mora Bermejo, Providence College, Providence, Rhode Island, dmoraber@friars.providence.edu"
"9" "Maryam Funmilayo, MA, Lamar University, Beaumont, Texas, mfunmilayo@lamar.edu"
"10" "DM Sabra, Islamic University of Gaza, Faculty of Medicine, Gaza, Palestine, dinamsabra@students.iugaza.edu.ps"
"11" "Sheilamae Ablay, PhD, Ronin Institute, Montclair, NJ"
"12" "sheilamae.ablay@ronininstitute.org"
"13" "Disclaimers: The views expressed in the submitted article are those of the authors and not an official position of our institutions."
"14" "Article word count: 2423 References: 28"
"15" "Funding: None."
"16" "Competing interests: None declared."
"17" "Author contributions: Concept and design: PPM. Conducted the literature review, drafted the manuscript, and approved final revisions: PPM, LZ,  ZMS, SE, SA, DMB, MF, DMS, SA. Technical editing and fact-checking: PPM, ZMS."
"18" "Acknowledgements: None."
"19" "E–Mentoring female underrepresented  public  health student researchers: Supporting a mo re dive rse post–pandemic workforce"
"20" "Disparities in academia and research during COVID–19"
"21" "Within higher education ,  underrepresented students continue to face inequalities and discrimination to this da y, 1   with  unique challenges emphasized during the COVID – 19 pandemic.  Mentoring,  whether through formal or informal counseling or coaching, is one way to offer assistance to such students. 2   Mentors can provide critical support as students contemplate and pursue completion of higher degrees and pursue occupations that directly serve their communities .  During COVID – 19 lockdowns, as classes and work became remote, mentoring also transitioned online to electronic mentoring or e – mentoring. E – mentoring was implemented formally by some universities, 3  and informally by independent researchers.  One female independent researcher of color had a research team consisting of 7 female colleagues in 6 countries and 7 female student researchers (she mentored 2 in–person, e–mentored 5). Since all the students represented different racial and ethnic backgrounds, they offer this unique collection of e–mentoring case studies during the pandemic.  The lead author mentored all 7 student authors of this paper. The senior author, also a female independent researcher of color shared her e – mentoring experiences. All of these e – mentoring relationships were created informally. Sharing these independent field reports should not be assumed to be a representation of any of the students’ 6 universities, rather as a sample of what can be achieved by invested e – mentors. By sharing these anecdotal experiences, the authors, particularly the lead and senior authors, hope to call upon all researchers of underrepresented groups to consider e – mentoring to support underrepresented student researchers for the benefit of diversification in the public health research field."
"22" "Mento ring as a s ervice"
"23" "Effective  mentoring benefits the public health field through the retention of strong and committed students who turn into community leaders and because both the mentor and student are willing to mentor others in the future. 4  A successful public health mentor offers instruction, counsel, and guidance and facilitates a student’s development professionally, academically, and emotionally.   Specific to research, a mentor with good listening skills can motivate a student to explore their interests and curiosities and further guide the student to develop a specialty in a topic they would be proud and passionate to pursue."
"24" "As Ronin Institute independent researchers, the lead and senior authors volunteer as mentors without support often offered in traditional academic settings. They teach their students to conduct research according to Ronin’s values of truth and empathy. 5    Additionally, Ronin’s “pay it forward” principle  aligns with   their’ religious, moral, and ethical beliefs in the importance of service. 6  They  strive to encourage and support their students beyond offering research experiences not often gained in classroom or Zoom conference room settings."
"25" "E–mentorships were  conducted via  email, phone, texting, Zoom, and other chat apps. They collaborated  by sharing data via Microsoft Office and Google Workspace. By empowering their students with options, choices, and openness to offer professional critiques in a non–judgmental environment, the mentors aim to treat their students as  colleagues . They believe this approach creates an ideal, albeit remote, research setting, allowing their students to flourish as junior scholars."
"26" "Doctoral student seeks out men tors f or further professional  development"
"27" "The first student is a multiethnic, multilingual, Muslim–American woman attending graduate school in Houston, a city that celebrates and encourages diversity. 7  In addition to her doctoral advisor, she sought out the opportunity to work with two female mentors of different backgrounds, one of which is the lead author. Her mentors offered personal anecdotes about their experiences in higher education or the workforce, provided opportunities to publish, and supported her on various projects during the pandemic. Such experiences emphasize the importance of having female mentors as an early career researcher. 8"
"28" "While female doctoral students are increasing in research and clinical work in the field of psychology, there were considerable inequalities between men and women as of 2017, especially in post–graduate pay. 9  Females in academia remain underrepresented and take longer than males, on average, to attain tenure. 10  In recent years, research on representation has caused many departments to rethink how the identities of staff and faculty members influence the experiences of their students. 11  Having a shared identity with a mentor can increase psychosocial and professional support, educational resources, and future job satisfaction. 12  Female mentors of ethnic–racial and religious minority backgrounds can help students cultivate essential skills that their training fails to teach them, such as navigating institutional barriers and negotiating pay. 13"
"29" "An ideal match for a first – generation  Mexican – American  undergrad uate"
"30" "The next student   witnessed firsthand the lack of trust her parents held towards public health officials. Faced with indifference from monolingual health officials and administration, these Spanish–speaking immigrants relied on themselves and their children to attain health services in Rhode Island. This is a common role children of immigrants take on. 14  Language barriers can prevent non–English speaking immigrants from accessing crucial public health messages, particularly about COVID–19. 15"
"31" "The opportunity for a global health research experience was based on a screened match made by the student's professor for a mandatory three–credit course. Seeing how health disparities affect racially–marginalized populations fueled the student’s desire to obtain a research opportunity. 16  The  mentor  served as an example of how someone they can relate to can provide the most impactful guidance. Mentoring has proved important to diverse first–generation college students’ professional and academic pursuits in public health 17  and crucial as cultural factors and language barriers can inhibit trust. 18"
"32" "An empathic B lack medical student in the South"
"33" "An  African–American woman, originally from the Northwest and living in the South, entered the research field while preparing for medical school. Working in an affluent hospital with poverty–stricken satellite sites, she encountered patient populations on both ends of the socioeconomic spectrum. During her tenure, she witnessed interactions with patients and various medical professionals and noticed the differences in patient care due to health insurance plans and/or patients’ racial backgrounds. Professional experiences such as these motivate this student  to make an  impact on the health of underserved populations."
"34" "Mentorship gives students the opportunity to hone their skills to become credible voices for the underrepresented groups they identify with. Dr. Joan Reede, Dean of Diversity and Community Partnership at Harvard Medical School,  stated, “Role models are critically important,” and explained that they give a visual of others who have accomplished the same or similar goals as the student and who understand the unique challenges the student will be presented with. Minority mentorship not only develops the individual but also “helps [organizations] better serve minority communities.” 19"
"35" "This medical student pursued a research internship to help bring accountability and trust to the research and medical profession through ethical practices. She is proud to be learning and applying Open Science principles from her mentor as they align with her desire to create more trustworthy, transparent, and accountable research projects. This student  is motivated to be a voice of change and justice while completing school rather than waiting or aspiring to do so in the future. An excellent mentor provides the tools, guidance, and even publication opportunities to fuel these passions now, rather than later."
"36" "Muslim – American medical student strives  to  ment or to give back"
"37" "A multiracial Muslim American wanted to become a doctor at a young age. She was further encouraged to enter medicine in later years due to the shortage of female Muslim doctors. The opportunity to study medicine in a Muslim country has allowed her to work on her Arabic fluency and study with Muslims and give back to them whenever she could."
"38" "This medical student sought a research internship during the lockdown. She knew that low representation of Muslims in data or research can be detrimental as it can lead to  overgeneralizations, which can be an issue for diverse gro ups such as the Muslim population. 20  Fortunate to have impactful female mentors, she wishes to mentor others and contribute to the promotion of future mentoring. 9"
"39" "She plans to implement a near–peer mentoring program like those in the US, in which clinical medical students mentor those in the basic sciences.  Near–peer mentoring has  proven social, professional, and emotional benefits primarily in the “improvement in problem–solving skills, responsibility, and communication skills.” 21  With her research knowledge in the health disparities of marginalized populations, she also hopes to impart on her peers the importance of treating patients with empathy. She sees the profession of medicine as a service and believes if doctors work with this in mind, patient trust is inevitable. She also hopes to co–lead  a Public Health Open Data Science project for fellow female medical students (grant proposal currently pending)."
"40" "Mentoring helped validate a  Bangladeshi Muslim’s pursuit of  public health"
"41" "A first–generation Bangladeshi Muslim admits that having a mentor earlier would have allowed her to focus on public health more confidently earlier in her career. She split her time studying public health and biology, working as a medical scribe, and even applying to medical schools, rather than centering her talents and energy around the pursuit of public health internships. She did so to appease her parents. Public health has long been an underrepresented field in the South Asian diaspora. 22  This lack of interest in public health has proved detrimental to public health projects in many South Asian countries, which simply cannot produce a substantial workforce to support their much–needed public health infrastructure."
"42" "There are several  ways to increase interest and boost  respect in the field of public health—primarily, mentorship.  When  this student’s parents  saw a successful peer of their own age, background, and financial standing advising their daughter on public health degrees, they were able to visualize their child’s future in a field they were otherwise unfamiliar with. A mentor can provide a tangible result of their public health work, such as an article in an academic journal. Additionally, mentors who serve a particular underrepresented group further promote the possibility that children of immigrants can use a public health career to serve minority groups both in the US and abroad."
"43" "Gaining practical experiences outside of the classroom allows underrepresented individuals to be more competitive candidates for opportunities  a t large organizations and prestigious institutions that parents are more familiar with, such as the WHO, CDC, or NIH. 23  These acronyms became well–known to this family, residents of the DC metropolitan area, during the pandemic. The status associated with working in such organizations or attending certain universities, while not necessarily important, may further cement the reputability of the public health field in the eyes of South Asian immigrant parents."
"44" "Mentors can show immigrant parents that a career based on serving a larger population through the public health field is just as worthy as helping individuals in a clinical setting. This student and her family are grateful to her mentor for helping to normalize her career choice."
"45" "A mentor – student pair not willing to give up"
"46" "Our last student  is an American–born, Nigerian– raised  Muslim female pursuing her second master’s degree full–time . An e–mentoring opportunity during the pandemic gave her the opportunity to pursue her interest in Muslim health and grant writing. However, the remote relationship with a Muslim mentor abroad was challenging and frustrating. In addition to the lockdown, acclimating to shared documents and new technology, scheduling across time zones, and adhering to strict deadlines was stressful for this student who is also a mother of four. Having a mentor who offered her motivation, kindness, and guidance on top of the demanding duties provided her with opportunities to pursue her interest and commitment in researching Muslim health. Furthermore, mentors who are transparent about the difficulties of balancing work and motherhood, especially during lockdowns, provide the student with examples of how to make it work. Although the student  wanted  to give up twice, she never did because her mentor never gave up on her."
"47" "Measurable outcomes of these public health students"
"48" "As of the 2021 Spring semester, 6 of the 7 student authors working with the lead author were  volunteer s; one worked for school credit. While no formal evaluation has been made, 1 student author withdrew during the semester, and the remaining 6 confirmed their continuation into the following 2 semesters. Three of the 6 student authors will have their second research  paper  published as a preprint and submitted to a peer–reviewed journal. They will have all been acknowledged in 1–3 additional papers for their technical editing or research assistance—skills acquired through this internship. The one student without an additional research paper worked exclusively on the currently pending $230,000 grant application. Two student authors were outliers. The student working for credit will have co–authored 3 papers. She also spent 6 weeks assisting the mentor submit 3  grant applications ranging in amounts from $20,000 to $230,000 (all currently pending), and helped research and/or write  7 grant proposals, pitches, or presentations. Another student is co–founder and co–lead to most of the lead author’s research projects and programs. By the end of the semester, she will have co–authored 10 papers, one of which she is the primary author and one of which she is the sole author with the mentor. She was also acknowledged for technical editing to 3 papers; worked on and/or submitted 14 grant applications, proposals, pitches or presentations; and has multiple side projects such the development of multiple Open Data publications and project websites."
"49" "During this current semester, the lead author had three additional students start. Within the first month, two withdrew. The third was another undergraduate student who worked for credit. Two students will continue by working for credit, and 5 will volunteer in the summer and fall semesters. Shall grants become funded, the lead author hopes to hire them all."
"50" "If the lead author takes additional students, she will prioritize student researchers who work  for credit rathe r than non–credit students as they had  a 100%  weekly meeting compliance and more accountability to the agreed upon semester learning objectives, goals and timeline. The lead author believes her e–mentoring schedule and structure were more effective, efficient, and mutually beneficial for the research completed by students working for credit. The lead author established additional e–mentoring policies to assure all research projects continued on their projected timeline while protecting the confidentiality of her projects."
"51" "E – mentoring schedule and structure"
"52" "Mentoring 5  active students and 2 inactive students involved approximately 22 hours a month in individual student meetings, which did not count time for emails, texts, or correcting their work. While it may seem like a large time investment, the lead author was inspired by each student's interaction. She regularly advised her students to update their resumes with each new skill acquired or accomplishment achieved. For example, 1 student submitted this preprint to her university for a competition and won a cash prize. Also, every meeting had time for the student's own agenda items. Communication is critical for a rewarding e–mentoring relationship, and a systematic method can assure that e–mentoring can increase a researcher's research capacity rather than create a burden."
"53" "During the active semesters of e–mentoring, 3 students worked on average 8–12 hours a week, and 3 students worked on average 3–7 hours a week. All students met with the lead author for an hour–long weekly phone, zoom or text meeting. While they also had access to the mentor   via text and email, the preferred method of communication was in–line comments within appropriate Google Docs. While trying to meet deadlines, students   could request an additional 15–60 minute phone call, this rarely happened. Additional time was typically scheduled for the student to meet the mentor in the current Google Doc to work online simultaneously. During the inactive semester, 2 students met with the mentor 1 hour per month and communicated with her via email and text for progress updates on outstanding papers or grants."
"54" "Public health e – mentoring beyond the pandemic"
"55" "E –mentoring offers numerous benefits such as cost effectivenes s 24"
"56" "and having the ability to create  better matches since mentors are not limited by geographical location . 25  Some drawbacks to e–mentoring include loss of non–verbal communication cues that may affect relationship building, internet connectivity problems, and scheduling conflicts across different time zones. Yet, it is possible. For example, online doctoral  students at the dissertation stage who were mentored remotely during the pandemic met all their goals and reported a high level of satisfaction. 26   Similarly, each student in this report showed positive experiences and a daptability by both parties proved essential."
"57" "Mentoring training materials were proven to increase  effectiveness   and could be beneficial for those new to e–mentoring or mentoring in general. 27,28  The  lead author drew from her experience of e–mentoring students for over 15 years. However, since this was the first year e–mentoring student researchers, her research team is  currently documenting best practices.. A follow–up article is currently pending publication in a peer review journal.  It  includes designing  a semester–long research plan with learning objectives, timelines, and milestones; and how to best use Google Workspace for an effective e–mentoring experience. The mentee also shares tips for potential mentors and mentees. Other  documents being compiled include: how to conduct a multi–author literature review, and how to apply for grants as an independent researcher;  acknowledgment and authorship guidelines; and  how to recruit students for school credit..  ."
"58" "The goal  of  these research internships was to train students as capable research colleagues and co–authors, regardless of degree level (Bachelors, Masters, Doctorate, or Medical Degree). Acknowledgement or authorship is not guaranteed to any student in any project as their efforts, time, and intellectual contribution must be justified. Students anticipate gaining new professional skills when signing their initial  internship agreement forms. However, this field report demonstrates that an e–mentoring research experience can also be personally rewarding. As a group, these authors add to the diversity of the public health workforce, which they are committed to  exp a nding.  To assist in this expansion, they welcome an open dialogue about any issue addressed in this  paper."
"59" "References"
"60" "Arday J.  Fighting the tide: Understanding the difficulties facing Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic (BAME) Doctoral Students’ pursuing a career in Academia. doi : 10.1080/00131857.2020.1777640"
"61" "Sanderson R, Spacey R.  Widening access to higher education for BAME students and students from lower socio-economic groups: A review of literature.  Journal of Higher Education Research.  2020;4(1)"
"62" "Ercan ES, Tufan AE,  Kütük ÖM,  Yazıcı İp. E-mentoring program organized by the Turkish Association for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2020; doi:  10.1007/s00787-020-01671-9"
"63" "Mahayosnand PP, Stigler MH. The need for mentoring in public health.  Am J Public Health.  1999;89(8):1262-1263."
"64" "Virapongse A , Lancaster A, Wilkins J. Empowering the Ronin Community. Ronin Institute website.  http://ronininstitute.org/empowering-the-ronin-community/3600/  Published March 30, 2020. Accessed January 30, 2021."
"65" "Virapongse A.  Ronin Institute Principle: Pay it Forward. Ronin Institute website.  http://ronininstitute.org/ronin-institute-principle-pay-it-forward/4244/  Published November 24, 2020. Accessed January 30, 2021."
"66" "Leighton H. Not only is Houston getting more diverse, but residents' households are, too. The Kinder Institute for Urban Research.  https://kinder.rice.edu/urbanedge/2019/05/14/not-only-houston-getting-more-diverse-residents-households-are-too . Published May 14, 2019. Accessed January 27, 2021."
"67" "Schmidt EK, Faber ST. Benefits of Peer Mentoring to Mentors, Female Mentees and Higher Education Institutions. Mentoring and Tutoring: Partnership in Learning. 2016;24(2):137-157. doi:  10.1080/13611267.2016.1170560"
"68" "Clay RA. Women outnumber men in psychology, but not in the field's top echelons. Monitor on Psychology.  https://www.apa.org/monitor/2017/07-08/women-psychology . Published July 2017. Accessed January 27, 2021."
"69" "The changing gender composition of psychology. Monitor on Psychology.  https://www.apa.org/monitor/jun07/changing . Published 2010. Accessed January 27, 2021."
"70" "Daniel, JH. (2009). Next generation: A mentoring program for black female psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40(3), 299–305. doi:  10.1037/a0013891"
"71" "Cross M, Lee S, Bridgman H, Thapa DK, Cleary M, Kornhaber R. Benefits, barriers and enablers of mentoring female health academics: An integrative review. PloS one.  https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30998791 . Published April 18, 2019. Accessed January 27, 2021."
"72" "Diele-Viegas, LM, Almeida, TS, Amati-Martins, I, Bacon, et al. (2020). Gender inequality and not female mentors hinder female scientists' career outcomes."
"73" "Katz V. Children as Brokers of Their Immigrant Families’ Health-Care Connections.  Social Problems.  2014;61(2):194-215. doi: 10.1525/sp.2014.12026."
"74" "Gil RM, Marcelin JR, Zuniga-Blanco B, Marquez C, Mathew T, Piggott DA. COVID-19 Pandemic: Disparate Health Impact on the Hispanic/Latinx Population in the United States.  Journal Infect Dis.  2020;222(10):1592-1595. doi:  10.1093/infdis/jiaa474"
"75" "Chowkwanyun M, Reed Jr AL. Racial Health Disparities and Covid-19 — Caution and Context.  N Engl J Med.  2020;383(3):201-203. doi : 10.1056/NEJMp2012910"
"76" "Hernandez KE, Bejarano S, Reyes FJ, Chavez M, Mata H. Experience preferred: Insights from our newest public health professionals on how internships/practicums promote career development.   Health Promot Pract .  2014;15(1):95-99. d oi: 10.1177/1524839913507578"
"77" "Pearson WS, Ahluwalia IB, Ford ES, Mokdad AH. Language preference as a predictor of access to and use of healthcare services among Hispanics in the United States.  Ethn Dis . 2008;18(1):93-97."
"78" "Diversity is tied to mission success. Youtube.  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RQ7wpPObZD0&t=37s  Published July 10, 2017.Accessed January 23, 2021."
"79" "Weatherhead S, Daiches, A. Muslim views on mental health and psychotherapy. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice. 2010; 83(1), 75–89. doi:10.1348/147608309x467807"
"80" "Akinla, O, Hagan, P, & Atiomo, W. A systematic review of the literature describing the outcomes of near-peer mentoring programs for first year medical students.  BMC Medical Education . 2018;  18(1). doi:10.1186/s12909-018-1195-1"
"81" "Karkee R. Public health education in South Asia: A basis for structuring a master degree course.  Front Public Health . 2014; 2(88). doi:  10.3389/fpubh.2014.00088"
"82" "Chemers MM, Zurbriggen EL, Syed M, Goza BK, Bearman S. The role of efficacy and identity in science career commitment among underrepresented minority students.  J Soc Issues.  2011; 67(3): 468-491. doi:  10.1111/j.1540-4560.2011.01710.x"
"83" "Ercan ES, Tufan AE,  Kütük ÖM,  Yazıcı İp. E-mentoring program organized by the Turkish Association for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry during the COVID-19 pandemic.  Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry . 2020;   doi:  10.1007/s00787-020-01671-9"
"84" "Mahayosnand PP. E-mentoring: an investment for the next millennium.  Am J Public Health . 2000;90(8), 1317–1318. doi:10.2105/ajph.90.8.1317"
"85" "Mullen CA.  Online doctoral mentoring in a pandemic: help or hindrance to academic progress on dissertations?  I nternational Journal of Mentoring and Coaching in Education . 2020; Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of-print.   doi:  10.1108/IJMCE-06-2020-0029"
"86" "Guse J, Heinen I, Kurre J, Mohr S, Bergelt C. Perception of the study situation and mental burden during the COVID-19 pandemic among undergraduate medical students with and without mentoring.  GMS J Med Educ . 2020; 37(7):Doc72. Published 2020 Dec 3. doi:10.3205/zma001365"
"87" "Forster CS, Nguyen ST, Powell WT, et al. Perspectives from the Society for Pediatric Research: advice on sustaining science and mentoring during COVID-19.  Pediatr Res.  2021. d oi: 10.1038/s41390-020-01321-5"
