Does Partisanship Shape Investor Beliefs?
Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic
J. Anthony Cookson, Joseph E. Engelberg and William Mullins∗
August 2020
Forthcoming at Review of Asset Pricing Studies

Abstract
We use party-identifying language – like “Liberal Media” and “MAGA”– to identify Republican users on the investor social platform StockTwits. Using a differencein-difference design, we find that the beliefs of partisan Republicans about equities
remain relatively unfazed during the COVID-19 pandemic, while other users become
considerably more pessimistic. In cross-sectional tests, we find Republicans become
relatively more optimistic about stocks that suffered the most from COVID-19, but
more pessimistic about Chinese stocks. Finally, stocks with the greatest partisan disagreement on StockTwits have significantly more trading in the broader market, explaining 28% of the increase in stock turnover during the pandemic.

∗

Cookson (tony.cookson@colorado.edu), Leeds School of Business at University of Colorado-Boulder.
Engelberg (jengelberg@ucsd.edu) and Mullins (wmullins@ucsd.edu), Rady School of Management, UC San
Diego. We are grateful for comments from Scott Baker, Snehal Banerjee, Asaf Bernstein, Steve Billings, Hui
Chen, Winston Dou, Diego Garcia, Paul Irvine, Vincent Pons, Yuval Rottenstreich, Antoinette Schoar, and
Steven Yee, as well as seminar participants at University of Colorado at Boulder and University of Technology
Sydney.

1

Introduction

The COVID-19 pandemic presented investors with a complex valuation problem. With
the first sign of community spread in the United States, investors were faced with a series of questions: How quickly would the virus spread? How deadly would it be? How
would the government respond? How long would the pandemic last? How quickly would
the economy recover? Could the pandemic present an opportunity for some firms? With
fundamental uncertainty about each of these factors, even among experts, investors had to
update their expectations about firms’ future prospects.
In this paper, we show these investor expectations in the wake of COVID-19 can be
predicted from their political identity as measured before COVID-19. Specifically, we find
that partisan Republicans become more optimistic than other investors when the crisis begins and remain more optimistic through the end of April 2020. We also show that political
identity shapes views among the cross-section of stocks during the pandemic: Republicans
become more pessimistic about US-listed Chinese firms (e.g., Baidu and Alibaba) while remaining more optimistic about firms that experienced the greatest losses. We also find that
stocks with the greatest partisan disagreement see the greatest increase in stock turnover
during the COVID-19 period.
Partisan differences influence beliefs across a host of issues (Milner and Judkins, 2004;
Gaines et al., 2007) and have increased dramatically in the last thirty years (Bishop, 2008;
Abramowitz and Saunders, 2008; Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy, 2019; Kaplan, Spenkuch,
and Sullivan, 2019). It is nonetheless surprising to see partisan identity matter when forming stock expectations. Investors have a strong financial incentive to form correct beliefs
about a stock’s future cash flows regardless of political affiliation. If partisan identity does
not help investors update expectations about a firm’s prospects, then their political identity
should be ignored when when forming these expectations. Nevertheless, we find a widening and sustained difference in investor beliefs between partisan Republicans and other
investors beginning with the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic.
1

We employ novel data from StockTwits, a popular investor social network, to measure
partisan identity at the individual level, and observe investment beliefs at a daily frequency.
StockTwits users explicitly stamp individual messages with bullish or bearish sentiment,
which gives a direct measure of their investment beliefs. We observe precisely when these
declarations of sentiment are made, allowing us to track the evolution of investor beliefs
through the COVID-19 pandemic. Critically, to link investor beliefs to partisanship, we
observe individuals’ partisan affiliation as revealed by their use of political language in
StockTwits posts prior to the pandemic. Our classification, which follows an approach
similar to Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010), cleanly identifies partisan Republican individuals
who use the platform.1
We identify how partisanship shapes investor beliefs during the COVID-19 period using a difference-in-difference design. We compare the difference in optimism between
Republicans and non-Republicans (the first difference) before and during the COVID-19
period in the United States (the second difference). In support of our empirical approach,
we observe parallel pre-trends for investment beliefs in the pre-COVID period (e.g., Figure 4), followed by a sharp divergence in investor beliefs after the first suspected case of
community spread of the virus in the United States.
Our core finding is that partisan Republicans remain, on average, more optimistic about
equities than other users during the COVID-19 period. The optimism of partisan Republicans closely tracks that of other users from October 2019 through February 2020. However, after the first case of U.S. community spread of COVID-19 in late February, partisan
Republicans became significantly more optimistic than other StockTwits users – a difference of 2-3 percentage points across all stocks and 4-5 percentage points for firms in the
S&P500. Because we include user-security fixed effects, these estimates reflect changes in
1 We also validate our individual classification of partisan users using belief updating around the 2016
election. Consistent with the evidence in Meeuwis et al. (2019), we find that partisan Republicans become
significantly more optimistic than other StockTwits users around the 2016 election of Donald Trump. Moreover, this partisan gap in optimism rises at critical junctures during the Trump presidency: the onset of
the U.S.-China trade war, the 20% market drawdown of late 2018, and the primary focus of this study, the
COVID-19 crisis in the U.S.

2

optimism within user about the same security through the COVID-19 period. This partisan
optimism gap held throughout the COVID crisis, as market valuations reached their bottom
in late March and began to recover in April.2
We also perform heterogeneity tests to illuminate the underlying source of partisan
investor optimism during the pandemic. First, we evaluate whether partisan Republicans
became more optimistic than other users about stocks that suffered the largest losses during
the COVID-19 period. Greater optimism about stocks that lost value during the crisis
reflects a belief in a quick stock market recovery. Consistent with this view, our tests reveal
that partisan Republicans are disproportionately more optimistic about stocks that fell the
most during the COVID-19 period.
Second, we examine Republicans’ relative beliefs about US-listed Chinese stocks (e.g.,
Baidu or Alibaba) during the COVID-19 crisis. President Trump repeatedly identified
COVID-19 as the “Chinese virus” in public statements, and singled out China’s lack of
forthright communication about the seriousness of the virus in the early stages of the pandemic (Higgins, 2020). Consistent with politically-driven negativity about China affecting
the investment beliefs of partisan Republicans, we find that they are significantly more
pessimistic about Chinese stocks during the outbreak in the United States. The timing
of Republican beliefs about Chinese stocks is instructive: they did not become more pessimistic about these stocks during the COVID-19 outbreak in China; instead, Republicans
became pessimistic about them in mid-March when new cases in China had fallen, but the
crisis in the U.S. was deepening. This points to a political, rather than economic, model for
their beliefs.3
The political divide in investor beliefs during COVID-19 coincided with an enormous
2 Our difference-in-difference design recovers the partisan gap in investment beliefs that emerges during
the pandemic. We do not, however, take a position on whether Republicans or non-Republicans have correct
beliefs during the pandemic. Our goal is to identify the role of political identity in shaping investor beliefs
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
3 Pessimism about Chinese firms could reflect the belief that Western politicians would place economic
restrictions on these companies. However, according to this view, non-Republicans should also become more
pessimistic about Chinese stocks. Viewed in this light, our finding of differential pessimism by Republicans
is difficult to reconcile with purely economic beliefs.

3

increase in trading volume: at the height of the pandemic, abnormal daily stock turnover
had increased by approximately 36% relative to pre-pandemic levels. In our final set of
tests, we measure partisan disagreement at the daily stock level and relate abnormal stock
turnover to partisan disagreement among the cross-section of stocks. Our estimates imply
a tight connection: a one standard deviation increase in partisan disagreement during the
pandemic leads to 10% more abnormal stock turnover, which is 28% of its increase during the COVID-19 period, and is greater than the trading implied by a standard deviation
increase in overall disagreement.
Our analysis primarily focuses on how partisan investment beliefs diverge during the
COVID-19 period, but our measure of partisan Republican sentiment accurately reflects
political events outside of this period. We find that Republicans became relatively more
optimistic about equities after the 2016 Presidential Election and during the US-China
Trade War that began in early 2018 and culminated with a near 20% market drawdown
in December 2018. These key moments of politically-based divergence in investor beliefs
on StockTwits also appear in Internet search volume. Google Search Intensity for “Trump”
together with “stock market” spikes for each of these events: the 2016 election, the USChina trade war and the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, Google Search Intensity for “Trump
and stock market” is greater during the COVID-19 period than around the 2016 election,
suggesting that the pandemic is an especially important period to investigate partisan disagreement in investor beliefs. Moreover, the fact that these spikes in Google search volume
coincide with a widening of the partisan optimism gap on Stocktwits provides support for
the external validity of our partisan classification, as does our finding of a clear link between
partisan disagreement and stock market turnover.4
Our central contribution is to show an individual link between partisan identity and investor beliefs. Our findings most closely relate to Meeuwis, Parker, Schoar, and Simester
4 Buckman et al. (2020) provides a daily news sentiment index that extends through the COVID-19 period.
In appendix Figure A.7 we find that the expectations of the majority of StockTwits users closely track this
index during 2020 and for several years before (correlations of around 0.8).

4

(2019), which shows that individuals in Republican areas invest their retirement assets
more aggressively after the 2016 election, consistent with partisan investment optimism.
Our analysis of investment beliefs during the pandemic period is substantively different
in at least two ways. First, the COVID-19 period was not only a shock to the level of
economic activity,5 but also a shock to uncertainty (e.g., Baker et al. 2020a) . Thus, our
finding of partisan optimism in the face of the pandemic is different than showing that
Republican investors view a Republican policy regime as favorable to stock market valuations, and suggests that people default to core identities, such as political affiliation, when
facing significant uncertainty.6 Second, our evidence is from direct observation of investment beliefs, expressed on StockTwits, whereas Meeuwis et al. (2019) infer differences in
investment beliefs from changes to portfolio holdings.
Our research also contributes to the emerging literature on how partisan identity shapes
financial beliefs (e.g., Kempf and Tsoutsoura, 2019). Our party-identification and sentiment measures from StockTwits have four advantages. First, our use of high-frequency
data on belief revisions enables us to describe the partisan dynamics at a daily or weekly
frequency, cleanly identifying the effect of an event on beliefs. Second, we provide an
individual link between partisanship and direct declarations of investment beliefs rather
than relying on geography to infer partisan identity. Geography is correlated with many
variables besides political party while individual declarations, such as #Trump2020, are
unequivocal.7 Third, we show important cross-sectional differences in partisan belief formation: our finding of Republicans’ pessimism about Chinese stocks shows that these partisan investor beliefs do not merely reflect general economic optimism, but a more nuanced
5 U.S. GDP decreased at an annual rate of 32.9% in the second quarter of 2020 according to the BEA
advance estimate.
6 The uncertainty-identity theory of Hogg (2007) argues that people cling to their social identity as a way
to reduce uncertainty. Relatedly, Bénabou and Tirole (2011) develop a model in which investments in one’s
identity (e.g., political identity) are important for shaping beliefs.
7 Using geography to proxy for partisan identity risks conflating partisanship with other omitted factors
that relate to investor belief formation, e.g., social connections (Bailey et al., 2018b). Meeuwis et al. (2019)
addresses this measurement concern by ruling out hedging needs and initial differences, and use survey data
to show that Republicans are more optimistic about the national economy, but not about their own economic
situations.

5

alignment of investor beliefs with partisan philosophy. Finally, we connect these beliefs to
outcomes in the overall market, specifically the extent of daily stock turnover.
Our research also relates to the literature on belief formation (Bailey et al., 2018a)
and sources of disagreement (Cookson and Niessner, 2020). Our main findings suggest
that partisan identity affects how people update their market beliefs upon the arrival of
new public information. In showing that a non-informational factor drives differential belief updating, we provide new evidence that investors apply different models to interpret
market information (e.g., Kandel and Pearson, 1995). The political friction we identify is
distinct from other views about inefficient belief updating, such as extrapolation (Bordalo,
Gennaioli, and Schleifer, 2018) or motivated beliefs (Brunnermeier and Parker, 2005; Benabou, 2015), and is complementary to work on selective exposure to confirmatory information (Cookson, Engelberg, and Mullins, 2020). Relative to existing work on how investors
form beliefs, we show that partisan identity can lead to significant differences, which is
surprising given recent evidence that typical investor characteristics do not explain much
variation (Giglio et al., 2020a).8
A survey-based literature in political science robustly shows that people express greater
optimism about the economy when their partisan position matches that of the Government
(e.g., Bartels (2002) and Evans and Andersen (2006)). A related series of papers argues that
this link between partisanship and economic perceptions affects outcomes such as spending
or economic activity (Gerber and Huber, 2009, 2010; Gillitzer and Prasad, 2018; Benhabib
and Spiegel, 2019), but recent work has challenged this claim (McGrath, 2017; Mian, Sufi,
and Khoshkhou, 2017). Our paper contributes to this debate on the real effects of partisan
perceptions by providing evidence that partisan disagreement materially increases stock
market trading volume.
Though both political and investment beliefs have been studied in the context of COVID8 Our research also relates to, but is distinct from, the literature on media slant (Gentzkow and Shapiro,
2010). Goldman, Gupta, and Israelsen (2020) show Republican firms are covered more favorably in the Wall
Street Journal than in the New York Times. Political bias in media coverage may contribute to our observed
differences in investor beliefs.

6

19, our work is the first to connect the two. For example, several articles have shown that
political beliefs affect real activities such as social distancing compliance (Allcott et al.,
2020; Barrios and Hochberg, 2020; Painter and Qiu, 2020) and subsequent infection rates
(Burstyn et al., 2020). In addition, there is an emerging literature that has studied how
COVID-19 has affected household consumption (Baker et al., 2020b), risk preferences
(Bu et al., 2020), expectations (Hanspal, Weber, and Wohlfart, 2020), and belief updating
(Giglio et al., 2020b). Our findings draw a connection between political and investment
beliefs during COVID-19 by showing a strong divergence in stock market beliefs between
Republicans and non-Republicans, and a relationship between this partisan-based disagreement and the cross-section of trading volume.

2

Setting and Data

In this section, we describe the StockTwits data, describe our approach to identifying partisans among StockTwits users, and provide some initial evidence linking partisanship and
investor beliefs.

2.1

StockTwits Data on Investor Beliefs

We employ message-level data from the investor social network, StockTwits. Founded in
2008, StockTwits claims to be the “largest social network for investors and traders, with
over two million registered community members and millions of monthly visitors.” The
platform is similar to Twitter. Panel (a) of Figure 1 shows the user interface. Users post
messages of up to 1,000 characters and use “cashtags” with the stock symbol (e.g., $AAPL
or $BTC for Apple or Bitcoin) to link the user’s message to a particular company. Cashtags allow users to aggregate opinions about particular stocks or other assets in a broader
discussion, just like hashtags on Twitter.
Although StockTwits users are not a fully representative sample of investors, the opin-

7

ions expressed on StockTwits have been shown to have external reliability. For example,
prior work has linked dispersion of opinion on StockTwits to overall trading volume in
stocks: Both Cookson and Niessner (2020) and Giannini, Irvine, and Shu (2018) show that
proxies for dispersion of sentiment relate to market-level trading volume. Because of its
unique data features, such as social connections and high-frequency belief updating, profile
information on location, and investor approaches, StockTwits has begun to attract academic
attention (Giannini, Irvine, and Shu, 2017; Cookson, Engelberg, and Mullins, 2020).
We have the full history of messages posted to StockTwits through April 2020. We
restrict attention to messages that mention only one ticker to focus on sentiment that can be
directly linked to a specific stock. Panel (a) of Table 1 presents summary information on our
sample. Focusing on StockTwits posts from October 2019 through April 2020, our sample
contains 2.3 million user-security-day observations, (119,434 unique users) about 1,042
unique securities (stocks, indexes and other assets). Our specifications with user-security
fixed effects drop singleton observations (i.e., users who post only once about a security
during our sample period), leaving us with approximately 1.9 million useable observations
in the October 2019 – April 2020 sample.
A valuable feature of StockTwits for academic research is that the platform encourages
users to self-classify whether their sentiment is bullish or bearish for each message. Users
can by click on a prominently displayed button on the StockTwits interface before posting
(e.g., see Panel (a) of Figure 1). Following Cookson, Engelberg, and Mullins (2020), our
observations aggregate posts to the user-stock-day level to prevent a user with multiple
posts about a security on a single a day from having inordinate weightIn addition, old
messages cannot be deleted on StockTwits. This feature not only preserves the incentives
of users to post truthful best forecasts for their follower-base but also ensures that the data
we extract from StockTwits reflect an unselected view of how users viewed the market at
each date in our sample. Using a battery of analyses of text and market events, Cookson and
Niessner (2020) provide extensive validation on the bullish versus bearish classification.

8

Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 1 present examples of a bullish post and a bearish post about
Apple (symbol $AAPL).

2.2

Identifying Partisan Investors in StockTwits

In addition to the self-classified sentiment about investments, StockTwits users sometimes
discuss other topics, including politics. These additional posts are useful for measuring
individual users’ partisan affiliation. We follow Gentzkow and Shapiro (2010) and identify
a list of keywords that flag posts as political.
We begin by identifying partisan Republicans. The process is as follows: we consider
all posts before 2020 that expressed direct support for President Trump’s reelection via the
terms #Trump2020 and #MAGA. For the users who created these posts, we examine all of
their other posts, looking for terms that this group uses at least 20x more frequently than
other users. From these posts, we select purely political terms that meet this condition,
such as “Stupid dems” and “Leftists.” Then, we identify users who employ this expanded
set of terms frequently. Adding these users to our set of partisan Republicans, we identify
additional political terms that this expanded group uses more frequently than other users.
We continue to iterate in this way until no new political phrases emerge. We take a similar approach to identify partisan Democrats, beginning with the terms “Idiot Trump” and
“Stupid Trump.”
Panel (a) of Table 2 reports the final list of keywords, which contain distinctively partisan Republican or Democrat language, such as “Liberal Media” and “Russia Hoax” among
Republicans, and “Faux News” and “#ImpeachTrump” among Democrats. The vast majority of the posts containing keywords are unambiguously partisan. We report several
examples of partisan messages in Panel (b) of Table 2. To be clear, this classification of
users is “out of sample” in two respects: (1) partisan users are identified via pre-2020
messages, distinctly prior to our COVID-19 sample period and (2) the sentiment-stamped
messages in our analysis rarely contain political language. Because the classification as9

signs partisanship at the user level, we do not rely upon the combination of messages that
contain sentiment and political statements.
Panel (b) of Table 1 presents summary information on our classification procedure.
Applied to the 179.2 million StockTwits messages before 2020, a total of 70,031 messages
contain partisan keywords (18,371 are stamped with bullish or bearish sentiment). Out of
the 780,908 users who were active on StockTwits prior to 2020, we identify 34,284 users
who make or like at least one partisan message.
For each user, we count the number of Republican (R) and Democrat (D) messages that
they either posted or liked on Stocktwits before 2020. We measure each user’s partisanship as the difference between the two (R − D). Table A.1 provides information about the
number of users we observe in our sample at various levels of R − D.9 The table illustrates that Stocktwits has many more Republican than Democrat users, consistent with Ke
(2019). For example, we observe 5,426 users where R − D ≥ 2 but only 323 users where
R − D ≤ −2. Because our sample contains so few identifiable Democrats, our analysis
throughout compares partisan Republicans to everyone else. However, both Table A.1 and
Figure A.1 illustrate that when we consider our main finding among partisan Democrats
we find the opposite result: partisan Democrats become relatively more pessimistic during
the pandemic, although this result is statistically insignificant (likely because we have so
few partisan Democrat users).
For our main analysis we identify partisan Republicans as those who have an R − D of
at least 4. In other words, we require that, before 2020, a user has either posted or liked
at least 4 messages with political sentiment and that the number of Republican messages
outnumber the number of Democrat messages by at least 4. Table A.1 demonstrates that
other cutoffs (e.g., R − D ≥ 3 or R − D ≥ 5) yield similar results. Our R − D ≥ 4 constraint
helps ensure that the individuals we identify are truly and persistently partisan Republican,
9 The number of users reported in Table A.1, and all regression tables, is after dropping singletons generated by our user-security fixed effects, i.e., users that post no more than once about each security in the
regression time period are not included in these numbers.

10

and identifies 6,191 users in the pre-2020 period. Restricting attention to the sample period (Oct 2019–Apr 2020), our sample contains 3,448 Republican-identified users and a
comparison group of 115,986 other users who were active during this period.10 Of course,
many of these other users are also Republicans who do not regularly use or like Republican
language on StockTwits. To the extent that our comparison group includes non-partisan
users and some partisan Republicans missed by our classification, our estimates potentially
understate the true size of the partisan gap. Finally, although partisan Republicans comprise only 3% of the users in our sample, they tend to be more active, making up 12% of
the user-symbol-day level observations.

2.3

Describing the Politicization of Stock Markets

Since the 2016 Presidential Election, President Trump has strengthened the connection
between political identity and beliefs about the stock market. He has tweeted about the
“stock market” 130 times through May 24th, 2020, and often cites the rise of the stock
market as a political accomplishment while cheering market milestones.11 Meeuwis et al.
(2019) highlights a connection between partisan identity and investment beliefs, showing
that the 2016 Presidential Election led investors from pro-Trump zip codes to invest more
aggressively, whereas investors in pro-Clinton zip codes did the opposite.
As validation of our classification of investor partisanship, we evaluate the sentiment of
StockTwits messages beginning in January 2015. To construct a time series of sentiment
by partisan affiliation we estimate the following specification:
Bulls, j,t = ηs, j + γ R (1Monthm × 1PartisanR j ) + γ B 1Monthm + εs, j,t

(1)

in which the dependent variable is an indicator for whether user j is bullish about stock
10 Most of our regressions consider the set of securities that have a permno and drop singleton observations.

With these restrictions, we have 2,754 partisan Republican and 66,634 other users.
11 The tweets can be found at the online Trump Twitter Archive (https://bit.ly/3cBxbmN).

11

s on day t, and ηs, j are user-security fixed effects which absorb each user’s average sentiment about each security over the sample period. γ B are month fixed effects for the baseline
group of users who are not partisan Republicans, while the vector of fixed effects γ R captures the differential sentiment of partisan Republican users. These fixed effect estimates
are time-varying sentiment measures, specific to how the opinions of each group – partisan
Republicans versus other users – change over time.
Panel (a) of Figure 2 plots the estimated sentiment time series, obtained from equation
(1). Prior to the date when Donald Trump was nominated (in July 2016), partisan Republicans and other users on StockTwits exhibit very similar sentiment patterns. Consistent with
the portfolio-based observations in Meeuwis et al. (2019), we observe that the 2016 Election leads partisan Republicans to become substantially more optimistic than other users,
and this divergence in investor optimism persists. Moreover, the plot shows that other important events during the Trump Presidency coincided with growth in the gap between the
sentiment of partisan Republicans and other users: the onset of the US-China trade war, the
market drawdown in December 2018, and the COVID period.
Beyond StockTwits, these periods of divergence of investor opinions coincide with the
public drawing a connection between politics and the stock market. Panel (b) of Figure
2 presents a plot of Google Search Intensity for “Trump and Stock Market.”12 Consistent
with the points of divergence we observe in Panel (a), Google Search Intensity for this
pair of terms has sharp spikes around the 2016 election, the onset of the US-China trade
war, the December 2018 market drawdown, and the COVID-19 period. The fact that these
spikes in Google search volume coincide with our measured Republican bullishness on
StockTwits also supports the external validity of our partisan Republican classification.
In other words, it appears unlikely that our classification is picking up the views of an
12 President Trump has often associated his administration with stock market performance. On February
7, 2018, he tweeted, “In the “old days,” when good news was reported, the Stock Market would go up.
Today, when good news is reported, the Stock Market goes down. Big mistake, and we have so much good
(great) news about the economy!” The tweet provides supporters of the President with guidance for how to
interpret news about the economy, consistent with differential interpretation of a public signal as in Kandel
and Pearson (1995).

12

unrepresentative population; it seems more likely that they represent broader partisan views
given that they coincide with the revealed interest of the Google-user population (Google
had approximately 250 million users in the US in 2019).13

2.4

Partisan Investor Beliefs during COVID-19

We focus on the COVID-19 period for several reasons. First, as we saw in Panel (a) of
Figure 2, the sharpest divergence of partisan investor beliefs occurs during the pandemic.
Second, the COVID-19 period also exhibits the largest amount of attention to “Trump and
Stock Market,” indicating that the connection between politics and financial markets is particularly salient during the pandemic. Third, as we show in Section 4, the COVID-19 period
exhibited significant market turmoil, with especially high trading volume. Divergence of
opinion is one potential explanation for this volume increase, and, as we will show, partisan
differences of opinion are an important explanation for this rise in trading.
To provide evidence on the timing of the pandemic shock, we estimate a version of
equation (1), with daily fixed effects from January 2020 through April 2020. Panel (a) of
Figure 3 presents the estimated daily sentiment fixed effects, after sweeping out user-stock
fixed effects. This series shows that partisan Republicans and other users on StockTwits exhibit similar investor belief dynamics from the beginning of January through the beginning
of March, but as of early March, partisan Republicans become significantly more optimistic
than other users. Panel (b) shows that the divergence in beliefs corresponds closely to when
Google Search volume for “Trump and Stock Market” spikes.
13 Our

finding of a strong link between partisan disagreement and stock market turnover (in Table 6) also
supports the external validity of our partisanship measure. Similarly, in appendix Figure A.7 we find that the
expectations of the majority of StockTwits users closely track the daily news sentiment index from Shapiro,
Sudhof, and Wilson (Forthcoming) and Buckman et al. (2020) during the COVID-19 period, and for several
years before (correlations of around 0.8).

13

3

Evidence of Partisan Investor Beliefs

This section presents regression evidence of how the investor beliefs of partisan Republicans diverge from other users on StockTwits through the COVID-19 period.

3.1

Partisan Republican Investor Optimism

We estimate the partisan gap in investor optimism during COVID-19 by focusing on the
period from October 2019 through April 2020. Using the sample of user-security-day observations of sentiment-stamped declarations about single stocks, we estimate the following
monthly difference-in-difference specification:
Bulls, j,t = ηs, j + γ B 1Monthm + ∑ βmR (1Monthm × 1PartisanR j ) + εs, j,t

(2)

m

in which the dependent variable Bulls, j,t is an indicator for whether user j is bullish
about stock s on day t (multiplied by 100 to aid interpretation as a percentage). ηs, j are usersecurity fixed effects that absorb the average sentiment of each user about each security in
the sample period. The month fixed effects (γmB ) yield time-varying sentiment estimates for
the baseline group. The coefficients of interest are βmR , which give the month-by-month
differences of partisan Republican investor sentiment relative to that of other users. We
cluster standard errors by user to account for serial correlation in sentiment within user.
Table 3 presents estimates of equation (2): column (1) is estimated for all securities
(including non-stock securities like Bitcoin), column (2) restricts attention to stocks with a
CRSP PERMNO , column (3) drops small capitalization stocks below the 25th percentile of
NYSE market capitalization as in Fama and French (2008) ($990 million here), and column
(4) restricts the sample to stocks in the S&P500 index as of Feb 29, 2020. To evaluate overall market optimism, it is not ideal to include non-stock securities (as in column 1), as these
securities may reflect views of fragmented and often idiosyncratic markets. Nevertheless,
regardless of the sample,we obtain qualitatively similar findings.
14

Consistent with the deterioration of the market after the first sign of community spread
of COVID-19 in the U.S., the month fixed effect coefficients reflect a decline in optimism
among the baseline category of investors, especially in March 2020. Referring to column
(3), which reports the results for the sample that excludes small firms, users are almost 6
percentage points less likely to express bullish sentiment in March and April 2020 than
they were in November 2019 (the reference month). Relative to this decline in baseline
optimism, we estimate that partisan Republicans are 3.7 to 4 percentage points more optimistic during March and April 2020. Moreover, examining the time series of partisan
Republican × month estimates, we observe similar trends in investor beliefs from October
2019 through February 2020, with a sharp divergence in March.
Figure 4 plots the estimates of the partisan Republican × month interactions from the
same specification used for Table 3, but estimated on a longer pre-period from March 2019
through April 2020. Panel (a) presents the sample that excludes small capitalization stocks,
and shows that the parallel pre-trends in beliefs are robust to using a longer sample. Moreover, as we highlight in Panel (b) and in column (4) of Table 3, the difference in the beliefs
of partisan Republicans in the COVID-19 period is larger when we condition on large capitalization stocks in the S&P500.14
Republicans remaining optimistic during the pandemic might suggest that they are optimists in general, which could drive our result. To address this concern, in column (7) of
appendix Table A.2 we classify the 28% of users that always declare bullish sentiment pre2020 as “Pre-Covid Optimists.” We estimate a single difference-in-differences coefficient
on 1Covidt × 1PartisanR j , rather than month-by-month coefficients (to keep the comparison simple), and add an analogous interaction for Pre-Covid Optimists. Although the
Pre-Covid Optimists are indeed differentially optimistic during the pandemic, Column (7)
of Table A.2 in the appendix shows that controlling for these optimists actually strengthens
the estimated partisan gap between Republicans and other users from 1.9 percentage points
14 Figure

A.4 in the Appendix presents an analogous plot at the weekly frequency using the main sample
(October 2019 through April 2020).

15

in the baseline specification in column (1) to 2.1 percentage points.

3.2

Heterogeneity in Partisan Republican Optimism

This section presents evidence on sources of heterogeneity in the divergence of sentiment
between partisan Republicans and other StockTwits users: (i) optimism about stocks that
recently lost value, (ii) optimism about the prospects of large firms, and (iii) pessimism
about US-listed Chinese stocks. For these heterogeneity tests, we estimate a triple difference specification of the following form:
Bulls, j,t = ηs, j + β1 1Covidt + β2 (1Covidt × 1PartisanR j ) + β3 Interactions,t
+ β4 (1Covidt × Interacts,t ) + β5 (1PartisanR j × Interacts,t )

(3)

+ β6 (1Covidt × 1PartisanR j × Interacts,t ) + εs, j,t

where the dependent variable Bulls, j,t (multiplied by 100 for ease of interpretation) is
an indicator for whether user j is bullish about stock s on day t, and ηs, j is a user-stock
fixed effect to absorb cross-user heterogeneity in sentiment across each stock. 1Covidt is
an indicator for the COVID-19 period (March and April).15 1PartisanR j is an indicator
variable for whether an individual is classified as a partisan Republican, and Interacts,t is
an interaction variable for: (i) an indicator for whether stock s is a member of the S&P500
as of February 29, 2020, (ii) an indicator for whether stock s is a US-listed Chinese stock,
or (iii) each stock’s return over the preceding month (returns from 21 trading days before
t to the trading day preceding t, denoted month returns,t−1 ). Our sample time period runs
from March 2019 through April 2020, and for the interaction with monthly lagged stock
returns we constrain the sample to S&P500 firms.
15 Though

our main specifications do not take a stance on the timing of the divergence of beliefs by estimating monthly coefficients, it is simpler to present the triple interaction evidence in a pre-post framework.
We choose the end of February as the event date because the daily fixed effects diverge in early March in
Figure 3.

16

3.2.1

Pessimism about China

Republicans were more likely than Democrats to blame China for the emerging crisis in the
United States (Perrett, 2020): Republican commentators and politicians (including President Trump) often referred to the coronavirus as the “Chinese Virus” or the “Wuhan Virus”
to underscore the fact that China was COVID-19’s likely country of origin.16
Given the sharp political divide on China during the COVID-19 period, it is natural
to evaluate whether Republican political views also shaped investor beliefs about Chinese
firms. We construct an indicator for Chinese ADRs in our sample (e.g., Baidu, Alibaba),
and estimate the triple difference specification in (3) using an indicator for whether stock
s is a Chinese ADR. If partisan Republicans are more pessimistic about Chinese stocks
during COVID, we should observe a negative triple interaction coefficient.
Column (1) of Table 4 presents the estimates from this specification. Consistent with
the hypothesis that partisanship shapes investor beliefs about Chinese stocks, we find that
partisan Republicans are approximately 7 percentage points more pessimistic about Chinese firms during the COVID-19 period than other StockTwits investors. For context, the
coefficient on 1 Covidt × 1 Interactions indicates that other users are more pessimistic
about Chinese firms, but their sentiment during the COVID-19 period falls only 1.3 percentage points. The triple interaction is also substantially larger than the baseline 2 percentage point optimism gap we observe in the difference-in-differences coefficient 1 Covidt ×

1 PartisanR j .17
16 In

support of this, in Appendix Figure A.2 we present the daily time series for Google Search volume
for the term “Chinese Virus.” The time series has two peaks – one around the time of the Wuhan lockdown
(Jan 25th), likely reflecting curiosity about a then-unnamed virus. The second peak was around a series of
tweets by President Trump that mentioned the term “Chinese Virus” (March 19th) – e.g., see Figure A.3. The
second peak is arguably when China’s role became politicized in the U.S., and is coincident with the largest
partisan differences in beliefs about Chinese stocks (see Figure 5).
17 A potential concern is that our partisan classification selects StockTwits users who have a greater expressed interest in China and are abnormally attuned to matters that affect Chinese stocks, which may contribute to the pessimism result we observe. To address this, we count the number of pre-2020 posts or likes
that mention the terms “China,” “Chinese” or “Trade War” for each user, and add an indicator for users interested in these topics interacted with the COVID dummy. As we report in appendix Table A.2 (columns
(2) - (6)), controlling for users’ intensity of interest in China or Trade War has little impact on our estimated
partisan optimism gap.

17

In addition, to show when this negativity emerged, we estimate a version of equation (3)
that replaces the 1Covidt indicator with a series of weekly fixed effects. Figure 5 plots the
triple interaction coefficient estimates, and indicates no significant pre-trends from March
2019 through early February 2020 (we also show a monthly version of this interaction
showing no pre-trends back to January 2018 in appendix Figure A.5). The weekly point
estimates give some indication of pessimism by partisan Republicans in early February, as
cases grew rapidly in China, but the triple difference estimate becomes even more negative
in mid-March. The timing of Republican beliefs about Chinese stocks is instructive: they
did not become more pessimistic about these stocks during the COVID-19 outbreak in
China; instead, they became pessimistic about them in mid-March when new cases in China
had fallen, but the crisis in the U.S. was deepening. This points to a political, rather than
economic, model for their beliefs.
Returning to the potential concern that our classification of partisan Republican could
simply proxy for optimism, in appendix table A.3 we also examine Pre-Covid Optimists’
views on US-listed Chinese stocks. We find that they are differentially optimistic about
US-listed Chinese stocks, unlike partisan Republicans, who are differentially pessimistic
(column (4) versus column (3)). This further supports our conclusion that partisan Republican is not a stand-in for optimism.

3.2.2

Optimism about Large Stocks

In column (2), we report estimates from the specification in equation (3) using an indicator for membership in the S&P500 as an interaction. These estimates show that partisan
Republicans are substantially more optimistic about firms in the S&P500 during the pandemic. Specifically, we estimate that partisan Republicans are 5.2 percentage points more
optimistic about S&P500 firms during the COVID-19 period (March and April, 2020),
relative to other users on StockTwits.
Given COVID-19 was a massive, economy-wide shock, it is interesting to see Repub-

18

licans’ differential optimism concentrated in large-cap stocks. While there are plenty of
small-cap and micro-cap firms with high idiosyncratic volatility that are discussed often
on StockTwits (e.g., Aurora Cannabis or Virgin Galactic), these were not the stocks where
political disagreement manifested during the pandemic. Instead, it appeared in stocks that
best represented beliefs about the market in general, like large, bell-weather stocks in the
S&P500.
Column (3) confirms this interpretation. At the end of 2019, we run a year-long marketmodel regression with daily returns and recover the the fraction of variation explained by
the market (R-squared). We then estimate the triple difference specification in equation
(3) with each stock’s market model R-squared as the interaction term. The result is clear:
Republican disagreement during the COVID-19 period is concentrated among stocks with
the highest share of systematic variance. Stocks with high levels of idiosyncratic variance
were not the playing field of partisan disagreement during the pandemic.

3.2.3

Optimism about Stocks that Lost Value

Finally, another possible manifestation of the partisan divergence of opinions during COVID19 is that partisan Republicans expect a faster and more complete economic recovery than
other users, so that they would be more optimistic about stocks that lost the most value.
To evaluate this possibility, we estimate the triple difference specification in (3) using the
stock return over the preceding month (from 21 trading days before t to the trading day
preceding t, denoted month returns,t−1 ) as the interaction variable. If partisan Republicans
are more optimistic about stocks that recently lost value, we would expect a negative triple
difference coefficient.18
Table 4 presents the results from estimating this specification in column (3), restricting
attention to S&P500 stocks where partisan differences in opinion are clearest. Consistent
18 Unlike

the China and S&P500 interactions the month returns,t−1 variable is time-varying within firm.
Thus, unlike the specifications in columns (1) and (2), the coefficients on month returns,t−1 and PartisanR j ×
month returns,t−1 are not absorbed by the user-stock fixed effects.

19

with partisan Republican belief in a faster and more complete recovery, we estimate that
partisan Republicans are around 10.7 percentage points more optimistic about the worst
performing firms during the COVID-19 period.

19

This optimism about firms that re-

cently lost value runs counter to the usual relation between recent market returns and investor beliefs on StockTwits, which typically exhibit significant momentum (indicated by
the positive and significant estimate on the baseline coefficient month returns,t−1 ). More
than leading partisan Republicans to reduce their typical proclivity toward momentum, the
results in this table indicate that partisan Republicans’ investor beliefs became contrarian
with respect to recent market movements.20

4

Partisan Disagreement and Stock Turnover

In this section, we connect differences in partisan investor beliefs to daily stock turnover,
which increased considerably during the pandemic. In Figure 6, we plot the daily percentiles (10th, 25th, 50th, 75th and 90th) of stock turnover from January 2019 through April
2020. Consistent with the timing of the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, daily stock turnover
sharply increased around the beginning of March 2020 and remained high through the end
of our sample. In addition to this increase in daily stock turnover, there is a similarly large
increase in the cross-sectional spread in daily turnover across firms.

4.1

Measuring Partisan Disagreement

We next turn to relating partisan differences in political beliefs to trading at the stock-day
level. For this analysis, we construct a difference of opinion measure between partisan
Republicans and other users. Following the approach in Cookson and Niessner (2020) for
19 The

estimated coefficient for the triple interaction equals 13.7%, multiplied by the worst performing
firm’s loss of 78.3% (Halliburton - see Table A.6), which equals our reported magnitude of 10.7.
20 Table A.6 reports the 10 worst-performing S&P500 stocks for the period from January 1st through the
market bottom on March 23rd. These stocks are in the energy sector (Halliburton and Schlumberger), airlines
(United Airlines and Boeing Inc), and major retail (Macy’s and Kohl’s).

20

the two group case, we measure partisan disagreement at the stock-day level as:

PartisanR
others
Partisan Disagrees,t = sents,t
− sents,t

(4)

PartisanR is the average of bullish (= 1) and bearish (= −1) messages about
where sents,t
others is defined analogously for
a stock s on date t for partisan Republican users, and sents,t

other StockTwits users. We restrict attention to stock-days for which there are messages of
both types (partisan Republican and other), which is necessary to compute PartisanDisagrees,t .

4.2

Stock Turnover in the Cross Section

For our analysis of stock turnover in the cross-section, we focus on a daily panel of stock
information from March 2019 through April 2020. Table 5 presents summary information
about this sample. We estimate the effect of partisan disagreement on daily stock turnover
using the following specification:
AbnormalLogTurnovers,t = β1 1Covidt + β2 Overall Disagrees,t

(5)

+ β3 (1Covidt × Overall Disagrees,t ) + β4 Partisan Disagrees,t
+ β5 (1Covidt × Partisan Disagrees,t ) + FE + δControlss,t + εst

where the dependent variable AbnormalLogTurnovers,t is the abnormal log turnover for
stock s on day t.21 1Covidt is an indicator for the COVID-19 crisis period (equal to one in
March and April, 2020). OverallDisagrees,t is the standard deviation of stamped sentiment
messages (bullish = 1, bearish = −1) about stock s on day t, and PartisanDisagrees,t is the
average divergence in sentiment between partisan Republicans and other users as defined
in equation (4). To aid interpretation, the disagreement measures are standardized to have
21 Following

prior research on disagreement and trading volume (e.g., Cookson and Niessner (2020)),
AbnormalLogTurnovers,t is the difference between log turnover on day t and the average log turnover from
t − 140 to t − 20 trading days (6-month period, skipping the most recent month).

21

a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
Stock fixed effects (FE) are included in all regressions. We include day fixed effects
in some specifications, and in the others we include the 1Covidt indicator to provide a
reference for the difference in stock turnover during the COVID-19 period. Fixed effects
for the number of user impressionss,t (i.e., the count of the number of users who post bullish
or bearish sentiment about a stock s on day t) are included in all but the first regression.
Controlss,t is a vector of standard controls from the literature: recent volatility (last five
days), recent abnormal returns (last five, and previous 25 trading days), and abnormal log
turnover for day t − 1. Standard errors are double clustered by stock and day to account
for, respectively, serial and within-day correlation in the errors.
Table 6 presents the results from estimating equation (5). In column (1), we present a
benchmark specification that quantifies the rise in stock turnover during the pandemic: we
estimate that the COVID-19 period has 36% more abnormal stock turnover, after accounting for stock fixed effects, which is consistent with the univariate evidence in Figure 6. In
column (2), we include number of impression fixed effects to absorb user activity at the
stock-day level, accounting flexibly for differences in attention (news, press releases, etc.).
Controlling for attention in this way reduces the estimated coefficient on 1Covidt by more
than half, to 16%.
In column (3), we also include Overall Disagrees,t and 1Covidt × Overall Disagrees,t .
Consistent with the literature, we see that overall disagreement correlates strongly with
stock turnover: a standard deviation increase in disagreement is associated with 5% greater
abnormal turnover outside of the COVID-19 period. However, during the pandemic, the
relation between disagreement and turnover more than doubles in magnitude, increasing
by almost 9 percentage points.
In column (4), we add Partisan Disagrees,t and 1Covidt × Partisan Disagrees,t to the
specification. Our estimates imply that there is no relation between partisan disagreement and trading volume before COVID (est = −0.008, se = 0.009). However, during

22

the pandemic, a standard deviation increase in partisan disagreement is associated with
10% greater stock turnover, which is 28% of the baseline rise in stock turnover during
the COVID-19 period (column (1)), and 50% of the effect of attention on turnover.22 The
estimated magnitude of the 1Covidt × Partisan Disagrees,t coefficient is greater than the
baseline coefficient for overall disagreement (0.101 versus 0.058). Moreover, this increase
in the sensitivity to partisan disagreement during COVID reduces the magnitude of the

1Covidt × Overall Disagrees,t coefficient, and renders it statistically insignificant.
The remaining columns show that these inferences about the relationship between partisan disagreement and the cross-section of stock turnover are not sensitive to including day
fixed effects (column (5)), nor to adding control variables often employed in the literature
(column (6)).
Our findings and empirical design draw a tight connection between partisan disagreement and abnormal stock turnover that is unlikely to be driven by other factors. Our main
coefficient of interest is β5 on the 1Covidt × Partisan Disagrees,t term, which compares
the abnormal stock turnover of high partisan disagreement stocks to that of low partisan
disagreement stocks, before versus during the COVID-19 period.23 In this context, we observe a strong link between partisan disagreement and abnormal stock turnover only after
the emergence of COVID-19. Further, our tests draw a comparison between stock-days after removing differences in financial attention (by including fixed effects for the number of
user impressions). Thus, any potential omitted variable must be (i) orthogonal to the number of users who post opinions about a stock on a particular day, and (ii) uniquely emerge
as a confounder during the COVID-19 period.24
In our final column we take advantage of two unique characteristics of the increase in
22 From columns (1) and (2), the inclusion of number of impressions fixed effects reduces the magnitude of the estimate on 1Covidt by 20.2 percentage points. The estimated magnitude on the 1Covidt ×
Partisan Disagrees,t term is 10.1, which is 50% of this drop.
23 Figure A.6 presents a leads and lags plot at the monthly frequency from a specification that replaces the
1Covidt indicator with monthly fixed effects. The plot shows parallel pre-trends, with a positive coefficient
that emerges in February, March and April.
24 Moreover, we address the reverse causality concern that trading today causes disagreement today by
estimating a lagged disagreement specification in appendix Table A.5. The results are similar.

23

partisan disagreement during the pandemic: (i) it reflects additional disagreement among
investors, and (ii) because it does not generate a trading motive (beyond increasing overall
disagreement), it has no direct relationship with turnover. In a standard IV setting, point (i)
constitutes the relevance condition and point (ii) constitutes the exclusion restriction. Thus,
we use partisan disagreement to investigate the causal impact of disagreement on trading
volume, removing standard confounders such as the arrival of news. To the extent that the
disagreement literature is interested in the disagreement-turnover elasticity to measure the
relative contribution of disagreement and liquidity motives in generating trading volume
(e.g., Kandel and Pearson, 1995; Kruger, 2020), our setting provides a unique opportunity
to estimate this parameter.
Specifically, we use partisan disagreement as an instrument for overall disagreement,
and report the second stage instrumented coefficients in column (7) of Table 6.25 The IV
estimate is 0.23 during the COVID period (0.045 + 0.185), significantly greater than the
OLS magnitude of 0.142 (0.053 + 0.089) in column (3). Thus, a standard deviation increase
in disagreement leads to 23% greater abnormal stock turnover.26 To estimate an elasticity
we run a log-log IV regression in appendix Table A.4 and obtain an abnormal turnover to
disagreement elasticity of 0.66, with a standard error of 0.086.27
Taken together, this table demonstrates that partisan differences in investment beliefs
contribute to the sharp rise in trading that emerged during the COVID-19 period. Our
findings suggest that partisanship not only shapes investment beliefs, but also influences
the extent of trading in the broader market.
25 The

first stage regressions and the OLS analogue are reported in appendix Table A.4. The relevance
condition is strongly satisfied.
26 Our instrumented estimate pre-COVID-19 is 4.5%, consistent with OLS estimates in the literature (e.g.,
Cookson and Niessner, 2020). The interaction with the pandemic period indicator suggests a heightened
sensitivity of turnover to disagreement.
27 In fact we use an inverse-hyperbolic-sine transformation of the overall (and partisan) disagreement variables to account for zero-valued observations.

24

5

Conclusion

Our paper provides evidence of a partisan divide in investor beliefs that emerges during the
COVID-19 pandemic. Using novel data from StockTwits, we find that partisan Republicans remain significantly more optimistic about equities than other investors, and that this
pattern persists through April 2020. Consistent with the narrative that partisanship shapes
investor beliefs, Republicans express a nuanced pattern of investment beliefs: they are more
optimistic about stocks that recently lost value but more pessimistic about US-listed Chinese stocks. The partisan disagreement we document explains 28% of the abnormal trading
volume during the COVID-19 period.
It should surprise no one that Democrats and Republicans disagree. Partisans predictably disagree about environmental policy, abortion, immigration and gun rights, among
other wedge issues. By contrast, partisan disagreement about equities during the COVID19 pandemic is surprising, particularly given how unhelpful partisan identity is for equity
valuation. After all, disagreement about stocks during COVID should reflect disagreement
about the virulence of the virus, its rate of spread, likely government response, its effectiveness, and related epidemiological issues.
The fact that we find a partisan divide in investor beliefs perhaps reflects the unprecedented heights of political polarization we have reached (Abramowitz and Saunders, 2008;
Bishop, 2008; Gentzkow, Shapiro, and Taddy, 2019). Political identity has become increasingly relevant for choices we make (Gerber and Huber, 2009; Chen and Rohla, 2018;
McCartney and Zhang, 2019) and beliefs we hold (Bartels, 2002; Gerber, Huber, and Washington, 2010). Our analysis begs several questions: Will the partisan divide that emerged
during the COVID-19 pandemic continue to shape investor beliefs and market outcomes
after the health crisis is over? Or, if partisan investor disagreement subsides, can we expect
partisan disagreement to reemerge when investors face the uncertainty of the next crisis?
We leave these questions for future research.

25

References
Abramowitz, A. I., and K. L. Saunders. 2008. Is Polarization a Myth? The Journal of
Politics 70:542–55.
Allcott, H., L. Boxwell, J. Conway, M. Gentzkow, M. Thaler, and D. Y. Yang. 2020. Polarization and Public Health: Partisan Differences in Social Distancing during the Coronavirus Pandemic. NBER Working Paper .
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, and J. Stroebel. 2018a. The economic effects of social
networks: Evidence from the housing market. Journal of Political Economy 126:2224–
76.
Bailey, M., R. Cao, T. Kuchler, J. Stroebel, and A. Wong. 2018b. Social connectedness:
Measurement, determinants, and effects. Journal of Economic Perspectives .
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, S. J. Davis, and S. J. Terry. 2020a. COVID-Induced Economic
Uncertainty. NBER Working Paper No. 26983 .
Baker, S. R., R. A. Farrokhnia, S. Meyer, M. Pagel, and C. Yannelis. 2020b. How Does
Household Spending Respond to an Epidemic? Consumption during the 2020 COVID19 Pandemic. NBER Working Paper .
Barrios, J. M., and Y. Hochberg. 2020. Risk Perception through the Lens of Politics in the
Time of the COVID-19 Pandemic. NBER Working paper .
Bartels, L. M. 2002. Beyond the Running Tally: Partisan Bias in Political Perceptions.
Political Behavior 24:117–50.
Benabou, R. 2015. The Economics of Motivated Beliefs. Revu d’economie politique
125:665–85.
Bénabou, R., and J. Tirole. 2011. Identity, Morals and Taboos: Beliefs as Assets. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 126:805–55.
Benhabib, J., and M. M. Spiegel. 2019. Sentiments and Economic Activity: Evidence from
US States. The Economic Journal 129:715–33.
Bishop, B. 2008. The Big Sort: Why the Clustering of Like-Minded America is Tearing Us
Apart. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
Bordalo, P., N. Gennaioli, and A. Schleifer. 2018. Diagnostic Expectations and Credit
Cycles. Journal of Finance 73:199–227.
Brunnermeier, M. K., and J. A. Parker. 2005. Optimal Expectations. American Economic
Review 95:1092–118.
Bu, D., T. Hanspal, Y. Liao, and Y. Liu. 2020. Risk Taking during a Global Crisis: Evidence
from Wuhan. Working Paper .
26

Buckman, S. R., A. H. Shapiro, M. Sudhof, D. J. Wilson, et al. 2020. News sentiment in
the time of covid-19. FRBSF Economic Letter 8:1–05.
Burstyn, L., A. Rao, C. Roth, and D. Yanagizawa-Drott. 2020. Misinformation During a
Pandemic. Working Paper .
Chen, M. K., and R. Rohla. 2018. The effect of partisanship and political advertising on
close family ties. Science 360:1020–4.
Cookson, J. A., J. E. Engelberg, and W. Mullins. 2020. Echo Chambers. Working Paper .
Cookson, J. A., and M. Niessner. 2020. Why don’t we agree? Evidence from a social
network of investors. Journal of Finance 75:173–228.
Evans, G., and R. Andersen. 2006. The Political Conditioning of Economic Perceptions.
Journal of Politics 68:194–207.
Fama, E. F., and K. R. French. 2008. Dissecting Anomalies. Journal of Finance 63:1653–
78.
Gaines, B. J., J. H. Kuklinski, P. J. Quirk, B. Peyton, and J. Verkuilen. 2007. Same Facts,
Different Interpretations: Partisan Motivation and Opinion on Iraq. Journal of Politics
69:957–74.
Gentzkow, M., and J. M. Shapiro. 2010. What Drives Media Slant? Evidence from U.S.
Daily Newspapers. Econometrica 78:35–71.
Gentzkow, M., J. M. Shapiro, and M. Taddy. 2019. Measuring Group Differences in HighDimensional Choices: Method and Application to Congressional Speech. Econometrica
87:1307–40.
Gerber, A. S., and G. A. Huber. 2009. Partisanship and Economic Behavior: Do Partisan
Differences in Economic Forecasts Predict Real Economic Behavior? American Political
Science Review 103:407–26.
———. 2010. Partisanship, Political Control and Economic Assessments. American Journal of Political Science 54:153–73.
Gerber, A. S., G. A. Huber, and E. Washington. 2010. Party Affiliation, Partisonship, and
Political Beliefs: A Field Experiment. American Journal of Political Science 104:720–
44.
Giannini, R., P. Irvine, and T. Shu. 2017. Nonlocal disadvantage: An examination of social
media sentiment. The Review of Asset Pricing Studies .
———. 2018. The convergence and divergence of investors’ opinions around earnings
news: Evidence from a social network. Journal of Financial Markets .
Giglio, S., M. Maggiori, J. Stroebel, and S. Utkus. 2020a. Five Facts about Beliefs and
Portfolios. Working Paper .
27

———. 2020b. Inside the Mind of a Stock Market Crash. Working Paper .
Gillitzer, C., and N. Prasad. 2018. The Effect of Consumer Sentiment on Consumption:
Cross-Sectional Evidence from Elections. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10:234–69.
Goldman, E., N. Gupta, and R. D. Israelsen. 2020. Political Polarization in Financial News.
Working Paper SSRN 3537841 .
Hanspal, T., A. Weber, and J. Wohlfart. 2020. Income and Wealth Shocks and Expectations
during the COVID-19 Pandemic. Working Paper .
Higgins, T. 2020. Trump says China made a ‘mistake’ and tried to cover up coronavirus
outbreak. CNBC Politics (https: // cnb. cx/ 2Y8yVPd ) [Published: May 3, 2020].
Hogg, M. A. 2007. Uncertainty-Identity Theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 39:69–126.
Kandel, E., and N. D. Pearson. 1995. Differential interpretation of public signals and trade
in speculative markets. Journal of Political Economy 103:831–72.
Kaplan, E., J. Spenkuch, and R. Sullivan. 2019. Measuring Geographic Polarization: Theory and Long-Run Evidence. Working Paper .
Ke, D. 2019. Left Behind: Partisan Identity and Wealth Inequality. Working Paper .
Kempf, E., and M. Tsoutsoura. 2019. Partisan Professionals: Evidence from Credit Rating
Analysts. Working Paper .
Kruger, S. 2020. Disagreement and liquidity. Working Paper .
McCartney, W. B., and C. Zhang. 2019. Sort Selling: Political Affiliations and Households’
Real Estate Decisions. Working Paper .
McGrath, M. C. 2017. Economic Behavior and the Partisan Perceptual Screen. Quarterly
Journal of Political Science 11:363–83.
Meeuwis, M., J. A. Parker, A. Schoar, and D. I. Simester. 2019. Belief Disagreement and
Portfolio Choice. Working Paper .
Mian, A., A. Sufi, and N. Khoshkhou. 2017. Partisan Bias, Economic Expectations and
Household Spending. Working Paper .
Milner, H. V., and B. Judkins. 2004. Partisanship, Trade Policy, and Globalization: Is There
a Left-Right Divide on Trade Policy? International Studies Quarterly 48:95–119.
Painter, M. O., and T. Qiu. 2020. Political Beliefs affect Compliance with COVID-19
Social Distancing Orders. Working Paper .

28

Perrett, C. 2020. A 57-page memo urged GOP campaigns to blame China for the coronavirus pandemic and insist the term ’Chinese virus’ isn’t racist. Business Insider
(https: // bit. ly/ 2AGUDlx ) [Published: April 25, 2020].
Shapiro, A. H., M. Sudhof, and D. Wilson. Forthcoming. Measuring news sentiment.
Journal of Econometrics .

29

Figures
Figure 1: Examples of StockTwits Posts and Sentiment
This figure presents examples of StockTwits posts. Panel (a) presents two screenshots of the StockTwits
posting interface – one with Bullish sentiment indicated, the other with Bearish sentiment. Panels (b) and (c)
present two examples of posts about Apple (symbol $AAPL).

(a) Examples of StockTwits Interface for Bullish versus Bearish Posts

(b) Example Bullish Post

(c) Example Bearish Post

30

Figure 2: Optimism for Partisan Republicans versus Other Users (Jan 2015 – Apr 2020)
This plot shows how differences in optimism between partisan Republicans and other StockTwits users
evolve over time from January 2015 to April 2020; the omitted (reference) period is January 2015. Panel (a)
presents estimated monthly fixed effects – separately for Partisan Republicans and other users as a baseline
– from a model with user-security fixed effects (following equation 1). Panel (b) presents monthly Google
Search Intensity for the term “Trump stock market.”

(a) Time Series of Monthly Fixed Effects

4

US-China
Trade War
begins

Trump
Trump
nominated elected

2

Market
drawdown
of 19.8%

COVID-19

0

Month fixed effect coefficient (%)

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10

Baseline
-12

Partisan Republican
-14

Feb-20

Apr-20

Oct-19

Dec-19

Jun-19

Aug-19

Feb-19

Apr-19

Oct-18

Dec-18

Jun-18

Aug-18

Feb-18

Apr-18

Oct-17

Dec-17

Jun-17

Aug-17

Feb-17

Apr-17

Oct-16

Dec-16

Jun-16

Aug-16

Feb-16

Apr-16

Oct-15

Dec-15

Jun-15

Aug-15

Feb-15

Apr-15

-16

(b) Google Search Intensity for “Trump and Stock Market”
100

90

80

60

50

40

30

20

10

31
Apr-20

Feb-20

Oct-19

Dec-19

Jun-19

Aug-19

Feb-19

Apr-19

Oct-18

Dec-18

Jun-18

Aug-18

Feb-18

Apr-18

Oct-17

Dec-17

Jun-17

Aug-17

Feb-17

Apr-17

Oct-16

Dec-16

Jun-16

Aug-16

Feb-16

Apr-16

Dec-15

Oct-15

Aug-15

Jun-15

Apr-15

0
Feb-15

Google Search Intensity

70

Figure 3: Optimism for Partisan Republicans versus Other Users Over Time – COVID
Period
This plot shows how differences in optimism between partisan Republicans and other StockTwits users
evolve over time from January 2020 until April 2020; the omitted (reference) period is January 1, 2020.
Panel (a) presents the time series of daily fixed effects – separately for partisan Republicans and other users
as a baseline – from a model with user-security fixed effects following equation 1. It also includes the level
of the S&P 500 index on the right axis (fixing it at the level of the preceding trading day on non-trading
days). Panel (b) presents the rolling one-week average of Google Search Intensity for “Trump and Stock
Market” for the same period (January 2020 to April 2020).

(a) Time Series of Daily Fixed Effects (Jan 2020 – Apr 2020)
Baseline

Partisan Republican

S&P 500

4
4200
2

0

-2

3200
-4

-6
2700
-8

-10
2-Jan-20
5-Jan-20
8-Jan-20
11-Jan-20
14-Jan-20
17-Jan-20
20-Jan-20
23-Jan-20
26-Jan-20
29-Jan-20
1-Feb-20
4-Feb-20
7-Feb-20
10-Feb-20
13-Feb-20
16-Feb-20
19-Feb-20
22-Feb-20
25-Feb-20
28-Feb-20
2-Mar-20
5-Mar-20
8-Mar-20
11-Mar-20
14-Mar-20
17-Mar-20
20-Mar-20
23-Mar-20
26-Mar-20
29-Mar-20
1-Apr-20
4-Apr-20
7-Apr-20
10-Apr-20
13-Apr-20
16-Apr-20
19-Apr-20
22-Apr-20
25-Apr-20
28-Apr-20

2200

(b) Google Search Intensity for “Trump and Stock Market” (Jan 2020 – Apr 2020)
70

50

40

30

20

10

32
27-Apr-20

23-Apr-20

19-Apr-20

15-Apr-20

7-Apr-20

11-Apr-20

3-Apr-20

30-Mar-20

26-Mar-20

22-Mar-20

18-Mar-20

14-Mar-20

6-Mar-20

10-Mar-20

2-Mar-20

27-Feb-20

23-Feb-20

19-Feb-20

15-Feb-20

7-Feb-20

11-Feb-20

3-Feb-20

30-Jan-20

26-Jan-20

22-Jan-20

18-Jan-20

14-Jan-20

6-Jan-20

10-Jan-20

0
2-Jan-20

Google Search Intensity (Rolling Weekly Average)

60

S&P 500 level

Day fixed effect coefficients

3700

Figure 4: Partisan Republicans are More Optimistic than Other Users During COVID
This figure presents the timing of the emergence of Partisan Republican optimism during COVID. Each panel
displays the estimated coefficients on the interaction between an indicator for whether a user is a Partisan
Republican and monthly fixed effects from equation (2), which includes user-stock fixed effects. The sample
follows Table 4 (March 2019 through April 2020). The vertical bars illustrate 95% confidence intervals with
standard errors clustered by user. Panel (a) presents the estimated coefficients excluding small capitalization
stocks below the 25th percentile of market equity as of December 31, 2019. Panel (b) presents the estimated
coefficients drawn from the sample of S&P500 stocks.

3.9

3.8

0.0

2.0

PartisanR x Month coefficient (% bullish)

4.0

6.0

(a) All Stocks, excluding Small Cap Stocks

0.5
-0.2

-0.1

-0.2

0.0

0.7
0.2

-0.4
-0.8

-1.0

-2.0

-1.4

-4.0

-2.4

019 pr2019 ay2019 Jun2019
A
Mar2
M

Jul20

19

Aug2

019

019

Sep2

ne) ec2019 an2020 eb2020 ar2020 pr2020
019
J
Oct2 19 (baseli
F
A
D
M
0
Nov2

10.0

(b) S&P500 Stocks

5.0

PartisanR x Month coefficient (% bullish)

6.3

0.0

4.6

0.3

0.0
-1.0

-1.1

-0.7

-0.9

-1.8
-2.9

0.6

-0.6

-1.8

-10.0

-5.0

-2.9

019

Mar2

019 ay2019 Jun2019
Apr2
M

19
ne) ec2019 an2020 eb2020 ar2020 pr2020
019 ep2019
019
Jul20
J
Oct2 19 (baseli
S
F
A
D
M
Aug2
0
Nov2

33

Figure 5: Partisan Republicans are Pessimistic about Chinese Stocks During COVID

-30

PartisanR x Week x China stock coefficient (% bullish)
-25
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10

15

This figure presents the time series of estimated coefficients on the triple interaction between an indicator for
partisan Republican users, weekly fixed effects, and whether the stock is a U.S.-listed Chinese firm. These
estimates are drawn from the weekly version of the specification in equation (3), which includes user-stock
fixed effects. The sample follows Table 4 (March 2019 through April 2020). The vertical bars illustrate 95%
confidence intervals with standard errors clustered by user.

9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
e)
20
20
20
20
20
20
r201 r201 r201 r201 y201 n201 n201 l201 g201 p201 p201 t201 v201 v201
selin5Jan20 6Jan206Feb20 Mar20 Mar209Apr20
1Ma 17Ma 7Ap 28Ap 19Ma 9Ju 30Ju 21Ju 11Au 1Se 22Se 13Oc 3No 24No 19 (ba
8
2
1
1
29
0
ec2
22D
Week starting

34

Figure 6: Percentiles of Daily Stock Turnover
This figure presents the time series of percentiles of daily stock turnover from January 2019 through the
end of March 2020. Each line on the plot represents a time series plot of the daily turnover for the 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles. The vertical line indicates the date of the first case of suspected local
transmission of COVID-19 on February 26th, 2020.

0.07

First case of COVID-19
community spread
0.06

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
2-Jan-19
12-Jan-19
22-Jan-19
1-Feb-19
11-Feb-19
21-Feb-19
3-Mar-19
13-Mar-19
23-Mar-19
2-Apr-19
12-Apr-19
22-Apr-19
2-May-19
12-May-19
22-May-19
1-Jun-19
11-Jun-19
21-Jun-19
1-Jul-19
11-Jul-19
21-Jul-19
31-Jul-19
10-Aug-19
20-Aug-19
30-Aug-19
9-Sep-19
19-Sep-19
29-Sep-19
9-Oct-19
19-Oct-19
29-Oct-19
8-Nov-19
18-Nov-19
28-Nov-19
8-Dec-19
18-Dec-19
28-Dec-19
7-Jan-20
17-Jan-20
27-Jan-20
6-Feb-20
16-Feb-20
26-Feb-20
7-Mar-20
17-Mar-20
27-Mar-20

Daily Turnover

0.05

10th Percentile

25th Percentile

50th Percentile

35

75th Percentile

90th Percentile

Tables
Table 1: Summary Statistics on StockTwits Data
This table presents summary statistics for the StockTwits data. Panel (a) presents counts of the various
units of observations that comprise the data – users by partisan affiliation, securities, message sentiment and
days.This provides an accounting of how we obtain the sample of user-security-day observations for our
regression analysis. Panel (b) presents summary information on the observations used to classify messages
and users as Republican, and number of messages posted by these users in the analysis sample.

(a) Dimensions of Data: Users, Securities, Sentiment and Days (Oct 2019 – Apr 2020)

User-security-days (obs)
Bullish
Bearish
Users
Republican
Other users

Totals
2,282,605
1,848,059
434,546
119,434
3,448
115,986

Totals
Days
Pre-COVID
COVID

213
152
61

Securities
CRSP (e.g., Tesla)
Non-CRSP (e.g., Bitcoin)

1,042
945
97

(b) Message and User Classification Details

Messages considered (pre-2020)
Messages that contain partisan keywords

179,229,891
70,031

Users considered (pre-2020)
Users who made or liked any partisan message
Republican-identified users (i.e., R-D ≥ 4 messages + likes)

780,908
34,284
6,191

Republican presence in sample (October 2019-April 2020)
Republican users
Republican observations (user-security-days)

3,448
266,294

36

Table 2: Classification of Partisan Messages
This table presents contextual information regarding our classification of partisan Republican messages.
Panel (a) presents the list of keywords used to flag partisan Republican tweets on StockTwits, which is the
result of an iterative procedure that follows the language-based relative frequency approach of Gentzkow and
Shapiro (2010). Panel (b) presents six example tweets that are flagged by this list of keywords – 3 Republican
tweets and 3 Democrat tweets. In the iterative process that generates this keyword list, we seed the list of
Republican keywords with “#MAGA” and “#Trump2020” and add terms to the list if they are used commonly
by individuals who write posts containing these initial keywords. If these terms relate to the stock market
(e.g., “S&P surging”) or are apolitical, we do not add them to the list. We repeat this iterative process to
populate the partisan Republican keywords until we obtain a stable set of individuals identified as partisan
Republican. We follow the same procedure to construct the list of Democrat keywords, starting instead with
“Idiot Trump” and “Stupid Trump”. A StockTwits user is identified as a partisan Republican if they post or
like at least four more Republican tweets than Democrat tweets.
(a) Partisan Keywords
Republican keywords
"#MAGA"
"The Liberals"
"Russia Hoax"
"Russian Collusion"
"#TRUMP2020"
"Stupid Dems"
"Hussein Obama"
"Leftists"
"Obummer"
"Trump Derangement"
"Fake News Media" "The Socialist"
"Crooked Hillary"
"MAGA 2020"
"Snowflake"
"The Commie"
"Liberal Media"
"Libtard"
"Libs"
"Stupid Democrats"
"Trump Hater"
"Sleepy Joe"
"Typical Liberal"
"Liberal Democrat"
"Liberal Agenda"
"You Liberal"
"Your Liberal"

Democrat keywords
"Drumpf"
"Orange Colored"
"Trump Nationalism" "Idiot in Chief"
"Trumptard"
"Criminal POTUS"
"Trump is a liar"
"Trump is an idiot"
"Idiot Trump"
"Clown Trump"
"Faux News"
Imbecile Trump
"Clown Child"
"Trump is an Imbecile"
"Stupid Trump"
Orange Scum"
"Pig Clown"
"Scumpig Clown"
"Liar in Chief"
"Lying Trump"
"Liar Trump"
"#IMPEACHTRUMP"
"#F***TRUMP"

(b) Examples of Partisan Tweets
Republican example messages
October 10, 2018 "Fox News... This crash will teach those libtards!! $spy
October 27, 2019

"Therapy bro, Trump derangement syndrome is no joke. Get some meds"

July 8, 2019

"I probably won’t be alive to see it but the US is a short step to being
a socialistic country. Only one election away. Vote TRUMP 2020 or else"

Democrat example messages
January 29, 2018
"$WYNN the only one less popular than Wynn now is the orange colored
scumpig clown child masquerading as potus. BEARISH"
July 20, 2018

$GM drumpf is killing this stock

November 2, 2018 "Glad to see the Manipulator in Chief saw Apple earnings on Faux News
scrambling for a deal now to try to save markets; very stable genius!

37

Table 3: Are Partisan Republicans More Optimistic through the COVID-19 Crisis?
This table examines whether partisan Republicans exhibit greater optimism than other users through the
COVID-19 crisis. The dependent variable is an indicator (multiplied by 100 to aid interpretation as a percentage) that a user j declares as bullish about stock s on day t. The specification (following equation 2) includes
monthly fixed effects, and their interactions with an indicator for whether a user is a partisan Republican.
The monthly fixed effects show the time series of sentiment for baseline users, whereas the PartisanR j ×
month interactions show the extent to which partisan Republicans are differentially optimistic in that month.
Column (1) is estimated on the top 1,042 securities by message volume on StockTwits (which includes nonstocks such as Bitcoin), column (2) restricts attention to stocks, column (3) restricts attention to stocks above
the 25th percentile of NYSE market capitalization as of December 31st, 2019, and column (4) includes only
stocks in the S&P500 as of March 1, 2020. The sample is at the user - security - day level, and runs from
October 2019 to April 2020. Standard errors clustered by user are reported in brackets; ∗ ,∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate
statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%.
Dependent variable: 1 x100 if Bulls,j,t
(1)
All securities

(2)
Only stocks

(3)
Mkt cap> NYSE p(25)

(4)
Only S&P500 stocks

0.2
[0.2]

0.5∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.3
[0.3]

-1.3∗∗
[0.5]

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

1 Dec2019

0.3∗∗∗
[0.1]

0.2∗
[0.1]

0.3
[0.2]

0.5
[0.4]

1 Jan2020

0.7∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.3∗∗
[0.2]

0.8∗∗∗
[0.3]

1.0∗∗
[0.5]

1 Feb2020

-0.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.0∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.9∗∗∗
[0.3]

-1.8∗∗∗
[0.6]

1 Mar2020

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.4∗∗∗
[0.3]

-5.9∗∗∗
[0.5]

-7.6∗∗∗
[0.9]

1 Apr2020

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.8∗∗∗
[0.2]

-5.8∗∗∗
[0.5]

-6.4∗∗∗
[0.8]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Oct2019

-0.9∗
[0.4]

-0.9∗∗
[0.4]

-1.2
[0.8]

-1.6
[1.3]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Dec2019

0.4
[0.3]

0.5
[0.3]

0.7
[0.5]

-0.7
[0.9]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Jan2020

0.7
[0.4]

0.6∗
[0.4]

0.4
[0.6]

0.2
[1.0]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Feb2020

0.5
[0.5]

0.6
[0.4]

0.6
[0.7]

0.3
[1.3]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Mar2020

1.6∗∗
[0.6]

2.0∗∗∗
[0.5]

3.8∗∗∗
[0.9]

5.4∗∗∗
[1.7]

1 PartisanRj x 1 Apr2020

2.1∗∗∗
[0.6]

2.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

4.0∗∗∗
[0.9]

4.1∗∗
[1.7]

1,936,128
75,417
.75
81.5
Yes

1,676,915
69,388
.77
84.9
Yes

642,575
37,398
.76
76.1
Yes

252,213
19,283
.74
73.2
Yes

1 Oct2019
1 Nov2019 (baseline)

# observations
# clusters (users)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
User-security FE

38

Table 4: Heterogeneity in Partisan Republican Optimism
This table reports estimates from triple difference specifications following equation (3). The dependent variable is an indicator (multiplied by 100 to aid interpretation as a percentage) that a user j declares as bullish
about stock s on day t. The 1Covidt variable is an indicator equal to one in March and April 2020; the
1PartisanR j indicator is equal to one for partisan Republican users. The Interaction variable varies by column: column (1) examines whether partisan differences in sentiment are different for US-listed Chinese
firms; column (2) examines whether they are different for large firms (S&P500 firms as of Feb 29, 2020).
Column (3) replaces the interaction with a continuous variable, the R2 from a market model run with daily
returns over the whole of 2019, to examine whether differential sentiment was driven by stocks that reflected
beliefs about the market in general. Finally, column (4) examines whether partisan differences in sentiment
are different for stocks based on their returns over the preceding month (also a continuous interaction). The
sample is at the user-stock-day level, runs from March 2019 to April 2020, and covers 930 stocks (the subset
of securities that have CRSP permnos out of the top 1,042 StockTwits securities by messages since 2013).
Column (4) is run on S&P500 firms in our sample (148 stocks). Standard errors clustered by user are reported
in brackets; ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 5% and 1%.

Dependent variable: 1 x100 if Bulls,j,t
(1)

(2)

(3)

Interaction:

Interaction:

Interaction:

(4)
Interaction:
1month returns
(S&P500 stocks)

1 in Covidt period

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.1∗∗∗
[0.2]

-2.3∗∗∗
[0.2]

-6.4∗∗∗
[0.6]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj

2.0∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.1∗∗
[0.4]

0.5
[0.4]

6.0∗∗∗
[1.5]

1 Covidt x 1 Interactions

-1.3∗∗
[0.6]

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.6]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj x 1 Interactions

-6.7∗∗
[3.4]

5.2∗∗∗
[1.4]

1 if China stock 1 if S&P500 stock market model R2

1 Covidt x market model Rs 2

-12.9∗∗∗
[1.4]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj x market model Rs 2

14.1∗∗∗
[3.6]

Month returns,t-1

5.5∗∗∗
[1.8]

1 Covidt x month returns,t-1

-4.3∗∗
[1.9]

1 PartisanRj x month returns,t-1

8.3∗
[4.8]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj x month returns,t-1
# observations
# clusters (users)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
User-security FE

-13.7∗∗∗
[4.9]
3,036,393
93,045
.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
.75
84.1
Yes

39

2,943,488
91,649
.75
84.0
Yes

462,827
26,738
.70
73.2
Yes

Table 5: Summary Statistics for Stock-Day Panel
This table presents summary statistics on the daily panel of financial data and disagreement measures for the
March 2019–April 2020 sample we use for the analysis of daily stock turnover reported in Table 6.

Mean

Median

SD

O.

Abnormal log turnovers,t

0.431

0.200

1.164

96,407

Overall disagreements,t

0.044

0.251

0.978

96,407

Partisan disagreements,t

-0.022

-0.407

0.957

96,407

Standard deviation of abnormal returnss,(t-5 to t-1)

0.050

0.031

0.085

96,407

Cumulative abnormal returnss,(t-5 to t-1)

0.007

-0.006

0.211

96,407

Cumulative abnormal returnss,(t-30 to t-6)

-0.007

-0.036

0.417

96,407

Number of impressionss,t

27.824

11.000

51.988

96,407

40

Table 6: Partisan Disagreement and Daily Stock Turnover
This table examines how our measure of partisan disagreement from StockTwits relates to daily abnormal log
turnover.
AbnormalLogTurnovers,t = β1 1Covidt + β2 OverallDisagrees,t + β3 (1Covidt × OverallDisagrees,t )
+β4 PartisanDisagrees,t + β5 (1Covidt × PartisanDisagrees,t ) + FE + δControlss,t + εs,t
AbnormalLogTurnovers,t is the difference between log turnover on day t and the average log turnover fromt −
140 to t − 20 trading days (6-month period, skipping the most recent month) for stock s. The 1Covidt
indicator equals one after February 2020. OverallDisagrees,t is the standard deviation of stamped messages
with sentiment (bullish = 1, bearish = −1), while PartisanDisagrees,t is the average divergence in sentiment
between partisan Republicans and other users, following equation (4). Both disagreement measures are
normalized to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation. Stock (permno) Fixed effects (FE) are
included in all regressions; number of impressions and day fixed effects are included in some. Number
of impressionss,t is the number of users that tweet with sentiment about each stock each day. Controls
include abnormal log turnover on day t − 1; volatility, measured as the standard deviation of abnormal returns
over days t − 5 to t − 1; and cumulative abnormal returns measured over days t − 30 to t − 6 and t − 5 to
t − 1. Column (7) presents the second stage estimates from an instrumental variables specification that uses
PartisanDisagrees,t as an instrument for OverallDisagrees,t ; first stage results are available in Table A.4.
The sample is at the stock - day level, and runs from March 2019 to April 2020. Standard errors separately
clustered by stock (permno) and day are reported in brackets; ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 5%
and 1%.

Dependent variable: Abnormal log turnovers,t
(1)
Only
1 Covid

1 in Covidt period

0.361∗∗∗
[0.048]

(2)
(3)
(4)
+ Overall + Partisan
+
#Impress. FE disagree. disagree.
0.159∗∗∗
[0.047]

(5)
+
Day FE

(6)
+
Controls

(7)
IV version
of (3)

0.143∗∗∗
[0.046]

0.150∗∗∗
[0.045]

0.131∗∗∗
[0.046]

Overall disagreements,t

0.053∗∗∗
[0.008]

0.058∗∗∗
[0.011]

0.060∗∗∗
[0.011]

0.029∗∗∗
[0.006]

0.045∗∗∗
[0.009]

1 Covidt x Overall disagree.s,t

0.089∗∗∗
[0.023]

0.025
[0.028]

0.012
[0.028]

-0.015
[0.017]

0.185∗∗∗
[0.031]

Partisan disagreements,t

-0.008
[0.009]

-0.009
[0.009]

-0.008
[0.005]

1 Covidt x Partisan disagree.s,t

0.101∗∗∗
[0.022]

0.092∗∗∗
[0.021]

0.066∗∗∗
[0.014]

Volatility of abnormal ret.s,(t-5 to t-1)

0.061
[0.087]

Cum. abnormal ret.s,(t-5 to t-1)

-0.223∗∗∗
[0.029]

Cum. abnormal ret.s,(t-30 to t-6)

-0.085∗∗∗
[0.026]

Abnormal log turnovers,t-1

0.513∗∗∗
[0.014]

# observations
# clusters (stocks)
# clusters (days)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
Stock FE
# of impressionss,t FE
Day FE

102,627
891
295
.27
0.400
Yes
.
.

96,436
888
295
.59
0.432
Yes
Yes
.

96,436
888
295
.60
0.432
Yes
Yes
.

41

96,436
888
295
.60
0.432
Yes
Yes
.

96,436
888
295
.61
0.432
Yes
Yes
Yes

96,407
888
295
.75
0.431
Yes
Yes
Yes

96,436
888
295
0.432
Yes
Yes
.

Internet Appendix to:

Does Partisanship Shape Investor Beliefs?
Evidence from the COVID-19 Pandemic
J. Anthony Cookson, Joseph E. Engelberg and William Mullins
We extend the series of daily optimism fixed effects in the top panel of Figure 3 from
January 2017 to June 2020, and make it available online at
http://www.tonycookson.com/data-and-programs.

1

1 Cookson,

Leeds School of Business at University of Colorado-Boulder (tony.cookson@colorado.edu).
Engelberg (jengelberg@ucsd.edu) and Mullins (wmullins@ucsd.edu), Rady School of Management, UC San
Diego.

Table A.1: Alternative measures of Partisanship
This table examines alternative measures of user partisanship. We define R − D as a user’s total number of
pre-2020 Republican messages and likes, minus their Democrat messages and likes. Each column presents
coefficients from the regression run in column (2) of Table 3 using different cutoffs for R − D to define a
partisan user. In the paper, we define a partisan Republican with R − D ≥ 4 (column (7) in this table) i.e.,
users that have posted or liked at least four more Republican than Democratic messages pre-2020. R − D
values below zero correspond to likely partisan Democrats. The bottom row reports the number of partisan
users defined by the various R − D conditions. The dependent variable is an indicator (multiplied by 100)
that a user j declares as bullish about security s on day t. The sample follows Table 3 (October 2019 through
April 2020). ∗ ,∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%.

Dependent variable: 1 x100 if Bulls,j,t

R-D ≡ #Republican minus #Democrat messages & likes

(1)
R-D≤-2

(2)
R-D≤-1

(3)
R-D≤0

(4)
R-D≥1

(5)
R-D≥2

(6)
R-D≥3

(7)
R-D≥4

(8)
R-D≥5

(9)
R-D≥6

(10)
R-D≥7

(11)
R-D≥8

0.2
[0.2]

0.2
[0.2]

0.3
[0.2]

0.5∗∗
[0.2]

0.5∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.5∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗
[0.2]

0.3∗∗
[0.2]

0.3∗∗
[0.2]

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

Dec2019

0.3∗∗
[0.1]

0.3∗∗∗
[0.1]

0.3∗∗
[0.1]

0.2
[0.2]

0.2
[0.1]

0.2
[0.1]

0.2∗
[0.1]

0.3∗∗
[0.1]

0.3∗∗
[0.1]

0.2∗∗
[0.1]

0.2∗∗
[0.1]

Jan2020

0.5∗∗∗
[0.1]

0.5∗∗∗
[0.1]

0.5∗∗∗
[0.1]

0.2
[0.2]

0.3∗
[0.2]

0.3∗
[0.2]

0.3∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗∗
[0.2]

0.4∗∗∗
[0.2]

Feb2020

-0.9∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.9∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.8∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.2∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.1∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.1∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.0∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.0∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.9∗∗∗
[0.2]

-1.0∗∗∗
[0.2]

-0.9∗∗∗
[0.2]

Mar2020

-3.1∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.0∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.0∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.7∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.4∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.2∗∗∗
[0.3]

Apr2020

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.3∗∗∗
[0.2]

-4.2∗∗∗
[0.3]

-4.0∗∗∗
[0.3]

-3.9∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.8∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.2]

1 PartisanRj x Oct2019

1.1
[0.9]

0.8
[0.7]

0.1
[0.6]

-0.5
[0.3]

-0.6∗
[0.3]

-0.7∗
[0.4]

-0.9∗∗
[0.4]

-0.6
[0.4]

-0.5
[0.4]

-0.5
[0.5]

-0.5
[0.5]

1 PartisanRj x Dec2019

0.7
[0.9]

-0.1
[0.6]

0.1
[0.5]

0.3
[0.2]

0.4
[0.3]

0.4
[0.3]

0.5
[0.3]

0.3
[0.3]

0.4
[0.4]

0.6
[0.4]

0.6
[0.4]

1 PartisanRj x Jan2020

-0.3
[1.3]

-0.7
[0.8]

-0.8
[0.6]

0.5∗
[0.3]

0.6∗
[0.3]

0.7∗
[0.3]

0.6∗
[0.4]

0.4
[0.4]

0.5
[0.4]

0.7
[0.4]

0.7
[0.5]

1 PartisanRj x Feb2020

-0.0
[1.3]

-0.8
[0.9]

-0.8
[0.7]

0.6∗
[0.4]

0.6
[0.4]

0.7∗
[0.4]

0.6
[0.4]

0.1
[0.5]

0.2
[0.5]

0.3
[0.5]

0.1
[0.6]

1 PartisanRj x Mar2020

-1.1
[1.1]

-1.3
[0.9]

-1.8∗∗
[0.9]

1.3∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.5∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.0∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.6∗∗∗
[0.6]

1.8∗∗∗
[0.6]

1.7∗∗
[0.7]

1 PartisanRj x Apr2020

-2.2
[1.8]

-0.8
[1.1]

-0.9
[0.9]

2.2∗∗∗
[0.4]

2.4∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.1∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.0∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.0∗∗∗
[0.6]

1.9∗∗∗
[0.6]

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
1,085

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
1,448

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
10,048

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
5,426

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
3,689

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
2,754

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
2,238

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
1,873

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
1,569

1,676,915
69,388
0.77
84.9
Yes
1,344

Oct2019
Nov2019 (baseline)

# observations
1,676,915
# clusters (users)
69,388
R2
0.77
Uncond. mean of dep. var.
84.9
User-Security FE
Yes
# users meeting R-D condition
323

ii

Figure A.1: Plotting coefficients from Table A.1

R-D≥1

R-D≤-1

R-D≥2

R-D≥3

R-D≥4
R-D≥5 R-D≥6 R-D≥7
R-D≥8

R-D≤0

R-D≤-2

-4

Estimated coefficient PartisanR x Post (%)
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3

4

The figure below plots the coefficients for the PartisanR j × Postt coefficients from Table A.1 using alternative
thresholds for the intensity and direction of the partisanship classification. The regression specification in
Table A.1 considers a single post period, rather than estimating separate March and April 2020 coefficients,
to simplify exposition. The first three coefficients (corresponding to R − D values of ≤-2, -1, and 0), are
likely Democratic partisans (blue diamonds). R − D values of ≥1 and higher are likely Republican partisans
(red circles). For example, a user with R − D ≥ 5 has at least five more Republican than Democrat pre-2020
likes and/or posted messages.

R-D ≡ Republican minus Democrat messages + likes

iii

Table A.2: Are partisan Republicans just optimistic? Or interested in the China Trade War?
This table examines whether the 1PartisanR j user variable reflects users who post frequently about the U.S.China Trade War, users that post often about China, or “Pre-Covid Optimists” (i.e., users always declaring
bullish sentiment pre-2020). Each column presents coefficients from the baseline regression run in column
(2) of Table 3, but combines all time periods into an (omitted) pre-period and a Post indicator (1Covidt ) equal
to one after February 2020, to simplify exposition. Column (1) reports the baseline estimates for comparison.
Columns (2)-(3) add an interaction of Covidt with an indicator for a user being in the top quartile or decile of
Trade War-related posts and likes pre-2020. Columns (4)-(6) focus on pre-2020 China-related posts and likes.
Column (7) instead adds an interaction with Pre-Covid Optimists. The dependent variable is an indicator
(multiplied by 100) that a user j declares as bullish about security s on day t. The sample follows Table 4
(March 2019 through April 2020). ∗ ,∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%.

Dependent variable: 1 x100 if Bulls,j,t
(1)
Baseline

(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Interactj : TradeWar Interactj : TradeWar Interactj : China Interactj : China Interactj : China
Interactj : Prementions ≥ p75
mentions ≥ p90
mentions ≥ p50 mentions ≥ p75 mentions ≥ p90 Covid Optimists

1 in Covidt period

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.4∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.7∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.7∗∗∗
[0.2]

-4.1∗∗∗
[0.2]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj

1.9∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.2∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.9∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.8∗∗∗
[0.6]

1.9∗∗∗
[0.6]

1.7∗∗∗
[0.5]

2.1∗∗∗
[0.5]

-0.6
[0.4]

0.1
[0.7]

0.3
[0.4]

-0.1
[0.5]

0.8
[0.7]

1.8∗∗∗
[0.3]

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

1 Covidt x 1 Interactionj
# observations
3,036,393
# clusters (users)
93,045
R2
0.75
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
84.1
User-Security FE
Yes

iv

Table A.3: Pre-Covid optimists are bullish about Chinese stocks, but Partisan Republicans
are Bearish
This table examines whether Pre-Covid Optimists (i.e., users always declaring bullish sentiment before 2020)
are differentially bullish about U.S.-listed Chinese stocks during the pandemic. Each column presents coefficients from the baseline regression run in column (2) of Table 3, but combines all time periods into an (omitted) pre-period and a Post indicator (1Covidt ) equal to one after February2020, to simplify exposition. Column (1) provides a baseline for 1PartisanR j ,while Column (3) shows a baseline for Pre −CovidOptimists j .
For reference, column (3) shows that Partisan Republicans are differentially pessimistic about U.S.-listed
Chinese stocks (as shown in Table 4). Column (4) examines whether Pre − CovidOptimists j are differentially bullish about Chinese stocks. The dependent variable is an indicator (multiplied by 100) that a user j
declares as bullish about security s on day t. The sample follows Table 4 (March 2019 through April 2020).
∗ ,∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and 1%.

Dependent variable: 1 x100 if Bulls,j,t
(1)
Baseline
for
Partisans

1 in Covidt period

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj

1.9∗∗∗
[0.5]

1 Covidt x 1 Pre-Covid Optimistsj

(2)
(3)
(4)
Adding
Adding
Baseline for
Pre-Covid
China stock
China stock
Optimists interaction to (1) interaction to (2)
-3.7∗∗∗
[0.2]

-3.5∗∗∗
[0.2]
2.1∗∗∗
[0.5]

1.7∗∗∗
[0.3]

1.6∗∗∗
[0.3]

1 Covidt x 1 China stocks

-1.3∗∗
[0.6]

1 Covidt x 1 PartisanRj x 1 China stocks

-6.7∗∗
[3.4]

1 Covidt x 1 Pre-Covid Optimistsj x 1 China stocks
# observations
# clusters (users)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
User-Security FE

-3.6∗∗∗
[0.2]

-2.5∗∗∗
[0.8]

3.1∗∗∗
[1.0]
3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

v

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

3,036,393
93,045
0.75
84.1
Yes

Table A.4: Instrumental Variable estimates of the sensitivity of Turnover to Disagreement
This table provides the first stage estimates for column (7) in Table 6, which uses PartisanDisagrees,t as
an instrument for OverallDisagrees,t (and similarly for the interaction with Covidt ). Column (2) reports
the instrumented coefficients found in Table 6, while column (1) reports the OLS equivalents. Columns
(4) and (5) report the first stage regressions: the Sanderson-Windmeijer (2015) multivariate F-test statistics are 5,332 and 2,288 respectively, indicating a strong first stage. Column (3) is a variant of (2) where
we replace OverallDisagreements,t with its inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS), and similarly for the instrument,
so as to estimate the elasticity of abnormal turnover to disagreement. Our estimate is 0.66, calculated as
= β̂ √ 12 x̄ȳ , where ȳ and x̄ are the sample means of the dep. variable and OverallDisagrees,t , and β̂
x̄ +1

is the sum of both OverallDisagrees,t coefficients). The sample and variable definitions follow Table 6.
AbnormalLogTurnovers,t is the difference between log turnover on day t and the average log turnover from
t − 140 to t − 20 trading days (6-month period, skipping most recent month) for stock s. The Covidt indicator
equals one after February 2020. OverallDisagrees,t is the standard deviation of stamped messages with sentiment (bullish = 1, bearish = −1), while PartisanDisagrees,t is the average divergence in sentiment between
partisan Republicans and other users, following equation (4). Both disagreement measures are normalized
to have a mean of zero and a unit standard deviation (except in column (3)). Fixed effects (FE) for stock
(permno) and number of impressionss,t are included in all regressions. Number of impressionss,t is the number of users that tweet with sentiment about each stock each day. Standard errors separately clustered by
stock (permno) and day are reported in brackets; ∗ ,∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 10%, 5% and
1%.

Dep. var.:
Abnormal log turnovers,t

Dep. var.:
Overall dis.s,t

1 Covidt x Overall dis.s,t

Dep. var.:

(1)
OLS

(2)
IV

(3)
IV (elasticity)

(4)
IV first stage

(5)
IV first stage

1 in Covidt period

0.143∗∗∗
[0.046]

0.131∗∗∗
[0.046]

-0.095
[0.071]

0.004
[0.019]

0.118∗∗∗
[0.026]

Overall disagreements,t

0.053∗∗∗
[0.008]

0.045∗∗∗
[0.009]

1 Covidt x Overall disagreements,t

0.089∗∗∗
[0.023]

0.185∗∗∗
[0.031]

Partisan disagreements,t

0.694∗∗∗
[0.009]

0.002
[0.001]

1 Covidt x Partisan disagreements,t

-0.045∗∗∗
[0.013]

0.626∗∗∗
[0.018]

96,436
888
295
0.52
0.044
Yes
Yes

96,436
888
295
0.42
0.019
Yes
Yes

IHS(Overall disagreements,t )

0.128∗∗∗
[0.024]

1 Covidt x IHS(Overall disagreements,t )

0.519∗∗∗
[0.087]

# observations
# clusters (stocks)
# clusters (days)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
Stock FE
# of impressionss,t FE
Elasticity estimate
Elasticity s.e.

96,436
888
295
0.60
0.432
Yes
Yes

96,436
888
295

96,436
888
295

0.432
Yes
Yes

0.432
Yes
Yes
0.663
0.086

vi

Table A.5: Robustness test: using lagged disagreement measures in Turnover regressions
This table is a variant of Table 6 in which we replace both OverallDisagrees,t and PartisanDisagrees,t with
their one-trading-day lags. There are no other differences in specification. Using lagged disagreement requires sentiment messages on day t − 1 and impression fixed effects require them on day t: this joint requirement shrinks our sample relative to Table 6. ∗∗ and ∗∗∗ indicate statistical significance at 5% and 1%.

Dependent variable: Abnormal log turnovers,t
(1)
Only
1 Covid

1 in Covidt period

0.361∗∗∗
[0.048]

(2)
(3)
(4)
+ Overall + Partisan
+
#Impress. FE disagree. disagree.
0.159∗∗∗
[0.047]

(5)
+
Day FE

(6)
+
Controls

(7)
IV version
of (3)

0.084
[0.054]

0.092∗
[0.053]

Overall disagreements,t-1

0.061∗∗∗
[0.009]

0.078∗∗∗
[0.011]

0.081∗∗∗
[0.011]

-0.060∗∗∗
[0.006]

0.035∗∗∗
[0.011]

1 Covidt x Overall disagree.s,t-1

0.148∗∗∗
[0.031]

0.102∗∗∗
[0.034]

0.084∗∗
[0.034]

0.038∗∗
[0.018]

0.235∗∗∗
[0.041]

Partisan disagreements,t-1

-0.027∗∗∗
[0.008]

-0.026∗∗∗
[0.008]

0.074∗∗∗
[0.006]

1 Covidt x Partisan disagree.s,t-1

0.081∗∗∗
[0.025]

0.073∗∗∗
[0.024]

0.033∗∗
[0.014]

0.072
[0.054]

Volatility of abnormal ret.s,(t-5 to t-1)

0.209∗∗∗
[0.077]

Cum. abnormal ret.s,(t-5 to t-1)

-0.209∗∗∗
[0.026]

Cum. abnormal ret.s,(t-30 to t-6)

-0.063∗∗
[0.025]

Abnormal log turnovers,t-1

0.569∗∗∗
[0.013]

# observations
# clusters (stocks)
# clusters (days)
R2
Uncond. mean of dependent var.
Stock FE
# of impressionss,t FE
Day FE

102,627
891
295
0.27
0.400
Yes
.
.

96,436
888
295
0.59
0.432
Yes
Yes
.

70,842
838
295
0.63
0.461
Yes
Yes
.

vii

70,842
838
295
0.63
0.461
Yes
Yes
.

70,842
838
295
0.64
0.461
Yes
Yes
Yes

70,817
838
295
0.80
0.461
Yes
Yes
Yes

70,842
838
295
0.461
Yes
Yes
.

Figure A.2: Google Search Intensity for “Chinese Virus”
This figure presents the daily time series of Google Search Intensity for the term “Chinese Virus” from
December 25, 2019 through April 30, 2020. The indicated peak is March 19th, which takes place after
a series of tweets by President Trump mentioning the term, “Chinese Virus.” The initial peak occurs on
January 25, 2020, two days after Wuhan instituted its lockdown.

120

March 19th

Google Search Intensity of "Chinese Virus"

100

80

60

40

20

0

viii

Figure A.3: President Trump tweets that contain the term “Chinese Virus”
This figure presents a screenshot from Trump Twitter Archive, with the search term “Chinese Virus.”
President Trump authored 8 tweets with the term between March 16 and March 22, 2020, each of which
occuring near the peak of Google Search Intensity noted in Figure A.2.

ix

Figure A.4: Partisan Republicans are more Optimistic than Other Users during COVID –
Weekly Estimates
This figure presents the weekly timing of the emergence of partisan Republican optimism during COVID.
The figures present the time series of estimated coefficients on the interaction between an indicator for
whether a user is a partisan Republican and weekly fixed effects. These estimates are drawn from a weekly
version of equation (2), which includes user-stock fixed effects. The sample follows Table 4 (March 2019
through April 2020). The vertical bars illustrate 95% confidence intervals with standard errors clustered
by user. Panel (a) presents the estimated coefficients on the sample of all stocks. Panel (b) presents the
estimated coefficients drawn from the sample of S&P500 stocks.

4.0

5.0

(a) All Stocks

2.5
2.1

2.0 2.0

1.8

1.7

0.9
0.5

-0.2

-0.3
-0.4
-0.6

-0.8-0.9

-0.3 -0.4
-0.5

-0.4

-0.9

-1.0

-0.8

-0.5 -0.5
-0.7 -0.6

0.0

0.8
0.5

0.4

0.3 0.3
0.0 0.0

-0.0

0.5
0.0

-0.1

-0.9

-0.9
-1.1 -1.0
-1.2-1.2

-1.0 -1.0-1.0-1.1
-1.1

-1.3

-0.1
-0.4
-0.4
-0.6

-0.6

0.1 0.0

-1.4
-1.6-1.7

-1.8

-2.1

-5.0

-4.0

PartisanR x Week coefficient (% bullish)
-3.0 -2.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0

3.1

2.4

0
9
0
9
0
9
9
0
9
9
9
0
9
9
9
0
9
9
9
9
e)
r201 r201 r201 r201 y201 n201 n201 l201 g201 p201 p201 t201 v201 selin c201 Jan202 Jan202Feb202Mar202Mar202Apr202
5
1Ma 17Ma 7Ap 28Ap 19Ma 9Ju 30Ju 21Ju 11Au 1Se 22Se 13Oc 3No 19 (ba 15De
8
26
16
19
29
0
ov2
N
4
2
Week starting

9.9
9.3
8.6

9.0
8.0

5.9
4.6
3.4

3.0

0.8

-1.8-1.8

0.3

-1.8

-1.1
-1.7

0.5
-0.3

1.0

1.0
0.2

-0.4-0.2

0.5
-0.2

0.1

2.2

2.1

1.5 1.6

1.4

1.7

1.4
0.6
-0.1
-0.7

0.2

0.1

-1.4

-0.9

0.7
-0.3

0.2 0.0

1.4

1.9 2.1

1.9
0.9 0.9

4.9
3.1

1.9
1.3

1.0 1.3

-0.3-0.2

-1.1-1.2
-1.7

-2.7

-5.6

-15.0

PartisanR x Week coefficient (% bullish)
-10.0
-5.0
0.0
5.0
10.0

15.0

(b) S&P500 Stocks

0
9
0
9
0
9
9
0
9
9
9
0
9
9
9
0
9
9
9
9
e)
r201 r201 r201 r201 y201 n201 n201 l201 g201 p201 p201 t201 v201 selin c201 Jan202 Jan202Feb202Mar202Mar202Apr202
5
1Ma 17Ma 7Ap 28Ap 19Ma 9Ju 30Ju 21Ju 11Au 1Se 22Se 13Oc 3No 19 (ba 15De
8
26
16
19
29
0
ov2
24N
Week starting

x

Figure A.5: Differential Partisan Republican pessimism about US-listed Chinese stocks:
monthly estimates since 2018

5.3

4.5
2.6

3.3
1.7

2.3
0.8
-0.7

-1.1

-1.1
-2.7

-2.2

-1.6

0.0

0.0

-0.1
-0.9

-1.8

-1.2

-1.7

-1.2

-0.6

-2.6
-4.9

-10.0

0.0

10.0

PartisanR x Month x US-listed China stock coefficient (% bullish)

20.0

This figure presents the time series of estimated coefficients on the triple interaction between an indicator for
Partisan Republican users, monthly fixed effects, and whether the stock is a U.S.-listed Chinese firm. These
estimates are drawn from the monthly version of the specification in equation (3), which includes user-stock
fixed effects. The sample runs from January 2018 through April 2020. The vertical bars illustrate 95%
confidence intervals with standard errors clustered by user.

-5.3

-10.3

-10.4

-20.0

-11.7

e)
18
19
18
18
19
20
18
18
19
18
19
18
18
19
18
19
20
18
19
19
20
18
19
19
18
19
20
Jan20 Feb20 Mar20 Apr20 May20 Jun20 July20 Aug20 Sept20 Oct20 Nov20 Dec20 Jan20 Feb20 Mar20 Apr20 May20 Jun20 Jul20 Aug20 Sep20 Oct2109 (baselin Dec20 Jan20 Feb20 Mar20 Apr20
0
Nov2

xi

Figure A.6: Partisan Disagreement and Abnormal Trading Volume – Leads and Lags Plot

0.10

0.02

0.00

0.09

0.07

0.05

Month x Political disagree. coefficient

0.10

0.15

This figure presents the monthly timing of the emergence of the relationship between partisan disagreement
and abnormal trading volume. The figure presents the time series of estimated coefficients on the interaction
between PartisanDisagrees,t and monthly fixed effects. These estimates are drawn from a regression
following equation (5), which includes user-stock fixed effects, number of impression fixed effects, and date
fixed effects. The sample follows Table 6 (March 2019 through April 2020). The vertical bars illustrate 95%
confidence intervals with standard errors double clustered at the stock and day levels.

0.02

0.02

0.01
-0.00

-0.01

-0.01

-0.03

-0.10

-0.05

-0.03

0.00
-0.01

019
019
019
019 Jul2019 ug2019 ep2019 ct2019 aseline) ec2019Jan2020 eb2020 ar2020 pr2020
O 19 (b
S
F
A
D
Mar2 Apr2 May2 Jun2
M
A
0
Nov2

xii

Table A.6: List of Stocks with Largest Percentage Loss (Jan 1 – Mar 23)
This table reports the 10 S&P500 firms that had the worst stock market performance from January 1, 2020
through the S&P500 market bottom on March 23, 2020.
Company
Halliburton Co
Devon Energy Corp
USX Corp
Kohl’s Corporation
MGM Resorts International
Macy’s Inc.
United Airlines
Schlumberger Ltd.
Boeing Co
Valero Energy

xiii

Return (Jan 1 – Mar 23)
-78.3%
-75.9%
-75.2%
-73.2%
-72.3%
-70.3%
-70.2%
-67.6%
-67.4%
-64.8%

Figure A.7: Comparing StockTwits optimism and News Sentiment
This figure presents estimated daily fixed effects following equation 1 from January-April 2020 (top panel)
and from January 2017-April 2020 (bottom panel). The omitted (reference) period is January 1, 2020 (top
panel) and January 1, 2017 (bottom panel). The figure also includes the daily news sentiment measure
developed in Shapiro, Sudhof, and Wilson (Forthcoming) and extended in Buckman et al. (2020) (labeled
BSSW (2020) below, available here). The correlation between the two series is 0.75 (top panel) and 0.79
(bottom panel). The time series of coefficients for the bottom panel is available here:
http://www.tonycookson.com/data-and-programs
2

0.3

0.2
0

0

StockTwits day fixed effects

-2

-0.1
-4
-0.2

-0.3

-6

BSSW (2020) sentiment measure

0.1

-0.4
-8
-0.5

StockTwits fixed effects

BSSW (2020) news sentiment
30-Apr-20

23-Apr-20

16-Apr-20

9-Apr-20

2-Apr-20

26-Mar-20

19-Mar-20

12-Mar-20

5-Mar-20

27-Feb-20

20-Feb-20

13-Feb-20

6-Feb-20

30-Jan-20

23-Jan-20

16-Jan-20

9-Jan-20

-0.6
2-Jan-20

-10

(a) Time Series of Daily Fixed Effects starting on Jan 1, 2020
2

0.6

0
0.4

-6
0
-8

-0.2

-10

-12
-0.4
-14

StockTwits fixed effects

BSSW (2020) news sentiment

-16

-0.6

xiv

(b) Time Series of Daily Fixed Effects starting on Jan 1, 2017

BSSW (2020) sentiment measure

0.2

-4

2-Jan-17
2-Feb-17
2-Mar-17
2-Apr-17
2-May-17
2-Jun-17
2-Jul-17
2-Aug-17
2-Sep-17
2-Oct-17
2-Nov-17
2-Dec-17
2-Jan-18
2-Feb-18
2-Mar-18
2-Apr-18
2-May-18
2-Jun-18
2-Jul-18
2-Aug-18
2-Sep-18
2-Oct-18
2-Nov-18
2-Dec-18
2-Jan-19
2-Feb-19
2-Mar-19
2-Apr-19
2-May-19
2-Jun-19
2-Jul-19
2-Aug-19
2-Sep-19
2-Oct-19
2-Nov-19
2-Dec-19
2-Jan-20
2-Feb-20
2-Mar-20
2-Apr-20

StockTwits day fixed effect sentiment measure

-2

