Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on the English Language in Ukrainian Context, November 2020

Pp. 4-15

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/elt3.1
Using Distance EdTech for Remote Foreign Language Teaching During the COVID-19
Lockdown in Ukraine
Babelyuk Oksana Andriivna
Department of Foreign Languages and Translation Studies, Institute of Psychology and Social
Protection,
Lviv State University of Life Safety, Lviv, Ukraine
Koliasa Olena Vasylivna*
Department of Germanic Languages and Translation Studies, Institute of Foreign Languages,
Drohobych Ivan Franko State Pedagogical University, Drohobych, Ukraine
*Correspondence Author.
Kushlyk Oksana Pavlivna
Department of the Ukrainian Language, Faculty of Philology, Drohobych Ivan Franko State
Pedagogical University, Drohobych, Ukraine
Smaglii Valeriia Mykhaylivna
Philology Department, Odesa National Maritime University, Odesa, Ukraine
Abstract
The situation with a coronavirus challenged the education system and forced educators to shift to
a fully E-learning. Many academic institutions were not ready for such a rapid change. The remote
learning of foreign languages during the COVID-19 lockdown caused modern teaching
technologies to expand the scope of the educational process, broaden its practical orientation,
contribute to the intensification of students' independent work, increasing their cognitive activity.
The goals of the article include: to define types and specifics of modern edTech for the educational
process on the way of transition from no E-Learning to fully E-Learning; to eliminate the role of
the Internet as means of information and communication edTech in teaching foreign languages at
higher education establishments; to find out the ways of improving students' learning at higher
educational establishments, the importance of using distance edTechs and Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, & Challenges (SWOC) analysis of E-learning techniques during the pandemic
lockdown. This article also provides the examples of usage of different edTechs in Ukrainian
higher education establismens in general. Drohobych Ivan Franko State Pedagogical University,
Lviv State University of Life Safety, Odesa National Maritime University in particular.
Keywords: distance edTech, E-Learning, foreign language teaching, remote learning, SWOC
analysis, the COVID-19 lockdown, Ukraine
Cite as Andriivna, B. O., Vasylivna, K. O., Pavlivna, K. O., & Smaglii Valeriia Mykhaylivna, S.
V. (2020). Using Distance EdTech for Remote Foreign Language Teaching During the COVID19 Lockdown in Ukraine. Arab World English Journal: Special Issue on English in Ukrainian
Context. 4 -15. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/elt3.1
4

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

Introduction
Speaking about the role of new technologies in education worldwide, one can distinguish
two opposite poles in the discussions, at one end of the continuum – transforming the current
system of education, like the National Education Technology Plan of the United States. It calls for
"applying the advanced technologies used in our daily personal and professional lives to our entire
education system to improve student learning, accelerate and scale up the adoption of effective
practices, and use data and information for continuous improvement" (United States Department
of Education: Transforming American Education: Learning Powered by Technology, 2016,
https://tech.ed.gov/). It is not a secret that in a predominantly "developed" country, new
technologies and approaches are layered upon older ones. Still, the education system works at least
from a global perspective. On the other side of the pole, one can see teachers and students of "less
developed" countries that would happily switch places. So, the conclusion is that contemporary
education depends on our perspective: one country's education crisis may be another country's
aspiration.
Traditionally the primary purpose of teaching foreign languages in Higher Education
Institutions (HEIs) is the formation of core communicative skills and practical mastery of at least
two foreign languages. Not so long ago, the major restructuring program at most HEIs was
conducted, emphasising on professional skills only. It aims to enable graduates to use global
resources and international talent to answer future challenges (UNESCO, 2010). Similarly, the
essential eight skills university graduates should possess are: (1) Character Development, (2) SelfManagement Skills, (3) Social and Cooperative Skills, (4) Communication Skills, (5) Literacy and
Numeracy, (6) Thinking Skills and Creativity, (7) Knowledge Application Skills, and (8)
Information Skills.
Character Development and Self-Management Skills are vitally important as they enable
graduates to deliver their idea as an individual or a group member and comprise a diversity of
backgrounds to come out with a right decision, solution, and negotiations (Morreale, Osborn &
Pearson, 2000). Communication skills traditionally are considered to be of priority as they refer to
the ability to use active listening, writing skills, oral communication, presentation skills,
questioning, and feedback skills to establish successful communication (QCA, 2000; SQA, 2003;
Washer, 2007; Jones, 2009). Under such conditions, the teacher's task is to administrate the
learning process, to enhance the students' cognitive activity, and choose appropriate teaching
methods that would allow each student to reveal his creativity. But at the present stage of rapid
information development, knowledge becomes obsolete very quickly. Educators are continually
looking for new approaches to make the organization of a learning process more effective.
That is why HEIs in Europe and Ukraine as well are turning a university curriculum from
the outdated conventional objective (no E-Learning form) to new high-tech contexts of global
changes (fully E-Learning), which we are witnessing now in the world's remote learning caused
by the pandemic COVID-19 lockdown. Another important aspect of this problem is the modern
employment settings. It is now generally accepted that the current changes in the global economy
and job market require graduates to have initiative skills, be adaptable to rapidly changing
situations, and work well in teams and different multicultural environments. All mentioned above
trigger significant changes in the way universities train their undergraduates and increases
Arab World English Journal
5
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

emphasis on graduates' continuing lifelong education. In these circumstances, a personalityoriented, differentiated approach to the very process of teaching, this for sure will contribute to
improving the quality of the educational process. As a result, a new curriculum is being worked
out by HEIs that is not only focused on the development of professional students' knowledge but
also on their core competencies, such as communication and IT skills, emotional intelligence,
ability to lifelong learning.
However, nowadays, many HEIs are still based mainly on obsolete concepts and focused
on content learning. When many existing-working activities are taken over by Al-based machines
and robots, our education is still based on traditional skills and competencies. It is interesting to
know that since the middle of the 20th century, a notion of "learning technology" was associated
with the technical usage of training tools only. At the end of the 20th century, a different meaning
appeared in the concept of "learning technology". Under this term, one can understand the most
rational ways of achieving learning goals (Babelyuk, 2019).
Objectives of the Study
1. To investigate, analyze, and characterize the types and specifics of modern EdTechs for remote
foreign language teaching.
2. To conduct the level of usage of the provided EdTechs during the pandemic in Ukraine.
3. To provide Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, & Challenges (SWOC) analysis of remote
foreign language teaching during the coronavirus pandemic in Ukraine.
Literature Review
At the beginning of the XXI century, in the dictionary of terms on general and social
pedagogy, "learning technology" is described as "a set of forms, methods, techniques, and means
of transmitting social experience, as well as technical equipment of this process" (Воронин, 2006,
p. 113). Different interpretations of this notion can be adhered to the following definition of
"learning technology," which is relevant for our research: learning technology is a sequence of
procedures and operations that make up an integrated didactic system, the implementation of
which leads to the achievement of guaranteed goals for training and education. But this definition
seems rather general, as it does not reveal the importance of technical components in the current
educational process.
One of the first recorded uses of the Internet for teaching is Computer-Mediated
Communication Systems (CMCS) at the New Jersey Institute of Technology in the 1970s (Hiltz
& Tutoff, 1978; Hiltz, 1986). That was a "blended" learning model (the combination of classroom
teaching with the online discussion between students and a teacher). The model is brought into a
variety of software programs to support Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC). One of the
most popular was CoSy, developed by the University of Guelph in Canada. A particularity of CoSy
was that it enabled threaded discussions (postings were linked directly to a specific previous
posting). This type of teaching was provided mainly through specially designed printed material,
audiocassettes, and broadcast television programs.
Up until 1990, educational applications of the Internet were limited (email, discussion
forms, including CoSy and such like types) due to the limitation of storing or sending large
Arab World English Journal
6
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

amounts of content (the narrow bandwidth (56Kbps)). The limit has been removed by the
development of the World Wide Web (WWW).
The introduction of WWW gave a push to the bringing in commercial products, providing
teachers with online learning environments that included "pages" for online course materials, tests
and assignments, discussion forums, and access to other web-based resources, now called learning
management systems (LMSs). In response to commercial LMSs, large research universities and
some government agencies worked out and used open sources of LMSs, such as Moodle and Sakai.
Methodology
The study is descriptive and provides the necessity of transference from no E-Learning to
fully E-Learning during the COVID-19 lockdown. The problems associated with remote foreign
languages teaching in Ukraine and possible solutions were also identified. The SWOC analysis
was provided to single out numerous strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and challenges
associated with the online mode of teaching during this pandemic. The research tool used for
analyzing the data of this research is a content analysis. The research method is descriptive
research. The qualitative aspects have been taken into consideration in the research study. This
study is entirely based on secondary data. A systematic review was done in detail for the collected
literature.
Secondary sources of data used are (a) journals, (b) reports, (c) search engines, (d) company
websites and scholarly articles, (e) research papers, and other academic publications.
Data Collection Procedure
The primary purpose of teaching foreign languages today is students' skills in foreign
language acquisition and general communicative skills. Different modern teaching technologies
help to realize a student-centric, personality-oriented, differentiated approaches to teaching and
contribute to improving the quality of the educational process in general.
But in the 1970-1980s new edTech were created and put into practice. Among the scholars
involved in the theoretical generalization of the latest pedagogical researches in the frame of HEIs,
one can name Klarin, Fomenko, Markova. They have worked out the key edTechs to increase the
effectiveness of the educational process when conducting foreign language lessons.
The Technology of Communicative Teaching
This technique presupposes the formation of general foreign language competencies/skills
at a communicatively optimal level. It is aimed at the simultaneous development of necessary
language skills (oral and written speech, grammar structures, reading, listening) is alive, accessible
communication. It is essential to fulfill some tasks to achieve this goal: to develop linguistic,
intellectual, and creative skills of students, which subsequently will satisfy the need for
independent knowledge acquisition; to create favorable educational conditions for the free
development of an individual as an equal part of an active joint educational activity. In
implementing this technology, such practices of teaching foreign languages as grammar drills,
audio-lingual, and video-lingual comprehension turned out to be effective and appropriate. A
significant advantage of this technology is its reliance on a factual psychological, pedagogical, and
methodological basis. Among them, one cannot but mention the growing popularity of e-resources,
Arab World English Journal
7
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

such as electronic dictionaries and other e-books and textbooks, which turned out to be particularly
useful during the COVID-19 lockdown.
Besides, during the pandemic lockdown in Ukrainian HEIs, the special attention was paid
to webinars, using ZOOM meetings. These are online seminars that provide a teacher with the
opportunity to transmit information simultaneously to all his/er remote participants – to receive
new knowledge using a virtual classroom in which they can hear and see the teacher and each other
from anywhere in the world. The benefits of webinars are apparent: 1) all participants are involved
in the learning process, they can ask questions and instantly receive answers to them; 2) the
educational process is exciting and alive: audio and video recordings received during a webinar
are replaced with text transcripts that make it easy to work on the text; 3) it presupposes a minimum
set of necessary tools for training: a computer, speakers with a microphone or headphones and
access to the Internet; 4) webinars significantly save time, because participants do not need to be
at the venue of the webinar.
This technology can be introduced into the educational process in HEIs through the Internet
and social networks. As indicated above, the technology of communicative learning involves
teaching foreign languages based on communication (oral and written). Due to the specific
communicative nature of social networks, all participants of the educational process have the
opportunity to speak the language they are learning not only with teachers but with acquaintances
from other countries and native speakers. That makes it possible to practice not only writing in a
foreign language but also speaking.
The Technology of Modular Teaching
It is the implementation of a teaching process by dividing it into professionally significant
actions and operations that allow students to achieve their learning goals independently and
stimulate their cognitive activities. It originated in the late 60s and, at the beginning, was spread
in English-speaking countries, such as the USA, England, and Canada. Modular education in its
modern form was proposed by American educators Russell and Postletway (1974). Its purpose is
"to create special conditions of choice for the complete mastery of the content of the educational
program in a different sequence, volume and pace through separate and independent training
modules, taking into account students’ interests and capabilities" (Современные
образовательные технологии, 2011, p. 432). The advantages of this edTech are creating
favorable conditions for students’ motivated study of foreign languages, mutual participants'
interaction in the educational process due to the implementation of an individual approach to a
learning process, the possibility of multilevel training in the process of foreign language learning.
During the COVID-19 lockdown in Ukrainian HEIs, this technology is implemented with
the help of the Internet and social networks through one of the most popular educational systems
Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment (MOODLE). This system is widely
used not only by universities, schools, language schools but also by independent tutors in more
than 100 countries. It has a broad range of opportunities to fully implement of the learning process
into the electronic environment, including various options for formation and presentation language
material, knowledge testing, monitoring of students' academic performance, communication, and
organization of their community. It is also worth noting that the main options of e-environment
Arab World English Journal
8
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

are developed with a focus on the pedagogy of social constructivism, which presupposes an active,
communicative involvement of students in the process of language knowledge, skills and abilities
formation, and their interaction, which is, to our minds, vitally crucial during the COVID-19
lockdown.
The Technology of Individualization of Learning
It is the implementation of a process of teaching foreign language independent students'
learning programs. The essential component of which is their specific psychological
characteristics. The idea of an individual approach to students' learning in a class or a team belongs
to Comenius (1592-1670). Since now, problems of personal practice in education in general, and
in HEIs, in particular, received a scientific background in studies on the following topics: ways of
increasing cognitive activity and independent activity of schoolchildren in learning; principles of
organization of group and individual work.
Hence, the edTech of individualization of learning is designed to eliminate discrepancies
between the real educational capabilities of each student and the level of their educational activity
according to their learning program. Thus, it is worth noticing that this technology can serve not
for individual purposes only, but also group tasks. But in both cases, it is essential to take into
account the personality traits of each student within his psychological aspect, which include:
student’s interest in the process of learning, the degree of confidence in his capabilities, cultural
characteristics, motivation to learn a foreign language, willingness to make one's own decisions.
Under the complicated conditions of the COVID-19 lockdown, the edTech of
individualization of learning provides an excellent opportunity for self-study, mainly while using
some means of distance education (the Internet). Via the Internet, students can independently find
the necessary information they need, related training materials, and practical educational resources
in the shortest possible time. Besides, as far as we can assume from our practice, students'
motivation for learning is continuously growing due to the Internet and social networks. It can be
explained by the fact that the Internet is the most familiar environment for contemporary learners,
where they can communicate easily, consult their teachers or native speakers.
The Technology of Multilevel (differentiated) Training
It is the implementation of teaching foreign languages some educational devices when
consolidating new material, some assimilation occurs, or review of the covered material. It can be
used at any stage of the lesson.
Differentiated multilevel training provides students' cognitive motivation and stimulation
of their mental activity; voluntary choice by each student of the level of assimilation of educational
material; organization of independent work of students at various levels; full assimilation of the
primary component of the content of education; paired, group and teamwork as forms of
organization of educational process; ongoing monitoring of learning material; introductory or final
control for each unit of mastering educational material (for students who still have not completed
the essential tasks, correction work is necessary until complete mastery). This technology allows
students to evaluate their capabilities of learning a foreign language, needs, and interests during
the educational process objectively.
Arab World English Journal
9
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

Testing Educational Technology
It is one of the most effective means of controlling students' acquired knowledge. For the
first time, testing was applied by Fisher in 1864 in the United Kingdom. He created a book that
presented questions and a series of answers to each of them. In Ukraine, testing appeared later and
was proposed by the Ukrainian scholar of Greek origin Rossolimo (1910).
The benefits of this technology are obvious: with the help of testing, a teacher can check
the progress of all students in the group simultaneously, because it takes a short period to complete
the test, which, accordingly, makes it possible to conduct it in almost any class. Another advantage
of this edTech is that all students are placed on an equal footing. So, testing takes place in the same
environment, with the same volume and complexity of tasks. The above advantages of testing
technology indicate the appropriateness of its use in the educational process in general and in
teaching foreign languages.
Due to popular social networks, which are significantly often used in the educational
process of HEIs during COVID-19 lockdown, students do not leave their comfort zone for the
implementation of classroom educational activities (including testing as well). For example,
through surveys on Instagram, a teacher can identify the level of learned material (conducting
testing) by students being in their familiar environment. By the way, this test option will not cause
stress for students, but only favorably affect the results.
Project Educational Technology
It presupposes almost any technological innovation in the new educational process, which
positively affects foreign language learning outcomes and increases students’ motivation.
Currently, one of the most popular devices in teaching foreign languages is project
technology. Since it presupposes the fulfillment of the following tasks: a) to develop students'
language skills; b) to navigate independently in the information space; c) to construct their
knowledge and apply it to solve various problems alone; d) to analyze the information received;
e) to develop students’ creative abilities. So, as we can see from the above statements, the use of
modern information technologies in general, and project technology can both diversify the
educational process and provide excellent opportunities for expanding the educational framework,
which, of course, involves increasing students’ motivation. It contributes to the individualization
of foreign language learning. Due to project technology, students can learn to work independently,
show their educational capabilities, and language abilities to the full, actively engaging in real
activities. Besides, it is necessary to stress that project technology provides teachers with a chance
to realize their students’ creative abilities, the results of which can significantly improve and
optimize any learning process as a whole. Sometimes, they are not applicable in the classroom
because of a lack of time, equipment, or other resources.
The Technology of Distance Education
It presupposes that students are provided with all the necessary textbooks, e-dictionaries,
and teaching aids, which they need in foreign language learning. It is aimed at cooperation between
participants of the educational process. Today, in contemporary HEIs, it is necessary to provide
students with a perfect opportunity for continuous training. They will have access to world
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

10

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

information and appropriate educational resources, improve their professional language skills, and
activate their creative development.
The main element of edTech distance education is a specially worked out distance
education course, presented in an electronic form. The basic requirements for its formation can be
formulated as follows: a) distance education course should be built on a modular basis; b) distance
education modules are based on a single model; c) module information elements are focused on
independent learning; d) the content of modules should include various contexts, taking into
account students' academic language level; e) each module has components intended for input and
output control of the learner’s knowledge; f) assessment procedures should be classified according
to the levels of material assimilation; g) the modules and information elements of the distance
course should include sets of expert rules that determine the path of the module (Кларин, 1995).
Also, it should be noted that many students and educators do not have full-time training
and special courses for retraining in the frame of distance learning. That is closely related to
information and communication technologies, which provide the possibility of implementing
online training and quick access to the necessary e-resources, putting into life the principle of
"long-life learning."
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
ICT creates appropriate educational information and communication environment of
foreign languages teaching in HEIs. The educational information environment is a set of conditions
providing unified approaches to the implementation of information activities and information
interaction when using a distributed information resource in education, science, and culture.
New information and communication edTech have selected didactic properties and
functions. Their essential features are quite clearly described in the works of Polat (Полат, 2002).
ICTs are effective means of teaching not only necessary language skills but also modern ways of
presenting cultural peculiarities of the countries. But the primary goal of this edTech is to prepare
students to live in a modern, rapidly changing information society, in a world where there is a
constant need for new professions, new knowledge and discoveries, and continuous training.
Hence, to the most commonly used ICT tools used in the educational process, we can include
electronic textbooks and manuals demonstrated with the help of a computer or a multimedia
projector; electronic dictionaries, encyclopedias, and reference books; simulators and testing
programs; educational resources of the Internet; DVD and CDs with pictures and illustrations;
video and audio equipment.
At present, all the abovementioned ICTs for teaching foreign languages are closely
connected with the Internet and social networks; that’s why they are frequently used during the
COVID-19 lockdown. Due to these ICT tools, standard educational methods and technologies are
being modernized, thereby meeting the modern needs of high-tech society and improving the
quality of the educational process in general.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

11

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

Discussion
The condition of the COVID-19 lockdown in Ukraine turned out to be a challenge for the
national education system. Educators had to move to fully E-learning form of teaching using
distance edTechs at remote learning: edTechs of communicative teaching; modular instruction,
individualization of learning multilevel (differentiated) training, testing, project, distance
education, information, and communication, selecting co-features which are most appropriate for
different types of teaching material.
Department of Germanic Languages and Translation Studies, Drohobych Ivan Franko State
Pedagogical University, Drohobych, Ukraine; Department of Foreign Languages and Translation
Studies, Lviv State University of Life Safety, Lviv, Ukraine; Philology Department, Odesa
National Maritime University, Odesa, Ukraine, introduced many innovative teaching techniques
emphasizing the interactive form of learning a foreign language. Some of the teaching methods
adopted are Powerpoint presentations of lectures and practical lessons, Web-based learning, virtual
laboratories, audio-visual aids, video-based demonstrations.
The departments organize the courses into three levels: master’s degree, bachelor’s degree,
and continuing education levels in learning foreign languages. Due to the COVID-19 lockdown,
they have devised a multi-media distance education enabling students to study independently
without having a conventional classroom. Universities have developed and integrated various
instructional media (ITT) into a distance teaching/learning system. These media help students
study independently without having to enter a conventional classroom to prevent spreading the
virus. The instructional media comprises main media (textbooks and workbooks mailed to
students) and supporting media (audio with scripts, recorded radio and television programs
accompanied with printed course materials and other audio-visual aids).
The websites of these universities contain full details of activities. They include a
development fund (including support for small projects); an inquiry service that links the
departments; the programs of online conferences, workshops; online projects looking at aspects of
teaching and learning.
During the COVID-19 lockdown, fully web-based courses in the abovementioned
universities were organized with all material and interaction solely via the web (ZOOM platform).
The main aim was to exclude contact teaching where the web is used as a support to facilitate
access to study guides and prescribed material according to the curriculum, and online
communication between lecturers and students. Many departments at the Universities must follow
the latter model to prevent the spread of the coronavirus.
The definite positive changes which facilitate the development of edTechs in Ukrainian
universities can be viewed. The Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine provided the access
to the international scientometric databases of Scopus and the Web of Science and now has
extended it until February 28, 2021, and May 31, 2021, for all state and municipal universities and
research institutions of Ukraine at the expense of the budget. Many institutions have also gained
access to new analytical tools.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

12

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

The Universities provided access to different web sites, courses, and media to increase the
research activity of students and teachers of their universities, i.e., Courséra (a technological
company) that provides the publication of educational materials on the Internet in the form of a set
of online courses (https://www.coursera.org/promo/free-courses-college-students?)
Web pages of the universities provide helpful tips and links to resources by category. Using
these Web pages during lockdown training sessions makes it easier for lecturers to teach and
students to study.
Distance education during the COVID-19 lockdown showed some concerns about essential
directions, which should be improved. They are the curriculum, evaluation, academic planning
and management, guidance and counseling, the use of edTechs.
Conclusion
"The key lesson for others may be to embrace e-learning technology before disaster
strikes!" (Todorova & Bjorn-Andersen, 2011, p. 598). Online teaching is no more an option. It is
already a necessity. The spread of the virus has accelerated the process of online learning in the
world, particularly in Ukraine. Disasters will continue to occur, and technologies will help us cope
with them. A high level of readiness to react to the changes in the environment and adjust ourselves
to different modes (remote learning/ online learning during the COVID-19 lockdown) is of high
importance. HEIs should prepare contingency plans to cope with challenges, pandemics, and
natural disasters. Sufficient availability of ICT, different edTechs, digital learning resources in the
form of Massive Open Online Courses, e-books, e-notes, and so on are of high importance (Huang
et al., 2020). Instruction, content, motivation, relationships, and mental health are the five essential
things for an educator providing online education (Martin, 2020).
The research allows drawing some theoretical assumptions (SWOC) of using distance
edTechs for remote foreign language teaching during the COVID-19 lockdown in Ukraine. Time
and location flexibility, covering a broad audience, immediate feedback is among strengths.
Technical disabilities, learners’ level of technological awareness, stress, and lack of eye contact
are among weakness. EdTechs development, academic flexibility – opportunities. The absence of
technical aids, quality of education, digital illiteracy is among challenges.
About the Author:
Babelyuk Oksana Andriyivna is a Doctor of Philology of Lviv State University of Life Safety.
The research interests include Linguopoetics, Stylistics, Cognitive Poetics, Text Interpretation,
Postmodern poetics, Contemporary American literarure (the short story genre). She is the Chief
Editor of the scientific journal "Lviv Philology Journal" in Lviv State University of Life Safety
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4837-1225
Koliasa Olena Vasylivna is an Associate Professor of Drohobych Ivan Franko State Pedagogical
University. Now is currently working on problems of Cognitive Linguistics and Postmodern
Poetics, Stylistics, Text Interpretation.
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5301-480X
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

13

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

Kushlyk Oksana Pavlivna is a Doctor of Philology of Drohobych Ivan Franko State Pedagogical
University. Now is currently working on problem of deryvatology (the stem-centered approach)
and syntax (the academic syntax and the functional syntax) of the Modern Ukrainian Language.
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7502-622X
Smaglii Valeriia Mykhaylivna is an Associate Professor of Odesa National Maritime University.
The field of her interests include Phonetics and Phonology, concepts, Intercultural
Communication, Pragmatics.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6222-7652
References
Бородина, В. А. (2003). Психология чтения в психологопедагогическом и библиотечноинформационном образовании [Psycology of Reading in Psycologico-Pedagogical and
Library-informational Education], Проблемы системогенеза учебной и
профессиональной деятельности, Ярославль: Аверс Пресс, 145-148.
Воронин A. C. (2006). Словарь терминов по общей и социальной педагогике. [The
Dictionary in General and Social Pedagogy]. Екатеренбург: ГОУ ВПО УГТУ-УПИ.
Babelyuk, O.A. (2019) Higher Education in Cyber Society: Pros and Cons. Паралелі та
контрасти: мова, культура, комунікація. Одема: Феникс, 22-24. Available at
http://dspace.onua.edu.ua/bitstream/handle/11300/12235
Bates, A.W., & Poole, G. (2003). Effective Teaching with Technology in Higher Education:
Foundations for Success. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley.
Современные образовательные технологии. (2011). [Modern Educational Technologies].
Москва: КНОРУС.
Huang, R. H., Liu D. J., et al. (2020). Handbook on facilitating flexible learning during
educational disruption: The Chinese experience in maintaining undisrupted learning in
COVID-19 outbreak. Smart Learning Institute of Beijing Normal University. Available at
http://www.alecso.org/nsite/images/pdf/1-4-2.pdf
Hiltz, S. R. (1986). The Virtual Classroom: Using Computer-Mediated Communication for
University Teaching. J. of Communication, 36 (2), 95-104.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1460-2466.1986.tb01427.x
Hiltz, S. R., & Turoff, M. (1993). The Network Nation, Revised Edition. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Jones, A. (2009). Redisciplining Generic Attributes: The Disciplinary Context in Focus. J Stud
High Educ, 34 (1), 85-100. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03075070802602018
Кларин, М. В. (1995). Инновации в мировой педагогике [Innovations in World Pedagogy].
Рига: Эксперимент.
Коляса, О. В. (2011). Конвенційний текст та гіпертекст: схожості та відмінності.
[Conventional text and hypertext: similarities and differences]. Науковий вісник
Південноукраїнського національного педагогічного університету ім. К. Д.
Ушинського. Лінгвістичні науки, 12, 85-91. Available at
http://nbuv.gov.ua/UJRN/Nvpupu_2011_12_12
Martin, A. (2020). How to optimize online learning in the age of coronavirus (COVID-19): A 5point guide for educators. Available at
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

14

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on English in Ukrainian Context, November 2020
Using Distance EdTech

….During the COVID-19

Andriivna, Vasylivna, Pavlivna & Mykhaylivna

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/339944395_How_to_Optimize_Online_Learning_in_t
he_Age_of_Coronavirus_COVID-19_A_5-Point_Guide_for_Educators
Morreale, S. P., Osborn, M. M., & Pearson, J. C. (2000). Why Communication is Important: A
Rationale for the Centrality of a Discipline. Available at
http://www.natcom.org/nca/files/ccLibraryFiles/FILENAME/000000000158/WhyCommi
sImportant.pdf
OECD. (2005). E-Learning in Tertiary Education: Where Do We Stand? Paris: OECD.
Qualifications and Curriculum Authority (QCA). (2000). Key skills units (Levels 1-5). London:
QCA.
Россолимо, Г. И. (1910). Психологические профили. Часть І: Методика [Psychological
Profiles, Part 1: Methods]. Типография Александрова.
Полат, Е. С. (2002). Новые педагогические технологии в обучении иностранным языкам.
[New Pedagogical Technologies in Foreign Language Teaching]. Иностранные языки в
школе, 1.
Sanchez C., & Inaki A. (2020). EdTech Knowledge Pack on Remote Learning Response to
COVID-19. Available at
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/925611587160522864/KnoweldgePack-COVID19RemoteLearning-LowResource-EdTech
Scottish Qualifications Authority (SQA). (2003). Key competencies: Some international
comparisons: Policy and Research. Research Bulletin, 2. Available at
http://www.sqa.org.uk/files_ccc/Key_Competencies.pdf
Todorova, N., Bjorn-Andersen, N. (2011). University learning in times of crisis: The role of IT.
Accounting Education, 20(6), 597–599. https://doi.org/10.1080/09639284.2011.632913
UNESCO. (2010). UNESCO Strategy for the Second Half of United Nations Decade of
Education for Sustainable Development. Available at
https://www.preventionweb.net/files/15341_unescostrategyfortheunitednationsde.pdf.
U.S. Department of Education. (2010). Transforming American Education: Learning Powered
by Technology. Available at https://www.ed.gov/sites/default/files/netp2010.pdf
Washer, P. (2007). Revisiting Key Skills: A Practical Framework for Higher Education. Journal
of Quality in Higher Education, 13(1), 57-67.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13538320701272755

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

15

