Stephen Oby, LCSW
Disequilibrium and COVID-19: Effectively Applying Crisis Intervention
University at Albany, SUNY
School of Social Welfare
Albany, NY, United States
soby@albany.edu
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6573-4708

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

2
Abstract

Crisis intervention is widely understood as a response to life-threatening emergencies and
therefore often limited in its application to natural disasters, severe physical violence, suicidal
ideation, and similarly dangerous incidents. While crisis intervention is appropriate for these
scenarios, historical definitions of crisis suggest the term and related interventions have much
broader application. The ramifications of the novel coronavirus and related cultural fallout
increase vulnerability and impair coping capacity in such a way that individuals are significantly
more likely to enter crisis states, demanding a prompt reconsideration of the breadth of this
practice technique. Successful application of crisis intervention reduces the long-term
psychological implications for individuals encountering sudden loss, unexpected traumas, and
other hazards that overwhelm traditional coping strategies, outcomes all made more likely by this
pandemic. Crisis intervention is a structured, time-limited, problem-oriented treatment modality
that is well suited to a remote practice environment because it is directive in its approach and
requires few contacts at a time when client access is potentially limited. This paper examines the
course of crisis with or without intervention, assessment and intervention tactics, social work
values when applying crisis intervention, and the implications of the use of this modality as it
relates to COVID-19.
Keywords: crisis; crisis intervention; COVID-19; coronavirus; disequilibrium; coping

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

3

Disequilibrium and COVID-19: Effectively Applying Crisis Intervention
The emergence of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and ensuing global pandemic
has yielded health risk, resource shortages, social distancing protocols, substantial financial
repercussions, and profound uncertainty. These outcomes together represent unprecedented
combinations of stress, vulnerability, and related mental health impairment (Pfefferbaum and
North 2020) and notably increase the likelihood of individuals experiencing a crisis. This paper
invites a reconsideration of how crisis intervention is understood and applied and supports
widespread dissemination of crisis intervention tactics in response to the conditions of COVID19 by seasoned social workers and new practitioners alike.
Crisis intervention models are widely understood as applied in response to acute crisis
episodes such as the sudden loss of a loved one, a terminal diagnosis, or a school shooting
(Roberts 2013). Within this understanding, the terms crisis and emergency might be used
interchangeably, and the criteria of a crisis are only met when an event is potentially traumatic.
For these reasons, crisis intervention is perhaps more well understood as an area of practice than
as a treatment model with crisis occurring primarily in domains such as disaster mental health,
domestic and sexual violence, and psychiatric emergency. The use of crisis intervention in these
environments is undoubtedly appropriate, however these examples do not adequately describe
the scope of this treatment modality. The function of crisis intervention is to identify and
intervene when the conditions of crisis are met, conditions that do not hinge exclusively on the
perception of severity in the crisis-inducing event.
Defining Crisis
A crisis intervention treatment strategy calls for the identification and timely response to
individuals experiencing a crisis, a mandate necessitating clear guidelines on what constitutes a

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

4

crisis. One of the earliest and most widely-used definitions of crisis describes a disruption to an
individual’s steady state in which an obstacle is encountered—one that usually represents a
threat to that individual’s life goals—and which cannot be overcome through traditional
problem-solving strategies (Caplan 1961). Further, when this steady state is threatened,
individuals attempt to utilize existing coping strategies but find that they are ineffective (Caplan
1961). The obstacle is understood as a threat to a “fundamental need satisfaction” and crisis
occurs when traditional coping does not succeed within the expected timeframe (Caplan 1964).
Rapoport (1962) refined this definition by identifying three components of a crisis: a hazardous
event, a threat to life goals, and an inability to respond with adequate coping mechanisms.
A more careful examination of each element of the described definition highlights the
utility of a crisis intervention approach. The impetus for a crisis is described as a hazardous event
which need only have the potential to disrupt a person’s steady state, or sense of equilibrium.
What is perhaps more relevant is the degree to which individuals experience hazards as threats to
their own life goals, which is also described as a threat to the individual’s steady state and an
individual’s fundamental need satisfaction. In all cases this frames the hazard as having
subjective meaning to the affected individual which has a clear bearing on the likelihood that the
event will be experienced as a crisis. Whether hazardous and threatening events ultimately
manifest as crises depends largely on the individual’s attempts to cope using what are described
as traditional or existing coping strategies. It is noteworthy that the failure of coping described in
these definitions do not indicate that an adaptive coping response is required to avoid a crisis
outcome, but simply one that overcomes the threat and restores the individual’s sense of
equilibrium. In this way, our understanding of coping is non-judgmental. Maintaining one’s
composure, addressing problems directly, and engaging in realistic appraisals of difficult

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

5

circumstances will likely enable a restoration of equilibrium and would be understood as a
healthy and productive response to distressing circumstances. However social isolation,
substance abuse, co-dependency, and self-harm, while likely to be perceived as maladaptive,
may also enable the perception of control over the hazardous event and a restoration of
equilibrium.
The course of crisis. One of the key concepts of crisis theory pertains to the trajectory of
a crisis: these are time-limited phenomena without a predetermined outcome (Jacobson 1979).
While the precise length of disequilibrium associated with a crisis cannot be known, one of the
early ideas within crisis theory indicates a six-week timeline (Lindemann 1944). Jacobson (1979)
suggests what is now a timely analogy of a virus to understand the course of a crisis: a virus
cannot be cured but rather monitored and treated, and the outcomes of being infected with a virus
vary significantly, with a timely course of treatment improving the likely trajectory of the virus
but without any guarantee of a desirable outcome. Crises are similar in that they warrant a
targeted intervention, the timeliness and effectiveness of those interventions has a bearing on the
eventual outcome of the crisis, and the range of potential outcomes is broad. Caplan (1961) states
that following the onset of a crisis, “a period of disorganization ensues, a period of upset, during
which many different abortive attempts at solution are made. Eventually some kind of adaptation
is achieved which may or may not be in the best interests of that person.”
The variations in outcome and degree of adaptation is highlighted in a core concept of
crisis theory: a crisis event represents not only a threat but an opportunity. Roberts (2013)
explains that crises “can serve as a challenge and opportunity for rapid problem resolution and
growth, or as a debilitating event leading to sudden disequilibrium, failed coping, and
dysfunctional behavior patterns.” The analogy of the virus is telling: a more dangerous and

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

6

harmful outcome of contracting a virus may be prolonged medical impairment or even death,
while the opportunity exists for the development of antibodies and a strengthened immune
system. Applying this analogy to crisis intervention, crisis can yield significant and protracted
psychological impairment and even suicide death but may also enable increased resilience and
new coping capacity. Therefore, the sole ambition of crisis intervention should not be to
successfully resolve the harmful ramifications of a crisis-inducing event, but should also
represent an attempt to facilitate growth and change.
Crisis and trauma. Given the wealth of literature pertaining to trauma, and the potential
overlap between crises and traumatic events, understanding the similarities and differences
between these terms is pertinent. The most recent edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) defines trauma as exposure “to actual or threatened death,
serious injury, or sexual violence” (American Psychiatric Association [APA] 2013), with
exposure understood as first-hand experience with the event, witnessing the event, or learning
that the event happened to a close family member or friend. This aligns closely with a
conventional understanding of crisis as related primarily to the significance of the hazardous
event and is not concerned with the subjective impact or coping experience.
Horowitz’s (1997) influential stress response framework of post-traumatic stress
challenges the explicit emphasis on death, injury, and violence outlined in the DSM. Horowitz
understood trauma as a response to serious life events followed by attempts at coping which may
prove unsuccessful if the intensity or duration of distressing thoughts, feelings, and actions are
too great, an interpretation not dissimilar to described definitions of crisis. Perhaps more
importantly, Horowitz indicates that a trauma need not involve actual immediate danger but
rather can result from a threat to one’s sense of self, others, or the world, a concept closely

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

7

aligned with the notion of a threat to life goals. Where Horowitz observes the emergence of
trauma is in the coping response: the use of defense mechanisms such as “denial, repression,
suppression, isolation, numbing, dissociation, use of drugs, or flight” prolong a traumatic
response through a cycle of avoidance and symptom intrusion.
Yet another variation on the interaction between crisis and trauma is identified by the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration (SAMHSA), which indicates that
“trauma results from an event, series of events, or set of circumstances that is experienced by an
individual as physically or emotionally harmful or threatening and that has lasting adverse
effects on the individual’s functioning and physical, social, emotional, or spiritual wellbeing”
(SAMHSA’s Trauma and Justice Strategic Initiative 2012). This statement also resembles the
described definitions of crisis, differentiated only by the existence of negative outcomes,
suggesting that trauma occurs when a crisis has “lasting adverse effects.” Within this definition,
any crisis may have the potential to become traumatic depending entirely on the effects of the
crisis on an individual’s functioning.
Developmental crisis. The onset of a crisis is the subject of some varying interpretations.
Golan (1978) suggests that a crisis can follow a catastrophic event or a series of significant
stressors but reasserts that the effect is one of disrupted homeostasis which, if not successfully
resolved, will yield disequilibrium. Caplan (1964) indicates that crisis may result from failure to
successfully cope with predictable change at various stages of the life course, such as the eight
stages of psychosocial development described by Eriksen (1950). Rapoport (1967) expands this
concept, indicating that, in addition to accidental crises/hazardous events, there are two other
types of crisis: developmental crises such as those proposed by Caplan and crises of role
transition e.g. retirement. Other theorists have made similar contributions broadening and

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

8

specifying types of crisis. While these interpretations of crisis are widely accepted, for the
purpose of this paper, crisis is understood as precipitated by a single event or obstacle that
becomes the subject of a targeted intervention.
If crises are understood as precipitated by a single hazardous event, major developmental
stages are perhaps best conceptualized as setting events. Setting events, a concept used primarily
in functional behavior analysis, are events that occur hours or sometimes days prior to an
unwanted outcome and that increase the likelihood of that outcome (Iovannone 2017). For
example, a parent becoming impatient with their child may be made more likely if the parent
failed to get restful sleep the night prior, with the lost sleep understood as the setting event.
Setting events do not guarantee an unwanted outcome but are often understood as the first event
in a sequence of events that may yield an unwanted outcome, when one occurs. Aspects of
predictable life course development may influence the likelihood of a hazardous event, the
degree to which it is experienced as a threat, and the individual’s ability to adequately cope, and
represent a setting event for crisis. For example, adolescence is a developmental period
characterized by role confusion (Eriksen 1950), a condition in which personal critiques may be
understood as particularly threatening and difficult to manage whereas the same critiques in a
different stage of life may be non-threatening or easily managed. This notion of a setting event
exacerbating crisis risk is supported by Sifneos (1960) whose definition has four components: a
hazardous event, a state of vulnerability which is necessary for crisis to manifest, the subjective
factor which makes the event unbearable, and the active crisis state.
Crisis and COVID-19
The circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic represent a generationally unique setting
event in which the probability of an individual experiencing a crisis significantly increases.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

9

While the pandemic will rarely represent a crisis-inducing event on its own, its consequences are
profound: the risk of illness and death, the implications of social distancing, the resulting
economic hardship, the broader sense of uncertainty and loss that accompanies an event of this
magnitude, and others. While some hazardous events that emerge during the pandemic, as well
as the threat they represent, may not be entirely unfamiliar—such as loss of life, financial
hardship, or the potential for disease—the circumstances are unique and stressors occurring so
rapidly that traditional coping may not apply. The implications of COVID-19 also pose new
threats; for example, public grieving for deceased loves ones is threatened by social distancing
demands. The pandemic also creates entirely new and unfamiliar hazards, such as the sudden and
prolonged closure of schools, abrupt cancellations of certain rites of passage—graduations and
weddings, for example—and extraordinary demands on medical personnel and other first
responders.
Additional unique elements of the COVID-19 pandemic increase risk for crisis. The
absence of a vaccine or effective antiviral treatments for COVID-19 has resulted in widespread
adoption of social distancing and quarantine protocols which, while seemingly effective at
reducing the spread of the virus, dramatically increase experiences of isolation and its
psychological ramifications. The combination of ambiguity, novelty, and unpredictability
associated with COVID-19 increases risk for anxiety (Whalley and Kaur 2020) and is a
combination of challenges for which many people are ill prepared to cope. Balancing the need to
meet basic needs and earn a livelihood with mitigating exposure to illness and disease is a
significant concern for a majority of people.
Perhaps the clearest hazard is the illness itself. While social workers and other mental
health practitioners are not positioned to explicitly intervene when a person is sick—this

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

10

obviously being the domain of medical personnel—the trusting nature of our relationships with
clients enables us to promote preventive efforts in regards to the illness including adherence to
social distancing protocols, hand washing, wearing a mask in public, and others promoted by
public health entities. Promoting these actions has the added benefit of decreasing the feelings of
uncertainty and powerlessness that can accompany the pandemic and potentially enhance coping
to a degree that reduces the risk for crisis outcomes.
Many general coping practices have been widely promoted following the onset of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Examples of these practices include the limitation of information intake
regarding the pandemic; taking care of one’s body e.g. eating well, exercising, and limiting
substance use; prioritizing enjoyable activities; and safely maintaining social ties such as through
the use of technology (The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2020). While these
tactics cannot be understood as having the capacity to overcome significant hazardous events
that may occur, they can potentially enhance coping in such a way that prevents less provocative
hazardous events from evolving into crisis.
The importance of these practices and others like them may be more pronounced in
populations made particularly vulnerable by the conditions of the pandemic. Individuals with
pre-existing mental health conditions may not only have an especially difficult time managing
stress and anxiety but are also made vulnerable by disrupted access to mental health providers
and, when applicable, psychotropic medications. Parents of young children are managing the
unprecedented demand of meeting the educational needs of children where schools are closed as
well as disturbances to the routines and peer contacts that enable healthy social development in
their children. Older adults and their caregivers may be uniquely fearful of the implications of
COVID-19 given the correlation between age and severe illness. Individuals in recovery are

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

11

experiencing disrupted access to peer support networks such as Alcoholics Anonymous.
Undoubtedly, other populations are made uniquely vulnerable, too, and will benefit from coping
enhancement exercises to prevent stressors from being experienced as unmanageable and
becoming crises.
Crisis Intervention
Parad (1971) defines crisis intervention as “a process for actively influencing the
psychosocial functioning of individuals during a period of disequilibrium.” The goals of such an
intervention are foremost oriented to the restoration of an individual’s steady state, which at the
time of the intervention is understood as disrupted. Ewing (1978) identified a core purpose of
crisis intervention as the modification of relevant characteristics including feelings, attitudes, and
behaviors that are understood as maladjustive in response to a crisis. France (1982) indicates that
a primary aim of crisis intervention is the restoration or improvement of an individual’s
adjustment. The intervention has been described as “psychological first aid” (Hafen and Peterson
1982).
Most responses to a client in crisis include an effort to minimize and resolve any
immediate problems, emotional conflicts, and distress through a time-limited and goal directed
process (Roberts 2013). Several models have been developed to outline the crisis intervention
process, including the ABC Model of Crisis Intervention which focuses on three steps for
intervention: establishing rapport, identifying the nature of the crisis and altering perceptions
regarding the crisis, and offering coping skills (Kanel 2015). Similar intervention tactics can be
found in Roberts’ seven-step crisis intervention model (Roberts and Ottens 2005), the most
“authoritative and comprehensive” statement regarding crisis intervention from the field of social

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

12

work (Payne 2014). The following section utilizes the Roberts seven-step outline, exploring the
ramifications of each of the steps in regard to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Assessment. The first step in the model is assessing a client for crisis. Even this initial
process may at times be preempted by the unique conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic because
social distancing demands have impaired our ability to identify when individuals may be
experiencing a crisis. Many of the service providers that may identify an individual who is
unable to cope with a hazardous event and has not sought out their own mental health support—
doctors and school personnel being two primary examples—are either closed or operating under
protocols where interactions are limited. Fewer interpersonal contacts with family, neighbors,
and co-workers mean that concerning symptoms may go unnoticed. Many mental health
providers may be experiencing delays in intakes due to adjustments to care provision imposed by
COVID-19. These various barriers are noteworthy in that many cases may go unnoticed and, if
crisis outcomes are detrimental, may impair future psychological functioning in a way that
increases the risk for additional crisis.
Helplessness, anxiety, frustration, inadequacy, and depression often accompany the onset
of crisis (Caplan 1974). Lindemann (1944) indicated five crisis reactions: somatic distress,
preoccupation, guilt, hostile reactions, and loss of patterns of conduct. Myer and Conte (2006)
describe reactions to crisis events as occurring across three domains: affective, behavioral, and
clinical. Affective reactions are defined as anger and hostility, anxiety and fear, and sadness and
melancholy, with some combination of these reactions occurring across domains ranging from
negligible to extremely severe. Behavioral responses are defined within three categories:
immobility, avoidance, and approach. Cognitive reactions are defined as perceiving the crisis as
a transgression, threat, or loss, with the area of life affected by these thoughts including physical,

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

13

psychological/self-concept, social relationships, and moral/spiritual. Myer and Conte’s
framework is applied in a publicly available triage assessment tool where clients are rated across
each of the described domains and assigned a severity rating.
Crisis assessment indicates whether a client is indeed in crisis; if so, clinicians either
proceed with a crisis intervention approach or triage when more urgent services are required,
such as a suicide assessment in an emergency room. Impairment in affect, behavior, and
cognition may indicate the existence of a crisis state but may also indicate other issues entirely;
the presence of a hazardous event that yielded the change in functioning is what most clearly
indicates the occurrence of a crisis. Aguilera et al. (1970) differentiate between a diagnostic
assessment, a process which characterizes the majority of initial client/practitioner interactions,
and an accurate assessment of the crisis-inducing problem, which is demanded in crisis
intervention.
Rapport building. The importance of relationships as a vehicle for supporting client
change and facilitating the helping process is a core principle of social work practice (National
Association of Social Workers [NASW] 2017a). This principle is understood as a particularly
crucial element of crisis intervention due to the high likelihood that the intervention is applied
during an initial contact with a client, the probability of a short-term relationship, and the
vulnerability of the client. Further, clients engaging with a practitioner in a crisis situation are
seeking competent and immediate support, demanding a speedier and more targeted rapport
building process. With many therapeutic contacts happening virtually during the COVID-19
pandemic, this demands teletherapeutic competence including a recognition of when
teletherapeutic services can be delivered safely, protocols for emergency situations, mastery over

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

14

technology, adaptations in communication approach, sensitivity to cultural and linguistic issues,
and others (NASW 2017b).
Safety planning is a noteworthy consideration when conducting crisis intervention
remotely. Safety concerns during the COVID-19 pandemic are likely to resemble those that
social workers are familiar with, including danger to self and others, symptoms worsening or
decompensation, and medical emergencies that may occur during therapeutic contact. However,
there is the possibility that connection issues may interfere with the clinical contact, that the
client’s whereabouts at the time of the contact are not explicitly known, or that a client simply
hangs up. These barriers unique to a teletherapeutic environment warrant a reconsideration of
how safety is maintained, both to ensure ethical practice and to communicate to clients that the
social worker is proactively addressing safety concerns thereby enhancing rapport. Important
additional considerations for a teletherapeutic environment include backup communications if
connection is interrupted or lost, presence of firearms in the home, and a greater emphasis on
resources in the vicinity of the client (Washington State Department of Social & Health Services
2017).
What will perhaps be an overlooked consideration in the process of projecting
competence and establishing rapport is the social worker’s own sense of wellness during this
extraordinary time. While the notion that COVID-19 “does not discriminate” or is an “equal
opportunity killer” has been emphatically refuted (Laurencin and McClinton 2020; Yancy 2020),
the fact remains that conditions of the pandemic are likely to be felt to some degree by everyone,
including social workers. This is a discipline that traditionally has complex and perhaps
ambivalent feelings toward the notion of self-care for a number of reasons including a lack of
organizational emphasis, a sense of selflessness as helping professionals, and perceived

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

15

weakness related to self-care, amongst others (Pyles 2018). The COVID-19 pandemic is perhaps
the ideal moment to address and overcome the field’s ambivalence, as the unique and even
overwhelming mental health demands of the moment, if not proactively managed, will have a
bearing on the quality of services social workers provide. This is an opportunity not only to
improve our own practices in self-care but to model for clients how to manage shared stressors.
Problem identification. In this step the social worker seeks to collaborate with the client
on identifying what event yielded disequilibrium and ensuing help-seeking behavior. The ability
to identify the existence of a precipitating event is one of central elements in practitioners’ ability
to identify a client in crisis (Bloom 1963). This event is sometimes referred to as “the last straw”
(Yeager and Roberts 2015) because a series of events may have increased vulnerability and
exacerbated the risk for a crisis outcome but only a single event is understood as ultimately
pushing a client into a state of disequilibrium. The identification of the last straw provides both
the client and the practitioner a needed target for the intervention. It is in understanding the
nature of this event and the failure of traditional coping to overcome it that enables the client and
practitioner to proceed with a shared and targeted understanding of what problem demands
resolution.
While many crises will be understood as evolving from the circumstances of COVID-19,
it is unlikely that the pandemic itself can be understood as the last straw in most instances.
Further, many clients will be experiencing several stressors concurrently, making the
identification of the last straw a challenge. Practitioners may be tempted to address the stressor
that appears the most serious or is interpreted by the practitioner as being the most significant
and therefore the most likely to yield crisis. However, to support a client in restoring their
equilibrium, the model calls for an explicit examination of the event that led directly to the crisis.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

16

Other issues that are described as precipitating the crisis event may be targets for future
intervention or, ideally, may become easier to manage if clients experience empowerment
through successfully resolving the conditions of the crisis-inducing event.
Validation. While identifying and understanding the problem has the potential to
contextualize related emotions, there is risk in such a targeted and time-limited intervention to
bypass the work of recognizing and exploring a client’s emotional state. There is a sense of
uncertainty regarding the appropriateness of one’s emotional response that can follow a crisis.
The risk for continued harm due to this sense of uncertainty demands an intervention that
validates a client’s emotional reaction in an accepting, supportive, private, and non-judgmental
manner (Yeager and Roberts 2015). This can be accomplished in part via active listening
techniques familiar to any social worker such as paraphrasing, probing, non-verbal affirmations,
and reflective responses. These techniques are effective at creating conditions where clients feel
understood and satisfied in an interaction with a helping professional (Weger et al. 2014).
However, the process of validating complex emotional reactions may extend beyond this
basic technical response and into how practitioners understand and intervene regarding the
client’s interpretation of events surrounding a crisis. Widespread recognition and emphasis on
the mental health ramifications of the COVID-19 pandemic may tempt social work practitioners
to combat seemingly unhealthy negative thought patterns in clients by emphasizing more
positive or optimistic perspectives. This approach might highlight the value of gratitude, the
likely time-limited nature of the pandemic, or the client’s relative privilege as understood by the
practitioner. Enhancing an individual’s positive subjective experiences and strengths is
defensible within a positive psychology framework (Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi 2000) and
resolving irrational thought patterns is a core tactic of cognitive theory (Ellis 1994). However,

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

17

given crisis intervention’s emphasis on validating a client’s emotions, these efforts may be
premature if not erroneous and potentially damaging. Rather than understanding seemingly
problematic emotional responses as fundamentally negative or irrational in some way,
practitioners might understand complex or “negative” emotions as important and valid indicators
of an individual’s experience with the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic (Parker-Pope
2020).
This failure to validate difficult emotions in an effort to promote positive thinking has
been described as “toxic positivity” (Lukin 2019). The danger of toxic positivity is that, in an
effort to support a client adapting their thinking in such a way to successfully overcome difficult
stressors, it invalidates clients and suggests that their feelings are somehow misguided. The
perils of toxic positivity are felt acutely during the COVID-19 pandemic, where fear, worry,
sadness, grief, and other difficult emotions may be more pronounced, and practitioners may feel
compelled to address these feelings as problematic. However, lessons from toxic positivity and
the tenets of crisis intervention demand practitioners acknowledge and validate these feelings as
appropriate and potentially healthy responses to uniquely distressing circumstances.
Coping skills. This step incorporates both an examination of previous unsuccessful
attempts at coping and strategies to more successfully cope moving forward. The ability for the
client to recognize which coping attempts were attempted and ultimately why they were
unsuccessful is critical (Yeager and Roberts 2015). This may yield considerations of client
pathology in terms of how stressors are routinely managed—or not managed—but the demand of
the intervention is to look exclusively at what coping attempts were made in response to the
problem understood as yielding the crisis. Clients will begin to consider what options may be
available going forward when emotional balance has been re-achieved. The development of

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

18

potential future coping responses is a collaborative one; clients may struggle to understand both
why traditional coping was inadequate and how best to proceed, but social work practitioners
cannot be familiar enough with a client’s strengths and resources to unilaterally impose
solutions. Yeager and Roberts (2015) suggest a solution-focused orientation here, with an
explicit use of techniques relevant to that treatment modality, including the miracle question and
scaling techniques.
The conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic are so unfamiliar that a reliance on traditional
coping may be understood as faulty, particularly when this step seeks to understand what coping
responses were successful in previous similar situations. This is where having successfully
identified the crisis-inducing problem drives the intervention: if the problem is understood as the
conditions of COVID-19 then no prior coping may appear adequate, but if the problem is
identified in a more targeted manner, existing resources can be more readily understood as
having the potential to be effective. For example, the harm from the end of a romantic
relationship during the COVID-19 pandemic may feel like an insurmountable problem given
limited access to interpersonal support from family and friends, restrictions on activities that may
be utilized to cope, and financial implications if the couple was cohabitating. As disequilibrium
occurs and thought processes become distorted, the individual may experience increased fear of
disease and cultural decline and begin grappling with more existential concerns about their
ability to experience love and intimacy, questions relevant to early adulthood (Eriksen 1950).
Having successfully supported the client in identifying what exactly the breakup meant at the
problem identification stage—for example, the client is simply experiencing a sense of loss—
allows the client and practitioner to consider coping responses not to the conditions of COVID19 but to previous instances where the client experienced loss.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

19

Action plan. During this step, a concrete plan based on agreed upon coping strategies is
adopted. Yeager and Roberts (2015) also indicate that a cognitive element is demanded, so that
not only has a client identified what happened but also what it meant and how understanding the
event differently may shape how the client interacts with it going forward. Yeager and Roberts
(2015) describe this as occurring in three steps: the client first obtains a realistic understanding of
the crisis-inducing event, followed by an examination of the specific meaning of the event to that
client, before finally developing a new and more adaptive understanding of the crisis event. This
process is understood as not only enabling mastery over the crisis but enables the client to more
successfully manage hazardous and threatening events in the future. If prior steps to the
intervention are successfully completed, this process of cognitive restructuring is less likely to be
perceived as an example of toxic positivity or similarly invalidating interactions but rather as one
that flowed naturally from the intervention and that enhances their problem-solving capacity
through a process of understanding.
Follow up. Contact should be reestablished at an agreed upon point following the
implementation of the action plan to determine the degree to which the plan was followed and its
effectiveness in terms of mitigating the client’s crisis state. Follow up contact may also include
reassessment for crisis and any new stressors the client may have encountered as well as how
they are responding (Roberts and Ottens 2005). Follow up also often includes referrals to needed
services including medical support, housing, legal services, or additional mental health support if
a need was identified in the course of the intervention. This will often require a referral to an
outside provider, however as previously described, not all applications of crisis intervention will
necessarily occur in isolated crisis-oriented treatment environments. Parad (1971) argues that any
client seeking mental health support may be a candidate for crisis intervention, as individuals

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

20

often seek this support when an event has made their lives feel difficult to manage. In this regard
any social work practitioner may consider crisis intervention when initiating services with a new
client, and so rather than refer to a different provider when the intervention is complete, can
decide whether to simply continue services. In these instances, the social work practitioner may
consider using the follow up stage of the intervention as a mechanism to terminate the crisisoriented relationship and re-contract for new treatment goals adopted once the crisis has been
resolved.
Social Work Value Considerations
Crisis intervention is a multi-disciplinary treatment approach, spanning social work,
psychology, and psychiatry, among others (Payne 2014). However, social workers may be
uniquely positioned to apply the crisis intervention modality in a thoughtful and targeted manner.
This is due in part to the presence of social work practitioners across diverse helping domains
and the increased likelihood that we will encounter clients in crisis. However, the value of social
workers applying crisis intervention is not simply a matter of client access but also pertains to
our discipline’s values. For example, social work’s person-in-environment emphasis is well
applied in a crisis situation, given the understanding that an interaction between an external
hazardous event and internal experiences of threat and coping have the capacity to lead to crisis.
Further, the examination and utilization of a client’s existing and at times unseen coping
resources is well aligned to a strengths perspective, another core social work value (Kim and
Bolton 2015). Not all social work values fit this neatly. Two other social work values that may
be vulnerable in the use of this modality will be examined here: client self-determination and
social justice.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

21

The promotion of socially responsible client self-determination is a central social work
value (NASW 2017a). This can represent a challenge when a client’s psychological state is
impairing their ability to make decisions in their own self-interest. Jacobson et al. (1968)
describe two approaches to crisis intervention. The first is a process of mutually directed
problem solving activity designed to accomplish a series of standard psychological tasks,
including acceptance, emotional expression, and cognitive restructuring; the second places
greater demand on practitioners and their ability to objectively determine the circumstances of
the crisis, specifically the reasons a client’s coping attempts have not reestablished equilibrium
and what adaptation must occur in order to accomplish this task. The challenges of this
dichotomy persist today, where the balance between a client’s right to self-determination and the
demand for a more directive approach is a delicate one. This may be exacerbated as a result of
the COVID-19 pandemic, a period in which a client’s opportunities may feel stifled and their
goals and sense of self may be unexpectedly upended, as well as the increased likelihood of
maladaptive coping adopted in response to unfamiliar stressors. Social workers should use their
own judgment but remember that the goal of the intervention is not to end the crisis but rather
support the client in navigating the crisis to a more desirable conclusion.
Crisis intervention models consider the interaction between individual and environment
but largely understand solutions as attained by the response of the individual. In this way the
nature of the hazardous event is not subject to any judgment but rather is accepted as part of the
crisis trajectory, creating a complicated relationship with the core social work tenet of social
justice if hazardous events are unjust in nature. For example, if a client loses a job not due to the
financial conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic but due to workplace discrimination, an explicit
emphasis on the client’s adaptation and response to the event might be understood as

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

22

perpetuating unjust conditions. Perhaps the most pronounced example of this threat in our
current circumstances is the disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on African Americans
(Laurencin and McClinton 2020; Yancy 2020). While crisis intervention demands a client-driven
response, social work practitioners should be mindful of the broader societal implications when
collaborating with clients on problem definitions and coping responses. Further, social workers
from privileged demographics—for example white, cisgender, and others—should be aware that
clients may be tentative about vocalizing the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic has had a
disproportionate impact on them. One example of this dynamic is the perception among African
Americans that therapy is the domain of older white males who are likely to be insensitive to the
African American experience (Thompson et al. 2004). Social workers using crisis intervention
must be aware of the ways in which hazardous events, the subjective experience of a threat to life
goals, and understandings of coping are all framed within particular social and economic
circumstances.
Conclusion
Understanding crisis not as a term that is interchangeable with emergency but rather as a
subjective and particular response that may emerge in the presence of a hazardous event enables
a broader application of the crisis intervention modality than what is often considered. A
recalibration is urgently needed around our understanding of crisis as widespread use of this
modality is necessitated by the conditions of the COVID-19 pandemic, including new or more
frequent hazards, unfamiliar threats to people’s goals, and the need for enhanced coping to
maintain equilibrium. The pandemic creates these conditions in many ways, not least of which
being the very vulnerable relationships many of us have with death, security, and related
feelings. We are all likely to feel threatened and overcome by losses of many kinds during this

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

23

challenging time. Crisis intervention may be the ideal modality of the moment, not only due to
the likely increase of crisis events, but also the time-limited and structured nature of the
intervention. This modality has the potential to meet client needs in a more expedient and
targeted manner.
Crisis intervention demands that social work practitioners do not create an expectation of
a return to normalcy. We must be cautions with clients in their progress toward regaining
equilibrium and how much we can reasonably expect in terms of coping. It is not uncommon or
even unhealthy for clients to experience significant emotional distress as a result of these
remarkable circumstances. The crisis intervention modality equips social work practitioners with
a strategy not to guarantee optimal mental health for our clients but to identify and address those
stressors that feel insurmountable and ideally to support clients in overcoming these stressors and
enhancing their ability to cope in the process.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

24
References

Aguilera, D.C., Messick, J.M., & Farrell, M.S. (1970). Crisis intervention: Theory and
methodology. St. Louis: The C.V. Mosby Company.
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders
(5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Association.
Bloom, B.C. Definitional aspects of the crisis concept. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 27(6),
498-502.
Bonanno, G.A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we underestimated the
capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? American Psychologist, 59(1), 20-28.
Caplan, G. (1974). Support systems and community mental health: Lectures on concept
development. New York: Behavioral Publications.
Caplan, G. (1964). Principles of preventive psychiatry. New York: Basic Books.
Caplan, G. (1961). An approach to community mental health. New York: Grune and Stratton.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2020). Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19):
with Stress. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov.
Ellis, A. (1994). Reason and emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Citadel Press.
Eriksen, E. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
France, K. (2014). Crisis intervention: A handbook of immediate person-to-person help (6th ed.).
Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, Publisher, Ltd.
Golan, N. (1978). Treatment in crisis situations. New York: The Free Press.
Hafen, B.Q. & Peterson, B. (1982). The crisis intervention handbook. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Hoff, L. (2009). People in crisis: Clinical and diversity perspectives. New York: Routledge.
Horowitz, M. J. (1997). Stress response syndromes: PTSD, grief, and adjustment disorders. New
York: Jason Aronson.
Jacobson, G.F. (1979). Crisis-oriented therapy. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 2(1), 3954.
Jacobson, G.F., Strickler, M., & Morley, W. (1968). Generic and individual approaches to crisis
intervention. American Journal of Public Health, 58(1), 338-343.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

25

Kanel, K. (2015). A guide to crisis intervention. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Kim, J.S. & Bolton, K.W. (2015). Strengths perspective. In Encyclopedia of Social Work.
Retrieved from https://oxfordre.com/socialwork.
Langsley, D.G. & Kaplan, D.M. (1968). The treatment of families in crisis. New York: Grune &
Stratton.
Laurencin, C.T. & McClinton, A. (2020). The COVID-19 pandemic: A call to action to identify
and address racial and ethnic disparities. Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities,
7, 398-402.
Lindemann, E. (1944). Symptomology and management of acute grief. The American Journal of
Psychiatry, 101, 141-148.
Lukin, K. (2019). Toxic positivity: Don’t always look at the bright side. Retrieved from
https://www.psychologytoday.com.
Myer, R.A. & Conte, C. (2006). Assessment for crisis intervention. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 62(8), 959-970.
National Association of Social Workers (NASW) (2017a). Code of ethics. Retrieved from
https://www.socialworkers.org.
National Association of Social Workers (NASW) (2017b). Technology in social work practice.
Retrieved from https://www.socialworkers.org.
Parad, H.J. (1971). Crisis intervention. In Encyclopedia of Social Work (16th ed.). New York:
National Association of Social Workers.
Parker-Pope, T. (2020). The New York Times events: Teens in lockdown [Audio podcast].
Retrieved from https://soundcloud.com.
Payne, M. (2014). Modern social work theory (4th ed.). Chicago: Lyceum Books.
Pfefferbaum, B. & North, C.S. (2020). Mental health and the Covid-19 pandemic. The New
England Journal of Medicine.
Puryear, D.A. (1979). Helping people in crisis. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Pyles, L. (2018). Healing justice: Holistic self-care for change makers. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Rapoport, L. (1967). Crisis-oriented short-term casework. Social Service Review, 41, 31-43.

CRISIS INTERVENTION & COVID

26

Rapoport, L. (1962). The state of crisis: Some theoretical considerations. Social Service Review,
36, 211-217.
Roberts, A.R. (2013). Crisis interventions. In Encyclopedia of Social Work. Retrieved from
https://oxfordre.com/socialwork.
Roberts, A.R. & Ottens, A.J. (2005). The seven-stage crisis intervention model: A road map to
goal attainment, problem solving, and crisis resolution. Brief Treatment and Crisis
Intervention, 5(4), 329-339.
Seligman, M.E. & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2000). Positive psychology: An introduction. American
Psychologist, 55(1), 5-14.
Sifneos, P.E. (1972). A concept of emotional crisis. Mental Hygiene, 44(2), 169-179.
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration’s Trauma and Justice Strategic
Initiative (2012). SAMHSA's working definition of trauma and guidance for traumainformed approach. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration.
Thompson, V.L., Bazile, A., & Akbar, M. (2004). African Americans’ perceptions of
psychotherapy and psychotherapists. Professional Psychological Research and Practice,
35(1), 19-26.
Washington State Department of Social & Health Services (2017). Telehealth implementation
guidebook. Retrieved from dshs.wa.gov.
Weger, H., Bell, G.C., Minei, E.M., & Robinson, M.C. (2014). The relative effectiveness of
active listening in initial interactions. International Journal of Listening, 28(1), 13-31.
Whalley, M. & Kaur, H. (2020). Living with Worry and Anxiety Amidst Global Uncertainty.
Retrieved from https://www.psychologytools.com.
Yancy, C.W. (2020). COVID-19 and African Americans. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 323(19), 1891-1892.
Yeager, K.R., & Roberts, A.B. (2015). Bridging the past and present to the future of crisis
intervention and crisis management. In A.R. Roberts & K.R. Yeager (Eds.), Crisis
intervention handbook: Assessment, treatment, and research (3-36). New York: Oxford
University Press.

