Nurul Tsanaa Lathifah1, Moses Glorino Rumambo Pandin2
Universitas Airlangga Surabaya, Indonesia
Jl. Airlangga No. 4-6, Mulyorejo, East Java, Indonesia
nurul.tsanaa.lathifah-2020@fkp.unair.ac.id; moses.glorino@fib.unair.ac.id
Book Review:
Important Character Education in the Covid-19 Era
Book title: Important Character Education in the Covid-19 Era: Strengthening Character Education
Prepares Peer Tutor Students in the Family neighborhood and Skaa Youth Organization; Author: Putu
Beny Pradnyana; Publisher: Surya Dewata (SD); City of Publishing: Bali; Edition: First Print, 2020;
Number of pages: viii + 74 pages; Book size: 14cm x 20cm; ISBN:978-623-93393-5-7

Character education is a system that aims to shape character by developing the potential
in each one to match character values. Character education is structured based on the values
contained in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution. In the beginning, character education was
considered not very important, but as the world developed, character education was finally
highlighted. Character education is deemed vital because it shapes and develops potential,
strengthens and improves, and filters out other things that do not follow the character values in
everyday life and Pancasila.
Character education can be a stronghold in various circumstances, even in emergencies
such as the Covid-19 pandemic. However, in preventing the spread of Covid-19, many violations
of health protocols resulted in unsuccessful character education, so strengthening character
education was needed. Strengthening character education aims to improve the harmonization of
taste, emotion, mind, and body so that character values are emphasized again.
This book aims to provide solutions regarding strengthening character education, namely
by gradually supporting character education to increase awareness of the importance of
implementing health protocols and reducing the number of cases infected with Covid-19. The
author provides a new perspective on how to strengthen character during the pandemic effectively.
This review aims to inform the contents of the book "Important Character Education in the
Covid-19 Era: Strengthening Character Education Prepares Peer Tutor Students in the Family and
Ska Youth Organization" to readers so that lessons can be taken so that they can implement in
life. This book is intended for all people to increase awareness of health protocols.
The author wrote this book based on a phenomenon that occurred at the end of 2019 when
the whole world was panicked because of the emergence of Covid-19 (1). Cases that initially came
from Wuhan, China, spread rapidly to various parts of the world. The first case of Covid-19
infection in Indonesia was revealed in March 2020 and continues to increase. The increase in
chances of being infected with Covid-19 caused by the lack of discipline in the community
towards existing health protocols indicates a decline in one of the values of the third Pancasila
principle, namely love for the homeland. This phenomenon occurs because the values of Pancasila
have not been appropriately achieved, causing a shift in ethics. Thing like this cannot be allowed
continuingly. Therefore this book provides one way to suppress cases of Covid-19 infection by
strengthening character education.
The book “Important Character Education in the Covid-19 Era: Strengthening Character
Education Prepares Peer Tutor Students in the Family neighborhood and Ska Youth Organization"
discusses various aspects of character education both in terms of dimensions, urgency and the
history of the formation of character education, the goals of character education, various
components that must be achieved in character education, and strengthening character education
in the era of the Covid-19 pandemic, especially for students.
At the beginning of the formation of the Indonesian state, character education has not been
spotlighted by the government. However, in 2005 and globalization, the modernization and then
the government highlighted character education as something that must be considered in the vision
and direction of long-term development. Indonesian character education is structured based on the
values contained in Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution. Character education is structured in such
a way as to form a system that aims to instill character values following by Pancasila and the 1945

Constitution. With its aim, character education has several functions when viewed from various
points of view. First to establish and develop potential, second to strengthen and improve, third to
filter out other things that do not match the character values. The components of character that
must be achieved in character education are competence, desire, habits. These three things indicate
the success of character education.
The success of character education is highly dependent on the success of the learning
process. Nevertheless, when all activities, even education, are shifted to online, the character
education that should be delivered fully becomes like a passing wind that passes without being
firmly embedded. The addition of cases infected with Covid-19 due to many violations of health
protocols committed mainly by the young generation was happened because of degradation
character education. Violations of health protocols that occur show that character education is not
achieved during this pandemic. Character education with components such as the emergence of a
desire to jointly protect the Indonesian people from Covid-19, the habit of obeying health
protocols that indicate the success of character education in this pandemic era, in reality, does not
work. Therefore, it is necessary to strengthen character education (1).
Strengthening character education creates harmony between the heart, taste, mind, and
body to emphasize character values to produce future generations with character values. In this
book, the author conducts online training to strengthen character education gradually and
effectively by delivering material related to character education and then measuring success by
filling out questionnaires. The method was successfully proven by the assessment score above
average or in the outstanding category. With a high final score, it indicates that character
strengthening is very effective. Through strengthening character education, it is hoped that moral
awareness and courage will arise in him to prevent the spread of the Covid-19 virus with existing
health protocols.
This book describes character education and strengthens character education in every
detail, both from the government and expert opinions. The indications for achieving character
education are well conveyed, and the character is strengthening training methods during the
pandemic to be effective. The language used in this book is very straightforward to understand,
covering a wide range of readers.
Character education is a good investment for the future. Character education forms the
next generation to take advantage of their potential and abilities with character values following
by Pancasila and the 1945 Constitution. One of the most fundamental values is from the third
principle of Pancasila Persatuan Indonesia. By implementing the values of the third precepts of
Pancasila in various aspects of life such as love for the homeland, prioritizing common interests,
being willing to sacrifice, of course will have an impact on the life of the state so that it can develop
even more. Even in emergency conditions such as the Covid-19 pandemic, character education
can be the first line of defense in protecting oneself. But many violations of health protocols have
occurred by the younger generation and have led to an increase in cases of Covid-19 infection,
therefore strengthening character education is needed. With the strengthening of character
education embedded, it is hoped that courage will arise in making decisions, awareness of the
importance of implementing health protocols to maintain the safety of others so that the
transmission of Covid-19 can be suppressed.
REFERENCE
1. Pradnyana, Putu Beny. Pendidikan Karakter Penting di era Covid-19: Penguatan Pendidikan
Karakter Mempersiapkan Mahasiswa Tutor Sebaya di lingkungan Keluarga dan Skaa Taruna
[Internet]. Bali : Surya Dewata (SD); 2020. 1-74 p.

Author:
Putu Beny Pradnya, S.Pd., M.Pd. is the eldest son of four children from the couple I Ketut Barki
and Ni Wayan Nadi, born on January 8, 1989, Tabanan. He holds a Bachelor of Elementary School
Teacher Education and a Masters of Basic Education at the Ganesha University of Education.
From 2014 until now, he has been a lecturer at STKIP Suar Bangli. He is also the Head of the
Elementary School Teacher Education Study Program since 2018-2022.

