"x"
"1" "Exploring   experiences   and impact  of the COVID-19 pandemic  on young racially  minoritised  people  in the United Kingdom : A Qualitative Study"
"2" "Rochelle  A .  Burgess 1 *,  Nancy Kanu 1 ,   Tanya  Matthews 2 ,  Owen Mukotekwa 2 ,  Amina Smith-Gul 2 , Intisar Yusuf 2 ,  Isabella Lamptey 2 , Nyisha McCauley 2 , Renae Wilson 2 ,  Michael Pirisola 2 ,  Malik Gul 2"
"3" "1   Institute for Global Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom"
"4" "2   Wandsworth Community Empowerment Network , London, United Kingdom"
"5" "*  Corresponding author"
"6" "E-mail:  r.burgess@ucl.ac.uk"
"7" "Abstract"
"8" "Within high-income-countries, the COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately impacted people from racially  minoritised  backgrounds. There has been significant research interrogating the  disparate  impact  of the virus ,  and recently, interest in   the long - term  implications of the global crisis on young people’s mental health and wellbeing.   However,  less work  explor es  the  experiences  of young  people from  racialised background s  as they navigate the pandemic, and the specific consequences this has for their mental health.    Forty  young people (age 16-25 )   from  black, mixed and other minority backgrounds  and living in London,   participated in consecutive focus group discussions  over a  two-month  period , to  explore  the impact of the pandemic on their lives and emotional wellbeing .  T hematic analysis  identified  seven  categories   describing the  impact of the pandemic ,   indicating :  deepening of existing  socioeconomic  and  emotional challenges ;  efforts to  navigat e  racism and difference  within the response ;   and  survival  strategies  drawing on  communal and individual  resources . Young people also articulated  visions for a future  public health  response  which  addressed  gaps  in current  strategies .   Findings point to the need to  contextualize  public health responses  to the pandemic  in line with  the lived experiences of  r acialised  young  people . We specifically note  the importance of  long-term  culturally  and socio-politically  relevant support interventions.  Implications for policy and practice are discussed."
"9" "Keywords  (6 max ) :  COVID-19 ;  young people ;  racial minorities ;   Public mental health;  policy recommendations, support"
"10" "TOTAL WORD COUNT ( Excluding headers and tables ):  6, 548"
"11" "Introduction"
"12" "People from historically marginalised communities , particularly those from groups who face exclusions specifically linked to race (racialised) ,  have borne the greatest epidemiological, economic, social and psychological consequences of the  COVID-19 pandemic   [ 1-3 ] .  While the  social and emotional  wellbeing of young people is of particular concern  [4-5] , available literature  is  rarely disaggregated by race or ethnicity . This  limit s  our ability to fully understand differential and compounded impacts created by structural differences ,  which elevate the risk of adverse mental health outcomes for young people from  racialised  backgrounds.  For example, studies have explored the impacts of the pandemic on young people from high-income-countries', mental health and wellness, in addition to investigating young people's perceptions of their government's response to the pandemic. A Portuguese survey exploring experiences of COVID-19  among  people  aged  of 16 to 24, found that the stressors carried biological ,  psychological and social impacts  [6] . A UK survey of 2,036 young people aged 13-2 5,  identified that 80% of respondents reported  a  deterioration   of their mental health statuses , and  heightened feelings of anxiety and loneliness  due to the  COVID-19 pandemic  [7] . Singh et al.'s   [8]  narrative review of studies exploring the mental health implications of COVID-19 and lockdowns on young people and adolescents suggested  a series of factors leading to this vulnerability . These   includ e :   developmental age, educational status, pre- existing  mental health conditions,   proximity to economic deprivation,  heightened challenges experienced by school-aged children and college-aged young people from lower-income backgrounds.   In a rare study exploring disaggregated data, a  survey exploring abuse and mental health across the UK during the pandemic found that  the  youngest  participants  (18-29)   people from  racially  minoritised   backgrounds   faced the most significant risks  of   experiencing abuse, self-harm and suicidal ideation   [9] ."
"13" "Scholars point to how s tructural inequities have made people from racialised background more susceptible to the virus and its corresponding financial and social outcomes   [1,  10- 1 2 ] .  For example ,   a  US study explored the differences in racial and ethnic minorities' health experiences throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, finding they were more likely to have lost a job due to the pandemic, missed housing payments,  faced  food insecurity ,  and  report higher feelings of anxiety   [13] ."
"14" "Institutionalised  exclusion and marginalisation have created a more volatile environment for  racially  minoritised  people to weather this pandemic, both within the UK and across other high-income-countries. For example,  p rotests against racist policing in the UK and the brutal murder of George Floyd by a Minneapolis police officer led to  widespread   attention  of  oppressive and  racist  policing practi c es facing racially marginalised people globally. In the UK, acknowledgement of oppressive and racist practi c es in policing for ced  many to   confront their  own heightened  vulnerability to a new global  health  threat  and its connections to  long standing  racism and systemic  oppression   [14] ."
"15" "A  growing body of evidence highlights the negative impact that racialised experiences of everyday life have on health outcomes for adults from  racially  minoritised  backgrounds   [ 15 - 1 7 ] . However,  there is limited literature exploring the mental  experiences of young people from these communities and its connections to deepening precarity and mental health consequences . Our work contributes to this gap, through exploring the following research questions:   How have young people  from rac ially  minoritized   communities  been affected by the pandemic? How does this relate to their  emotional  wellbeing, and how do they cope with these new sets of challenges?    A nd ,   importantly, how can programmes better support their needs?  Our work is framed by a non-medicalised  framing   of  mental distress, in order to maintain an emphasis on the downstream factors and symptoms that may lead to the development of poor mental health outcomes in the future  [ 1 8 ]."
"16" "2.0  Methods"
"17" "2.1  Research design and setting"
"18" "We used qualitative research methods to explore the perspectives and experiences of COVID-19 and initial lockdown  period  in the UK ,  among young people  aged 16-2 5   from  racially  minoritised  backgrounds  living  in London. A repeated focus group design was conducted over eight weeks to explore young   people’s experiences, perceptions of the response ,  and coping strategies  amidst the pandemic . The design emphasized a strength-based exploration, which  counters a deficits-based approach by  interrogating resilience  and survival  within communities  in the face of  socio-political  stressors . Strength-based exploration  has  proven to be a  valuable platform for supporting  development of  more meaningful  health  programs and  enabling  environments   [19-21 ]."
"19" "The study  was informed by  co-design  [ 22 ] , working in partnership with Wandsworth Community Empowerment Network’s (WCEN) Black  Minds Matter (BMM) collective; a London based  youth  activist  organi s ation  committed to advocating for  and improving  young  racially  minoritised   people’s mental health and wellbeing.   Peer  facilitators  [ BMM members aged 20-30 ]   contributed across the life of the project, informing the  research  design , collection  and analysis of data as part of the research  team.  Methods and  analysis are  reported in   accordance  with the consolidated criteria for  reporting  qualitative research  (COREQ)  guidelines  [ 23]."
"20" "2.2  Participants and sampling"
"21" "Ethical approval was provided by the corresponding authors’  institution   (Project ID 16127/003). Forty participants between the ages of 16 to 25  were recruited to  two cohorts , broken into three age categories (16-17;  18-20; 21-25) .  In cohort 1, participants were purposively  sampled  from within the WCEN BMM collective, to ensure an existing level of trust between participants and researchers  given the nature of the topics being explored . The second cohort were identified through snowballing sampling methods, recruiting from additional youth organisations in   London linked to WCEN.  Peer  facilitators  were members with connections these organisations. Demographic details are presented in  Table 1."
"22" "Table 1. Participant ’s  Demographics"
"23" "Characteristics"
"24" "N  (%)"
"25" "Total Participants"
"26" "40 (100%)"
"27" "Race/Ethnicity"
"28" "Black African and or Black Caribbean "
"29" "35 (87.5%)"
"30" "Mixed Ethnicity "
"31" "2 (5%)"
"32" "South Asian "
"33" "3 (7.5%)"
"34" "Gender Identity"
"35" "Female "
"36" "32 (80%)"
"37" "Male "
"38" "8 (20%)"
"39" "Age"
"40" "16-17 "
"41" "10 (25%) "
"42" "18-20 "
"43" "20 (50%)"
"44" "21-25"
"45" "10 (25%)"
"46" "Education"
"47" "College* "
"48" "23 (57.5%)"
"49" "Undergraduate/ University "
"50" "12 (30%)"
"51" "Postgraduate/ Masters "
"52" "5 (12.5%) "
"53" "First Half of Postcode [IMD  decile index *]"
"54" "Postcodes within  Greater  London  area"
"55" "2 nd  decile  [ N17 ]"
"56" "1 (2.5%)"
"57" "3 rd  decile  [ SE2, SE6, SE8, SW9, RM8 ]"
"58" "8 (20%)"
"59" "4 th  decile   [SE1,  SE5, SW2, SW8, CR0, CR7, BN2 ]"
"60" "12 (30%)"
"61" "5 th  decile  [ SW6, CR4 ]"
"62" "5 (12.5%)"
"63" "6 th  decile  [ SW1 ]"
"64" "10 (25%)"
"65" "9 th  decile  [ TW2 ]"
"66" "1 (2.5%)"
"67" "Postcodes outside of  Greater  London  area"
"68" "8 th  decile  [ BR2]"
"69" "1 (2.5%)"
"70" "9 th  decile   [ AL4 ]"
"71" "2 (5%)"
"72" "* College in the UK meaning, the preliminary schooling that people may do in preparation for an Undergraduate degree at a University, and or where people can learn vocational skills "
"73" "* *  Index of Multiple Deprivation (IMD)  decile index  is how relative deprivation is measured in England   [24] .  The British Ministry of Housing Communities & Local Government calculates IMD scores annually, within deciles ranging Lower-layer super output area (LSOA) or neighbourhood scores from 1, being least deprived, to 10, being most deprived. The IMD scores are the most current published data and are from 2019  [25] . For this research, the IMD scores presented were calculated by averaging all of the IMD scores from the first half of participants' postcodes within the local authorities."
"74" "Recruitment  was conducted by email and  telephone discussions, and  handled by the WCEN project manager , who was also available to answer  any research queries. All participants were informed of the benefits and potential risks of participating in this study, given participant information sheets regarding the study, and signed informed consent forms  electronically given remote data collection strategies in place due to the pandemic .  Consent was re-affirmed verbally at the start of each discussion group."
"75" "2.3  Data Collection"
"76" "Focus groups were  organ is ed  by  age   (see table 2)  to account for differences in life circumstances of  adolescents  and young people .  Facilitators worked in pairs to run each  group;  combining  an academic  or senior staff of WCEN  member, with one of our  peer facilitator s .  All groups were trained on the data collection protocol (topic guides, ethical protocols) by RAB.  Sessions were facilitated using a topic guide, exploring participants' experiences and perspectives of COVID-19 and government's response ,  coping strategies, and  planning for how policy and communication  could be improved to better support young people from these backgrounds. The topic guides were  drafted by RAB and  revised following  discussions with  peer facilitators ,  given the ir proximity to the experiences  being explored in the guides ."
"77" "Each group met four times, fortnightly over eight weeks. Facilitators reminded participants during each focus group meeting of their right to withdraw from the study .  The focus group discussions  were  held on zoom on an institutional account,  were  audio recorde d  and  lasted  average of  60 minutes.  During each focus group discussion, facilitators were given a link to a  password-protected,  live Google document that allowed for anonymous editing.  P articipants were invit ed to anonymously populate the  G oogle  document   with their  answers if they felt  un comfortable   sharing feelings   verbally in the groups ."
"78" "Table  2 . Age demographic focus group section assignment by recruitment cohort"
"79" "Age Group "
"80" "Number of Participants Enrolled"
"81" "Cohort 1"
"82" "Group  1 "
"83" "21-2 5"
"84" "5"
"85" "Group 2 "
"86" "18-20"
"87" "5"
"88" "Group 3 "
"89" "16-17"
"90" "5"
"91" "Group 4"
"92" "16-17"
"93" "5"
"94" "Cohort 2"
"95" "Group 5"
"96" "18-20"
"97" "4"
"98" "Group 6"
"99" "18-20"
"100" "5"
"101" "Group 7"
"102" "18-20"
"103" "6"
"104" "Group 8"
"105" "21-2 5"
"106" "5"
"107" "2.4  Analysis"
"108" "Each   g roup (n=8)  met  four  times, resulting in   36   total  focus group discussion s  (FGD) .  In this study we focus on  24  FGDs that explored topics most pertinent to our study questions ( impact of the pandemic and  desires for  public mental health policy ) .   Of these FGDs,  20  a udio recordings were transcribed verbatim by NK . Four recordings  were not clear enough for transcription purposes   and  google document s for these groups were used instead.  All participants  were anonymised at point of transcription.   Microsoft  excel  was used to organize and manage data."
"109" "Data was analysed iteratively  using  of Braun and Clarke’s  [ 26 ]  thematic analysis method , following all six steps:  (1) familiarisation with data; (2) generation of initial  codes; (3) searching for themes; (4) reviewing the themes; (5) defining and naming themes; and lastly (6) producing the final report.  A  group  analysis was coordinated  to ensure the full involvement of young people throughout."
"110" "RAB and NK familiarised themselves with all of the focus group transcripts , analysing them by age cohorts  to explore  cross cutting  themes.  Each  independently  coded   a set of FGDs  (NK:  16-17 , RAB:  21-25 ), then  devised an   initial  structure of a  coding framework  to organise data driven codes using  six categories  loosely guided by the topic guides.  Transcripts from the 18-20  cohort  were distributed to peer  facilitators  and senior facilitators , who i ndependently  cod ed   and identi fied  data driven codes.    A  team analysis meeting   created a bottom-up  framework, and  which was cross-checked with the initial framework d eveloped by RAB and NK . After refinement a seventh  category was created based.  NK  verified  the more detailed themes and categories,   by re-reading  a  select ion of  transcripts  applying the  final coding framewor k . No  changes were made.  The coding framework  was  approved by the research team, and a summary of findings was shared with participants, to check the validity of our claims  [26- 30] .  Peer  researchers   also  verified the  initial draft of the results section,  to reach  consensus  about the major  findings and potential implications of the work. This approach  further  reduced  barriers for peer researchers' engagement in the  breadth of the  academic process  [ 31-32] ."
"111" "3.0  Results"
"112" "Analysis  produced seven categories  which described the impact of and  efforts  to manage the pandemic by young people : (1) socioeconomic challenges :   deepening  current burdens and future instability , (2) emotional challenges : disruptions to life and fears of the future ,  (3)  government’s  response : too much too soon and lack of  clarity , (4)  n avigating  racism and difference  during the pandemic response , (5) survival during crisis :  finding the new you in this new situation, (6) community: transitions, successes ,  and spirit,   and (7) visions for a future response."
"113" "3.1  Socioeconomic challenges:  current burdens and future instability"
"114" "The socioeconomic challenges  faced by  young people  were consistent across all  age cohorts,  specifically  the  experiences of financial insecurity . Parents had lost income,  and young people  had also lost work , increasing feelings of precarity.  Concerns were i ntensified as government policies seemed to create new financial strain on their lives.    For  example  th e  potential loss of access to  subsidised  travel  for  children under  18  in  London  was frequently discussed,  with one participant stating:"
"115" "It’s a lot. It's like over a pound when I get on the bus, so I really put on like seven pounds on if I'm like going different- if I'm taking different busses. They still have the cap, I think. But it's just stress. I can’t be bothered to get on the bus anymore because I have to pay.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"116" "Many worried about how this would affect their ability to move around the city, which would have  knock-on  consequences for other issues, such as schooling or  engaging in employment .  Participants also expressed  insecurity about the future,  highlighting  frustration regarding the lack of job opportunities available ,  and the impact this would have on their future , as many relied on the industries that were most disrupted by the pandemic :"
"117" "Another thing is, um, I was looking for part-time jobs during the pandemic, which is really stupid, but I still wanted to try so like when they reopen. Hopefully I get a job or something like that. I can't remember who said it, but one of the MPs - I'm not sure if he's a MP, but they said that they would increase more jobs for young people, especially those under 18. And I trusted them and it's not working. I don't see any jobs for us.   (Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"118" "3. 2   Emotional challenges:  disruptions  to life  and  fears of the future"
"119" "In addition to distress from expected consequences, such as grief related to  covid-related deaths among  family , and missing friends and relationships, p articipants noted  spec ific  emotional   challenges that they attributed to government management of  the pandemic .  These linked to new worries about  school,  stark  changes to routines and un certainty  as the UK eased out of its first lockdown in July 2020."
"120" "Young people  across all age groups  struggled  with   deepening of  existing  or  the   emergence of  new  mental health  difficulties as a result – most  notably anxiety ."
"121" "For younger  p articipants  specifically, u nclear communication regarding school caused stress and anxiety , as noted by one young  person :  ‘ I feel like the closer we get to September the more anxious I get because I don't know like I have no idea what's  gonna  happen next year.’ (Group 4, 16-17-year-old ).   Changes to routine  established   emotional challenges as highlighted by the anxiety felt by the absence of a routine, and the difficulties participants had in managing time is illustrated below:"
"122" "…. It's like quite hard to adjust, especially since I was expecting school to like, come back the next month. I was like, it's not that bad. I'll just wait for school to come back. And it wasn't ever - well it's  gonna  come back , [but]   it  seemed like it wasn't ever coming back because I was just like, I don't know what to do … . I'm like, Okay, what do I do?   (Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"123" "A s the country began to ease out of the  first  lockdown  in Summer 2020 , p articipants  worried  that their social skills had been negatively impacted during isolation . They   noted  anxiety about  reintegrating into the outside  world ,  as  lockdown restrictions   were lifted , as  i llustrated  in the following quote:"
"124" "I feel like after corona and everything was announced and being locked in your house for so long …   a nd then you go out- like for me personally …  to be out for longer just would make me feel uncomfortable. Like I'd start feeling like I'd about to have an anxiety attack. Just because  I don't really know …  you hear so much about what's going on and how bad it is .. . It makes me worry more than I'm used to.  (Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"125" "3. 3   Th e  government’s response:  lack of clarity , and too much too soon"
"126" "Across all age groups, participants’ perceptions of the government’s response  reflected feelings of frustration and disappointment. Beyond their distress at the  loss of  their  ‘normal’ way of life,  many felt that  the government had  misread the scale of the impact of the lockdown and virus on their lives. For example :"
"127" "And I was just like these guys have really got their lives on hold. Thinking that one day things will eventually like go back to normal. And the government is just going to be like alright yeah that’s enough. Everyone go back to what you were doing before. And I was just realizing that too much has changed for that to happen. For everything to just go back. Like  it's  gotten to a point where even if the virus like disappears off the face of the Earth. Things are not just going to return to normal. Like too much has changed. The economy has been impacted too much. People’s way of lives  have  been impacted.   (Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"128" "Additionally  participants expressed frustrations regarding the UK government’s handling of the pandemic  and its impact on their emotional state.    ‘But um I feel like, maybe specific to the UK, it wasn't handled well.  So  the sense of panic was kind of amplified.’   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old).  At the heart of this, was concern about  poor government communication,  disagreeing with  the UK  response, particularly lockdown policies:"
"129" "But we've treated it as like, this unknown force of nature, that's  gonna  wipe out half the population. And now, like, the approach - and that approach has just ruined a lot of people's lives and set a lot of people back many years, months, whatever.   (Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"130" "Yo u ng people also felt they were  excluded from government COVID-related messaging ,  expressing  frustration  at being  blamed for increases in cases, or systematic vulnerability to the virus :"
"131" "I feel like, I don't  wanna  say the government doesn’t care about us. But  …  I feel like young people are not a priority in the government's mind right now. Because even like, when you go for information there's nothing tailored for, for young people.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"132" "This was compounded by  their experiences of  race  related   marginalisation   within the response strategy . Participants across all age groups were acutely aware that people from Black and other minority groups were not only more vulnerable, but  simultaneously being  blamed for that  vulnerability and the poorer outcomes within their communities.  For example :"
"133" "‘Well …. they  kind of blame the BAME community for not taking COVID seriously, when it's hitting us the most.’ (Group 3, 16-17-year-old) ."
"134" "But still, I think there could have been a lot  more clear , um, guidelines like even just in the past few months, when the government is encouraging a lot of young people and in particular, to go out and make use of the eat out, help out scheme. And they were encouraging that. And then within a matter of weeks, they're now blaming young people, because the rates have been going up, so it's such a contradiction, and I think they're just looking for a scapegoat. And unfortunately, young people have become that scapegoat. Because they're sending everyone back to school, sending everyone back to universities, but and then blaming them. So, I don't know what message they're trying to send out at the moment. But I don't think it's clear.   (Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"135" "3. 4   Navigating  racism and difference  during the pandemic response"
"136" "As alluded to in the above theme, young people felt that there were racialized dynamics that deepened the psychological burden and impact of the pandemic in their lives.   For example, y oung people described the  dilemma that  they faced  as the Black Lives Matter movement surged in summer months ;   balancing  a desire, and drive to  participate in protests  seeking to change their lives ,  alongside  anxi ety  about their  increased vulnerability  to COVID-19:"
"137" "I was just saying that I think like, that's a dilemma a lot of  B lack people face because even I remember when I was going to the protest, my sister was like, I really, really want to go. My sister's that has type one diabetes, and she was just like, ‘I'll be risking my life’. And I was like, I don't think it's like, pro- B lack to risk your life. I just think your  B lackness is not defined by if you went to a protest, or if you even signed the petition, but like, like the fact that you're living and just doing what you want to  do, and  having that autonomy. That's what we all want to do.   (Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"138" "Y oung people  across age groups  were  sensitive to the  mental health challenges they faced  as a result of the pandemic. However,  a desire to act on these issues  often intersected with stigma related to mental health services   held by older generations  in  their  households .  It is important to note that many participants  consciously rejected stigma  held by their  elders ,   but noted the difficulties faced in accessing services more widely in their communities, a s  exemplified  within  this conversation :"
"139" "Participant  2 : Because they're  (community elders)  thinking  ' T here's  nothing wrong with me. What? What are you talking about?' But it's like, they hear they hear certain words and obviously the stigma around it.  So  it's  gonna  be a negative connotation. Like, it's just 9 times out of 10 it ’ s just a prevention thing."
"140" "P articipant  3:   Yeah. And I think there's the thing like, historically, the help hasn't been there, like there has been no help to access.  So  it was sort of like, you have to be okay. Because you have no choice."
"141" "P articipant  2: Yeah."
"142" "P articipant  3 : And that was instilled in people. So now even though the help is there, because we're so used to um people, like, what not having our best interest at heart, we choose not to use it.  (Group 2, 18-20-year-olds)"
"143" "Young people, particularly in older age groups, had a sense that their communities had been consistently left behind and overlooked by governments, and that the  pandemic enabled much of the same to continue . As powerfully stated by one young person:"
"144" "I'm fed up  [with]  thinking they're   (the government)  going to help  -  they're not going to help. They don't care, we are not a priority to them, they have their own people, and they don't care. Yeah.  (Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"145" "In addition, many felt that the health communication strategies in place  were ill-suited to their specific age, ethnic and cultural contexts.  Among  16-17 age cohort  in particular ,  it was felt that  cultural and age  representation was essential to  ensure young people  trust ed the source of the information, which would contribute to their willingness  to  act on it."
"146" "Like, if you get an adult, the answer is not going to be able to relate to them. youngsters are like, I'm, I'm 17, you're, you're 27. How am I meant to relate to you? Like you're giving me this information, but it's not going to help me because look at you and look at me.   (Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"147" "3. 5   Survival during crisis :  f inding the new you in this new situation"
"148" "Participants  described a range of new  self-care strategie s, defined broadly by all age groups  as intentional  practice   that  privileges and supports t h eir  physical and mental wellbeing ."
"149" "Yeah  I just wanted to stay healthy, you know. And I just wanted to be - just collect, look after myself in a sense. Self-care.  ( Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"150" "Um, I would just say focusing on myself more, okay. Just relaxing, making sure that I'm mentally okay.  ( Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"151" "Participants  engaged in activities such as Yoga, listening to music, and spending a lot of time online .    Some participants expressed their enjoyment of the  increased free time they had  as an unintentional outcome of the lockdown, stating:"
"152" "I'm really, I'm really enjoying that. It’s just like sleeping when you want, waking up when you want. Just doing a couple of things from your bed,  it's  just like I am really enjoying that time because I know I’m not going to get that again. And I think I’m just really enjoying taking the time for myself.   (Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"153" "3. 6   Community :   t ransitions, successes ,  and spirit"
"154" "P articipants  highlighted   the role of communities  in accommodating systemic neglect  and establishing  new modes of communication and  engagement  during  and after  the lockdown.  Y oung people indicated how social media has become a site for community engagement and acknowledged their  contributions to  supporting other community members during this crisis."
"155" "Analysis highlighted a pointed frustration toward the government's  disregard for   their  communities  noting that survival and  community systems  often needed to  fill the gaps left by institutions, as illustrated  below:"
"156" "Um, I feel like if I left it to the government? No, definitely not. I know, I'm opening a youth club. So, I don't, I'm not worried about them. But if I left it to them, no, no, they're not worried about our problems. Our problems are our problems, and they need to be dealt with by us. In their eyes.     ( Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"157" "Participants noted the heightened importance and power of community in their lives during the pandemic . They highlighted   expansion  of existing support and developments of new relationships  and scaffolding that had not previously existed,  to respond to  personal, financial and social  emergencies  faced by the  community :"
"158" "During the lockdown time and  my  neighbours  had a church group, and they were giving out money . W e ll  not giv ing  out money. They were paying people's rent fines, like things that people couldn't afford bills, and stuff like that. They supported me a bit during lockdown .   (Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"159" "Throughout periods of prolonged  physical  isolation, how young people gather and engage with their communities has evolved to meet the moment.  Analysis highlighted how  young people  turned to  social platforms,   as a new stie for  community engagement during lockdown, as highlighted:   ‘ I watch a lot of  YouTube  so I like the content coming out I feel like because like everyone’s indoors um I feel like there’s more community base as well.’ (Group 5, 18-20-year-old)."
"160" "Analysis highlighted that young people were aware of their capacity to work individually and collectively for change.  During the  pandemic, young people’s awareness of their role within their communities  were  amplified,  and they began to shift their actions,  through  checking in with others and  joining  online communit ies .  and supporting neighbours or those viewed as vulnerable.  For example, a participant who worked at a primary school shared their duty to ensure their stresses from the pandemic, and  concurrent protests  did not impact  younger  children  they  supported:"
"161" "But being in that environment, I have to put their problems before mine because obviously if I come in with a negative energy and like they can see, I'm not really feeling like as positive as I should be as someone they're meant to be like, looking  to for help. I just didn't want to be that person to like, bring them down even more.  (Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"162" "The quote above highlights the duty shared by young people, as their concern for the difficulties wider community members have faced manifests as a responsibility to safeguard them, specifically from the amplified mental health difficulties throughout the COVID-19 crisis."
"163" "3 .7   Visions for a future response"
"164" "Our research  also gave participants the opportunity to reflect on a  new  vision for  future   public health and public mental health  response s  to the pandemic.  Perspectives varied between groups .   For the youngest cohort ,  ages 16-17,  Participants expressed appreciation for the platform provided by this  research itself ,  and desires for  peer-led  COVID support groups,  as they  valued the opportunity  to discuss their  challenges  with peers who have had similar experiences."
"165" "I said it in the previous  sessions …  a discussion group like this, it says, because it allows young people to kind of talk to each other about how they feel, instead of just holding it in. And just like, everyone can share their experience with each other. And then if you hear that someone's experiences similar to yours, you won't feel that lonely anymore. So, something like this, it doesn't even have to be like a massive thing to just be with like, group for people. I just something like even in a place or an environment I like … we'll just talk to each other about how you feel and how you're coping with things.   (Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"166" "This cohort also suggested that the government  could improve communications about the pandemic with young people, by stressing a logic of care, and the importance of feeling like they connect with the speaker,  as highlighted by the following  quote:"
"167" "Maybe it's a young professional, basically giving the message out, because when it's like an older white person giving me news, I don't know, just. So maybe if there's like a young person, you'd be able to trust them more kind of take more seriously. And it's like, a person that seems like they genuinely care. Because I feel like a lot of the times people just say it because not as they don't care. But it's just like, if a young professional, just the person that seems like they genuinely care about you, and your well-being lots of people will be more interested in what they're saying. It doesn't even have to be a young professional, just a professional that seems to care about you.   (Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"168" "The two o lder cohorts  felt strongly that  the government  could  improve its response by backing organizations and  projects   led locally by typically  minoritised  community members.  In addition to arguing that young people should be involved in establishing  communication strategies, p articipants within the oldest cohort highlighted the  enhance  ongoing  work  already  being done within  minoritised   communities:"
"169" "But maybe just amplify like, some of like the services that are already there …  a lot of the mental health services and like services that are made by us like there's so many people who are have got great youth projects, who've got like mentorship projects for  B lack children. And I feel like they're not amplified enough. Like maybe in our  community  they are. But they're not  on the  BBC, they're not on like the NHS website. Like, I feel like the government needs to amplify people who are already doing the work. Because there's a lot of people that are actually doing this  work, and  doing it last specifically for  B lack children. So, I feel like those voices definitely need to be amplified.   (Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"170" "Lastly,  all age groups agreed on the importance for compassion from  systems  they engage in .  The youngest cohort  (ages 16-17)  asked for patience while navigating the pandemic and expectations for their school performance."
"171" "I think now that we're going back to school, I think there should be more. I don't know how to describe it, but like, a bit more understanding for young people because like for, for us, like I've made for myself, as soon as we go back to school, there's like our mocks are coming up. And it's understandable because we did miss out on doing our mocks, but I just feel like, there should be more understanding that young people are missing conditions at school. Like some people can't replicate that working environment at home. So, to be more understanding, and like, maybe take off some of the pressure that is when young people, because we did miss out on a lot. And we had to go through, like a very rough time.  (Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"172" "The  oldest cohort expressed concern for the difficulties  faced by young people, noting the potential impacts of  these compounded struggles, and the need for action to  mitigate this"
"173" "I think we are resilient people, but I just feel like these younger people, like, their resilience is unmatched, because they're literally doing stuff that they shouldn't have to do. Um, and also society's just harder for them. Like, they're  gonna  now pay to go to school, like, what is that? I mean, like, you can't even have free travel. And it feels like so small, but it's such a big thing.  (Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"174" "4.0  Discussion"
"175" "Th r ough a series of  focus group discussions  with  young people in London from  racially  minoritised   backgroun ds,  our study  highlights  the intersections of existing and historical  exclusions  faced by  their communities  and how the pandemic ’ s worsening of those realities, created  frustrations and distress."
"176" "Young people spoke specifically about loss of  opportunities for income generation, and how this  potentially shaped their futures , as the central concern in relation to socio-economic realities.  Many  participants in our study are from deprived  backgrounds , which have been  among the  hardest hit during the pandemic. Many  continued  to search for work, despite the  disappearance of sectors where jobs normally existed. The newly developed anxieties and  emotional  distress  linked to the  loss of these opportunities  poses a particular  mental health concern  for  this group of young people,  as  recent evidence from  Sweden  indicat es  that  employment precarity  is  a key social determinant  shaping the   development  of mental health problems in previously healthy young people  [33] .  Given that many young black people face exclusion from appropriate mental health services in  the  UK[ 34 ], creating and  cementing  new pathways  is concerning ."
"177" "Participants in this study  also  indicated the  compounded difficulties of navigating the pandemic when  negotiating their identity linked  to  their marginalised status.  Many spoke of the ways in which their wellbeing was hindered by the push and pull of systems  that simultaneously identified  them  as   vulnerable ,  then  blamed  them  for that vulnerability, and  wider  demands to be seen as protesting  against the factors that drive their vulnerability.    Consensus from work  in  other  high - income settings like  the UK, which supports their experiences, noting  the  amplification of vulnerability  faced by racialised  minorities, particularly  with regards to the mental health of Black  people  [35-37] .  Our study’s findings  contribute  to th is  literature,  emphasising  the specific  difficult ies   facing   young   B lack  people .  This is significant, as this  these encounters are the  starting point of a life-long  exposure to the  psychological pressures of  paradoxical decisions  that   risk  wellbeing  on the one hand,  in order to fight for access to rights, justice and change  in their communities  on the other .  Recent work by  Wakeel and Njoku  [ 38 ]  in the US, notes that  these challenges occur across the life span, contributing to weathering of various  aspects of  health ,  including mental health .  The compounding pressures of  the pandemic and  protests to end anti-black racism  among our participants forms a clear pathway to deepening  mental health  challenges of  young people from racialised backgrounds,   as the constant flow of information affirms Black people's proximity to mortality, creating an  additional  burden that young Black people are forced to navigate  [ 39 -40 ]."
"178" "However, in addition to these difficulties,  there  were c onsistent accounts of self-care  across the cohorts .  Increasing such positive health behaviours  has been supported by studies in other European contexts, such as  in Portugal  where   Branquinho  et al.     [6]  found that many young people enjoyed the free time they  experienced due to  lockdowns, as  it created  the time  for  personal development.   Specifically , participants in our study described new  habits such as meditation or exercising to keep physically and mentally well , which has been noted as beneficial to managing  stressors  caused by the crisis  elsewhere in Europe   [ 41 - 4 4 ] .    As  such ,   these strategies emerge as a  starting point  for  expanding   future   public health  strategies linked to the pandemic .  However , we  argue  the need for these supports to be extended into the long term – as  noted by  many young people  in our study , the  impacts of the pandemic  have changed the landscapes of their lives  for the long term .     The need to manage stressors will not be  addressed by brief one-off  interventions,  and  will likely require provision of structural  and other  economic  resource s   to  enable  meaningful  participation . This goes beyond free/ low-cost  services, but thinking about related incidental costs, such as travel , which has been suggested as critical to securing good mental health in a post-pandemic UK [45]"
"179" "4.1 Study implications and limitations"
"180" "The pandemic has driven many researchers  in to  online data collection ,  in response to social distancing guidelines.  However,  for participants  in  our study , connectivity issues  and  access to   mobile  data  occasionally  limit ed  the ability of participants from the most marginalized backgrounds to participate in our study ,  which  at times affected  attendance .  We tried to account for this  in advance,  by  conducting a longitudinal design, to increase chances for engagement.  Furthermore, the online  groups  meant that  audio recording  from within laptops varied at times being inaudible or not recording at all (n=4). The in clusion of google docs made for a useful backup and highlights the value of triangulating methods within online qualitative studies."
"181" "The methodology used  gave young people  a chance  to share and explore what they were feeling and experiencing, by acknowledging and reaffirming their pandemic experiences, and  sharing  strategies they used to navigate the crisis.   This points to the value of research methods that are interested in paradigms of transformation – noting the importance of orientations and methods that acknowledge  young  people’s capacity for survival   and positions them as experts in their own right  [4 6 ]."
"182" "Table 3. From  struggles  to solutions – recommendations to support emotional wellbeing of young  B lack and minority young people in  during and post-pandemic"
"183" "Category"
"184" "Code"
"185" "Impact"
"186" "Recommendations"
"187" "Socioeconomic challenges :  current burdens and future instability"
"188" "Insecurity about future"
"189" "Interruption of school & concerns of school progression"
"190" "Feeling lost and stuck"
"191" "Uncertainty about getting securing employment"
"192" "Maintain  financial support for families"
"193" "Protecting work/internship schemes for vulnerable young people from hard hit communities"
"194" "E motional challenges: disruptions to life and fears of the future"
"195" "Mental health conditions and emotional wellbeing"
"196" "Impact of isolation on mental health"
"197" "Stress from school"
"198" "Stress from changes to routine"
"199" "Stress and anxiety from the UK easing out of the first lockdown in July 2020"
"200" "Concerns of social skills being negatively impacted from prolonged isolation"
"201" "Online p eer support networks connecting young people in regular conversations"
"202" "Staged transitions back to the ‘real world’ as young people reengage with wider communities"
"203" "Support for schools to  manage increased anxiety among young people about their futures"
"204" "The g governments  response: too much too soon and lack of clarity"
"205" "Feeling excluded from government messaging and approach"
"206" "Government’s approach to the pandemic caused a loss of ‘normal’ way of life"
"207" "Government messaging was not tailored and inaccessible"
"208" "Not surprised at perceived government failings from government’s reputation of being uncaring"
"209" "Giving young people ownership over health messaging to ensure that it is targeted to their needs"
"210" "Navigating racism and difference  during the pandemic response"
"211" "Psychological burden of negotiating racial  minoritised  identity"
"212" "Lockdown gave time to reflect on struggles within their communities"
"213" "Importance of representation (e.g. similar age, race/ethnicity, socioeconomic background) when accessing support services and interpreting messaging"
"214" "Including young people in design of racially sensitive communications around the pandemic"
"215" "Survival during crisis: finding the new you in this new situation"
"216" "Finding joy within lockdown"
"217" "Creative ways to find joy amidst  crisis"
"218" "Prioritisation of self-care practices"
"219" "Adoption of new hobbies and habits"
"220" "Reducing barriers to access self-help support for young people ( i.e  – free data packages for vulnerable households)"
"221" "Community transitions, successes and spiri t"
"222" "Community evolution from pandemic"
"223" "Community filling gaps left by government failings"
"224" "Funding and financial support for local community organisations responding to pandemic"
"225" "In table three, we summarise  our  six  areas of importance highlighted by young people, alongside  recommendations that flow from  their calls  for action  raised within discussions ."
"226" "Overall,  p articipants communicated feelings of being overlooked and excluded from the government's response to the virus.  A s  messages and services  are  not  generally tailored for young people, participants emphasised the need to develop bespoke messaging for young people to communicate similar information  as  that which  was  given to the adult population. Government and public health officials should cultivate a youth-friendly messaging stream to release critical information and changes to the rules, as a significant component of society felt excluded, forgotten, frustrated and anxious  during  initial  stages of the pandemic .   Consequently,  visions for future  public health  responses  reflected a desire for  compassion from wider institutions  in light of  the difficulties that they  experience   pre-  and post - pandemic.  We  suggest that systems can best show compassion  for the pressures on young people’s lives,  by responding not just to emotional distress, but the social and political drivers of uncertainty in their lives; protecting jobs and internship schemes,  increasing financial resources to vulnerable households and reducing as many economic barriers to participating in social life as we reopen  society and communities."
"227" "4.2 Conclusion"
"228" "Young  people  from  minoriti s ed  backgrounds are a continued focus of social welfare interventions , often  designed on their behalf.  Within these efforts, we often  fail to recognise  their  continued survival in the face of adversity, as a process that makes them experts in their own right."
"229" "Alongside young co-researchers, this study sought to understand how the pandemic affected young people from  racialized backgrounds. Through a  repeated  measure   focus group design, we  explored how young people ’s  mental health and well-being  were affected  by the pandemic and related policy ,  highlighting  barriers and  coping strategies and  solutions . While  participants in the study expressed frustration  with  the government messages , which were  consistently identified as unclear  and unfairly  targeted, they illuminated  survival  mechanisms and practi sed  self-care to cope during the pandemic .  Importantly, they  had clear accounts of what needed to be done to make messaging  and responses  better suited to their needs; highlighting the importance of establishing online peer-support groups, and financial backing  for local community - based and  - led strategies targeting the COVID-19 pandemic and related emotional and social struggles.  It is our hope that this  work  amplif ies  young people's ongoing experiences of the pandemic and  enables  explicit  responses  from wider systems  in the  face  of an  ongoing crisis , for  those   hardest hit ."
"230" "4 . 3  Declaration of Competing Interests"
"231" "The authors declare no conflict of interest regarding the research, authorship , and publication of this article."
"232" "4 . 4  Funding"
"233" "This research  was supported in part by  a n  I nstitute for Global Health  Summer studentship. The work received no other funding from any sources."
"234" "Authors and Contributions"
"235" "Rochelle A nn  Burgess  (RAB) :  conceptualisation, methodology,  formal analysis, supervision,  writing- original draft ,   writing- reviewing & editing .   Nancy Kanu (NK):   methodology, project management,  investigation,  formal analysis, writing- original  draft ,  writing- reviewing & editing .  Tanya Matthews  (TM):   project management, investigation, formal analysis, writing-reviewing & editing .  Owen  Mukotekwa  (OM):  project management, investigation.  Amina Smith-Gul (A S G ) :  investigation, formal analysis .  Intisar Yusuf (IY):  investigation, formal analysis.  Isabella Lamptey:   investigation, formal analysis, writing- reviewing & editing  Nyisha  McCauley (NM):   investigation, formal analysis, writing- reviewing & editing .  Renae Wilson (RW):  investigation, formal analysis, writing- reviewing & editing .  Michael  Pirisola  (MP):  investigation, formal analysis, writing- reviewing & editing .  Malik Gul (MG) :   conceptualisation ,  supervision , writing- reviewing & editing.  Data Verification:  The data has been verified by all authors."
"236" "Reference s"
"237" "Bentley GR. Don't blame the BAME: Ethnic and structural inequalities in susceptibilities to COVID‐19. American journal of human biology. 2020;32(5):e23478-n/a."
"238" "Burgess RA, Osborne RH,  Yongabi  KA, Greenhalgh T,  Gurdasani  D, Kang G, et al. The COVID-19 vaccines rush: participatory community engagement matters more than ever. The Lancet. 2020;397(10268):8-10."
"239" "Lund EM. Even more to handle: Additional sources of stress and trauma for clients from marginalized racial and ethnic groups in the United States during the COVID-19 pandemic. Counselling Psychology Quarterly. 2020:1-10."
"240" "Wright L, Steptoe A,  Fancourt  D. How are adversities during COVID-19 affecting mental health? Differential associations for worries and experiences and implications for policy.  medRxiv . 2020."
"241" "United Nations Population Fund . Adolescents and Young People & Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19): Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Preparedness and Response UNFPA Interim Technical Brief; 2020 [Available from:  https://www.unfpa.org/sites/default/files/resource-pdf/COVID-19_Preparedness_and_Response_-_UNFPA_Interim_Technical_Briefs_Adolescents_and_Young_People_23_March_2020.pdf."
"242" "Branquinho  C, Kelly C, Arevalo LC, Santos A, Gaspar de Matos M. “Hey, we also have something to say”: A qualitative study of Portuguese adolescents’ and young people's experiences under COVID‐19. Journal of community psychology. 2020;48(8):2740-52."
"243" "YoungMinds . Coronavirus: Impact on young people with mental health needs Survey 2: Summer 2020.  YoungMinds ; 2020."
"244" "Singh S, Roy D, Sinha K, Parveen S, Sharma G, Joshi G. Impact of COVID-19 and lockdown on mental health of children and adolescents: A narrative review with recommendations. Psychiatry Res. 2020;293:113429-."
"245" "Iob  E, Steptoe A,  Fancourt  D. Abuse, self-harm and suicidal ideation in the UK during the COVID-19 pandemic. The British Journal of Psychiatry. 2020;217(4):543-6."
"246" "Bhala  N, Curry G, Martineau AR, Agyemang C, Bhopal R. Sharpening the global focus on ethnicity and race in the time of COVID-19. The Lancet. 2020;395(10238):1673-6."
"247" "Aldridge RW,  Lewer  D,  Katikireddi  SV, Mathur R, Pathak N, Burns R, et al. Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic groups in England are at increased risk of death from COVID-19: indirect  standardisation  of NHS mortality data.  Wellcome  open research. 2020;5."
"248" "Farmer P. On Suffering and Structural Violence: A View from Below. Daedalus. 1996;125(1):261-83."
"249" "El- Mohandes  A,  Ratzan  SC,  Rauh  L, Ngo V, Rabin K, Kimball S, et al. COVID-19: A Barometer for Social Justice in New York City. American Journal of Public Health. 2020;110(11):1656-8."
"250" "Joseph–Salisbury R, Connelly L, Wangari-Jones P. “The UK is not innocent”: Black Lives Matter, policing and abolition in the UK. Equality, Diversity and Inclusion: An International Journal. 2020;40(1):21-8."
"251" "DeVylder  J,  Fedina  L, Link B. Impact of Police Violence on Mental Health: A Theoretical Framework. American journal of public health (1971). 2020;110(11):1704-10."
"252" "Music G. Covid, racism and Black Lives Matter: A deadly constellation. Developmental child welfare. 2020;2(3):197-207."
"253" "Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA. Racism and Health: Evidence and Needed Research. Annual review of public health. 2019;40(1):105-25."
"254" "Garcia JA, Sanchez GR, Sanchez-Youngman S, Vargas ED, Ybarra VD. RACE AS LIVED EXPERIENCE: The Impact of Multi-Dimensional Measures of Race/Ethnicity on the Self-Reported Health Status of Latinos. Du  Bois  review. 2015;12(2):349-73."
"255" "McGorry  PD, Hartmann JA, Spooner R, Nelson B. Beyond the “at risk mental state” concept: transitioning to transdiagnostic psychiatry. World Psychiatry. 2018;17(2):133-42."
"256" "Williams DR, Lawrence JA, Davis BA, Vu C. Understanding how discrimination can affect health. Health services research. 2019;54(S2):1374-88."
"257" "Richards M, Romero E, Deane K, Carey D,  Zakaryan  A, Quimby D, et al. Civic Engagement Curriculum: a Strengths-Based Intervention Serving African American Youth in a Context of Toxic Stress. Journal of Child & Adolescent Trauma. 2016;9(1):81-93."
"258" "Njeze  C, Bird- Naytowhow  K, Pearl T,  Hatala  AR. Intersectionality of Resilience: A Strengths-Based Case Study Approach With Indigenous Youth in an Urban Canadian Context. Qualitative health research. 2020;30(13):2001-18."
"259" "McCammon SL. Systems of Care as Asset-Building Communities: Implementing  Strengths-Based Planning and Positive Youth Development. Am J Community Psychol. 2012;49(3):556-65."
"260" "Robert G. Participatory action research: using experience-based co-design to improve the quality of healthcare services. Understanding and Using Health Experiences–improving patient care. 2013."
"261" "Tong A, Sainsbury P, Craig J. Consolidated criteria for reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist for interviews and focus groups. International Journal for Quality in Health Care. 2007;19(6):349-57."
"262" "Ministry of Housing Communities & Local Government. English indices of deprivation 2019: mapping resources Gov.uk. 2019."
"263" "Ministry of Housing Communities & Local Government. The English Indices of Deprivation 2019 (IoD2019). 2019."
"264" "Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology. 2006;3(2):77-101."
"265" "Birt  L, Scott S, Cavers D, Campbell C, Walter F. Member Checking: A Tool to Enhance Trustworthiness or Merely a Nod to Validation? Qualitative Health Research. 2016;26(13):1802-11."
"266" "Creswell JW, Miller DL. Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry. Theory Into Practice. 2000;39(3):124-30."
"267" "Thomas DR. Feedback from research participants: are member checks useful in qualitative research? Qualitative Research in Psychology. 2017;14(1):23-41."
"268" "Slettebø  T. Participant validation: Exploring a contested tool in qualitative research. Qualitative Social Work. 2020:1473325020968189."
"269" "Schneider H,  Maleka  N. Patterns of authorship on community health workers in low-and-middle-income countries: an analysis of publications (2012–2016). BMJ global health. 2018;3(3):e000797-e."
"270" "Memon  A, Taylor K,  Mohebati  LM,  Sundin  J, Cooper M, Scanlon T, et al. Perceived barriers to accessing mental health services among black and minority ethnic (BME) communities: a qualitative study in Southeast England. BMJ Open. 2016;6(11):e012337."
"271" "Castleden  H, Morgan VS,  Neimanis  A. Researchers' Perspectives on Collective/Community Co-authorship in Community-based Participatory Indigenous Research. Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics: An International Journal. 2010;5(4):23-32."
"272" "Canivet  C,  Bodin  T,  Emmelin  M, Toivanen S,  Moghaddassi  M,  Östergren  P-O. Precarious employment is a risk factor for poor mental health in young individuals in Sweden: a cohort study with multiple follow-ups. BMC Public Health. 2016;16(1):687."
"273" "Novacek  DM, Hampton-Anderson JN, Ebor MT, Loeb TB, Wyatt GE. Mental health ramifications of the COVID-19 pandemic for Black Americans: Clinical and research recommendations. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy. 2020."
"274" "Loeb TB, Joseph NT, Wyatt GE, Zhang M, Chin D, Thames A, et al. Predictors of somatic symptom severity: The role of cumulative history of trauma and adversity in a diverse community sample. Psychol Trauma. 2018;10(5):491-8."
"275" "Yancy CW. COVID-19 and African Americans. JAMA. 2020;323(19):1891-2."
"276" "Wakeel F, Njoku A. Application of the Weathering Framework: Intersection of Racism, Stigma, and COVID-19 as a Stressful Life Event among African Americans. Healthcare. 2021;9(2):145."
"277" "Behan C. The benefits of meditation and mindfulness practices during times of crisis such as COVID-19. Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine. 2020;37(4):256-8."
"278" "O’Donnell KT, Dunbar M,  Speelman  DL. Effectiveness of using a meditation app in reducing anxiety and improving well-being during the COVID-19 pandemic: A structured summary of a study protocol for a randomized controlled trial. Trials. 2020;21(1):1-2."
"279" "Khandelwal S. Efficacy of Mindfulness Meditation Intervention on Mental Health During the Times of COVID-19. Available at SSRN 3631052. 2020."
"280" "Brand R,  Timme  S,  Nosrat  S. When pandemic hits: Exercise frequency and subjective well-being during COVID-19 pandemic. Frontiers in psychology.  2020;11:2391 ."
"281" "Rose N, Manning N, Bentall R,  Bhui  K, Burgess R,  Carr  S, Cornish F,  Devakumar  D, Dowd JB,  Ecks  S, Faulkner A. The social underpinnings of mental distress in the time of COVID-19–time for urgent action.  Wellcome  open research. 2020;5."
"282" "Mannell  J, Willan S,  Shahmanesh  M, Seeley J,  Sherr  L, Gibbs A. Why interventions to prevent intimate partner violence and HIV have failed young women in southern Africa. Journal of the International AIDS Society. 2019;22(8):e25380."
"283" "Supplementary data:  Appendices"
"284" "A 1.   Socioeconomic challenges coding framework table"
"285" "Colour coding by age group"
"286" "Multiple Ages"
"287" "16-17"
"288" "18-20"
"289" "21-25"
"290" "Category:"
"291" "Socioeconomic challenges"
"292" "Code"
"293" "Definitions"
"294" "Sample Codes"
"295" "Money problems"
"296" "Loss of financial support ( eg.  bus passes); Economic issues caused by pandemic"
"297" "It’s a lot. It's like over a pound when I get on the bus, so I really put on like seven pounds on if I'm like going different- if I'm taking different busses. They still have the cap, I think. But it's just stress. I can’t be bothered to get on the bus anymore because I have to pay.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"298" "I think children should be, I feel like children in poverty should be getting resources for free because it will help them for their future as well.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"299" "Insecurity about future"
"300" "Finding work; Career prospects; Lack of general opportunities"
"301" "Another thing is, um, I was looking for part-time jobs during the pandemic, which is really stupid, but I still wanted to try so like when they reopen. Hopefully I get a job or something like that. I can't remember who said it, but one of the MPs - I'm not sure if he's a MP, but they said that they would increase more jobs for young people, especially those under 18. And I trusted them and it's not working. I don't see any jobs for us.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"302" "A2. Emotional challenges coding framework table"
"303" "Colour coding by age group"
"304" "Multiple Ages"
"305" "16-17"
"306" "18-20"
"307" "21-25"
"308" "Category:"
"309" "Emotional challenges"
"310" "Code"
"311" "Definitions"
"312" "Sample Codes"
"313" "Mental health conditions"
"314" "Depression diagnosis; Anxiety; Negative mental health  heightened during isolation"
"315" "You know what I mean? Also like I was  gonna  say, when things like this if that person's also feeling comfortable enough to actually want to speak about these things, because sometimes things like that happen. You just - not want to be by yourself but you end up pushing other people away. Not on purpose, but because that's the only way you really know how to express how you're  feeling  and you may not know how to say how you are feeling. Because there are no words for it.  ( Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"316" "Yeah, I'd say like, in terms of mental health, because I tend to see a lot of like those kinds of scientists saying that a lot of young people's mental health have been or will be affected by this, but they haven't really given a medium where like, that can be helped.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"317" "Um, one of my friends during this current period, well it wasn't because of COVID. But COVID didn't help because she was now isolated, but she did, like become suicidal again. And it's because she was by herself. And like, we, like, we were her support system. And we couldn't reach out because  when we couldn't, like, go out, she couldn't come. What could we do at this point?  (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"318" "I was I was in a bad place back then you know. But I just- I was not trying to leave my room. And then Corona happened and then I was like, wow, don't really  gonna  end bro sound like why  would I  leave my room when I wasn’t leaving my room before. Might as well just stay in my room now.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"319" "Change to routines"
"320" "Changes in sleep; Anxiety caused by lack of a routine; Struggles with time management, creates and deepens anxiety"
"321" "Not that it's like anyone's responsibility to do that for me. I know that I should do that. It's like quite hard to adjust, especially since I was expecting school to like, come back the next month. I was like, it's not that bad. I'll just wait for school to come back. And it wasn't ever - well it's  gonna  come back. It was like it seemed like it wasn't ever coming back because I was just like, I don't know what to do. I'm so used to people telling me what to do when I have to do something myself and decide. I'm like, Okay, what do I do?   (Focus Group 3, 16-17 - year-old)"
"322" "Um I mean, I know I’m not managing my time, but I’m not too bothered about it. Because there’s not a lot going on for me. But there is a thing that I need to do for  uni  that I’ve been like pushing back for months now, and I should probably start that. But  its  because of the way that my schedule has changed this last week. So, I’m going to bed at like stupid hours, and then I’m waking up late and staying in bed for another couple hours. By the time I’m like ready to do stuff, I’m just like, there’s not actually a lot of time left.  So  I should probably do something about that, but at the same time, I’m not in a rush for it .  (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"323" "I felt like very like, confused. I didn't know what was going on. There was like - I wasn't really doing anything. Usually, I'd be up the school and  stuff  but the days were just like, all mixed together. Like it wasn't really a pattern anymore. It was discombobulated .   (Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"324" "My sleep schedule was inverted.  So  you would never catch me during the day ever. But perhaps at night, you might catch me darting through the corridors to go to the kitchen or something.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"325" "Difficulty managing long-term conditions during COVID"
"326" "Difficulty accessing health care, further creating isolation and anxiety; Disability; Managing long term health conditions; Health challenges"
"327" "And I don't mind, during lockdown, I got quite sick because I was meant to have appointments because I um I have like arthritis issues. So literally once lockdown started, they cancelled my appointments. And so that kind of left me at home. And because of how severe the pain was  getting,  I couldn't really do anything.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"328" "This entire time we've just been hearing while people are dying people are sick, because it spreads so easily this, this, this this this.  Its  like, nothing to be productive in, you know, reassuring that we'll be okay. It's more like, if you catch it like you're most likely  gonna  die. So just keep that in mind type of thing. And that's just not been helpful to anybody really, especially like people who have previous existing health conditions, because it's like, they felt that- a lot of them, especially like people that I know, just didn't go out. And that's even unhealthy for anybody's mind, regardless of if you're sick or not.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"329" "Stresses over school"
"330" "Exam scandal; Having to self-teach; Instability and anxiety over future"
"331" "And on the news with the sixth formers who got real marks, and lost, they lost things, like not being able to go to universities they wanted to go to. That's worrying me, because if next year, another lockdown happens, like the pandemic gets worse again. Then my grades, maybe will end up like  their's  and I don't know what.  So  I'm worried about my future right now.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"332" "No, so we didn't get given any zoom classes, which was really hard on us.  So, what they did was they just gave us like PowerPoints where we have to go through. And even though they gave us the PowerPoints, it wasn't that informative. So, more that, they gave us all the work, like telling us, you're doing all the work, they weren't there to like, guide us or help us.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17 - year-old)"
"333" "I feel like the closer we get to September the more anxious I get because I don't know like I have no idea what's  gonna  happen next year.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"334" "U sually at this time I would be worried about like exams and stuff, like I would be prepping for it. But it all just ended so suddenly.  So  it was like, like it was like they just threw me into the deep end.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"335" "Easing out of lockdown"
"336" "Anxiety reintegrating back into the 'outside world'; Stress about communication skills being negatively impacted from isolation; Feelings of indifference towards adapting to this new way of life"
"337" "My mum was a bit worried, a bit worried. Yeah, because - well all  parents are worried to be honest. But she was worried, because she thinks like, if I go out a lot of  times  she's  gonna  see me in a sense where I might catch the virus or I don't know something might happen. You know?  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"338" "I will say seeing friends made me happier. Being able to have a bit of a social life.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"339" "And everyone was in the same boat. Which was yeah - which was kind of like sad as well. Cause everyone wants just wants to just have a normal life. It won't happen. And we just kind of have to deal with new changes.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"340" "I did feel a little shy or a little bit anxious, but I think it's because I haven't been ready to meet people that much. I mean, I don't communicate with people generally, but I think because I haven't been going to Uni, in quite a while. And talking to people- seeing people every week. But I think my ways of communication have kind of diminished a little bit .  (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"341" "I feel like after corona and everything was announced and being locked in your house for so long. And then you go out- like for me personally, I just - to be out for longer just would make me feel uncomfortable. Like I'd start feeling like I'd about to have an anxiety attack. Just because I don't really know, what like – with corona, you hear so much about what's going on and how bad it is. And you know, always be careful. It makes me worry more than I'm used to.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"342" "A3. Perception of government response coding framework table"
"343" "Colour coding by age group"
"344" "Multiple Ages"
"345" "16-17"
"346" "18-20"
"347" "21-25"
"348" "Category:"
"349" "Perceptions of government response"
"350" "Code"
"351" "Definitions"
"352" "Sample Codes"
"353" "Loss of ‘normal’ way of life"
"354" "Quick return to normal placed people at risk; Dislike of the government's push to normal; Families forced to work in unsafe conditions"
"355" "And I was just like these guys have really got their lives on hold. Thinking that one day things will eventually like go back to normal. And the government is just going to be like alright yeah that’s enough. Everyone go back to what you were doing before. And I was just realizing that too much has changed for that to happen. For everything to just go back. Like  it ’ s  gotten to a point where even if the virus like disappears off the face of the Earth. Things are not just going to return to normal. Like too much has changed. The economy has been impacted too much. People’s way of lives  have  been impacted.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"356" "Poor messaging"
"357" "Lack of clarity; Poor communication; Lack of trust in government; Lack of justification for guidelines ( e.g.  masks, rule of 6)"
"358" "Um, I don't know. It just, I feel like a broken record. Just clarity. Just state what we need to do. Yeah, and especially in the way they were talking about how BAME individuals that are more susceptible to catch, the virus or like there's a high death rate for BAME individuals by saying that immediately. You know? Speak to BAME people. ‘Oh, whoa, this is a bit  more dangerous for us’- which would, again inspire us to obey the rules more often. So again, just being clear.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"359" "Everyone has no idea what's going on. People are scared. People are dying. So, the higher places like government, people aren’t sure as well. It makes it worse for everyone else. So, I understand where they’re coming from, but  also  they need to like set down rules, which will apply to you. Not just ’Oh, you want to stay five feet apart? Or just stay six feet apart?’ It doesn't really make any sense.”   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"360" "Yeah. Exactly. There isn't as much transfer. And the government  isn't, or  hasn't been certain on how things are being transferred, or how to regulate it. And I just feel like things have been taken a bit out of proportion, personally.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"361" "But um I feel like, maybe specific to the UK, it wasn't handled well.  So  the sense of panic was kind of amplified.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"362" "But we've treated it as like, this unknown force of nature, that's  gonna  wipe out half the population. And now, like, the approach - and that approach has just ruined a lot of people's lives and set a lot of people back many years, months, whatever.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"363" "Excluded from messaging"
"364" "Feeling disconnected from traditional media sources; Feeling forgotten and overlooked; BAME people not being treated as a priority"
"365" "I'm not really sure about Instagram so maybe that's a better way of showing it. Yeah, I think what's interesting too, I'd love to hear everybody else's opinion and perspective, but it seems like a lot of younger people don't really watch television like that. Like we stream and get our media elsewhere, but we don't really watch more traditional television. That's something like our parents would do.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"366" "So basically, the news that we're getting, but even different newspapers  is  like from the perspective and like from the view of that one person, which happens to be a wealthy white man. So, a lot of the times the news that we receive is not we can relate to, because we can't relate to that one. Wealthy white man, the way he sees things he sees, like, poor people as like an inconvenience. 'Why do we have to help them? They should work hard for it.' Whereas from our perspective, we're more understanding, but then we also can't relate to him because we could be like 'Oh, he has all this money, why can't he help us?'.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"367" "I feel like, I feel like, I don't  wanna  say the government doesn’t care about us. But I feel like they're, more focused on - I feel like young people are not a priority in the government's mind right now. Because even like, when you go for information there's nothing tailored for, for young people.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"368" "I was saying this to my mum as well, that they  ( government officials)   weren’t even referring to us when they were saying young people on the TV. They were referring to, like, people aged like 20 to 40ish. And they kind of excluded us in  their , like plans and explanations, there hasn't really been much. I don't know, room to explain anything for us.   (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"369" "Ending language of blame and shame"
"370" "Frustration as government officials blamed young people for increases in cases; Feelings that young people were a scapegoat for second wave"
"371" "But still, I think there could have been a lot  more clear , um, guidelines like even just in the past few months, when the government is encouraging a lot of young people and in particular, to go out and make use of the eat out, help out scheme. And they were encouraging that. And then within a matter of weeks, they're now blaming young people, and because the rates have been going up, so it's such a contradiction, and I think they're just looking for a scapegoat. And unfortunately, young people have become that scapegoat. Because they're sending everyone back to school, sending everyone back to universities, but and then blaming them. So, I don't know what message they're trying to send out at the moment. But I don't think it's clear.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"372" "Exactly. And also, just going off that point, though, the way that they have kind of advertised this in a way like one of the government's like slogans is ‘protect granny’ or something like, yeah, it's kind of, it's kind of like saying, oh, young people are the reckless ones of our society, the ones that are basically ruining, like any sort of progression. Ruining any sort of like returning to normality. When, in actual fact, if you look at it, young people have been trying their best throughout all of it. But it's the government and like the way that everything is set up. It's not designed to protect young people, but they're designed to blame young people.  (Group 7, 18-20-year-old )"
"373" "Well or when they kind of blame the BAME community for not taking COVID seriously, when it's hitting us the most. (Group 3,  16-17- year -old )"
"374" "A4. Survival during crisis – findings the new you in this new situation coding framework table"
"375" "Colour coding by age group"
"376" "Multiple Ages"
"377" "16-17"
"378" "18-20"
"379" "21-25"
"380" "Category:"
"381" "Survival during crisis - finding the new you in this new situation"
"382" "Code"
"383" "Definitions"
"384" "Sample Codes"
"385" "Self-care strategies"
"386" "Meditating; Avoiding social media during these times; Finding enjoyment during lockdown"
"387" "I'd say for me, I haven't been on social media as weird as that sounds, like I've kind of tried to stay away from it. Because like, a lot of the time when I went on social media there was just like loads of negative things.   (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"388" "I'm really, I'm really enjoying that. It’s just like sleeping when you want, waking up when you want. Just doing a couple of things from your bed,  it's  just like I am really enjoying that time because I know I’m not going to get that again. And I think I’m just really enjoying taking the time for myself.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"389" "I would walk more, um eat healthier as well. To stay safer to be honest. Healthier.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"390" "Yeah  I just wanted to stay healthy, you know. And I just wanted to be - just collect, look after myself in a sense. Self-care.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"391" "Yeah, um, I would just say exercising. For me personally, just for the stress.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"392" "Um, I would just say focusing on myself more, okay. Just relaxing, making sure that I'm mentally okay.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"393" "Creation"
"394" "Creating new systems and activities of support; New ways to connect with people; New habits and routines; Starting new businesses"
"395" "I'd say like currently, I'm a bit more optimistic compared to like, the middle of lockdown. I was like, the middle of lockdown hit me the hardest cause I was very unmotivated. I don't know if that's a word de motivated. Yeah, I didn't have any motivation at all to do anything. I just didn't see the point. And it was like just even simple tasks. I couldn't do it. Just like I just struggled to get out of bed. I just stayed in bed and listen to music and slept all day. So, I'm kind of getting out of that and getting up more recently, I started cooking a lot more because it's like a distraction at least  have  something to do. So, I realized I'm actually not that bad. I should have done it more often.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"396" "For some reason, when I spend the whole day doing one thing. When I can focus on one thing, I become extremely productive.  So  I  kinda  just make a schedule around that and assigned various things to  to  different days. So that I can come out of lockdown slash quarantine feeling like I didn’t they just waste months of my life.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"397" "So  I started  a  eyelash company and a  lipgloss  company as well. Just like a cosmetic company.   (Focus Group 7, 18-20-year-old)"
"398" "Yeah, I got into a bit of art, just more basic drawings or more basic, like, for example, like sunsets.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"399" "So I'm like, there is no point  in  procrastinating  because you could have gotten this done a week ago. You know? Let me just do it now. So,  self disciplining  myself. I think I've gotten better at that. Discipling myself.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"400" "Social support systems"
"401" "Increased reliance and engagement with friends and family; Supporting friends and family who need you"
"402" "I'm in managing my time. But maybe, I think maybe because I live with my parents that obviously, they're like, your parents like, helping you manage your time. Yeah. I just yeah. Other than that, if I was living by myself, I don't think l would be managing my time.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"403" "But now I get to see my friends. Even if it's just a come to the station and meet. You know? Because we kind of live close.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"404" "Agency"
"405" "Belief that life will pass by, waiting on  the  government  so people should take control of their own lives and maximize the situation to their benefit; Finding optimism in the current situation"
"406" "I would say there is joy in the fact that things haven’t just crumbled to pieces.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"407" "Before I was procrastinating, saying I'll do it later, or later, and then another time. Okay, then next week Monday I'm  gonna  start. But now is the thing where I've got nothing else to do. I might as well do  it,  you know? So yeah, so as I said, I enjoy doing what I do now because I've kind of developed from  from  it anyway.  ( Focus Group 6, 18-20-year-old)"
"408" "There’s a lot of people who aren’t used to making their own decisions and having their own agency when it comes to taking control of their life. You know they just pass through the system, go to  uni , get a job, pay their taxes et cetera. But now you’re in a position where if you just sit down and wait for the government to tell you, you can go out now life will just pass you by.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"409" "Even though COVID’s been really bad, I would honestly say, not an advantage, but like most of like, the exams I had to do, were at home.  So  it meant that some of the exams I had to do were open book. So that is the advantage. But  also  for me personally, since everything is slowed down, it's given me more time to like develop myself.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"410" "A5.  Navigating  racism and difference coding  during the pandemic response  framework table"
"411" "Colour coding by age group"
"412" "Multiple Ages"
"413" "16-17"
"414" "18-20"
"415" "21-25"
"416" "Category:"
"417" "Navigating racism and difference during the pandemic response"
"418" "Code"
"419" "Definitions"
"420" "Sample Codes"
"421" "Psychological burden"
"422" "Anger; Psychological separation for survival; Negotiating Black identity or  other  minoritised  identity"
"423" "Especially it's like they're saying we're not allowed to go out and then that you want to be productive, and  go to the protests, but  then you've got to mind COVID-19 that's still out there. Now, and you're just trying to think of what's next.  (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"424" "And that was instilled in people. So now even though the help is there, because we're so used to um people, like, what not having our best interest at heart, we choose not to use it. In some of the same time,  its  like with the police. Historically, like  B lack communities haven't had a good relationship with the police. And even though now more lack people and stuff are trying to join the police to make it better, there's still a lot of stigma. Like if you say, 'oh  im  going to call the police' in the ghetto, people are going to look at you sideways.  (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"425" "I was just saying  that,  I think like, that's a dilemma a lot of  B lack people face because even I remember when I was going to the protest, my sister was like, I really, really want to go. My sister's that has type one diabetes, and she was just like, ‘I'll be risking my life’. And I was like, I don't think it's like, pro- B lack to risk your life. I just think your  B lackness is not defined by if you went to a protest, or if you even signed the petition, but  like,  like  the fact that you're living and just doing what you want to do, and having that autonomy. That's what we all want to do.  (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"426" "So yeah. And even though there's a pandemic, I still feel like, it's good still, because racism is a killer. People get killed because the  color  of the skin, and it's not a choice.  (Focus Group 4, 16-17-year-old)"
"427" "It  don't  matter. Don't let them   (the government )  have power, do it for yourself, I'm fed up are thinking they're going to help  -  they're not going to help. They don't care, we are not a priority to them, they have their own people, and they don't care.  (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"428" "Importance of representation"
"429" "Need to see people who look like you ( eg.  Similar age, race, socioeconomic background); People who understand your experience; Challenging stigma in BAME communities regarding seeking mental health support"
"430" "I don't know if this is more of a personal thing, but sort of normalizing that as well. normalizing asking for help going out to like actively seek help when you feel you need it. Because especially in our community, that is not a normal thing.   (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"431" "But anyways, one big news company to kind of like that we can relate to that we can share our news, our truth, because we can only relate to ourselves, we can't expect that one white male that has like pressed pushing out his agenda into all these news companies, like newspapers, we can't expect him to relate to us because he's never going to relate to us.  (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"432" "Like, if you get an adult, the answer is not going to be able to relate to them. youngsters are like, I'm, I'm 17, you're, you're 27. How am I meant to relate to you? Like you're giving me this information, but it's not going to help me because look at you and look at me.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"433" "P2 : Because they're  (community elders)  thinking 'There's nothing wrong with me. What? What are you talking about?' But it's like, they hear they hear certain words and obviously the stigma around it.  So  it's  gonna  be a negative connotation. Like, it's just 9 times out of 10  its  just a prevention thing."
"434" "P3: Yeah.  And I think there's the thing like, historically, the help hasn't been there, like there has been no help to access.  So  it was sort of like, you have to be okay. Because you have no choice."
"435" "P2 : Yeah."
"436" "P3 : And that was instilled in people. So now even though the help is there, because we're so used to um people, like, what not having our best interest at heart, we choose not to use it .   (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-olds)"
"437" "A6 . Community: transitions, successes and spirit coding framework table"
"438" "Colour coding by age group"
"439" "Multiple Ages"
"440" "16-17"
"441" "18-20"
"442" "21-25"
"443" "Category:"
"444" "Community: transitions, successes and spirit"
"445" "Code"
"446" "Definitions"
"447" "Sample Codes"
"448" "Community systems at work"
"449" "Community to fill institutional gaps and failures; Need for youth clubs"
"450" "Um, I feel like if I left it to the government? No, definitely not. I know, I'm opening a youth club. So, I don't, I'm not worried about them. But if I left it to them, no, no, they're not worried about our problems. Our problems are our problems, and they need to be dealt with by us. In their eyes .  (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"451" "During the lockdown time and  my  neighbours  had a church group, and they were giving out money . W e ll  not  giv ing  out money. They were paying people's rent fines, like things that people couldn't afford bills, and stuff like that. They supported me a bit during lockdown .  I didn't   know that they were available via like social media and stuff. But they were, like more on my doorstep as my  neighbours .  (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"452" "Community spirit evolution"
"453" "Evolutions of ways to communicate with people; Changes in the meaning of community engagement"
"454" "I'd say things like this, because a lot of the times like we’re just to young people out of many, but we have all these opinions. So, I'm pretty sure there are other young people that keep their opinions to themselves. So, I think by talking about these things, because a lot of the times, we just assume that someone's doing okay during this like lockdown, but then they could be having a hard time as well, if we  was  all open about it and spoke about our experiences to one another.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"455" "As I said you don’t need to parade around doing up superman or whatever. You just need to pay attention and just open your eyes and think. If there’s a situation where you could help are you going to go ‘Ah I’m too shy’ or ‘What if they tell me to get out of their face’ or something. Just uh be a bit more aware and look to see if there’s any way you can help.   ( Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"456" "Social media as site of community"
"457" "Using social media to engage with community"
"458" "I watch a lot of  YouTube  so I like the content coming out I feel like because like everyone’s indoors um I feel like there’s more community base as well.   (Focus Group 5, 18-20-year-old)"
"459" "Responsibility to wider community"
"460" "Deep concern for others, beyond family, despite not trusting information"
"461" "And I feel like I've also learned to not put my feelings aside but at the same time, I put my feelings aside obviously for the other children because I obviously have my own problems going on. But being in that environment, I have to put their problems before mine because obviously if I come in with a negative energy and like they can see, I'm not really feeling like as positive as I should be as someone they're meant to be like, looking  to for help. I just didn't want to be that person to like, bring them down even more.   (Focus Group 2, 18-20-year-old)"
"462" "A7. Visions for a future response coding framework table"
"463" "Colour coding by age group"
"464" "Multiple Ages"
"465" "16-17"
"466" "18-20"
"467" "21-25"
"468" "Category:"
"469" "Visions for a future response"
"470" "Code"
"471" "Definitions"
"472" "Sample Codes"
"473" "Giving young people ownership"
"474" "Government communication strategies will improve through giving ownership to young people"
"475" "So  if we kind of remove the idea that young people are useless, they don't do anything for our society, because a lot of the times older people just say that this generation is messed up, or this generation is like useless, or this generation, they just kind of put us down a lot.  So  we just end up seeing ourselves as just like, we're not helpful to society, there's no point in getting involved in anything. So, if we can just present ourselves and present young people as helpful that we need you like young people. ‘You're useful young people. We care about you, young people. You're special.’ Which is anything to be able to promote ourselves, and each other is just useful, we're not useless.  (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"476" "Peer support groups"
"477" "Online platforms for young people to share their experiences with peers of COVID/lockdown"
"478" "And like in a very healthy environment, where like, there was no judgment, no mockery or anything like that. I feel like that is something young people could do, because as well as helping themselves by like getting it off their chest, they're helping others because some people need to hear what others are going through to kind of like, think about what they're going through at the same time. So maybe more discussions like this will opportunities to have more discussions like this? And not only about just this lockdown, just other things in general. But other issues in general, because I don't think it should only stop with how we cope with Coronavirus. Like other issues like that young people face like maybe poverty or like racism, colourism or like just loads of issues that we all have, we should just have  B lack in a community where we can have these open discussions about it. And it's like, there's no right or wrong answer to anything that we're saying. Because it's your own perspective. It's your own experience.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"479" "I said it in the previous  sessions…  a discussion group like this, it says, because it allows young people to kind of talk to each other about how they feel, instead of just holding it in. And just like, everyone can share their experience with each other. And then if you hear that someone's experiences similar to yours, you won't feel that lonely anymore. So, something like this, it doesn't even have to be like a massive thing to just be with like, group for people. I just something like even in a place or an environment I  like… we'll just talk to each other about how you feel and how you're coping with things .  (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"480" "Compassion and understanding from systems"
"481" "Need for patience and understanding from institutions regarding the difficulties that young people in school have endured"
"482" "I think it would, it would make young people feel like they're more supported in a way and that, like, we're also worried about you as well. It's just kind of like, I think because our family just wanted to make sure everyone's safe at home, but then they don't really realize the effects that is lockdown has on young people, and how young people might struggle to cope with it. So, it was just like grouping young people with every other group and within the society, and it's just not really fair to do that. Because I feel that young people have really struggled, not the most, but struggled a lot with the whole lockdown. Because we are missing school, we can't see our friends, it’s really stressful. And we're seeing a lot of things on social media, because young people spend a lot of time on social media, a lot of things have been going on. We're exposed to so much and it's like there wasn't it didn't seem there could have been it didn't feel that there was much support.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"483" "I think we are resilient people, but I just feel like these younger people, like, their resilience is unmatched, because they're literally doing stuff that they shouldn't have to do. Um, and also society's just harder for them. Like, they're  gonna  now pay to go to school, like, what is that? I mean, like, you can't even have free travel. And it feels like so small, but it's such a big thing.   (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"484" "I think now that we're going back to school, I think there should be more. I don't know how to describe it, but like, a bit more understanding for young people because like for, for us, like I've made for myself, as soon as we go back to school, there's like our mocks are coming up. And it's understandable because we did miss out on doing our mocks, but I just feel like, there should be more understanding that young people are missing conditions at school. Like  some people can't replicate that working environment at home. So, to be more understanding, and like, maybe take off some of the pressure that is when young people, because we did miss out on a lot. And we had to go through, like a very rough time.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"485" "Improving government response by building in BAME contributions"
"486" "Publishing accessible messages tailored to young people; Utilizing youth advisors to interpret COVID-related messaging for young people"
"487" "But maybe just amplify like, some of like the services that are already there are a lot of the mental health services and like services that are made by us like there's so many people who are have got great youth projects, who've got like mentorship projects for  Bl ack children. And I feel like they're not amplified enough. Like maybe in our  community  they are. But they're not unlike BBC, they're not on like the NHS website. Like, I feel like the government needs to amplify people who are already doing the work. Because there's a lot of people that are actually doing this  work, and  doing it last specifically for  B lack children. So, I feel like those voices definitely need to be amplified.   (Focus Group 1, 21-25-year-old)"
"488" "Improved communication through connection"
"489" "Successful communication linked to a logic/context of care; Fostering connection through those that are similar to you ( eg.  Similar age, race, socioeconomic background)"
"490" "Maybe it's a young professional, basically giving the message out, because when it's like an older white person giving me news, I don't know, just. So maybe if there's like a young person, you'd be able to trust them more kind of take more seriously. And it's like, a person that seems like they genuinely care. Because I feel like a lot of the times people just say it because not as they don't care. But it's just like, if a young professional, just the person that seems like they genuinely care about you, and your well-being lots of people will be more interested in what they're saying. It doesn't even have to be a young professional, just a professional that seems to care about you.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
"491" "I'd say someone who's able to communicate with them. Cause, say if they want to go with someone who doesn't know anything about what they're going through, it will be harder to talk to them. Because, for example, as we said, if I if one of us were to go to like a white person and try and tell them what we're going through, like at family, at home, they wouldn't be able to understand anything. Even like with expectations. I'm quite I'm pretty sure it's common with all like being community and families. They have high expectations. I won't say when  we go to like no offense for like a white family and we told them all. This is what they'll be like. Not even that hard, like they wouldn't understand where we're coming from.   (Focus Group 3, 16-17-year-old)"
