Firm Partisan Political Positioning, Affective Polarization, and Risk Communication:
Examining Firms’ Voluntary Disclosures on COVID-19

Richard A. Benton1
School of Labor and Employment Relations
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
rabenton@illinois.edu
J. Adam Cobb
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
adam.cobb@mccombs.utexas.edu
Timothy Werner
McCombs School of Business
University of Texas at Austin
timothy.werner@mccombs.utexas.edu

November 8, 2020

Abstract
COVID-19 is among the most salient issues in the world presently, and for many current
executives, it is likely to be among the greatest challenges they will face. Upon entering the U.S.
context, the disease was immediately subject to the process of affective polarization, with clear
partisan splits forming around perceptions of its risks that did not relate to science. We explore
whether firms’ preexisting political positioning affected how they voluntarily disclosed to their
investors on a novel, affectively polarized issue by examining whether firms’ disclosure of
COVID-19 risks covaries with their partisan political giving. Analyzing conference call and
campaign contribution data for the S&P 500, we find a positive association between a firm’s
contributions to Democrats and its disclosure of COVID-19 risks.
Keywords: COVID-19; managerial risk; affective polarization; corporate political activity;
voluntary disclosure
Running Head: Firm Partisan Political Positioning and COVID-19 Risk Communication
1

All authors contributed equally; names are listed alphabetically. Corresponding Author: Richard A. Benton. The
authors thank Abhinav Gupta, Robert Prentice, Brian Roberts, Hollis A. Skaife, and Andrew Weaver for their advice
and feedback.

Firm Partisan Political Positioning, Affective Polarization, and Risk Communication:
Examining Firms’ Voluntary Disclosures on COVID-19
In early November 2019, scientists first identified a novel coronavirus in the Wuhan province of
China. The disease that the virus inflicts, the Novel Coronavirus Disease-2019 or COVID-19,
spread rapidly, with the first case in the United States reported on January 21, 2020. By that
month’s end, the World Health Organization (WHO) declared it a public health emergency, and
on March 11, the WHO upgraded the disease to pandemic status. Since that time, much of the
world, including the U.S., has undergone a radical social transition as travel restrictions,
quarantines, hazard controls, and various social distancing orders became the new normal. Not
surprisingly, COVID-19 and the efforts to minimize its impact have had a dramatic impact on
business, imposing a set of unique challenges for many corporate executives. Among these
challenges, executives must assess the risks that the virus and associated policy responses pose to
their firms and decide whether and how to voluntarily disclose those risks to key stakeholders
(cf. Hardy & Maguire, 2020).
Somewhat unique to the U.S., however, is that from the onset, political discourse around
the disease took on a particularly politicized nature, whereby conservatives/Republicans view the
disease differently than do liberals/Democrats. Nationwide surveys (Agiesta, 2020) and other
studies (Barrios & Hochberg, 2020; van Holm et al., 2020) consistently show that Democrats
perceive the risks of COVID-19 as more serious than do Republicans. In fact, many Republican
political leaders and many members of the conservative news media continued to downplay the
risks of the disease well into March 2020, even as evidence mounted that the disease would have
a significant impact on the economy (Green et al., 2020). Political debates about COVID-19
have seemingly been colored heavily by what political scientists refer to as affective

1

polarization: the dislike and distrust of members of the other political party as a function of
social identity, not policy differences or ideology (Iyengar et al., 2019).
In this paper, we explore whether and how affective polarization impacts the decisionmaking of America’s corporate executives. To do so, we examine the association between firms’
partisan political positioning (i.e., where they lay on a continuum between Republican and
Democrat), as reflected in their corporate political action committee (PAC) donations, and their
voluntary disclosures of COVID-19-related risks on quarterly earnings calls. Prior research
reveals that executives’ political ideologies affect the willingness of firms to adopt risky
financing (Hutton et al., 2014) and tax (Christensen et al., 2015) strategies, such that firms led by
conservative CEOs exhibit less willingness to engage in risky strategies. This research has led to
important discoveries about how correlations between political-psychological tendencies and
human behaviors (e.g., conservatives tend to be more risk averse) impact corporate strategies.
In this study, we aim to complement and extend prior work by showing that when an
issue becomes affectively polarized, executive responses to it are likely to split on party lines
irrespective of those baseline tendencies. Specifically, in the case of COVID-19, conservative
elites and those in the broader population have downplayed the risks of the disease whereas
liberals have done the opposite. We theorize that due to the affective polarization of COVID-19,
executives of Republican-leaning firms will be less willing to voluntarily discuss risks related to
the disease in their quarterly earnings calls. This despite the fact that, at baseline, such firms
would be assumed to be the most risk averse. In so doing, we consider how a firm’s public,
partisan political behavior positions it in the broader, increasingly polarized U.S. political system
and the consequences its political position has on executive decision-making and risk
communications.

2

Earnings calls represent an economically important empirical context in which to
measure voluntary disclosures of risk, as studies reveal that financial markets react to the
information voluntarily shared in these calls above and beyond what is mandated as part of a
firm’s financial statements (Frankel, Johnson, & Skinner, 1999; Bushee, Matsumoto, & Miller,
2003; Chen, Demers, & Lev, 2018). By voluntarily disclosing its risks, a firm reduces
information asymmetry between managers and shareholders, which increases analysts’ forecast
accuracy and impacts trading behavior (Guo et al., 2020). In so doing, voluntary risk disclosure
improves shareholders’ trust in the firm’s management, which can reduce the firm’s cost of
capital (Healy & Palepu, 2001), and reduce the costs incurred from shareholder lawsuits
(Skinner, 1997). Timely and accurate voluntary risk disclosure may also improve executives’
credibility with analysts and limit their personal liability from adverse events (Skinner, 1994). As
such, there is value in understanding the factors that motivate the extent to which executives
communicate to the investment community the potential effects of systematic risks, like COVID19. Whether and how such communications are impacted by affective polarization and political
positioning is therefore an important, and to our knowledge, a heretofore unstudied phenomenon.
The COVID-19 pandemic provides an excellent test case to study whether affective
polarization has spilled-over into the realm of voluntary risk disclosures, and executive decisionmaking more generally, for at least three reasons. First, existing work finds strong ties between
conservatism and threat perceptions (e.g., Jost et al., 2003), including the threat of disease (e.g.,
Beall et al., 2016), as well as a preference for risk-averse corporate strategies (Hutton et al.,
2014). Yet, as it pertains to COVID-19, those who identify themselves as conservatives are more
likely to see COVID-19 as less threatening than are liberals. As noted above, absent affective
polarization of the disease, we would expect Republican-leaning firms to be leerier of the

3

business risks associated with COVID-19, and thus more likely to voluntarily disclose those risks
to the broader investment community. Because of the politicization of the issue, however, we
expect the opposite; providing us a strong test of our proposed theory.
Second, in the early months of the disease’s spread, there was uncertainty about the virus,
how severe it was, and how best to handle it. Furthermore, in these early months (pre-March 25,
2020), neither securities regulators nor standard setters provided guidance or rules for how firms
should communicate with their stakeholders on the issue. Yet, despite this lack of guidance, the
potential impacts of the disease were significant enough for most large U.S. firms for their
leaders to consider how the disease might impact future performance and whether and how to
voluntarily disclose its potential risks to financial analysts and major investors. Third, COVD-19
is a de novo, exogenous issue, which allows for a relatively clean test of whether a firm’s preexisting partisan political positioning affects its stated views on a novel and affectively polarized
issue. Thus, COVID-19 represents an appealing empirical test case to study the impacts of
affective polarization on executive decision-making and firms’ voluntary risk disclosures.
The results of both ordinary least squares and matched sample analyses of this
relationship in S&P 500 firms reveal that the more Democratic (Republican) a firm’s partisan
political positioning is, the greater (lesser) the amount of discussion related to COVID-19 risk by
that firm’s representatives on its earnings call held during the first quarter of 2020 (January 2 to
March 31). Of note, this pattern of results runs counter to those from prior research that, although
focused on the level of individual executives, finds that conservative-led firms exhibit greater
caution and risk aversion. We also present analyses of the opening statements of earnings calls,
the results of which were consistent with those taken from the full earnings calls. Additionally,
we analyzed earnings calls in the second quarter of 2020 (April 1 to June 30); the results of

4

which were not significant. In further tests, we find that our effects begin diminishing in late
March, which roughly corresponds to the point in time in which the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) called upon executives to discuss COVID-19 risks in their earnings calls, as
well as broader interventions by local, state, and federal governments to minimize the disease’s
spread and deal with the economic fallout from it. This pattern represents a potential boundary
condition of our theory. Specifically, as ambiguity about an issue’s risks declines and when
executive discretion to discuss it is curtailed, the impact of affective polarization on voluntary
risk disclosure may be muted. In sum, given evidence that Republicans more broadly have
minimized the disease and its potential impact, our findings provide evidence that affective
polarization and a firm’s own partisan positioning help to shape its communications of COVID19 risks. Moreover, by showing that risk discussions in earnings calls are determined, in part, by
an issue’s politics and a firm’s partisan positioning, this study presents novel evidence that the
quality of voluntary financial disclosures can be colored by a firms’ political commitments.

THEORY AND HYPOTHESIS
A key premise undergirding much of contemporary organizational scholarship is the idea that a
firm’s environment can change, often in unpredictable ways (e.g., Child, 1972; Thompson,
1967). Significant disruptions to a firm’s environment, such as natural disasters (Ballesteros &
Gatignon, 2019), financial crises (Flammer & Ioannou, 2020), political upheavals (Cobb et al.,
2017) or, indeed, pandemics cast doubt on prior expectations of firm performance as they create
new, and potentially unforeseen risks to the firm (Audia et al., 2000). Following Christensen et
al. (2015), we view business risk as arising when “there is uncertainty about both the positive
and negative outcomes associated with… activity” (1920). Because executives are tasked with
being stewards of their firms, they have strong incentives to objectively assess the risks faced by

5

their firms (Davis, Schoorman, & Donaldson, 1997). They are also expected to communicate
these risks to help facilitate understanding among the firm’s key stakeholders about the relevant
issues facing the firm in light of the disruption (Fjeld et al., 2007).
Yet, not everything that could potentially be defined as a risk is recognized or disclosed
as one (Hardy et al., 2020; Douglas & Wildavksy, 1982). According to upper echelons theory, a
firm’s willingness to recognize, disclose, and/or take risks, like other strategic choices, is a
product of its executives’ construal of reality based upon their psychological makeup and
experiences (Hambrick, 2007). Psychological factors, and in particular the cognitive models
managers adopt, affect managers’ construal of the firms’ external environment and thus affect
their strategic choices with regard to how to best communicate and manage environmental risk
(Eggers & Kaplan, 2013; Helfat & Peteraf, 2015).
To this end, a long line of psychological research shows that conservatives tend to be
more risk-avoidant than are their more liberal counterparts (see, Jost et al., 2003). Researchers
have also found that the political ideologies of executives affect their willingness to have their
firms engage in risky strategies. For example, Hutton and colleagues (2014) find that Republican
executives tend to prefer less risky corporate policies: their firms have lower levels of debt,
lower capital and research and development expenditures, and make less risky investments.
When facing exogenous, uncertainty-increasing events (e.g., 9/11 attacks, Lehman Brothers
bankruptcy), Republican executives enacted even more conservative policies. Research also
finds that when firms are led by Republican executives, they are less willing to engage in tax
avoidance activities – also a risky strategy (Christensen et al., 2015). These studies provide
evidence that the ideology of executives plays a role in determining firms’ risk appetites.

6

Importantly, however, both firm- and environmental-level factors may constrain
executives’ ability to rely on their construal of the environment in making risk-related strategic
decisions. Principally, the performance, diversification, and size of the firm and the dynamism,
complexity, and munificence of the firm’s environment, may all influence executives’
understanding of and reaction to novel environmental conditions (see, Hoskisson et al., 2017). In
this paper, we extend this prior literature in two ways. First, we introduce a new construct to the
literature that can also serve as a firm-level constraint on risk-related strategic decisions: a firm’s
partisan political positioning. A firm’s partisan political positioning reflects a firm’s “conscious
choice” (Baron, 2013: 38) to align itself to a greater or lesser degree with a specific political
party in the social, political, and social spaces in which it operates. A firm’s public partisan
political positioning, therefore, is an actively chosen, collective, and strategic firm-level outcome
arrived at by the managers responsible for the firm’s corporate political activity and nonmarket
strategy more broadly. Further, in the U.S. context, it is an outcome disclosed to the public under
the firm’s name. Consequently, stakeholders, including politicians and social activists, identify it
as the positioning of the firm as a whole (McDonnell & Werner, 2016).
We view a firm’s partisan political positioning as a distinct concept from its
organizational political ideology, which Gupta, Briscoe, and Hambrick (2017) define as,
“prevailing beliefs among organizational members about how the social world operates,
including convictions about what outcomes are desirable and how they should be achieved” (4).
A firm’s organizational political ideology has deep roots in individuals’ psychological make-up
and is operationalized based upon aggregating individual behavior. Although the upper echelon
directs the firm’s observable corporate political activity (Chin et al., 2013) and thereby
establishes the firm’s partisan political positioning, we argue that because corporate PACs appear

7

to follow a pattern of long-term investing in politicians (Snyder, 1992), there is substantial path
dependence in a firm’s partisan political positioning that helps to anchor that echelon’s future
acknowledgement of the riskiness of the firm’s external environment.
Second and relatedly, we argue that in novel strategic contexts, and absent disclosure
regulation or guidance, a firm’s voluntary disclosure of risk will be shaped by the relationship
between its partisan political positioning and the partisan political nature of the issue generating
risk – specifically, whether or not the issue is subject to affective polarization. Many issues
related to managerial risk taking and risk disclosure lack a partisan valence, suggesting that a
firm’s partisan political positioning may not affect executives’ understanding of and decisionmaking on such issues. For those that do have a partisan valence, however, the upper echelon of
the firm will have a harder time deviating from the partisan political positioning it had previously
adopted. That is, if managers publicly align their firm with one party to a greater degree at time t,
they may, at time t + n find themselves collectively adopting their preferred party’s view of an
issue as their firm’s view of it. This, in turn, should influence the extent to which the firm
voluntarily discloses business risks arising from affectively polarized events. Hence, it may be
the case that on an issue that is affectively polarized a firm’s partisan political positioning
becomes a “core rigidity” (see, Leonard-Barton, 1992), which could potentially turn a nonmarket
competitive advantage – e.g., alignment with a political party or actor – into a disadvantage.
Baron (2013) refers to such a potential outcome as a “peril of nonmarket positioning” (42).
Recent research in political science suggests that affective polarization is becoming an
increasingly significant form of partisan polarization in American political, social, and economic
life. Public opinion data reveal that mass political behavior and attitudes are increasingly shaped
not by ideology but by “negative partisanship,” or sheer dislike, of the opposition (Abramowitz

8

& Webster, 2016). Not only are Americans more distrustful across parties, a process of
“affective spillover” has occurred in which partisan allegiances affect social and economic
behaviors as far ranging as dating and hiring (Iyengar et al., 2019). Consumers, for example, are
less willing to purchase gift cards, even at substantial discounts, from companies that have PACs
that contribute to their non-preferred party (McConnell et al., 2018).
Given the dramatic and pervasive spillover effects of affective polarization throughout
American life, there is strong reason to suspect that it will similarly impact executive decisionmaking, including voluntary discussion of risk. To be clear, we make no claims about what the
‘correct’ amount of risk communication should be. Rather, we expect that affective polarization
and pre-existing partisan political positioning will shape how firms discuss threats. Determining
whether this relationship holds is substantively important because affective polarization may lead
executives to view achieving alignment between the firm and its co-partisans on an issue as
being more important than recognizing the potential business risks of the issue. In our research
setting, affective polarization could therefore undermine the quality of voluntary disclosures,
making it harder for financial market participants to understand how the risks of an affectively
polarized issue are likely to impact a given firm. These arguments motivate our hypothesis:
Hypothesis 1: In novel strategic contexts, the degree to which a firm voluntarily
discloses risk related to an affectively polarized issue will be positively correlated
with the degree to which its partisan political positioning aligns with the political
party that views the issue as a source of systemic risk.
EMPIRICAL CONTEXT: THE AFFECTIVE POLARIZATION OF COVID-19
As noted in the introduction, the first phase of the COVID-19 pandemic unfolded over a series of
months. On January 7, 2020, cases of pneumonia that had been earlier reported from the Wuhan
province in China had been identified as a new coronavirus, and the following day, the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control (CDC) issued its first official health advisory about the outbreak. On
9

January 20, Chinese officials confirmed that human-to-human transmission of the virus was
possible. The following day the first U.S. case was confirmed and the first earnings call by a firm
in our sample (United Airlines Holdings, Inc.) that discussed COVID-19-related risk occurred.
Around this time, Google search intensity for the coronavirus began to increase in the U.S. (see,
Figure 1 for the across-time distribution in conference calls, as well as firm and public attention
to coronavirus), likely reflecting increased media attention to the outbreak (Ducharme, 2020).
[ Insert Figure 1 about here ]
By the end of January, the WHO had declared the outbreak a “public health emergency of
international concern,” and the U.S. announced travel restrictions on China. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, by this time several firms openly discussed the coronavirus and voluntarily
disclosed associated risks in their earnings calls; a trend that, as Figure 1 shows, grew in the
following weeks. Further global air restrictions were put in place by the U.S. and other large,
industrial countries on February 2. Two days later, the Wall Street Journal published an op-ed
warning that a pandemic seemed inevitable (Bario & Gottlieb, 2020), and the U.S. Senate
Intelligence Committee began briefings on the virus. Hence, from mid-January to early February,
both governments and the media produced increasing amounts of information that suggested that
the coronavirus could present a major health and potentially a significant economic challenge.
To be clear, during this early period there was uncertainty about the virus and the
potential for it to disrupt economic activity. Yet, by early February efforts to stem the virus’
spread in China were underway, leading to significant declines in export activity from the
country (Cerdeiro et al., 2020). Although public health authorities across Europe made
interventions to minimize its spread, in the U.S., partisanship colored responses during this
period. President Donald Trump, many Republican political leaders, and some members of the

10

conservative media continued to downplay the virus’ risks into March (Green et al., 2020). For
example, despite the Dow Jones Industrial Index dropping 1,000 points on February 24 – the first
day in which U.S. stock markets reacted strongly to COVID-19 fears – the president stated that
the virus was under control and that the stock market was now undervalued (Stevens, 2020).
By early- to mid-March, however, various levels of the U.S. government began making
more significant efforts to curb the disease’s spread, as well as to cope with its economic fall-out.
The Federal Reserve cut interest rates 0.5 points on March 3, and the president signed an
emergency spending bill on March 6. The weekend of March 7 and 8 witnessed a significant
price war erupting in oil markets, causing prices to plummet. On March 11, the WHO declared
COVID-19 a pandemic, and President Trump announced a travel ban on EU countries. He
followed up by declaring a national emergency on March 13. That same day, several U.S. states
announced school closures, a trend that continued through that weekend. March 16 witnessed the
second worst decline in Dow Jones history, and the S&P index and NASDAQ declined around
12 percent each. Although only days later President Trump declared that the country will “soon
be open for business,” by month’s end, most U.S. states had imposed stay-at-home orders, over
three million Americans filed for unemployment (with 6.5 million more to join them the first
week of April), the Federal Reserve announced major interventions in the bond market, and the
U.S. Congress passed a $2 trillion stimulus package.
We do not claim that each political party had reached full consensus about COVID-19
risks in these early months. However, considerable evidence suggests that COVID-19 became an
affectively politicized issue during this time and multiple studies examining individual behavior
support this claim. For example, data from the Pew Research Center revealed that in mid-March,
Democrats were more likely than Republicans to view the coronavirus as a “major threat to

11

public health” (Green & Tyson, 2020). Relying on location data from a large sample of
smartphones, several studies find that in areas with more Republican voters, individuals engaged
in less social distancing (e.g., Allcott et al., 2020; Barrios & Hochberg, 2020; van Holm et al.,
2020).2 Moreover, at the elite level, Green and colleagues (2020) find that in this early period,
Democratic members of Congress discussed the risks of the coronavirus more frequently than
did Republicans, and research has shown that similar partisan splits occurred in the media’s
presentation and discussion of the virus (see, e.g. Jamieson & Albarracín, 2020). This
polarization of political elite discussion of COVID-19 peaked in mid-February and continued
into March, which the authors suggest may help explain some of the inter-party variance in
behavioral findings observed in other studies.
The emergence of COVID-19 provides an ideal setting in which to test our arguments
regarding firms’ voluntary disclosure of risk for several reasons. First, because prior research
shows that conservatives tend to be more risk averse (Jost et al., 2003) and leerier of the threat of
disease (Beall et al., 2016), we should expect that the executives of firms with a Republicanleaning political position would be more cognizant of the risks of COVID-19 and more willing to
voluntarily disclose those risks to members of the investment community. In a situation where a
political party is more naturally identified with an issue (e.g., Democrats and climate change), it
would be difficult to assess the unique effects of affective polarization absent some sort of shock
to disrupt long-held beliefs on the issue. In the context of COVID-19, by contrast, we can
disentangle the effects of affective polarization from those of baseline, and perhaps
psychologically rooted, preferences.

2

Barrios and Hochberg (2020) find that risk perceptions of COVID-19 among Republicans increased after March 9,
when it was announced that the virus had struck the Conservative Political Action Committee meetings and several
Republican politicians began self-quarantining. This pattern suggests that partisans’ “perceptions are affected not by
changes in fundamental underlying risk, but rather by political-related interpretations of the risk” (1).

12

Second, while there was uncertainty as to the ultimate impact of the disease, there is little
dispute that it posed risk to many firms in the short- to medium-run. Although other issues are
likely to be similarly polarized, they may not affect the performance prospects of most firms in a
time frame clear enough to garner mention in firms’ communications with analysts and investors,
making it more challenging to observe executives’ risk assessments on such issues. Additionally,
during the early months of the crisis, executives had ample discretion about whether and how to
discuss COVID-19 risks, as there was no regulatory guidance about doing so. Finally, because
COVID-19 was an exogenous event that was affectively polarized in the U.S. from the onset,
COVID-19 could not have shaped firms’ prior partisan political positioning. Hence, we can more
precisely determine how a firm’s prior political positioning affected how firms communicated
business risks associated with the disease. Many affectively polarized issues, such as climate
change and immigration, are long-standing; thus, they may discursively impact a firm’s partisan
positioning. Our research design rules out some possible alternative explanations, including
concerns of reverse causality.
In sum, we argue that it is reasonable to ask whether a firm will be more or less likely to
voluntarily disclose COVID-19 as a business risk based upon its partisan political positioning. If
affective polarization has spilled over into firms, then in line with our hypothesis 1, we would
predict that more Democratic-aligned firms will recognize and voluntarily disclose perceived
COVID-19 risk at higher levels than Republican-aligned firms.

SAMPLE AND DATA
To examine the effects of firms’ partisan political positioning on the willingness to voluntarily
disclose a de novo and politicized risk, we examine the behavior of the cumulative membership
of the S&P 500 index between 1990 and 2020. Our initial sample consists of every firm that

13

appeared in the S&P 500 during this period that was still a going concern as of January 2020.3
We link data on disclosed COVID-19 risk, measured using computational text analysis of
earnings calls transcripts (Hassan et al., n.d.), with an indicator of corporate political
partisanship, constructed using firm PAC contributions to political candidates and political party
affiliated committees at the federal level. We also include several firm, industry, and state-level
controls constructed from Compustat and other sources.
For our main analyses, we focus on earnings calls held during the first quarter (Q1) of
2020 (i.e., between January 2 and March 31). We do so for two main reasons. First, on March
25, the SEC’s Division of Corporate Finance released guidance to firms about the organization’s
“views regarding disclosure and other securities law obligations that companies should consider
with respect to the coronavirus disease.”4 On April 8, Jim Clayton, the Chairman of the SEC
urged firms to be more forthcoming about the impact of COVID-19, what actions they are taking
in response, and what future plans might entail in light of it.5 Although neither of these actions
had the force of law, research that examines firms’ reactions to similar issuances of disclosure
guidance in the wake of market downturns and periods of volatility shows that this guidance
substantially increases the quantity and quality of firms’ disclosures (see, Kravet and Muslu
[2013] for a discussion or Leuz and Schrand [2009] for a specific empirical application to SEC
guidance issued following the fall of Enron in 2001).
Second, research reveals that the effects of affective polarization are minimized when
information is available to counteract it. For example, when asked questions about outcomes

3

The 30-year cumulative population of the S&P 500 includes 1,181 firms, according to Index Constituents data
from Compustat Capital IQ. However, many of these firms delisted their securities for various reasons, particularly
mergers and acquisitions over the past 30 years. By early 2020 there remained 521 firms in this population that held
Q1 2020 earnings calls. We also removed 8 firms due to missing data on key earnings statement variables.
4
https://www.sec.gov/corpfin/coronavirus-covid-19
5
https://www.sec.gov/news/public-statement/statement-clayton-hinman

14

such as GDP growth or unemployment, people’s estimates are shaded by their political
orientation; they believe that economic outcomes are more (less) favorable when their party is in
(out of) power (e.g., Bartels, 2002). Yet, these perceptual biases have been found to be less
pronounced when the actual state of the economy is less ambiguous (i.e., uniformly good or bad)
(Healy & Maholtra, 2013). Research on how affective polarization shaped responses to COVID19 also reveals that in areas with high caseloads of the disease, variance in the perceptions of
COVID-19 risks between conservatives and liberals dissipated (Druckman et al., 2020). As the
threat of COVID becomes more palpable, partisan reasoning diminishes.
Because of the largely unprecedented nature of the economic shutdowns and restrictions
occurring throughout the U.S., Europe, and Asia by the end of March, whether there would be, at
the minimum, short- to medium-run disruptions and/or performance effects of COVID-19 was
difficult to debate for most U.S. firms. Along with these interventions, there were a record
number of unemployment claims, and several significant stock market declines. It therefore
stands to reason that by late March, the ambiguity about the economic effects of COVID-19 had
diminished and the threat of it to business leaders became clearer. That is not to say that one
could determine with complete accuracy what the effects of COVID-19 would be for each firm.
Rather, the claim here is that as ambiguity about the economic effects of COVID lessened, so too
did the potential impact of affective polarization on voluntary risk disclosures.
We acknowledge that affective polarization continued to impact the discourse around the
virus into quarter 2 (Q2) and continues to do so at the time of this writing. However, these
ongoing debates are less about whether and how COVID-19 will affect society and the economy
and have more to do with what the appropriate steps to address the crisis should be. Much of the
ambiguity about the potential harm of the virus has dissipated and the SEC issued guidance at the

15

start of Q2, which informed our decision to focus on earnings call held in Q1. However, as part
of a supplemental analysis, we also analyze data from Q2 (i.e., between April 1 and June 30). We
expect that our effects will diminish over time but stress that we might not expect such an effect
on other affectively polarized issues, absent clear regulatory guidelines and the emergence of a
consensus about whether the issue in question would have an impact on the economy.

Dependent variable: Conference call disclosures of COVID-19 risk
Our dependent variable captures voluntary firm-level disclosures of COVID-19 related risks, as
captured in transcripts from earnings calls that occurred during Q1 of 2020. Computational
linguistic analyses of earnings calls transcripts have become popular in several disciplines,
particularly in accounting, finance, and economics (Loughran & McDonald 2013; 2016), and
increasingly in the field of strategic management (Guo et al., 2017; Pan et al., 2017). Such
methods have become well established for measuring firms’ strategic orientations, such as timehorizons (Brochet, Loumioti, & Serafeim, 2015), sentiment and uncertainty (Loughran &
McDonald, 2011; 2013), optimism about future performance (Davis et al., 2015), and various
kinds of firm risks (e.g., Hassan et al., 2019).
Conference call data see myriad applications because in the face of unexpected events,
financial market participants rely heavily on the quality of information provided to them by firms
to determine how the event is likely to impact firms’ prospects. When a firm provides new
information, previously private information quickly gets reflected in firms’ stock prices (Beaver,
1968). In the face of a novel exogenous event, a firm’s disclosures help analysts and investors
make sense of the potential impacts on it (Hail, Muhn, & Oesch, 2020), suggesting that such
discussions of risk play a vital role in helping financial markets understand how firms are to
likely be impacted by novel events. As noted by Wang, Li, and Xiao (2018), risk disclosure

16

serves two main functions. First, it increases the supply of public information by interpreting
known risk factors and revealing unknown ones (e.g., a new risk). Doing so improves reporting
quality and increases transparency (Elmy, Leguyader, & Linsmeier, 1998). Second, risk
disclosure guides market participants’ understanding of the possible range of future performance
by the focal firm (Kravet & Muslu, 2013).
Earnings calls represent a valuable platform for managers to communicate with the
investment community. An earnings call is a voluntary quarterly teleconference in which firm
officials, often the CEO and/or CFO, discuss operational and financial results from the previous
quarter, as well as their outlook for future performance. Although anyone can participate, it is
common for analysts following the firm and major investors to attend. Executives frequently
discuss economic, industry, or political conditions and how these conditions impact current
performance as well as their outlook for future performance. There are two key portions of an
earnings call. First, is the firm-generated opening statement (presentation), commonly prepared
and/or reviewed by senior managers. Afterwards, a “question and answer” (Q&A) session is held
whereby callers can ask questions of executives who then answer them. Unlike firms’ written
mandatory disclosures, conference calls contain managers’ spoken words and spontaneous
conversations between managers and call participants, providing a useful setting to observe
managers’ disclosure behavior directly (Fu et al., 2019). We provide examples of conference call
transcripts with varying levels of discussion related to COVID-19-related risks in Appendix 1.
Studies of earnings transcripts have consistently found that the contents and sentiments
expressed in these calls provide information to market participants above and beyond what is
contained in financial statements. Several studies reveal that conference calls promote a timelier
incorporation of information into stock prices (Kimbrough, 2005), as the contents and sentiments

17

expressed in the calls impact investor trading (e.g., Matsumoto et al., 2011). Voluntarily
providing new information in earnings calls also leads to greater convergence in valuation
opinions among investors (Guo et al., 2020). Thus, conference calls are economically important
and provide one of the few avenues through which firms can communicate future risks in an
interactive manner with market actors who rely on this information to make decisions.
Although a variety of approaches exist, most earnings call text analysis methods involve
computationally searching texts for a set of words or word combinations (bigrams) from
predefined dictionaries; dictionaries may be general or purpose specific to capture sentiment
related words, risk related words, or time-horizon related statements. Recent work expands on
these foundational methods by using earnings calls to measure discussions of specific topics. For
example, Hassan et al. (2019) propose a measure characterizing firms’ disclosures of political
risks. Their approach involves using training libraries of political and non-political texts to
identity bigrams that are frequently used in political texts. They then search earnings call
transcripts and count the number of instances where political bigrams are used in conjunction
with synonyms for risk or uncertainty. Using a series of validation tests, they find that their
measure effectively captures firms’ disclosures of political risk. Building on this work, Hassan
and colleagues have developed similar methods for identifying firm risk disclosures concerning
more specific topics, such as Brexit or the Fukushima nuclear disaster (Hassan et al., 2020).
Recently, Hassan and colleagues (Hassan et al., n.d.) proposed a measure of firm
disclosures of COVID-19-related risk, as reflected in company earnings calls. Mirroring the
above approach, the measure involves counting the number of times the disease is mentioned in
the earnings call and measuring the frequency with which these mentions coincide with
synonyms for risk or uncertainty. Specifically, the researchers identify common synonyms for

18

the disease using online resources and newspaper articles covering COVID-19, combined with
hand checks to verify that these disease terms are commonly used in the calls. Using this word
list, they construct a measure of disclosed COVID-19 exposure, which is the count of the number
of times COVID-19 synonyms are used in the transcript divided by the total number of words in
the transcript. This measure captures the proportion of the text that addresses COVID-19. Next,
the researchers construct a measure of disclosed COVID-19 related risk by conditioning the
search for disease mentions on their proximity to synonyms for risk or uncertainty. The COVID19 risk disclosure measure is the frequency with which the disease is mentioned in conjunction
(within 10 words) with a synonym for risk or uncertainty, normalized by transcript length. This
measure captures the proportion of the discussion that directly addresses risks related to COVID19. Hassan and colleagues have validated this measure of disclosed COVID-19 risk in several
ways, including a manual validation test that reveals that transcripts typically mention COVID19 risks in conjunction with firm-specific concerns regarding a collapse in demand, supply chain
disruptions, potential facility closures, and employee welfare.
We use firm COVID-19 risk disclosure exhibited in earnings call transcripts, as
constructed by Hassan et al., as our dependent variable. The authors rely on data from the entire
transcript to construct their measure of COVID-19 risks, which they make publicly available, as
prior research finds that the presentation and Q&A sections contains distinct information
(Matsumoto et al., 2011). We took the additional step of collecting transcripts ourselves to test
measures of COVID-19 risks that appear only in the opening remarks of the transcripts. Our
rationale for doing so was partly motivated by the fact that because these opening statements are
carefully crafted and vetted, that they likely represent a more intentional and conservative

19

measure of voluntary COVID-19 risk communication. Wang and Xing (2020) also find that
investors react more to COVID-19 related discussions in the presentation section.
To create risk measures with just the opening statements, we first collected copies of the
earnings calls for each of our sample firms from the Capital IQ Key Developments Database. We
then closely replicated the Hassan et al. (2020) measures by following the method described in
their prior studies.6 Next, we constructed a similar measure using only the presentation section of
the transcripts, thus excluding the Q&A section. From these texts, we created a measure of
COVID-19 risk disclosures-opening, which is measured as the frequency with which the disease
is mentioned in the opening statement in conjunction (within 10 words) with a synonym for risk
or uncertainty, normalized by the length of the presentation section. This measure captures the
proportion of only the presentation section that discusses COVID-19 related risks.

Key explanatory variable: Political partisanship index
Our focal explanatory variable is a firm-level political partisanship index, measured on a
continuous scale from fully Republican (0) to fully Democratic (1). We follow established
methods in strategy research in measuring firm political partisanship using contributions to
political candidates, parties, and party affiliated committees, as disclosed in U.S. Federal
Election Commission (FEC) reporting. In particular, we focus on contributions made by the
firm’s PAC. Prior research has used corporate PAC contributions and/or executives’
contributions to measure corporate political ideology but, for our purposes, corporate PAC

6

Computational text analysis typically involves multiple decisions about data cleaning, tokenization, handling of
stop words, and differences in underlying texts that can reflect differences across data vendors. As a result, our
constructed measure differs slightly from the original Hassan et al. data due to small differences in transcript
construction, data cleaning, and the fact that our underlying data comes from a different source. Although we could
not perfectly match their measure, our respective measures of COVID-19 risk disclosure are correlated at 0.967; the
statistical and substantive results we present below do not differ if we employ Hassan et al.’s measure or our
measure based upon this attempt to exactly replicate theirs.

20

contributions have a few important advantages as a measure of a firm’s partisan political
positioning. First, in contrast to executives’ giving or firms’ spending on lobbying or “dark
money,” creating and giving through a PAC is perhaps the most thoroughly disclosed method of
engaging in federal politics a firm can engage in and contributing to specific politicians and
parties creates open associations between the firm and these partisans (Bebchuk & Jackson,
2010). Second, a firm’s PAC is what key stakeholders, including policymakers, consider the
voice of the firm in politics, and politicians are sensitive to the associations that stem from
accepting corporate PAC contributions (McDonnell & Werner, 2016; Richter & Werner, 2017).
Third, whereas CEO, board, and general employee political contributions are perhaps
appropriate for measuring ideological commitments, they ultimately capture the political
preferences of individuals. By contrast, PAC contributions reflect the partisan preferences of
several individuals and the firms’ goals (Cohen et al., 2019) and thus are a better measure of how
a firm is strategically positioning itself in partisan politics. Lastly, because corporate PACs are
typically viewed as access-seeking, pragmatic actors (Bonica, 2016), we expect that PAC
contributions offer a more conservative test of our expectation that corporate political leanings
affect voluntary COVID-19 risk disclosures than an ideology-focused measure would.
Other than employing PAC contributions in place of individual contributions, we follow
the method established by Chin, Hambrick, and Treviño (2013) to measuring a firm’s partisan
political positioning from political contributions. We include contributions made in the ten years
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic (since 2010) in order to have a sufficiently long window to
capture stable partisan patterns in political contributions.7 Using each firm’s PAC contributions,

7

In analyses available upon request, following Gupta et al. (2017), we construct this measure using a shorter PAC
contribution window of six years or three election cycles; our results are fully robust. We present the results using
the ten-year measure, as it provides more variation in partisan control over both chambers of the U.S. Congress.

21

we calculate four measures that capture distinct elements of political giving: 1) the number of
contributions to Democratic Party candidates or committees, divided by the number of
contributions given to both parties; 2) the dollar amount given to Democrats divided by the
amount given to both parties; 3) the number of years over the (10-year time frame) the firm made
contributions to Democrats divided by the number of years contributions were made to either
party; and 4) the number of distinct Democratic party recipients to which the firm made
contributions divided by the number of distinct recipients of both parties. These four indicators
all exhibit similar means and variances, so following Chin et al. (2013) we calculate the simple
average to generate our firm-level political partisanship index.
We handle non-contributing firms in two ways. First, we follow Chin et al. (2013) in
assigning a political partisanship index score of 0.5 (perfectly moderate) to firms that did not
contribute to a political candidate or party affiliated committee during the observation widow. In
our regression models, we introduce a dummy variable to flag these non-contributors with an
imputed political partisanship score. Second, we estimate a model excluding non-contributors
from the sample, and the results are consistent.

Control variables
We include several control variables that could affect the voluntary disclosure of COVID-19
risks and may be correlated with a firm’s partisan political positioning. First, our models control
for COVID-19 exposure, as measured by Hassan et al. (n.d.), which measures the extent to which
COVID-19 was discussed in the earnings call, without giving weight to whether it was discussed
as a significant risk factor. We include it to account for cross-firm variation in whether COVID19 was discussed. COVID-19 exposure is the frequency of COVID-19 synonyms in the earnings
call transcript divided by the length of the transcript (number of words). In analyses using

22

disclosed COVID-19 risks-opening, we calculated and used a measure of COVID-19 exposureopening using text from the opening statements from the transcripts. Relatedly, we also control
for peers’ COVID-19 risk disclosure, which we measure as the average COVID-19 risk
disclosure scores among other firms in the same 3-digit NAICS industry that held their Q1
earnings call prior to the focal firm’s earnings call.
Second, we control for several measures that may affect firms’ political giving behavior.
Our models control for the proportion of corporate PAC contributions made to incumbents. This
control captures the role of contributions in gaining access to lawmakers and accounts for the
pragmatic dimension of corporate political activity (Bonica, 2016). Because potential policy
responses to COVID-19 response could also come from the state level, we include two measures
of state policymaking and ideology: a dummy variable indicating whether the firm’s
headquarters is in a state with a Democratic governor and a scaled variable running -1 (most
conservative) to 1 (most liberal) of the mass liberalism of the public in the firm’s headquarters
state in 2019, as estimated based upon public opinion data and updated by Caughey and
Warshaw (2018). The former measure accounts for the likelihood of emergency policy
intervention by the governor, and the latter measure accounts for potential community effects on
both a firm’s political activity and its early response to COVID-19.
Additionally, we control for firms’ disclosed political risks, as indicated in the earnings
call transcripts. As defined and validated by Hassan et al. (2019), this measure captures risks
associated with political concerns, such as regulation, trade, and government funding. As
described above, this measure counts the frequency that political topics are discussed in
conjunction with synonyms for risk and uncertainty. In a similar vein, we control for the total
annual dollar amount of firm lobbying expenditures, averaged over the prior 10 years. This

23

variable is log-transformed to account for right skewness. As an alternative measure, we control
for lobbying expenditures for just 2019, which yields consistent results. Data on corporate
lobbying come from the Center for Responsive Politics’ OpenSecrets lobbying database.
As much of the research in this broader area explores the political ideology of its topmanagement team (e.g., Chin et al., 2013), to rule out the possibility that we are capturing the
ideology of the firm’s leaders who are frequently featured on earnings calls, we include measures
of political ideology for each firms’ CEO (CEO political ideology) and CFO (CFO political
ideology). To construct these variables, we identified each firm’s CEO and CFO in Q1 2020
using Compustat’s Execomp database and constructed a political partisanship index for each
individual in the same way we did for the firm (i.e., by using their personal campaign
contributions as reported to the FEC over the prior 10 years to construct an index).
Not all firms were likely to be adversely affected by COVID-19, suggesting that not all
were equally as likely to voluntarily disclose COVID-19 risks in earnings calls. The extent to
which these differences affect the relationship between political positioning and disclosed
COVID-19 risks, they present potential omitted variables. We measure these factors prior to
COVID-19-related disruptions because our dependent variable captures projected risk disclosure,
rather than backward looking effects of the disease.
To that end, we first introduce four measures to capture the extent to which firms in our
sample were exposed to global market risks. First, we leverage data from Hoberg and Moon
(2017; 2019) to create three variables: China exposure, other Asia exposure, and Europe
exposure. Analyzing 10-K filings data, Hoberg and Moon count mentions of different countries
to capture the extent to which firms are exposed to either input or output risks from each country
mentioned. Thus, China exposure represents the number of times “China” is mentioned in these

24

financial reports for each firm; Other Asia exposure represents the number of times all Asian
countries, except China, are mentioned; and Europe exposure represents the number of times a
European country is mentioned in the 10-K statements. The authors validated these measures
against data on foreign trade as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau. There are two limitations to
our use of these measures: i) 44 firms in our sample had no data on 10-K country mentions; and
ii) these data were last updated in 2017, potentially missing adjustments that firms made in the
2017-2019 period to their foreign exposure, especially to China. We deal with the former
through imputation of missing data (discussed further below), and the latter is likely to largely
subsumed into industry fixed effects that we include, as the trade war between the U.S. and
China has largely affected sectors (e.g., steel, agriculture) as a whole and not individual firms. As
an additional effort to control for such exposure using late-2019 data, we also calculated the
percentage of foreign revenues from the Compustat segments database. This measure was also
not available for all firms in our sample (82 of our 513 sample firms lacked it), but as with the
variables above we employ imputation to deal with missingness. Taken together, these variables
capture firm-level variance in firms’ exposure to foreign markets, which has had a significant
effect on stock market reactions in Q1 2020 (Ramelli & Wagner, 2020).
Research also reveals that in Q1 2020, markets responded more negatively to firms with
less cash and with more debt (Ramelli & Wagner, 2020), the logic being that such firms will
have a more difficult time weathering a market downturn. Hence, we control for leverage, which
is firms’ long-term debt plus debt in current liabilities divided by total assets, and cash/assets,
which is cash and short-term investments divided by total assets. Finally, because COVID-19
related disruptions are likely to vary across industry, we include dummies for three-digit NAICS
code. Our results are fully robust to employing industry fixed effects at the three-digit SIC code

25

level. These measures are taken from Compustat. Furthermore, we control for several indicators
of size and performance, including (logged) total assets, return on assets, and market-to-book
ratio. These measures are constructed from Compustat. We also control for institutional investor
ownership concentration, measured using the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index drawn from
Thomson-Reuters data on institutional ownership.
Although analyses reveal that most of the voluntary disclosures of COVID-related risks
involved discussion of its effect on demand for firms’ products and services and supply chain
disruptions, some firms may have also been more apt to voluntarily discuss COVID-19 risks due
to their broader stakeholder orientation (Hassan et al., n.d.). Firms with a stronger stakeholder
orientation may be more likely to disclose COVID-19 risks, in part, because of the virus’
potential impact on workers, the broader community, and society. To help account for this
possibility, we include a measure to capture whether firms are more stakeholder minded; we use
Sustainalytics’ ratings of firms’ environment, social, and governance (ESG) factors.
Sustainalytics’ ESG rating is a continuous measure comprised of analysts’ evaluations along 163
unique indicators, and we employed the latest available composite score data (October 2018).
Unfortunately, Sustainalytics does not cover 25 of our sample firms, but as with our foreign
exposure variables, as we discuss further below, we address this missingness via imputation.
Finally, we control for the timing of each firm’s Q1 earnings call. Although the severity
of COVID-19 was initially ambiguous, as time elapsed, the disease’s virulence and economic
impact became clearer. Therefore, given increased information and salience over time, earnings
calls held later in the quarter may be more likely to disclose COVID-19 risks. We thus include a

26

continuous control variable that indexes the date of the earnings call, constructed as the number
of days after January 1, 2020 that the call was held.8
As noted above, there were missing data for several of our control variables, particularly
our measures of ESG (Sustainalytics ESG ratings) and foreign trade exposure (China exposure,
Other Asia exposure, Europe exposure, and Percentage of foreign revenues). Given our
relatively small sample, we aimed to preserve as much of it as we could, and thus, we used
multiple imputation techniques to impute missing data for these five variables.9
Table 1 presents the descriptive statistics and correlations for our variables.
[ Insert Table 1 about here ]

MODEL AND RESULTS
We estimate OLS regression models with heteroscedastic robust standard errors. We estimate i) a
baseline model that includes only our political partisanship index, ii) a fully specified model with
both our political partisanship index and the controls included, iii) the fully specified model run
on the subsample that excludes non-contributing firms, and iv) the fully specified model that
focuses only on COVID-19 discussion in the presentation section of the earnings call. Table 2
presents these results.
[ Insert Table 2 about here ]

8

The likelihood that a call discussed of COVID-19 risks may not follow a linear functional form. As alternatives to
including this linear time control, we ran analyses using several alternative specifications, including: (a) the squared
term of count of days since January 1, 2020, (b) the 7-day cumulative sum of the number of articles published in six
major newspaper outlets (Chicago Tribune, Los Angeles Times, New York Times, Wall Street Journal, Washington
Post, and USA Today) that mentioned COVID-19 or related synonyms, and (c) the cumulative number of reported
COVID-19 cases in the United States. The results are consistent irrespective of specification. We used this linear
control as it is easiest to interpret, but analyses with other specifications are available upon request.
9
We use the multiple imputation with chained equations (mi) in Stata 15. Total ESG and Percent foreign revenue
were imputed using OLS regression while China exposure, Other Asia exposure, and Europe exposure were imputed
using Poisson regression. We estimated the multiple imputation equations using all other variables in the analysis
and produced 10 imputed samples. We also estimated our models using only cases with complete data, and despite
reduction in our sample size (from 513 to 378), our results were statistically and substantively significant.

27

Model 1 estimates the baseline effect of partisan political positioning on firms’
voluntarily disclosed COVID-19 risks and shows a significant positive effect for our partisanship
index (𝛽 = 0.052, p < 0.05), with more Democratic-leaning firms, as indicated by their corporate
PAC contributions, being more likely to voluntarily disclose COVID-19-related risks in their
earnings calls. Model 2 introduces the fully specified model and indicates that the political
partisanship effect is positive and statistically significant (𝛽 = 0.062, p < 0.05). In terms of effect
size, a one standard deviation increase in Democratic giving on the political partisanship index is
associated with a 39 percent increase in voluntarily disclosed COVID-19 related risks. By way of
comparison, firms in the airline industry (NAICS 481) disclosed 67 percent more COVID-19
related risks as compared to non-Airline companies during these early months of the pandemic.
Model 3 estimates the fully specified model on the subsample of firms that made political
contributions, excluding non-contributors that had been imputed as moderate in the main sample.
Model 3 similarly shows a positive and significant political partisanship effect on voluntarily
disclosing COVID-19 related risk (𝛽 = 0.063, p < 0.05). In this model, a one standard deviation
increase in Democratic giving, among contributing firms, corresponds to a 37 percent increase in
voluntarily disclosed COVID-19 related risks. The consistency of our findings across Models 2
and 3 helps assuage concern that selection into political contributing may affect our results.
Finally, Model 4 focuses on voluntarily disclosed COVID-19 related risks in the prepared
presentation section of the earnings call, rather than the full transcript. Model 4 shows a positive
and significant political partisanship effect on voluntarily disclosing COVID-19 related risks in
the presentation section (𝛽 = 0.106, p < 0.05). In this model, a one standard deviation increase in
Democratic giving corresponds to a 38 percent increase in voluntarily disclosed COVID-19
related risks. In analyses available upon request, we also estimated models using the COVID-19

28

risk scores on the Q&A section alone and found no significant political partisanship effect on
COVID-19 related risk. Taken together, these results help assuage concerns that our effects
primarily arise due to in analysts’ questions in the Q&A section.
Finally, one possible alternative explanation for our finding is that there are baseline
differences in executives’ proclivity to talk about business risks more generally based upon their
firms’ partisan positioning. Imagine, for example, that executives of Democratic-leaning firms
were generally more forthcoming in their voluntary communications about risk on earnings calls.
To account for this possibility, we conducted a placebo test using data from Hassan et al., (2019)
in which we examine whether a firm’s partisan political positioning affected its discussion of
overall business risk in the Q1 2019. We find no such relationship, suggesting that, consistent
with our theorizing, on topics without a partisan valence, a firm’s partisan positioning will not
impact how its management discusses risk. These results appear in Appendix 2.

Supplemental Analyses
In addition to our main results, we conducted supplemental analyses to consider i) how the
political partisanship effect varies over time and ii) concerns regarding causality.

Time effects
The main results estimate the effect of political partisanship on COVID-19 voluntary risk
disclosure among all Q1 2020 earnings calls for the firms in our sample. However, it is likely
that this effect varies over time. In our main results we account for this with a control variable
capturing how distant in days from January 1, 2020 the earnings call was. Yet, the time effect is
worthy of separate investigation because it could indicate an important scope condition for our
theory – partisan political positioning may only induce nonmarket strategic rigidity and thus

29

affect risk disclosures when ambiguity is high and/or firms have greater discretion over their
disclosures. Broader acceptance of concrete pandemic-related threats and regulatory guidance
may vitiate affective polarization’s effects by reducing the uncertainty that allows cognitive
biases to affect perceptions and behavior and effectively limiting firm discretion, respectively.
To examine differences in the partisan positioning’s effect over time, we estimate our
main regression model on time-staggered overlapping subsamples using a 50-day window.10
We started by estimating our model on a subsample of earnings calls held during the first 50
days of the year (January 1 to February 19). We then estimated the model on progressively later
subsamples, advancing the start of our 50-day sample window by 5 days in each iteration. This
strategy allows us to investigate changes in the point estimates and standard errors associated
with the partisan political positioning effect as time progresses.
[ Figure 2 about here ]
Figure 2 presents regression estimates and standard error bars for each of our 11
overlapping temporal subsamples from January 1 through April 9. The figure shows that the
estimates were all positive throughout the entire period, indicating a partisan political positioning
effect consistent with the main results. However, beginning with the February 9 to March 30
subsample, the political partisanship effect begins to lose statistical significance, as evidenced by
the standard error bar including zero. The standard errors expand further in the subsequent time
samples. This pattern of results is consistent with the historical progression of the pandemic – by

10

This technique is commonly called temporally recursive regression and is often used for modeling historical
processes in time-series data (Griffin & Isaac, 1992). The technique involves estimating periodized regression
models on recursive overlapping historical subsamples to investigate changes in effect sizes and significance levels
across historical time (e.g., see, Isaac, Street, & Knapp, 1994; Abbott, 2001; Isaac & Christiansen, 2002; Ermakoff,
2019). We experimented with multiple time-window lengths (longer and shorter windows) and multiple time-step
iterations (5-day steps, 10-day steps). These analyses were generally consistent with the main results but face tradeoffs in-terms of sample size. Specifically, fewer firms held Q1 earnings calls during later time windows (especially
after mid-March), making it challenging to estimate fully specified models. Concomitantly, standard errors increase
for these smaller subsample sizes that capture times of the year when fewer earnings calls were held.

30

late March, there was less ambiguity about the short- to mid-term consequences of the pandemic
and the associated stay-at-home orders, the president had declared a national emergency, and
more importantly, the SEC had issued guidance concerning COVID-19 related risk disclosures.
We also investigated whether partisan political positioning had an effect on COVID-19 risk
disclosure in earnings calls held during Q2 2020, and as expected, found no statistically
significant partisanship effect during this period.

Matched sample analysis
We also conducted a matched sample analysis designed to account for pre-pandemic differences
in political leanings across firms. This strategy involves i) matching firms that exhibit different
political contribution patterns but are otherwise similar on other dimensions and ii) using the
matched sample to estimate the effects of political partisanship on differences in voluntary
COVID-19 risk disclosure. Although most matching techniques for observational data are
applicable only for binary treatment effects, the political partisanship index is a continuous
measure and thus requires a different strategy. We adopted a technique called Covariate
Balancing Propensity Score Estimation (CBPS), which estimates propensity scores that
maximize both the treatment assignment prediction and covariate balance. This strategy avoids
the process of iterating between model fitting and balance checking common in most propensity
score matching techniques by implementing modeling fitting and balancing simultaneously.
Most importantly for our application, CBPS is appropriate for continuous treatment effects and
can estimate treatment weights for continuous variables, and these treatment weights can then be

31

used to estimate the causal effect of a continuous treatment (Fong, Hazlett, & Imai, 2018). This
process is similar to inverse probability weighting used for binary treatment effects.11
We estimated CBPS weights by matching on three dimensions: i) industry, ii) total ESG
rating from Sustainalytics, and iii) an exogenous indicator of Democratic party context which is
the share of Democratic party held seats in the U.S. Congress from the firm’s headquarters state
and on the congressional committees with jurisdiction over the firms industry (pooled from 2010
to 2019).12 To construct our matching weights, we estimated CBPS weights using Total ESG and
Democratic party context within 2-digit industry groups. This strategy allows us to match firms
with similar stakeholder orientations and partisan political environments within industry
segments. We adopted this approach because industry, stakeholder orientation, and partisan
political context can all have substantial effects on firm’s partisan political positioning. We then
used the CBPS weights to estimate OLS regression models of the causal effect of partisan
political positioning. However, note that we were unable to use multiple imputation for missing
data on our ESG and foreign trade exposure variables within the CBPS weighted models (see the
multiple imputation discussion above). Therefore, these models rely on the subsample of
observations with complete data, reducing our sample size from 513 to 348.
[ Insert Table 3 about here ]
Table 3 presents the results from OLS regression models with CBPS weights. Model 1
estimates the baseline effect of partisan political positioning on firms’ voluntarily disclosed
COVID-19 risks and shows a significant positive effect for our partisanship index (𝛽 = 0.083, p

11

We implemented CBPS estimation and weighting using the CBPS package in R, https://CRAN.Rproject.org/package=CBPS.
12
We gathered data on the partisanship of state Congressional delegations from the websites of the Secretary of U.S.
Senate and the Clerk of the U.S. House and data on committee ratios from the Congressional Research Service. To
match firms to the Congressional committees with jurisdiction over their industry, we employed the mapping
created by Ovtchinnikov and Pantaleoni (2012).

32

< 0.01). Model 2 introduces the fully specified CBPS weighted model and indicates that the
political partisanship effect is positive and statistically significant (𝛽 = 0.114, p < 0.001). Model
3 estimates the fully specified model on the subsample of firms that made political contributions,
excluding non-contributors, reducing the sample size to 235. The model similarly shows a
positive and significant political partisanship effect on voluntarily disclosing COVID-19 related
risk (𝛽 = 0.088, p < 0.01). Finally, Model 4 focuses on voluntarily disclosed COVID-19 related
risks in the prepared presentation section of the earnings call, rather than the full transcript. The
model shows a positive and significant political partisanship effect on disclosing COVID-19
related risks in the presentation section (𝛽 = 0.157, p < 0.01). These findings of our matched
sample analyses are fully consistent with our main results, revealing a positive and significant
relationship between partisan positioning and voluntary discussions of COVID-19 risks.

DISCUSSION
The results of this study pose important considerations for scholars of managerial risk and
corporate decision-making more broadly. We show that the more Democratic a firm’s
management had politically positioned the firm prior to the emergence of COVID-19, the more
likely the firm’s management was to voluntarily disclose risks due to the disease. We believe that
these results provide evidence that affective polarization in American politics has spilled over
into corporate America. This insight, that affective polarization may be a type of environmentallevel factor that limits how a firm’s management can formulate strategy given also the prior
partisan political positioning they have chosen for the firm, represents an important theoretical
contribution. Further, our operationalization of a firm’s partisan political positioning represents
an important empirical contribution in that it affects how a firm interacts with its external

33

environment and captures an important dimension of a firm’s identity in the public sphere that its
organizational (or CEO, board, or employee) ideology does not.
Our study holds important practical implications as well. Notably, a large body of
evidence points to the importance of firms’ voluntary risk disclosures and communications to the
broader investment community. That is, investors and analysts rely on executives to provide
them with information about the firms’ prospects and risks; a fact that is especially important
when the firm is confronted with a novel risk (Hail et al., 2020). To our knowledge, ours is the
first study to reveal that how executives communicate business risks can be colored by political
partisanship. In so doing, our study has key implications for investors and analysts, who must
consider that a firm’s political positioning may bias executives in ways that lead them to play up
or play down certain risks. If such bias is not considered, market actors may form inaccurate
judgments of firms’ future prospects. Such information may also inform the types of questions
market participants ask on such calls in an effort to obtain more accurate information.
In terms of limitations, the mechanism behind our finding needs further unpacking. We
argue that recognizing that they are facing an issue characterized by affective polarization, a
firm’s upper echelon makes decisions about whether and how to discuss COVID-19 risks in a
manner that is consistent with the firm’s prior partisan political position. Importantly, however,
voluntary risk disclosure involves two distinct steps: recognizing the risk and freely disclosing it.
We can only observe the latter, however. Ideally, we could observe the conversations that
precede the earnings calls to determine whether the executives consider the constraints
associated with their partisan political positioning and the politics of the disease in determining
whether and how they voluntarily reveal COVID-19 risks. Such information, however, is not
widely available. We can also imagine other possible pathways, such as executives relying on

34

private information from politicians to whom their firms’ PACs contribute money to guide their
discussions of COVID-19 risks. Future work relying on other methodologies, such as interviews
and case studies may be able to adjudicate between these possible mechanisms.
Our time effects analyses also point to potential boundary conditions in our theory. We
see evidence in studies of mass public behavior that individuals in more conservative areas abide
more closely to social distancing recommendations when COVID-19 outbreaks increase in their
area (Druckman et al. 2020), suggesting that information/uncertainty reduction may minimize
the impact of affective polarization on behavior (Healy & Maholtra, 2013). In our study,
however, we cannot know for certain what the differential impacts on voluntary risk disclosure
that the SEC’s guidance about discussing COVID-19 risks had versus the broader awareness that
COVID-19 was significantly and adversely impacting the U.S. (and global) economy. Again,
future work relying on other methodologies may be able to adjudicate between these two
mitigating factors. More generally, future work should further explore both discretion and
uncertainty reduction as boundary conditions to affective polarization on executive decisionmaking. Moreover, given the unique contours of campaign finance in the U.S. and the fact that
affective polarization, although present in other polities, is stronger in the U.S. (Boxell,
Gentzkow, & Shapiro, 2020), it is important to study the impact of affective polarization on
firms’ voluntary risk disclosures, and strategic actions more broadly, on other affectively
polarized issues and in other countries.

CONCLUSION
COVID-19 is among the most salient issues faced by all of society at present, and for the current
crop of top executives of firms large and small, it will likely be among the greatest and gravest
challenges they will face in their careers. Upon entering the U.S., the disease was almost

35

immediately subject to the process of affective polarization, with clear partisan splits forming
around perceptions of the risk that it posed that had little to do with ideology or science. This
created a unique managerial challenge, and we provide evidence here that indicates, in light of
the disease being affectively polarized, firms’ preexisting partisan political positioning colored
their discussions of it as a business risk.
Exploring the degree to which firms voluntarily acknowledge the risks unleashed by
COVID-19 is of critical societal importance given the economic and political challenges the
world will face in the next several years due to the disease. Further, such grand challenges are
only likely only to increase in frequency and severity (Haass, 2020). We believe that the findings
here can help inform how firms will perceive of such present and coming risks, including the
inevitable adjustments that will occur because of unmitigated climate change, another critical
issue for business and society that has already undergone the process of affective polarization.

36

REFERENCES
Abramowitz, A. I., & Webster, S. (2016). The rise of negative partisanship and the
nationalization of U.S. elections in the 21st century. Electoral Studies, 41(1), 12–22.
Agiesta, J. (2020, 12 May). CNN poll: Negative ratings for government handling of coronavirus
persist. CNN.com Retrieved from https://www.cnn.com/2020/05/12/politics/cnn-poll-federalgovernment-handling-of-coronavirus/index.html.
Allcott, H., Boxell, L., Conway, J., Gentzkow, M., Thaler, M., & Yang, D. Y. (2020).
Polarization and public health: Partisan differences in social distancing during the Coronavirus
pandemic. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 26946.
Audia, P. G., Locke, E. A., & Smith, K. G. (2000). The paradox of success: An archival and
laboratory study of strategic persistence following radical environmental change. Academy of
Management Journal, 43(5), 837–853.
Ballesteros, L., & Gatignon, A. (2019). The relative value of firm and nonprofit experience:
Tackling large-scale social issues across institutional contexts. Strategic Management Journal,
40(4), 631-657.
Baron, D. P. (2013). Business and its environment. Boston: Pearson
Barrios, J. M., & Hochberg, Y. (2020). Risk perception through the lens of politics in the time of
the COVID-19 pandemic. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 27008.
Bartels, L. M. (2002). Beyond the running tally: Partisan bias in political perceptions. Political
Behavior, 24. 117-150.
Beall, A. T., Hofer, M. K., & Schaller, M. (2016). Did the ebola outbreak influence the 2014
U.S. federal elections (and if so, how)? Psychological Science, 27(5), 595–605.
Beaver, W. H. (1968). The information content of annual earnings announcements. Journal of
accounting research, 6. 67-92.
Bebchuk, L. A., & Jackson, Jr., R. J. (2010) Corporate political speech: Who decides? Harvard
Law Review, 124, 83–117.
Bolton, A. (2020, 11 May). GOP senators worry Trump, COVID-19 could cost them their
majority. The Hill. Retrieved from https://thehill.com/homenews/senate/496898-gop-senatorsworry-trump-covid-19-could-cost-them-their-majority
Bonica, A. (2016). Avenues of influence: On the political expenditures of corporations and their
directors and executives. Business and Politics, 18(4), 367–394.
Borio, L. & Gottlieb S. (2020, February 4). Stop a U.S. coronavirus outbreak before it starts.
Wall Street Journal. Retrieved from https://www.wsj.com/articles/stop-a-u-s-coronavirusoutbreak-before-it-starts-11580859525
Boxell, L., Gentzkow, M., & Shapiro, J. M. (2020). Cross-country trends in affective
polarization. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. w26669.
Brochet, F., Loumioti, M., & Serafeim, G. (2015). Speaking of the short-term: Disclosure
horizon and managerial myopia. Review of Accounting Studies, 20(3), 1122–1163.
Bullock, J. G., Gerber, A. S., Hill, S. J., & Huber, G. A. (2015). Partisan bias in factual beliefs
about politics. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 10(4), 519–578.
Bursztyn, L., Rao, A., Roth, C., & Yanagizawa-Drott, D. (2020). Misinformation during a
pandemic. Working paper, University of Chicago.
Bushee, B. J., Matsumoto, D. A., & Miller, G. S. (2003). Open versus closed conference calls:
the determinants and effects of broadening access to disclosure. Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 34(1–3), 149–180.

37

Caughey, D., & Warshaw, C. (2018). Policy preferences and policy change: Dynamic
responsiveness in the American states, 1936–2014. American Political Science Review, 112(2),
249–266.
Cerdeiro, D. A., Komaromi, A., Liu, Y., & Saeed, M. (2020). World seaborne trade in real time:
A proof of concept for building AIS-based nowcasts from scratch. International Monetary
Fund. Working Paper No. 20/57.
Cheema-Fox, A., LaPerla, B. R., Serafeim, G., & Hui, W. (2020). Corporate resilience and
response during COVID-19. Working paper, Harvard Business School.
Chen, J., Demers, E., & Lev, B. (2018). Oh what a beautiful morning! Diurnal influences on
executives and analysts: Evidence from conference calls. Management Science, 64(12):5461–
5959.
Child, J. (1972). Organizational structure, environment and performance: The role of strategic
choice. Sociology, 6(1): 1–22.
Chin, M. K., Hambrick, D.C., & Treviño, L. K. (2013). Political ideologies of CEOs: The
influence of executives’ values on corporate social responsibility. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 58(2), 197–232.
Christensen, D. M., Dhaliwal, D. S., Boivie, S., & Graffin, S. D. (2015). Top management
conservatism and corporate risk strategies: Evidence from managers’ personal political
orientation and corporate tax avoidance. Strategic Management Journal, 36(12), 1918–1938.
Cobb, J. A., Wry, T., & Zhao, E. Y. (2017). Funding financial inclusion: Institutional logics and
the contextual contingency of funding for microfinance organizations. Academy of
Management Journal, 59(6), 2103-2131.
Cohen, A., Hazan, M., Tallarita, R., & Weiss, D. (2019). The politics of CEOs. Journal of Legal
Analysis, 11(1), 1–45.
Davis, A. K., Ge, W., Matsumoto, D., & Zhang, J. L. (2015). The effect of manager-specific
optimism on the tone of earnings conference calls. Review of Accounting Studies, 20(2), 639–
673.
Davis, J. H., Schoorman, F. D., & Donaldson, L. (1997). Toward a stewardship theory of
management. Academy of Management Review, 22(1), 20–47.
Devers, C. E., Wiseman, R. M., Holmes, Jr., R. M. (2007). The effects of endowment and loss
aversion in managerial stock option valuation. Academy of Management Journal, 50(1), 191–
208.
Douglas, M., & Wildavsky, A. B. (1982). Risk and culture: An essay on the selection of
technical and environmental dangers. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Ducharme, J. (2020, February 7). News coverage of coronavirus in 2020 is very different than it
was for ebola in 2018. Time. Retrieved from https://time.com/5779872/coronavirus-ebolanews-coverage/
Druckman, J. N., Klar, S., Krupnikov, Y., Levendusky, M., & Ryan, J. B. (2020). How affective
polarization shapes Americans’ political beliefs: A study of response to the COVID-19
pandemic. Journal of Experimental Political Science, 1-20.
Eggers, J. P., & Kaplan, S. (2013). Cognition and capabilities: A multi-level perspective.
Academy of Management Annals, 7, 295–340.
Elmy, F. J., LeGuyader, L. P., & Linsmeier, T. J. (1998). A review of initial filings under the
SEC's new market risk disclosure rules. Journal of Corporate Accounting & Finance, 9(4), 3345.

38

Fjeld, R. A., Eisenberg, N. A., & Compton, K. L. (2007). Quantitative environmental risk
analysis for human health. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Flammer, C., & Ioanou, I., (2020). Strategic Management During the Financial Crisis: How
Firms Adjust Their Strategic Investments in Response to Credit Market Disruptions. Working
Paper, Boston University.
Fong, C., Hazlett, C., & Imai, K. (2018). Covariate balancing propensity score for a continuous
treatment: Application to the efficacy of political advertisements. The Annals of Applied
Statistics, 12(1), 156-177.
Frankel, R., Johnson, M., & Skinner, D. J. (1999). An Empirical Examination of Conference
Calls as a Voluntary Disclosure Medium. Journal of Accounting Research, 37(1), 133-150.
Fu, X., Wu, X., & Zhang, Z. (2019). The Information Role of Earnings Conference Call Tone:
Evidence from Stock Price Crash Risk. Journal of Business Ethics, 1-18.
Green, J., Edgeron, J., Naftel, D., Shoub, K., & Cranmer, S. J. (2020). Elusive consensus:
Polarization in elite communication on the COVID-19 pandemic. Science Advances, 6(28),
eabc2717.
Green, T. V., & Tyson, A. (2020, April 2). 5 facts about partisan reactions to COVID-19 in the
U.S. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from https://www.pewresearch.org/facttank/2020/04/02/5-facts-about-partisan-reactions-to-covid-19-in-the-u-s/
Griffin L. J. & Isaac, L. W. (1992) Recursive regression and the historical use of “time” in timeseries analysis of historical process. Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and
Interdisciplinary History, 25(4), 166-179.
Guo, W., Sengul, M., Yu, T., (2020). The Impact of Executive Verbal Communication on the
Convergence of Investors’ Opinions. Academy of Management Journal, In Press.
Guo, W., Yu, T., & Gimeno, J. (2017). Language and competition: Communication vagueness,
interpretation difficulties, and market entry. Academy of Management Journal, 60(6), 2073–
2098.
Gupta, A., Briscoe, F., & Hambrick, D. C. (2017). Red, blue, and purple firms: Organizational
political ideology and corporate social responsibility. Strategic Management Journal, 38(5),
1018–1040.
Hail, L., Muhn, M., & Oesch, D. (2020). Do Risk Disclosures Matter When It Counts? Evidence
from the Swiss Franc Shock. Journal of Accounting Research, In Press.
Hambrick, D. C. (2007). Upper echelons theory: An update. Academy of Management Review,
32(2), 334–343.
Hardy, C. & Maguire, S. (2020). Organizations, risk translation, and the ecology of risks: The
discursive construction of a novel risk. Academy of Management Journal, 63(2), 685–716.
Hardy, C. Maguire, S., Power, M., & Tsoukas, H. (2020). Organizing risk: organization and
management theory for the risk society. Academy of Management Annals, 14(2), 1032–1066.
Hassan, T. A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., & Tahoun, A. (2019). Firm-level political risk:
Measurement and effects. Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(4), 2135–2202.
Hassan, T. A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., & Tahoun, A. (2020). The global impact of Brexit
uncertainty. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No. 26609.
Hassan, T. A., Hollander, S., van Lent, L., & Tahoun, A. (n.d.) Firm-level exposure to epidemic
diseases: COVID-19, SARS, and H1N1.
Haass, R. (2020). The world: A brief introduction. New York: Penguin Press.
Hayward, M. L. A., Hambrick, D. C. (1997). Explaining the premiums paid for large
acquisitions. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1), 103–127.

39

Healy, A. & Malhotra, N. (2013). Retrospective voting reconsidered. Annual Review of Political
Science, 16, 285–306.
Healy, P. & Palepu, K. (2001). Information asymmetry, corporate disclosure, and the capital
markets: A review of the empirical disclosure literature. Journal of Accounting and Economics,
31(1), 405-440.
Helfat, C. E., & Peteraf, M. A. (2015). Managerial cognitive capabilities and the
microfoundations of dynamic capabilities. Strategic Management Journal, 36(6), 831–850.
Hoberg, G., & Moon, S. K. (2017). Offshore activities and financial vs operational
hedging. Journal of Financial Economics, 125(2), 217-244.
Hoberg, G., & Moon, S. K. (2019). The offshoring return premium. Management Science, 65(6),
2876-2899.
Hoskisson, R. E., Chirico, F., Zyung, J., & Gambeta, E. (2017). Managerial risk taking: A
multitheoretical review and future research agenda. Journal of Management, 43(1), 137–169.
Hutton, I., Jiang, D., & Kumar, A. (2014). Corporate policies of Republican managers. Journal
of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 49(5-6), 1279–1310.
Iyengar, S., Lelkes, Y., Levendusky, M., Malhotra, N., & Westwood, S. J. (2019). The origins
and consequences of affective polarization in the United States. Annual Review of Political
Science, 22, 129–146.
Jamieson, K. H., & Albarracin, D. (2020). The Relation between media consumption and
misinformation at the outset of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in the U.S. The Harvard Kennedy
School Misinformation Review.
Jost, J., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A., & Sulloway, F. 2003. Political conservatism as motivated
social cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 129(3), 339–375.
Kimbrough, Michael. (2005). The effect of conference calls on analyst and market underreaction
to earnings announcements. The Accounting Review, 80(1), 189–219.
Kravet, T., & Muslu, V. (2013). Textual risk disclosures and investors’ risk perceptions. Review
of Accounting Studies, 18(4), 1088–1122.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1992). Core capabilities and core rigidities: a paradox in managing product
development. Strategic Management Journal, 13(S2), 111–125.
Leuz, C., & Schrand, C. (2009). Disclosure and the cost of capital: Evidence from firms’
responses to the Enron shock. National Bureau of Economic Research. Working Paper No.
14897.
Loughran, T., & McDonald, B. (2011). When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis,
dictionaries, and 10-Ks. Journal of Finance, 66(1), 35–65.
Loughran, T., & McDonald, B. (2013). IPO first-day returns, offer price revisions, volatility, and
Form S-1 language. Journal of Financial Economics, 109(2), 307–326.
Loughran, T., & McDonald, B. (2016). Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A survey.
Journal of Accounting Research, 54(4), 1187–1230.
Matsumoto, D., Pronk, M., & Roelofsen, E. (2011). What makes conference calls useful? The
information content of managers' presentations and analysts’ discussion sessions. The
Accounting Review, 86(4), 1383–1414.
McConnell, C., Malhotra, N., Margalit, Y., & Levendusky, M. (2018). The economic
consequences of partisanship in a polarized era. American Journal of Political Science, 62(1),
5–18.
McDonnell, M-H., & Werner, T. (2016). Blacklisted businesses: Social activist challenges and
the disruption of corporate political activity. Administrative Science Quarterly, 61(4), 584–620.

40

Ovtchinnikov, A. V., & Pantaleoni, E. (2012). Individual political contributions and firm
performance. Journal of Financial Economics, 105(2), 367–392.
Pan, L., McNamara, G., Lee, J. J., Haleblian, J., & Devers, C. E. (2018). Give it to us straight
(most of the time): Top managers’ use of concrete language and its effect on investor
reactions. Strategic Management Journal, 39(8), 2204–2225.
Ramelli, S., & Wagner, A. F. (2020). Feverish stock price reactions to COVID-19. The Review of
Corporate Finance Studies, 9(3), 622–655.
Richter, B. K., & Werner, T. (2017). Campaign contributions from corporate executives in lieu
of political action committees. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 33(3), 443–474.
Skinner, D. J. (1994). Why Firms Voluntarily Disclosure Bad News. Journal of Accounting
Research, 32(1), 38-60.
Skinner, D. J. (1997). Earnings disclosures and stockholder lawsuits. Journal of Accounting and
Economics, 23(3), 249-282.
Stevens, P. (2020, February 25). Trump is reportedly furious that the stock market is plunging on
coronavirus fears. CNBC. Retrieved from https://www.cnbc.com/2020/02/25/trump-isreportedly-furious-with-the-plunging-stock-market-due-to-coronavirus-fears.html
Snyder, Jr., J. M. (1992). Long-term investing in politicians; Or, give early, give often. Journal
of Law & Economics, 35(1), 15–43.
Thompson, James. D. 1967. Organizations in action, New York: McGraw-Hill.
van Holm, E. J., Monaghan, J., Shahar, D. C., Messina, J. P., & Surprenant, C. (2020). The
impact of political ideology on concern and behavior during COVID-19. Working paper,
University of New Orleans.
Wang, X., Li, Y., & Xiao, M. (2017). Do risk disclosures in annual reports improve analyst
forecast accuracy? China Journal of Accounting Studies, 5(4), 527–546.
Wang, V. X., & Xing, B. (2020). Battling Uncertainty: Corporate Disclosures of COVID-19 in
Earnings Conferences Calls and Annual Reports (April 28, 2020). Available at SSRN:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/3586085.

41

Table 1: Descriptive statistics and correlation matrixa
1. Disclosed Covid-19 Risk
2. Political Partisanship Index
3. Prop. contributed to incumbents
4. CEO Partisanship Index
5. CFO Partisanship Index
6. Disclosed Covid-19 Exposure
7. Disclosed Political Risk
8. Peers’ Disclosed Covid-19 Risk
9. Lobbying expenditures b
10. Total Assets b
11. Return on assets
12. Cash on hand
13. Leverage
14. Market-to-book
15. Institutional investors (HHI)
16. HQ state Democratic governor
17. HQ state policy index
18. ESG Rating
19. China-exposure
20. Other Asia-exposure
21. Europe-exposure
22. Percentage foreign revenue
23. Call date (days since Jan 1, 2020)

Mean
.02
.44
.53
.39
.45
.26
127.09
.01
6.79
9.88
.05
.09
.34
1.39
.09
.62
.65
57.92
5.67
16.88
23.19
.45
37.19

S.D.
.07
.11
.42
.27
.24
.50
208.10
.02
8.01
1.43
.09
.12
.21
70.58
.18
.49
1.65
8.51
10.76
27.77
33.74
.41
13.14

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

.04
-.03
-.03
.00
.61
.22
.19
.00
-.09
.04
-.01
-.01
.02
-.03
-.01
.08
.09
.17
.12
.13
.19
.26

-.33
.36
.22
.09
-.01
.06
-.22
-.02
.09
.23
-.07
-.03
.02
.20
.34
-.01
.03
.03
-.03
.13
-.04

-.06
-.05
-.16
.01
-.09
.49
.36
-.05
-.09
.07
.05
.06
.03
-.05
.14
-.05
-.05
.03
-.07
-.09

.25
.09
-.05
.16
-.06
-.02
.05
.26
-.14
-.02
.06
.19
.26
-.03
.12
.07
.07
.15
.01

.03
-.02
.04
.00
-.01
.03
.14
.01
-.01
.02
.14
.27
.03
.05
-.00
.10
.08
-.02

.19
.51
-.10
-.15
.09
.08
-.01
.02
-.00
.01
.08
.10
.24
.22
.13
.27
.44

.07
.15
.06
-.02
-.01
-.03
.02
-.03
.05
.03
.09
-.08
-.02
.08
-.02
.04

-.13
-.11
-.01
.09
-.01
.03
.12
.00
.03
.10
.21
.19
.13
.26
.28

.37
.04
-.09
-.00
-.01
.06
.02
-.01
.20
-.03
-.01
.02
-.06
-.13

-.14
-.16
-.01
.01
.09
.05
.04
.33
-.15
-.03
-.06
-.08
-.08

.32
-.03
-.02
.15
.07
.13
.04
-.01
.02
-.02
.05
-.09

-.20
.02
-.10
.23
.38
-.03
.11
.12
.05
.24
-.12

-.08
.01
-.06
-.12
.07
-.01
-.01
.01
-.05
.11

.02
.06
.07
-.09
.03
.02
.01
-.10
.05

-.07
-.03
-.00
.06
.02
.08
.05
-.01

.55
.09
.04
.02
.03
.14
-.13

.17
.08
.10
.07
.21
-.14

.15
.21
.03
.16
-.01

.54
.39
.33
.00

.51
.39
.01

.34
.01

-.07

a

n = 513; all S&P 500 firms (1990–2020) without missing data.
b
Variable is log-transformed.

42

Table 2: OLS regression models predicting disclosed COVID-19-related risksa
Political Partisanship Index
Disclosed Covid-19 Exposure

(1)
Full Text
.052*
(.021)
.098***
(.022)

(2)
Full Text
.062*
(.024)
.102***
(.024)
.000
(.015)
-.010
(.013)
-.006
(.010)
.000
(.000)
-.604*
(.239)
.000
(.000)
-.004
(.004)
-.037
(.031)
-.020
(.025)
-.003
(.014)
-.000
(.000)
.001
(.010)
.002
(.009)
.000
(.003)
.000
(.000)
.000
(.000)
-.000
(.000)
.000
(.000)
.008
(.009)
.000
(.001)
-.023
(.012)
.018
(.062)
Yes
513
.50

Incumbent Contributions
CEO Partisanship Index
CFO Partisanship Index
Disclosed Political Risk
Peers’ Disclosed Covid-19 Risk
Lobbying expenditures b
Total assets b
Return on assets
Cash on hand
Leverage
Market to Book
Institutional investors (HHI)
HQ state Democratic governor
HQ state mass liberalism
ESG Rating
China-exposure
Other Asia-exposure
Europe-exposure
Percentage foreign revenue
Call date (days since Jan 1, 2020)
Partisanship index imputed flag
Constant
Industry FEs
N
r2

-.000
(.000)
-.021**
(.007)
-.002
(.019)
Yes
513
.48

a Robust
b

standard errors in parentheses.
Variable is log-transformed.

43

(3)
Full Text
.063*
(.029)
.126***
(.033)
.004
(.016)
-.014
(.017)
-.010
(.012)
.000
(.000)
-.830*
(.334)
-.001
(.001)
-.004
(.005)
-.058
(.044)
.009
(.038)
.003
(.020)
.000***
(.000)
.007
(.015)
.001
(.010)
-.001
(.003)
.000
(.000)
.000
(.001)
-.000
(.000)
.000
(.000)
.018
(.012)
.000
(.001)

.019
(.078)
Yes
339
.61

(4)
Presentation Text
.109*
(.052)
.130**
(.039)
-.023
(.029)
-.054
(.036)
-.005
(.026)
.000
(.000)
-.637
(.506)
.000
(.001)
-.007
(.010)
-.095
(.063)
-.052
(.057)
.019
(.034)
-.000
(.000)
-.009
(.013)
-.014
(.023)
.006
(.007)
-.000
(.001)
.000
(.001)
-.000
(.000)
-.000
(.000)
.029
(.020)
.001
(.001)
-.068*
(.026)
.110
(.159)
Yes
513
.40

Table 3: CBPS Weighted OLS regression models predicting disclosed COVID-19 related risksa
Political Partisanship Index
Disclosed Covid-19 Exposure

(1)
Full Text
.083**
(.035)
.105***
(.024)

(2)
Full Text
.114***
(.038)
.101***
(.025)
-.003
(.019)
-.034**
(.017)
-.019
(.012)
.000**
(.000)
-.029
(.031)
.000
(.000)
-.006
(.005)
-.036
(.043)
-.020
(.035)
-.006
(.020)
-.000
(.000)
.001
(.016)
-.004
(.011)
.003
(.003)
.000
(.001)
.001
(.001)
-.000*
(.000)
.000
(.000)
.021*
(.012)
-.000
(.001)
-.028*
(.017)
.047
(.075)
Yes
348
.54

Incumbent Contributions
CEO Partisanship Index
CFO Partisanship Index
Disclosed Political Risk
Peers’ Disclosed Covid-19 Risk
Lobbying expenditures b
Total assets b
Return on assets
Cash on hand
Leverage
Market to Book
Institutional investors (HHI)
HQ state Democratic governor
HQ state mass liberalism
ESG Rating
China-exposure
Other Asia-exposure
Europe-exposure
Percentage foreign revenue
Call date (days since Jan 1, 2020)
Partisanship index imputed flag
Constant
Industry FEs
N
r2

-.000
(.001)
-.022***
(.008)
-.005
(.028)
Yes
348
.49

a Robust
b

Standard errors in parentheses
Variable is log-transformed

44

(3)
Full Text
.088**
(.042)
.125***
(.033)
-.005
(.022)
-.046**
(.022)
-.001
(.014)
.000
(.000)
-.033
(.038)
-.002
(.002)
-.005
(.007)
-.049
(.050)
.034
(.048)
.009
(.027)
.000**
(.000)
.007
(.015)
-.004
(.013)
.000
(.004)
-.000
(.001)
.000
(.001)
-.000
(.000)
.000
(.000)
.034**
(.016)
-.000
(.001)

.082
(.088)
Yes
235
.61

(4)
Presentation Text
.157**
(.076)
.116***
(.044)
-.033
(.032)
-.090*
(.048)
-.025
(.030)
.000**
(.000)
-.014
(.075)
.001
(.002)
-.011
(.014)
-.103
(.107)
-.035
(.078)
.017
(.047)
-.000
(.000)
-.024
(.021)
-.029
(.032)
.015
(.009)
-.001
(.001)
.001
(.001)
-.000
(.000)
-.000
(.000)
.058*
(.031)
.001
(.002)
-.078**
(.034)
.185
(.209)
Yes
348
.39

Figure 1: Earnings Calls and Google Search Trends

45

Figure 2: Estimates and Standard Errors from Temporally Recursive OLS Regression Models –
Overlapping Fifty Day Subsamples from January 1 to April 9

Note: Regression estimates and standard errors from Temporally Recursive regression models using 5-day increment overlapping
50-day subsamples from January 1, 2020 to April 9, 2020.

46

Supplementary Appendices for
“Firm Partisan Political Positioning and Perceptions of COVID-19-Related Risk”

November 8, 2020

Supplementary Appendix 1
This supplementary appendix presents three excerpts from the preambles of conference
calls held by members of the S&P 500 during the first calendar quarter of 2020. They are Devon
Energy, Leggett & Platt, and Delta Airlines. We chose these firms as exemplars because they
cross-industry boundaries (energy, diversified manufacturing, and passenger air travel), but all
three are from industries that are affected by COVID-19. We present the three in the order of the
degree to which the discuss perceptions of the business risks posed by COVID-19. First, Devon
Energy does not mention the disease in any manner; second, Leggett & Platt discusses the
disease but largely in terms of its broad potential impacts on the economy and specifically, notes
that they are not providing any guidance with regard to COVID-19-related risks; and third, Delta
Airlines discusses firm-specific risks and impacts of the disease. Of course, some of this
variation may be driven by when exactly in the disease’s course the calls occurred, which is why
we control for the distance from January 1, 2020 in our econometric model.

1

Devon Energy (CEO Dave Hager speaking)
Thanks, Scott and good morning everyone. For Devon, 2019 can best be defined as a year of
exceptional execution and differentiating performance across every aspect of our business. As
you can see on slide 5 of our operations report, a critical accomplishment during the year was our
timely and tax-efficient transformation to a U.S. oil business. Even with the challenging market
conditions, we successfully completed our portfolio simplification objectives in only 10 months
and we're able to exit noncore assets at highly accretive valuations.
Furthermore, by sharpening our focus on Devon's world-class U.S. oil assets, we delivered a step
change improvement in corporate level rates of return, achieved enhanced capital efficiencies,
expanded our margins, reduced leverage and returned industry-leading amounts of capital to
shareholders. All in all, it was a great year. But let me be clear, we are just getting started and the
investment case for Devon has never been stronger.
Looking ahead to 2020, our strategic framework for success and disciplined capital priorities
remain unchanged. These priorities are outlined on slide 10 of our operations report. As always,
Devon's top priorities will be to fund the maintenance capital requirements of our business and
the quarterly dividend. Once these objectives are met, next step in our capital allocation process
is to selectively deploy capital to high-return projects that will efficiently expand the cash flow
of our business.
Importantly, our 2020 plan meets all of these capital allocation priorities at low breakeven
funding levels, even after accounting for the recent weaknesses in gas and NGL strip pricing.
Should this volatility drive prices higher, we will remain disciplined and the benefits of any
pricing windfall above our conservative base planning scenario will manifest itself in higher
levels of free cash flow for shareholders, not higher capital spending. Conversely, should we see
price volatility to the downside, we've designed our operating plan to have the flexibility and
agility to reassess the capital program and react to any structural changes in the macro
environment.
Leggett & Platt (CFO Jeffrey L. Tate speaking)
Finally, we know impacts from the coronavirus, are top-of-mind for many of you, and we’re
closely monitoring global developments. Our current 2020 guidance does not include possible
impacts from the virus. It’s still too early to develop reasonable quantitative data related to the
impact. Our first priority is the health and safety of our employees around the world. For our
employees in China, we’ve extended the Lunar New Year plant shutdowns in accordance with
Chinese provincial and local government extensions. We’re establishing protocols in all 16 of
our Chinese facilities to better protect our 5,200 employees in China when they can return to
work…
And for all Leggett & Platt employees around the world, we’ve implemented a travel ban to
Asia, and are severely restricting all international travels. We’re assessing the potential impact of
this pandemic on our business, including demand for our goods and our customers’ goods,
inventory availability through our supply chain as well as our customers’ supply chain, the
global movement of goods and workforce availability. We do not anticipate that there are factors

2

unique to us that will cause the impact from this coronavirus to be greater to our company than
our global manufacturers – than other global manufacturers.
Delta Airlines (CEO Ed Bastian speaking)
None of us could possibly have anticipated the speed with which COVID-19 has affected the
health of the world’s people and slowed economies across the globe. This has led to an
unprecedented situation where demand for near-term air travel dropped to almost zero in a matter
of weeks.
Our response has been focused on three priorities. First, protecting the health and the safety of
our employees and our customers. Second, preserving our financial liquidity to work through this
crisis. And third, ensuring we’re well positioned to recover once the virus is contained and
building a plan to accelerate our progress through this period of recovery. Nothing is more
important than the health and the safety of our people and our customers and we have
substantially increased our investment in cleanliness across the organization. These include a
wide range of safety and cleaning measures on our planes, at the airports and across our facilities
and these actions won't end when the virus abates. We’re taking steps to help our employees and
customers practice social distancing. They include blocking middle seats, pausing automatic
upgrades, modifying our boarding process and reducing meal service and other touch points.
…
On Monday, we received $2.7 billion of the $5.4 billion that's expected over the next few
months. $3.8 billion of this is direct aid with $1.6 billion in a low interest unsecured 10-year
loan. When you combine this release with our actions in the capital markets and our aggressive
cost management, we expect to have at least $10 billion in liquidity at the end of the June
quarter. Since early March, we’ve raised $5.4 billion in new financing and will likely raise
several billion more this quarter, a strong indication of the confidence that the capital markets
have in Delta. And while this will help ensure we have liquidity to weather the crisis with a more
than 90% expected reduction in revenues this quarter. We needed to quickly address costs to
stem cash burn. We have taken actions to reduce our total cost base by over 50% in the June
quarter. This amounts to a $5 billion reduction over the prior year which is impressive, given the
very short frame with which we’ve had to get this done. And it was the great spirit of the Delta
people that were a big part of making that happen. Right now 37,000 employees, more than onethird of our workforce have elected to take voluntary unpaid leaves ranging from 30 days to one
year, a significant personal sacrifice that I will forever be grateful for. This is helping reduce our
daily cash burn, which started at $100 million per day in March, down to $50 million a day,
starting next month in May. Paul will go into more detail on these cost reductions and the cash
burn trajectory that we are seeing.
After taking care of the safety of our customers and our people and protecting the financial
liquidity of our enterprise, the third priority, we have is starting to build our recovery plan. These
are truly unprecedented times and the path to recovery is uncertainty and will likely be choppy.
And while we all wish we could predict the pace of the recovery, the truth is, our recovery will
be dictated by our customers feeling safe, both physically and financially to begin to travel at
scale. Given the combined effects of the pandemic and associated financial impact on the global
economy, we believe that it could be up to three years before we see a sustainable recovery. And

3

to succeed throughout that environment, we will likely need to resize our business in the near
term to protect it in the long term. And while the resizing of our business over the short term is
painful, it will also be an opportunity to accelerate strategies to streamline our Company,
simplify our fleet and reduce our fixed cost base in ways not possible in the past.
It will allow us to advance the timelines of some of our critical airport infrastructure projects as
we don’t have the same constraints that limited progress and drove higher cost to construct it.
We will be focused on what it takes to regain consumer confidence to travel and we are listing
the very best medical advisors to help us navigate the journey from testing through to vaccines
and helping translate those solutions to our business model. Safety will no longer be limited to
flight safety, but personal safety as well. And while we may have more questions and answers
about our path forward at present. One thing that is certain, it is that the strength that are core to
Delta’s business, our people, our brand, our network and our operational reliability are enduring.
These advantages will continue to differentiate Delta and position us to succeed.

4

Supplementary Appendix 2
Our main results show that partisan political positioning is correlated with perceptions of
COVID-19 risk, as measured using transcripts from earnings calls occurring in the first quarter
of calendar year 2020. We argue that the partisan positioning effect is largely due to the partisan
valence associated with COVID-19 due to affective polarization and not underlying political
associations with risk tolerance or perceptions. To bolster this claim, we conducted a
supplementary analysis to examine whether partisan political positioning is associated with risk
perceptions that carry no partisan valence. A null result would lend confidence to our
interpretation that the partisan political valence surrounding COVID-19 affects how firms
respond.
To test this argument, we conducted a supplementary analysis of risk perceptions from
earnings calls occurring in the first quarter of calendar year 2019 (i.e., one year prior to COVID19’s emergence but in the same quarter). This dependent variable is the frequency of risk or
uncertainty synonyms in the transcript, normalized by transcript length (number of words).13 The
variable is log transformed to account for right-skewness. This measure does not give weight to
any specific source of risk and thus should carry no salient partisan valence.
Our key independent variable is the political partisanship index, as described in the main
text, occurring in the prior 10 years. We also control for other factors used in the main regression
models, including donations to incumbents, logged lobbying expenditures, logged total assets,
return-on-assets, debt-to-equity ratio, market-to-book ratio, institutional investor concentration,
the partisanship imputation flag, and industry fixed-effects using 3-digit NAICS codes.
[ Insert Table SA2-1 about here ]

13

Hassan et al make this variable available on their website, www.firmlevelrisk.com

5

Table SA2-1 presents the OLS regression models, regressing perceived risk on the
political partisanship index and covariates. All models show a null effect of political partisanship
on disclosed risk; further, the estimated effect sizes are considerably smaller than the results in
the main paper, and the estimates fail to reach statistical significance.
These results lend confidence to our argument that the political valence of COVID-19
due to affective polarization affects whether and how a firm’s partisan political positioning
matters. As an affectively politicized issue, firm’s perceptions of COVID-19-related risk vary
depending on their own partisan political positioning. However, partisan positioning matters
does not have a significant impact on determining firms’ responses to non-politicized issues.

6

Table SA2-1: OLS regression models predicting disclosed risks in Q1 2019a
Political Partisanship Index

(1)
-1.213
(34.263)

Incumbent Contributions
CEO Partisanship Index
CFO Partisanship Index
Lobbying expenditures b
Total assets b
Return on assets
Cash on hand
Leverage
Market to Book
Institutional investors (HHI)
HQ state Democratic governor
HQ state policy index
ESG Rating
China-exposure
Other Asia-exposure
Europe-exposure
Percentage foreign revenue
Call date (days since Jan 1, 2020)
Partisanship index imputed flag
Constant
Industry FEs
N
r2
a
Robust Standard errors in parentheses
b
Variable is log-transformed

.064
(.212)
-6.716
(5.618)
65.283***
(16.345)
Yes
509
.24

7

(2)
-21.433
(39.063)
13.861
(11.612)
17.573
(10.796)
-11.763
(14.622)
.367
(.297)
6.231*
(3.069)
-15.447
(26.846)
-16.795
(22.772)
-20.463
(12.767)
-.001
(.019)
6.697
(16.680)
-2.312
(5.609)
1.559
(2.218)
-.045
(.352)
.069
(.202)
-.032
(.119)
-.056
(.080)
4.346
(11.215)
.257
(.239)
13.207
(11.660)
6.212
(32.177)
Yes
509
.34

(3)
-15.766
(48.888)
5.746
(11.007)
14.275
(15.493)
-15.897
(18.555)
1.150**
(.401)
11.890*
(4.628)
-2.339
(40.202)
-51.375
(35.135)
-26.469
(16.371)
-.039
(.073)
7.577
(20.143)
-3.170
(7.638)
2.953
(3.117)
-.184
(.426)
.113
(.288)
-.020
(.175)
-.095
(.102)
7.521
(16.869)
.817
(.417)
.
.
-87.379
(50.994)
Yes
340
.37

