Gender Differences in Telecommuting and Implications for Inequality at Home and Work

Thomas Lyttelton1, Emma Zang1, Kelly Musick2

Authors’ affiliations:
1

Department of Sociology, Yale University, USA

2

Department of Policy Analysis and Management and Cornell Population Center, Cornell

University, USA

1

Abstract.
The global pandemic has led to an unprecedented shift to remote work that will likely
persist to some degree into the future. Telecommuting’s impact on flexibility and work family
conflict is a critical question for researchers and policy-makers. Our study addresses this
question with data collected before and during the COVID-19 crisis: the 2003-2018 American
Time Use Survey (ATUS, N = 19,179) and the April and May 2020 COVID Impact Survey (N =
784). Comparing mothers and fathers who work exclusively at the workplace, exclusively from
home, and part-day from home, we describe differences in time spent on housework, childcare,
and leisure; the nature of time worked at home; and the subjective experiences of telecommuting.
In addition to a broad descriptive portrait, we take advantage of a quasi-experimental design in
the ATUS leave supplements to examine time working at home among those who report ever
telecommuting, providing estimates of telecommuting’s effect on other uses of time that better
approximate causal relationships than prior studies. We find that gender gaps in housework are
larger for telecommuters, and, among telecommuters, larger on telecommuting days. Conversely,
telecommuting may shrink the gender gap in childcare, particularly among couples with two full
time earners, although childcare more frequently impinges upon mothers’ work time. Survey
data collected following the March COVID19 stay-at-home orders show that telecommuting
mothers more frequently report feelings of anxiety, loneliness and depression than
telecommuting fathers. Early estimates of responses to the COVID19 pandemic offer insights
into future implications of telecommuting for gender equality at work.

2

Introduction
The global pandemic has led to an unprecedented shift to remote work. Prior to the
COVID-19 crisis, 16% of workers reported working some time from home on an average day
and a third of all workers reported the option to telecommute part of the day (S. S. Kim,
Galinsky, & Pal, 2020; U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2019). The share telecommuting prior to
COVID-19 represented only a fraction of all work that could be done at home (Noonan & Glass,
2012), as evidenced in part by the massive increase in response to temporary health concerns.
Many employers have been reluctant to give up direct supervisory control, or argue that face
time is a critical feature of the productive process (Allen, Golden, & Shockley, 2015; Miller &
Rampell, 2013). COVID-19 has changed this in the short term—and will likely lead to long-run
restructuring. Facebook, for example, announced that it would be moving to permanent remote
work for half its employees following adjustments required by COVID-19 (Conger, 2020).
Telecommuting holds broad public appeal (Allen et al., 2015). U.S. workers want more
control and flexibility over their schedules and value working from home over alternative work
arrangements (Brenan, 2020; Mas & Pallais, 2017). Women with children in particular are
willing to take wage penalties in exchange for more flexibility in hours (Mas & Pallais, 2017).
This is in the context of a relatively punishing labor market in terms of hours and inflexibility,
with little of the institutional support in place elsewhere to mitigate work family conflict (Blau &
Kahn, 2013; Collins, 2019; J. Glass, Simon, & Andersson, 2016; Gornick & Meyers, 2003;
Kalleberg, 2011; Pettit & Hook, 2009). The demands of time-intensive and inflexible workplaces
are intensified by mothers’ disproportionate share of the work at home (Blair-Loy, 2003; Hays,
1996; Jacobs & Gerson, 2016; Townsend, 2002), and increasing work hour flexibility has been
identified as a key mechanism for reducing gender inequality in employment and earnings

3

(Goldin, 2014; Ishizuka & Musick, 2018). Given recent increases in telecommuting and the
likelihood that it will be incorporated more fully into a post-COVID labor market, its potential to
increase flexibility and ease work family conflict is a critical question for researchers and policymakers.
Evidence on whether telecommuting will be an effective tool for addressing gender
inequality is limited—and mixed. Telecommuting increases retention and job satisfaction (Allen
et al., 2015; Belanger, Collins, & Cheney, 2001; J. L. Glass & Riley, 1998; Nilles, 1998;
Rathbone, 1992; Tamrat & Smith, 2002). But it has also been linked to a general expansion of
work hours and low wage returns to working at home beyond the standard work week (J. L.
Glass & Noonan, 2016). Flexible work practices like telecommuting may have counterbalancing
effects on domestic labor and the dynamics of how it’s divided between spouses (Noonan, Estes,
& Glass, 2007). To the extent that telecommuting interacts with entrenched gendered norms
about who does what in the household, it may exacerbate gender inequality in housework and
childcare, disproportionately increasing time on housework and childcare, as well as
multitasking and work interruptions that reduce the quality of mother’s work and increase their
stress relative to fathers.
Our study examines telecommuting with data collected before and during the COVID-19
crisis, comparing mothers and fathers who work exclusively at the workplace, exclusively from
home, and part-day from home. We examine gendered patterns of selection into telecommuting;
telecommuters’ time in housework, childcare, and leisure; and contextual features of work time,
including work fragmentation and the copresence of children, and the subjective experiences of
mothers’ and fathers’ work at home. Our analysis proceeds in two parts: First, we use nationally
representative time diary data from the 2003-2018 American Time Use Survey (ATUS) to

4

develop a broad descriptive portrait of the demographic characteristics, time use patterns, and
subjective wellbeing of mothers and fathers who worked either a full day or part-day from home
on the diary day. For time use, we further draw on ATUS supplements in waves 2017 and 2018
and limit our sample to respondents who report ever working from home. Critically, this allows
us to assess diary-day variation in work location among a sample of telecommuters, providing
greater causal leverage on how telecommuting affects housework and childcare over the course
of a day. Second, we use data from the COVID Impact Survey (CIS, https://www.covidimpact.org) collected by NORC at the University of Chicago in April and May 2020, after states
implemented stay-at-home orders to limit COVID-19 transmission. We describe the prevalence
of telecommuting among mothers and fathers, their characteristics, and their subjective wellbeing.
This work contributes to the literature on the effects of flexible work practices on work
family conflict. It adds to what we know about telecommuting in four important ways. First, it
relies on diary data to describe how mother’ and fathers’ telecommuting is associated with time
use patterns over the course of a day. Time diaries provide more accurate data on time use than
retrospective surveys, and allow us to examine multiple facets of time inequalities, including the
domestic division of labor, leisure time, and momentary wellbeing. Second, it uses detailed data
on the context of work activities to tap the quality of time, including information on disruptions
to work spells and how respondents are feeling. Third, we use an innovative approach that helps
to account for individual characteristics that may confound our understanding of how
telecommuting differentially affects mothers’ and fathers’ time in housework and childcare.
Finally, we take a brief look into how these dimensions are playing out in the current crisis.

5

Broadly, our work responds to calls for predicting and understanding the impact of COVID-19
on gender equality (Alon, Doepke, Olmstead-Rumsey, & Tertilt, 2020).

Background
Gender and telecommuting among parents
Work-family conflict disparately impacts women with young children, as mothers do far
more care work and housework than fathers (Bianchi, Sayer, Milkie, & Robinson, 2012; Sayer,
Bianchi, & Robinson, 2004). Mothers with young children appear to highly value telecommuting
and are more willing than childless women or men to accept lower wages in return for working
from home (Mas & Pallais, 2017). Increased flexibility in work hours is associated with higher
maternal employment, making it possible for some mothers to stay in jobs who would otherwise
drop out (Goldin, 2014; Ishizuka & Musick, 2018). Like other policies and practices that address
work family conflict, however, telecommuting may have different implications for women and
men that ultimately exacerbate some dimensions of inequality (Gornick & Meyers, 2003; Pettit
& Hook, 2009). In the case of telecommuting, these may include inequalities in housework and
childcare, the quality of work time, and the overall well-being of mothers and fathers.
Flexible work practices like telecommuting have the potential to reinforce gendered
social norms that underpin the domestic division of labor. Gendered norms continue to tie
fatherhood primarily to full-time employment and motherhood to time-intensive, child-centered
caregiving (Blair-Loy, 2003; Hays, 1996). Women’s time use is more responsive to changes in
the family such as caregiving needs and spouse work hours (Bianchi, 2000; Cha, 2010). In this
context, telecommuting may disproportionately increase mothers’ housework and childcare.
Telecommuting removes the spatial distance between work and home provided by traditional
workplaces, allowing more give in managing the competing demands of work and family.
6

Women may disproportionately translate time saved by working from home to housework and
childcare (Noonan & Glass, 2012), whereas men may shift more of these gains to investments in
work or leisure.
The greater responsiveness of women to family demands may result in a blurrier
boundary between work and home among mothers who telecommute and have implications for
the quality of work done at home. Mothers spend more time multitasking than fathers, and the
additional hours are mainly on housework and childcare (Offer & Schneider, 2011). To the
extent that mothers working from home are simultaneously on task to manage children or other
household demands, it may exacerbate gender gaps in multitasking. Their telecommuting time
may be more affected than fathers’ by interruptions in work spells that divide their attention
between work and family. We see evidence of this in other domains of time use, for example,
mothers’ leisure is more often spent in the presence of children and more often interrupted by
housework and childcare (Bittman & Wajcman, 2000; Craig & Mullan, 2013; Mattingly &
Blanchi, 2003). Their sleep, too, is more often disrupted by childcare demands than fathers’
(Musick, Meier, & Flood, 2016). These findings suggest that telecommuting may more
negatively affect the quality of mothers’ relative to fathers’ telecommuting time, with potential
implications for career advancement and pay.
Differences in time use and the quality of work time may further play into differences in
mothers’ and fathers’ affective orientation towards work and quality of life. Multitasking is
associated with emotional strain (Mattingly & Sayer, 2006; Milkie, Raley, & Bianchi, 2009;
Nomaguchi, 2009; Offer & Schneider, 2011). Multitasking and work interruptions may also
exacerbate tension associated with role switching and role conflict (Greenhaus & Beutell, 1985;
Hilbrecht, Shaw, Johnson, & Andrey, 2008). To the extent that multitasking and interruptions are

7

more commonly experienced by women working from home than men, telecommuting may be
less effective at alleviating work family conflict among women, and mothers who telecommute
may have lower overall life satisfaction and more negative feelings than their male counterparts.
These differences are potentially exacerbated by the greater likelihood that women, who often
dominate low-level clerk and service jobs, are more likely to work from home involuntarily
compared to men (Nilles, 1998; Travis, 2003), lowering their perceptions of control and leading
to negative emotions (Allen, Johnson, Kiburz, & Shockley, 2013).
Evidence on telecommuting and work family conflict
Prior research is limited on the implications of telecommuting for the complex
interlocking facets of work and domestic gender inequality. Many studies have focused on
women or men, without an explicit gender comparison. Prior work has shown that women who
had access to flexible work, including telecommuting, were less likely to reduce their working
hours after giving birth (Chung & Van der Horst, 2018) but experienced weaker wage growth (J.
Glass, 2004). Telecommuting was also found to cut into women’s leisure time (Hilbrecht et al.,
2008; Noonan & Glass, 2012; Scott-Dixon, 2004). Work on fathers has shown, similarly, that
access to flexible work per se does not reduce work-life conflict, particularly when there are
gender-related cultural barriers (Allard, Haas, & Philip Hwang, 2007; Doucet & Merla, 2007).
Among the few studies that compared women and men, female telecommuters were
generally found to be more affected by the blurring of boundaries between work and home.
Although both male and female telecommuters expand their normal work hours, mothers are
more likely to replace the time saved from commuting with childcare and household chores than
fathers (Noonan & Glass, 2012). Using both cross-sectional and longitudinal samples of pregnant
and postpartum women and their spouses from Midwest U.S., Noonan et al. (2007) found that
telecommuting mothers spent more time in childcare than their non-telecommuting counterparts,
8

whereas there was no significant difference in childcare time among fathers by telecommuting
status. Similar gendered patterns were found for housework (Silver, 1993). Among
telecommuters, women and mothers with young children at home have higher perceived time
pressure and decreased time use control (Thulin, Vilhelmson, & Johansson, 2019). Evidence
from Sweden on the interaction between gender and the presence of children showed that gender
differences in work-life balance among telecommuters were small in childless households,
whereas in households with children, women found it harder than men to concentrate on one role
(Hartig, Kylin, & Johansson, 2007). In the U.S. context, using longitudinal data on 227 couples,
Hammer, Neal, Newsom, Brockwood, and Colton (2005) found that flexible work arrangements
increased women’s work-life conflict but no significant results were found for men.
Past work is limited in accounting for the selectivity of telecommuting, leaving
uncertainty about whether telecommuting differentially affects work-life conflict for men and
women, or whether gendered patterns are driven by individual differences between men and
women who work at home versus the workplace. Women typically have stronger motivations to
telecommute than men (Mokhtarian, Bagley, & Salomon, 1998; Moktharian, 1996). Among
those who prefer to telecommute, women are more likely to prefer telecommuting for the sake of
family responsibilities, stress reduction, and having more time for themselves, whereas men
often prefer telecommuting to get more work done (Mokhtarian et al., 1998). Occupations further
structure selection into remote work. For high-level professionals, which tend to be heavily
male-dominated, telecommuting is often provided as an optional benefit intending to increase
employees’ flexibility and autonomy (Travis, 2003). By contrast, for low-level clerks and service
workers, which tend to be female-dominated, telecommuting is often motivated by cost savings
in real estate, rent, utilities, and overhead (Nilles, 1998; Travis, 2003). Accounting for individual

9

selection into telecommuting requires leverage on these individual and occupational
confounders.
Past work is also limited in generalizability and accuracy and scope of measurement.
Much of the existing research on telecommuting and work-life conflict draws on small samples
or samples of subpopulations, and measurements typically rely on global recall, for example, of
time in childcare or housework (e.g. Allard et al., 2007; Doucet & Merla, 2007; J. Glass, 2004;
Hilbrecht et al., 2008; Scott-Dixon, 2004). Outcomes include earnings, work hours, performance,
job satisfaction, leisure time, work-role stress, fatigue, and perceived work-life conflict (e.g., J.
Kim, Henly, Golden, & Lambert, (2019); Noonan and Glass (2012), Shaw, Andrey, and Johnson
(2003), Hammer et al. (2005), and Allen et al. (2015)). Questions about the nature of
telecommuting time and broader dimensions of subjective well-being while working at home
remain underexplored. Answering these questions requires detailed data on individuals’ time use
and subjective well-being in the context of a working day.
Our Study
Our study presents a multi-faceted analysis of gendered patterns in telecommuting in the
U.S. It draws from nationally representative time diary data that provides more detail on the
context of work and is less prone to error and bias than global recall (J. Robinson & Godbey,
2010; J. P. Robinson, 2002). Further, it takes advantage of a quasi-experimental design in the
ATUS leave supplements to examine time working at home among those who report ever
telecommuting, when their work location is arguably randomly assigned. Estimates from this
analysis help us address concerns about selectivity into telecommuting and better approximate
causal relationships than those from previous studies. Finally, we provide the first estimates of
responses to the COVID19 pandemic and offer insights into future implications of
telecommuting for gender equality at work.
10

Prior literature suggests that telecommuting may exacerbate gender inequalities between
parents by increasing mothers’ exposure to domestic demands and blurring the work-life
boundary. Based on conceptual and empirical evidence, we expect telecommuting to increase
mothers’ housework and childcare and reduce their leisure relative to fathers’. We further expect
more multitasking and interruptions to mothers’ work at home relative to fathers’, and in turn
lower levels of subjective well-being. We examine these questions triangulating across data
sources and samples and combining descriptive approaches with strategies designed to provide
greater leverage on causal questions.
Data and Measures
Data Sources
We draw on data collected before and during the COVID-19 crisis. We use the 20032018 ATUS to develop a broad descriptive portrait of diary day telecommuting among mothers
and fathers. We further draw on two subsets of these data: the Well-Being Module collected in
2010, 2012, and 2013 allows us to examine subjective well-being in daily activities; the 20172018 supplement provides information to identify a subsample of mothers and fathers who report
ever working from home. Finally, data during the COVID-19 crisis come from the first two
waves of the CIS collected by NORC from April 20 to May 10. These new data describe the
characteristics and well-being of telecommuters in April and May of 2020, after states
implemented stay-at-home orders to limit COVID-19 transmission.
ATUS. The ATUS is an excellent resource for studying telecommuting because it records
in extraordinary detail the nature and context of daily activities for a very large representative
sample of American workers (Hofferth, Flood, & Sobek, 2020). ATUS is a time diary: it prompts
respondents to record their activities for 24 hours prior to 4AM on the day of the survey, which

11

survey researched code into highly detailed standardized activity categories. Crucially for our
purposes, ATUS also records the location of activities and co-presence. The former allows us to
differentiate telecommuting from working at the workplace, the latter allows us to identify when
children are present during work or other activities.
Three other features of ATUS are important for our analyses. First, ATUS draws its
respondents from the Current Population Survey (CPS), and so the survey also records
demographic, household, and work characteristics. Second, for three years of the survey in 2010,
2012, and 2013, ATUS asked respondents to report their affect during three randomly chosen
activities. We use these measures to examine gender differences in affect and wellbeing between
telecommuters and workers in workplaces. Third, the ATUS collected supplements in waves
2017 and 2018 that asked respondents whether they ever worked from home. We use these data
to examine variation in diary day telecommuting among mothers and fathers who ever
telecommute, providing leverage on estimating causal effects of telecommuting, as well as a
plausible way of identifying likely telecommuters in our sample.
ATUS 2003-2018 sample. Our main sample includes parents ages 21-60 with resident
children <18, who reported on a weekday diary day, and who worked on that day (see details in
Appendix Figure A1). We exclude self-employed respondents (12.5% of parents in the sample)
because the relationship between work and time flexibility is likely very different for workers
with and without bosses. Ages 21-60 represent prime working ages and exclude relatively few
parents with resident children younger than 18. We exclude respondents who worked less than
two hours (in all locations combined) on the diary day to capture days at work. We also drop
weekend diaries, as expectations around work and opportunities for leisure and social activities
differ significantly on the weekend. Finally, we drop respondents who exclusively report a work

12

location that is neither home nor the workplace (2% of the sample). Our final sample includes
19,179 respondents and 47,830 work activities.
ATUS leave sample. For a subset of analyses, we draw on waves 2017 and 2018 of the
ATUS that include a supplement asking whether respondents ever telecommute. We apply the
same sample limitations here as in our main sample (N = 19,179), but further restrict our analysis
to respondents who report ever telecommuting and report going into a workplace at least once on
a normal work week (18%, N = 343).
ATUS well-being sample. In 2010, 2012, and 2013 ATUS included questions about how
respondents were feeling in three randomly selected activities during the diary day. The day
reconstruction method based on momentary assessments of well-being provides reliable
information on affective response grounded in the context of daily activities (Kahneman,
Krueger, Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone, 2004; Stone, Mackie, Sciences, & Council, 2013). This
sample is limited to the 1,837 work activities (including 191 telecommuting activities) that
include measures of subjective wellbeing and 3,285 parents (including 722 telecommuting
parents) who report affect across diary day.
CIS Sample. The COVID Impact Survey is a nationally representative survey collected
by NORC in April and May 2020 to assess the health and economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic. We limit this sample to parents who were employed in March 2020, aged 25-55. This
range differs from that of our ATUS samples because the survey records age as a series of
categories.
ATUS Measures
Telecommuting

13

At the activity-level, we define telecommuting on the basis of respondents working on
their main job (activity code 050101) and reporting that their location was “home.” For
respondent-level analyses, we divide respondents into those who exclusively worked from home
on the diary day, respondents who exclusively worked from the workplace, and respondents who
worked both from home and the workplace. We tested several other telecommuting taxonomies,
including a binary telecommuting/workplace measure, and categorization based on duration of
time telecommuting, and we found very similar results for each. We replicate our descriptive
models using duration categories in Appendix Tables A9 – A15.
In our analysis of telecommuters from the ATUS leave supplement, we use the following
question to identify mothers and fathers who ever telecommute in their current job: “Are there
days when you work only at home?” We measure frequency of telecommuting with the question
“How often do you work only at home?”
Demographic characteristics
We examine the socio-demographic profiles of men and women who telecommute,
including work characteristics, demographics, and family composition. Our work measures are
usual weekly work hours, whether a respondent works part time (less than 35 hours a week),
weekly earnings, and broad occupation (professional, management, and other occupations). For
demographics, we examine age, whether a respondent graduated from four year college, the age
and number of the respondent’s children in the household, race (Black, Non-Black), ethnicity
(Hispanic, non-Hispanic), whether a respondent is married/cohabiting, and if the spouse/partner
is employed in full time work.
Housework, childcare, and leisure

14

We define housework broadly to include both core housework (cleaning, tidying, laundry,
and textile repair) and ancillary housework activities, such as food preparation, household
maintenance, and vehicle maintenance (activity codes 020100 to 020700). Prior research finds
gender inequalities in both broadly and narrowly defined housework, but larger inequalities in
the latter case (Bianchi et al., 2012), so our estimates are likely conservative. We use two
measures relating to childcare. First, we create a measure of childcare that combines basic care
activities of younger children (e.g., feeding, bathing) with activities relating to education (e.g.,
helping with a child’s homework or attending a PTA meeting) and health (e.g., sitting with a sick
child) and associated travel of all minor children. Second, we construct a broader measure of all
time spent with household children based on responses to the activity-level question “Who was
with you?” We combine our narrower measure of childcare with housework to generate a
summary measure of domestic work. Leisure includes socializing, leisure activities, such as
watching TV, listening to music and doing hobbies, and attending and watching sports.
Indicators of work context
We construct two measures that indicate competing demands and divided attention: the
fragmentation of work and the presence of children. Fragmentation is the number of separate
work activities across diary day and captures the extent to which work is divided into separate
spells. It is commonly used to measure activity quality in time use studies (Flood, Meier, &
Musick, 2019). The presence of children while working is a summary of all minutes
respondents’ children were present during work activities, based on the activity-level “who with”
question. ATUS began recording copresence for work activities in 2010, so analyses of child
presence are based on a 2011-2018 sample (N = 9,302).
Subjective well-being

15

We use measures from the ATUS well-being supplements to examine subjective wellbeing during work spells and over the course of the diary day. For each of three sampled
activities, ATUS respondents were asked to rate their feelings across multiple indicators. We
examine responses to the following: 1) How happy did you feel during this time? 2) How
stressed did you feel during this time? 2) How tired did you feel during this time? Response
options ranged from 0 (e.g., not at all happy) to 6 (e.g., very happy).
CIS Measures
Within the constraints of differences in data structure and measurement approach, we
generate key measures from the CIS that are similar to those from the ATUS. Telecommuting is
based on respondents’ answering affirmatively that they have worked from home in response to
COVID-19. We compare mothers and fathers who report working from home, working from the
workplace, and being unemployed in April and May of 2020.
Global assessments of subjective well-being include depression, anxiety, hopelessness,
and loneliness. These questions record the frequency with which respondents have experienced
these states in the previous seven days. Because a majority of respondents experience them for
less than one day, we make dichotomous versions of these variables which report whether a
respondent experienced the emotion for one day or more in the prior week. We also take an
average of four dichotomous measures to create an overall measure of negative affect
experienced in the previous week.
Demographic characteristics are coded comparably to the ATUS and include weekly
work hours, working part time, broad occupational categories, graduating from a four-year
college, number of children in the household, race (Black, Non-Black), and ethnicity (Hispanic,
Non-Hispanic). Age and age of youngest household child are recorded as a series of age

16

categories, and we recode these to the category midpoint for comparability to the ATUS. The
CIS does not include information on weekly earnings or spousal employment.
Analytical Strategy
Our analysis proceeds in the following steps: First, we describe the demographic
characteristics of mothers and fathers in the ATUS who worked either a full day or part-day from
home on the diary day. Second, we examine time use and work context for mothers and fathers
across work locations, using both the full ATUS sample and a smaller group of telecommuters
for whom work location on the diary day is arguably random. In assessing gender gaps, we
include supplementary models of time use and gender gaps among couples. Third, we investigate
gender differences in subjective wellbeing by telecommuting status during work and across diary
day. Finally, we compare the CIS sample to data from the ATUS, and we provide descriptive
statistics on the subjective well-being of telecommuters.
Across a series of figures, we present estimates of parents’ time use - both overall and by
mothers’ work hours - and work contexts. We present both bivariate statistics and estimates
adjusted for demographics, work characteristics, and diary day time use. The adjusted estimates
are calculated using fully-interacted OLS models. For time use and work context, we present
estimates from three models. Model 1 includes no controls, and so establishes a descriptive
baseline. Model 2 includes controls that are plausibly exogenous to the gendered process of
household bargaining. We include survey year, age and its quadratic, race, ethnicity, college
education, and marital status. Model 3 adds family and work controls. These characteristics may
explain work locational differences in time use gender gaps, but also may themselves be
influenced by workers’ and households’ telecommuting decisions. In this model, we add controls

17

for the number and age of household children, spouse or partners’ fulltime employment, detailed
occupation, earnings, usual hours worked, and diary day hours worked.
Models estimated with the full sample account for the differences in characteristics of
mothers and fathers by telecommuting status that we can observe in the ATUS. Results may be
confounded by unobserved mechanisms that differentially select mothers and fathers into
telecommuting and influence their time use, such as differential preferences for household labor
or childcare. Because the full models control for diary day work hours, they may also
underestimate the effects of telecommuting on time use and work contexts to the extent that
workers reduce their formal work hours in response to increasing housework or care work. We
therefore use telecommuting questions from the 2017 and 2018 ATUS leave supplements to gain
better leverage on causal estimates for time use and work context. The leave supplement reports
whether or not respondents ever telecommute for an entire day, and if so, how frequently they
telecommute. This provides us with a sample of ever-telecommuters who vary in their diary day
work location. We exclude parents who telecommute five days a week, as they could not
plausibly be observed in the workplace. For ATUS respondents surveyed Monday to Friday, the
day of the week on which the diary is administered is random. Whether or not we observe evertelecommuters in the workplace or telecommuting depends on how frequently they telecommute,
which we control for, but we assume that assignment into these categories is otherwise random.
We find only spousal employment differences in these samples (T tests are reported in Appendix
Table A17), and we include this as a control in our models. Due to smaller samples, we pool
mothers and fathers and include gender interactions, and we do not estimate models of time use
by gender and mothers’ work hours.

18

In our third step of the analysis, we investigate gender differences in subjective wellbeing
by telecommuting status during work and across diary day. For subjective wellbeing outcomes,
we estimate simpler models because the sample size is much smaller. For these outcomes we
include a bivariate Model 1, as above, and a second model that contains the same exogenous
controls as for Model 2, above, along with a control for diary day work hours. These models are
estimated at the activity level, with activities nested in respondents. We therefore cluster
standard errors at the individual level.
In our final step, we compare the CIS sample to data from the ATUS, and we provide
descriptive statistics on the subjective well-being of telecommuters compared to those in the
workplace and the recently unemployed. COVID-19 has precipitated widespread job losses,
which have been highest in female-dominated service-sector occupations (Alon et al., 2020). We
include unemployed respondents as a category in our CIS comparisons because employed nontelecommuting respondents, particularly women, are a highly selective sample of workers.

Results
Gender and Telecommuting Prior to COVID
Work and Demographic Characteristics
Table 1 reports the demographic characteristics, work characteristics, and time use
patterns of mothers and fathers in our full ATUS sample by whether they worked exclusively in
the workplace (“workplace”), part-day at home (“mixed”), or exclusively at home (“home”) on
the diary day. Telecommuters working exclusively at home on the diary day are more likely to
work part time. Whether working part-day or all day at home, telecommuters have higher
socioeconomic status (SES) on average than those working exclusively in the workplace, as

19

indicated by higher earnings, higher shares in professional and management jobs, and higher
education. Telecommuters also tend to be slightly older and Whiter, and are more likely to work
longer hours, be married or cohabiting, and have a full-time working spouse or partner than nontelecommuters.
Gender patterns in demographic and work characteristics are broadly similar across
telecommuting categories. Mothers report more part-time work, lower earnings, lower shares in
management jobs, and are less likely to be married or cohabiting but more likely to have a fulltime working spouse or partner in the household than fathers. Mothers also report comparable or
higher shares in professional jobs than fathers. However, mothers report lower levels of college
attainment than fathers among those exclusively working from home whereas it is the opposite
for parents who work at least part time in the workplace. There are higher shares of black
mothers than black fathers across telecommuting categories. Among Hispanics, there are higher
shares of fathers working exclusively in the workplace and lower shares of them telecommuting
than mothers. There seem to be few differences by gender or telecommuting in number of
children or age of youngest child.
[Table 1 About Here]
Time Use Patterns
As shown in Table 1, mothers report fewer work hours than fathers on diary days, across
telecommuting statuses. For those who worked exclusively at home, mothers and fathers both
work shorter days (399 and 477 minutes, respectively) than others, and the gender gap is larger
than those for workers who work at least part time in the workplace. For mixed respondents,
workdays are particularly long. Figure 1 plots work time by gender and telecommuting. Panel A
presents average diary day work time by gender. Panel B plots estimates of the gender gap in

20

work time by work location. The unadjusted gender gap in work time is 77 minutes for
telecommuters, 60 minutes for parents in the workplace, and 48 minutes for parents who split
their time between both locations. Adjusting for exogenous characteristics does little to change
these patterns, but include work and family controls (including typical weekly work hours) both
substantially reduces the gender gap in work time, and erases differences by work location.
[Figure 1 About Here]
Panel C shows the timing of work across the diary day by gender and telecommuting. A
posited benefit of telecommuting is that it allows workers to schedule their work around other
commitments, but we see little evidence of this in Figure 1. Exclusive telecommuters
overwhelmingly work during normal work hours, like workers in the workplace. It is true that
workers who work both at home and in the workplace are far more likely than other groups to
work from home early in the morning and in the evening, but the fact that their hours in the
workplace are similar to those of workplace workers suggests that their hours working from
home are in addition to rather than substituting for workplace hours. As shown in Table 1,
mothers and fathers who split their time between work locations spend, on average, only 23%
and 20% of their work time telecommuting, which further suggests that the workplace remains
the primary work location for the majority of these workers.
As shown in Table 1, on diary days worked exclusively at home, mothers and fathers
both do more housework (102 and 50 minutes, respectively), and the gender gap is larger than
those for workers who work at least part time in the workplace. Both mothers and fathers do
more childcare (109 and 80 minutes, respectively) and spend more time with children (292 and
217 minutes, respectively) when they telecommute. The gender gap in childcare is smaller but
the gender gap in time with children is larger than those for workers who work at least part time

21

in the workplace. Both fathers and mothers exclusively telecommuting have more leisure time
(183 and 147 minutes, respectively) than those who work at least part time in the workplace. The
gender gap in leisure time is larger than those for workers who work at least part time in the
workplace. Figure 2 Panel A shows average (unadjusted) time use for mothers and fathers.
[Figure 2 About Here]
Figure 2 Panel B plots the gender gap in each outcome across a series of nested models.
The baseline gender gap in housework is 52 minutes for telecommuting parents, which is 17
minutes larger than the gender gap for parents in the workplace. With full controls, the difference
declines to 9 minutes, but remains significant (p.<0.05). For childcare, baseline estimates suggest
there is no difference in the gender gap across work locations, but after adjusting for the full set
of covariates we find that telecommuting is associated with a significant 15-minute shrinking of
the gender gap. For time spent with children, baseline estimates show that the gender gap is
larger by 27 minutes for telecommuters than workers in the workplace. This gap remains when
adjusting for exogenous controls, but with full controls the gap shrinks to less than 5 minutes and
loses significance. The gender gap in leisure time is larger for telecommuters than workers in the
workplace. At baseline, the difference is 10.5 minutes and not significant to p.<0.05, but with
controls the difference grows to 19.3 minutes and is statistically significant.
In supplementary models that assess potential differences across subgroups, we
separately estimate models of time use by gender, work location and mothers’ work hours for
couples. We compare fathers’ time use and gender gaps for couples in which the mother works
full time (35+ hours per week) or part time. Only 2.8-6% of fathers work part time, as Table 1
shows, so we do not examine couples in which the father works part time. For these analyses, we
only include married or cohabiting employed respondents in couples in which the father works

22

full time. All time use and work context models top code dependent variables at the 99th
percentile to downweight influential outliers. Figure 3 plots the results, providing descriptive
data on how partners’ time use is interrelated among dual-earning couples. Estimates in Panel A
suggest that telecommuting allows fathers to increase their time spent on childcare, relative to
fathers in the workplace. Fathers in the workplace with a full-time partner spend an additional 12
minutes on childcare, compared to fathers with a partner who works part time. The equivalent
difference for telecommuting fathers is 21 minutes. Fathers who work in the workplace do more
housework when their partners work full time than when their partners work part time, but the
same is not true for telecommuting fathers, whose time spent on housework does not differ by
partners’ work status. Fathers’ leisure time does not discernably vary by partners’ work hours.
[Figure 3 About Here]
Panel B plots the gender gap in time use by work locations and mothers’ work
arrangements. Regardless of whether the mother is working full- or part-time, gender gaps in
housework are larger among telecommuters. The magnitudes are similar across mothers’ work
arrangements (26 and 21 minutes larger in gender gap when mothers work part time and full
time, respectively). However, gender gaps in childcare are smaller among telecommuters when
mom works full time. The overall gender gap in childcare is 20 minutes smaller among
telecommuters than that among those in the workplace, whereas when mothers work part time, it
is 7 minutes larger among telecommuters. Time with children and leisure gaps do not differ by
telecommuting status, irrespective of mothers’ work hours.
To summarize, telecommuting parents spend more time on household labor than their
counterparts in the workplace, but the patterns are gendered. Telecommuting fathers do more
childcare compared to their non-telecommuting counterparts, adjusting for demographic and

23

work characteristics, and this is particularly the case when their partners work full time.
However, unlike telecommuting mothers, telecommuting fathers do little extra housework
compared to their non-telecommuting counterparts, and gender gaps in housework are larger for
telecommuters than for parents in the workplace, across all model specifications. Perhaps in
consequence, gender gaps in leisure time are larger for most telecommuters, adjusting for
demographic and work characteristics, although we do not see this in subgroup analysis. We did
not find significant differences in gender gaps in time spent with children or formal work hours
by telecommuting status.
Work Contexts
Telecommuting radically alters the contexts in which parents work, which may in turn
have gendered consequences. As shown in Table 1, the number of work spells and work time
with child present are greater among parents who at least work part time at home than those who
exclusively work in the workplace. In particular, children are present for, on average, 18 minutes
of fathers’ and 31 minutes of mothers’ work time when exclusively working at home. Figure 4
Panel A plots adjusted means and predicted gender gaps in work fragmentation by
telecommuting status. Telecommuting mothers and fathers experience more distinct work spells
on the diary day compared to their counterparts working exclusively in the workplace, after
adjusting for exogenous characteristics. However, there are no gender differences in the
fragmentation of work across telecommuting categories after adjusting for diary day work hours
and other controls.
[Figure 4 About Here]
Panel B presents the results for the presence of a child during work. Children are present
during work far more often for telecommuters than those exclusively working in the workplace.

24

They are present for, on average, 18 minutes of fathers’ and 31 minutes of mothers’ work time
when exclusively working at home, as shown in Table 1. Controlling for demographics, family
and work characteristics, and diary day work hours, the gender gap in child presence during
work time is 10 minutes for exclusive telecommuters, 5 minutes for “mixed” telecommuters, and
indistinguishable from zero for parents in the workplace.
Diary Day Time Use and Work Contexts Among Telecommuters
Table 2 reports plausibly causal estimates for time spent on housework, childcare, time
spent with children, leisure time, work time, and work time with children among evertelecommuters. These models take advantage of a series of questions on telecommuting in the
2017-2018 leave supplements, along with the randomization of diary day, to compare gender
gaps in time use among telecommuters observed working at home and in the workplace.
The increase in time spent on housework associated with working exclusively from home
is 49 minutes larger for mothers than fathers. The increase in housework associated with working
partially from home is 29 minutes larger for mothers than fathers. Both of these results are
significant (p < 0.05). However, compared to parents on days in the workplace, the gender gap
in childcare declines by 47 minutes and the gender gap in time spent with children declines by 33
minutes for parents on days telecommuting, although neither difference is significant at the 5%
level. The penalty in leisure time is larger for female telecommuters than male telecommuters,
but the estimate is extremely imprecise. Work time falls by 12 minutes more for men than
women when they exclusively work from home, but this difference is both small and very
imprecise. In contrast, while fathers who split their time between the workplace and home on
diary day work 61 minutes longer than fathers who work exclusively in the workplace, the work
time of mothers who split their time does not differ from that of mothers in the workplace. The

25

increase in work time spent with children associated with telecommuting is 33 minutes more for
mothers than fathers, and is significant at the 5% level.
The estimates from the telecommuters-only sample are generally in the same direction as
those from our broader sample, but they are larger in magnitude. The full model from our broad
sample, for example, estimates that the increase in the gender housework gap associated with
exclusive telecommuting is 9 minutes, while in the telecommuter-only sample it is 48 minutes.
The differences in magnitude between these estimates is largely the result of differences in the
kinds of telecommuters in the two samples. The broad sample includes all telecommuters we
observe working from home on diary day, but for our telecommuter-only sample, we only
include respondents who have ever telecommuted for a full day. This is because ATUS only
records frequency of telecommuting for these respondents, and telecommuting on diary day is
only plausibly random after adjusting for how often parents telecommute. Appendix Table A18
replicates the models reported in Table 2 including all ever-telecommuters. These models
produce estimates of gender gaps in time use substantially more similar to estimates from the
main sample. Further investigations, discussed in the online appendix, rule out two further
potential explanations: SES differences between the samples and the possibility that mothers and
fathers differentially distribute their time use across days worked from home and in the
workplace.

Subjective Wellbeing
We examine subjective wellbeing both during work activities and across diary day, using
the ATUS wellbeing modules from 2010, 2012 and 2013. Unadjusted wellbeing estimates by

26

gender and telecommuting are shown in Table 3. Because these analyses rely on a smaller
sample than the main ATUS analyses, we divide parents only into telecommuters (exclusive or
mixed) and non-telecommuters. In general, telecommuting parents are more stressed and tired,
and less happy than non-telecommuters during work. However, it is not necessarily the case
when it comes to diary day average affect.
[Table 3 About Here]
Figure 5 plots adjusted mean wellbeing by gender and work location, alongside predicted
gender gaps in wellbeing. Due to sample size, we include identical controls to the exogenous
models above, along with diary day work time. Neither men’s nor women’s wellbeing varies
substantially by location during work activities. Across the diary day, fathers who telecommute
are less tired than fathers in the workplace, but the same is not the case for mothers. Mothers are
more tired and more stressed than fathers in the workplace, although locational differences in
gender gaps in wellbeing are not statistically significant, either during work or across diary day.
Thus, if telecommuting increases parents’ flexibility in juggling work and family responsibilities,
we find little evidence that this improves wellbeing.
[Figure 5 About Here]
Gender and Telecommuting During COVID-19
As shown in our analysis so far, before the COVID-19 crisis, gender gaps in some
aspects, such as time spent on housework, are larger among telecommuters compared to nontelecommuters. But in other aspects, such as time spent on childcare, we find some evidence that
gender gaps are smaller among telecommuters. No significant differences in gender gap are
found in subjective wellbeing by work location. In response to COVID-19, 40% of parents who
were employed in March 2020 were telecommuting in April and May, and this figure is 55% for

27

currently employed parents.1 We use the information we have on telecommuting during COVID19 to assess how the crisis is shaping gender inequality—and to shed some light on what we
might expect for the future. We first examine the characteristics of COVID-19 telecommuters to
telecommuters in the ATUS sample. Second, we examine subjective wellbeing gaps of mothers
and fathers telecommuting in the current crisis.
Results comparing characteristics of telecommuters from the ATUS and the CIS samples
are shown in Table 4. Telecommuting mothers in these two samples are similar on the
characteristics most proximate for the domestic division of labor: hours worked, working part
time, spousal status, and the age and number of children. They are also similar in terms of SES:
the majority of both groups are college educated. Although the proportion of respondents in
professional jobs is higher for the CIS sample, the proportions of respondents in high status (i.e.
professional and management) jobs are very similar across samples. The largest differences
between the samples are in racial composition, with telecommuters in the CIS sample far more
racially and ethnically diverse than those in the ATUS sample.
[Table 4 About Here]
For fathers, there are greater differences between the samples. While similar in terms of
educational attainments, the percentage of telecommuting men with professional or management
jobs is higher in the ATUS sample. Telecommuting men in the ATUS also work longer hours
and have fewer and older children than their CIS counterparts. As it is for women, the CIS
sample is much more racially diverse. Few differences among telecommuting men are found in
the proportion working part time and marital status in these two samples.

1

Figure calculated using COVID-Impact Sample described above.

28

We can gain further insight into the dynamics of gender inequalities during COVIDinduced telecommuting by examining patterns of subjective wellbeing in the CIS sample, which
we plot in Figure 6. It is striking to observe the very negative effects of unemployment on
subjective wellbeing for both males and females. Over one third of unemployed workers
experienced feeling hopeless in the week prior to interview for example, and both mothers and
fathers experience the highest rates of all kinds of negative affect when unemployed. While men
more frequently experience negative affect than women when unemployed, women more
frequently experience negative affect while working, across work locations.
For all outcomes except hopelessness, significantly more telecommuting mothers than
fathers report negative affect in the prior week. By contrast, for unemployed respondents and
respondents in the workplace, gender differences are mostly not statistically distinguishable from
zero. Estimated gender gaps are consistently larger among telecommuters than workers in the
workplace, but differences by work location are not statistically significant at the 5% level.
Thus, while locational differences in gender gaps in wellbeing are not significantly different
from zero, among the 55% of employed parents who now telecommute, mothers report
significantly lower wellbeing than fathers.
[Figure 6 About Here]
Conclusion
Telecommuting could theoretically either reduce gender disparities by giving women
greater control over their schedules and giving men more time to invest in housework and
childcare, or increase gender disparities, by removing the barriers between work and competing
time demands that unequally fall on women. In support of reducing gender disparities at home,
we find that telecommuting increases time spent on childcare for both fathers and mothers versus

29

working in the workplace, and increases fathers’ childcare time more. When mothers work full
time, in particular, telecommuting fathers spend more time on childcare. However, in support of
exacerbating gender disparities, we also find that telecommuting mothers do relatively more
housework than telecommuting fathers and are more likely to be working with a child present
than fathers, which may adversely affect mothers’ productivity. The gender gaps in housework
and work time with children are greater among telecommuters than workers in the workplace.
These results hold after controlling for demographics, work hours, occupation, employment
status, and SES, and in a sample of ever telecommuters for whom diary day telecommuting is
close to random. During COVID, telecommuting mothers consistently reported more anxiety,
loneliness, and depressed feelings than telecommuting fathers, although locational differences
missed statistical significance in relatively small samples. Overall, we find that parents’ response
to telecommuting is gendered, in ways that both exacerbate and ameliorate existing gender
inequalities in formal work and household labor.
Many parents find caring for their children meaningful, but the same is less often true for
housework (Musick et al., 2016). Time spent doing housework could be spent on other activities,
such as formal work or leisure, and considering the opportunity cost of housework is one way to
quantify the consequences of the increased gender gap in housework associated with
telecommuting. Using a simple regression of hours worked on housework to estimate these costs,
it suggests that each additional hour of housework is associated with a reduction of 0.65 hours
worked, and median hourly earnings for mothers who telecommute in our sample is $24.03.
Thus, for our ever-telecommuting mothers, the additional 49 minutes of housework mothers do
while telecommuting, compared to fathers, is associated with $12.68 in lost daily earnings. For
mothers who telecommute one day a week, this translates to $660 in annual lost earnings. For

30

mothers who telecommute four days a week, the equivalent figure is $2638. Even with the more
modest increase in the gender housework gap of 9 minutes we estimate with our full sample, the
annual opportunity cost is still substantial. For mothers who telecommute one day a week, the
annual opportunity cost is $125 and for mothers telecommuting four days a week, the figure is
$500.2 There are also likely productivity losses associated with working with a child present, but
this is harder to quantify.
Our study has several limitations. First, while we examine gender differences in
subjective wellbeing for telecommuting parents during COVID-19, data limitations prevent us
from examining time use and work context for COVID-19 telecommuters. If parents
telecommuting during COVID differ substantially from those telecommuting previously, time
use patterns could differ. Second, because ATUS records one diary per household, we are not
able to examine the dynamics of dual-telecommuting households, which COVID-19 has made
relatively common. Third, our causal estimates are for a sample of regular telecommuters and so
may not hold for occasional telecommuters, and rely on the assumption that observing
telecommuting among telecommuters is randomized after adjusting for telecommuting
frequency. We show that our samples of diary-day telecommuters and non-telecommuters for
these analyses are extremely similar, which is consistent with randomization, but we can only
establish similarity based on observed characteristics. Finally, our study provides only limited
insight into why telecommuting leads to gender disparities in time use and wellbeing. Further

2

The equation for the daily opportunity cost is Gender gap x Reduced work hours associated with
increased housework x Median earnings per minute. So, for the ever-telecommuting estimate: 48.73 x
0.65 x (24.03/60). Note that these figures are conservative compared to those produced by the standard
technique used to calculate opportunity costs in economics (Chari, Engberg, Ray, & Mehrotra, 2015; Van
den Berg et al., 2006), which assumes a counterfactual in which 100% of time spent doing an activity
would be replaced by formal work.

31

work on household bargaining dynamics and work characteristics could illuminate these
questions.
Despite these limitations, our results suggest that the unprecedented increase in
telecommuting in response to COVID-19 has the potential to exacerbate gender inequalities in
the formal labor market and the domestic division of labor, particularly when daycares, childcare
facilities, and schools are facing extended closures, increasing the already heavy burden of the
pandemic on households (Collins, Landivar, Ruppanner, & Scarborough, 2020). In addition, the
social distancing measures have a particularly substantial impact on sectors with disproportional
female shares (Alon et al., 2020), and women have been more likely to lose their jobs than men
during the COVID-19 crisis (Adams-Prassl, Boneva, Golin, & Rauh, 2020). For those who
remain employed, we find suggestive evidence that mothers telecommuting during the COVID19 crisis are more likely than fathers to report feeling anxious, lonely, or depressed. Recent polls
during the pandemic confirm that women’s subjective well-being may be more severely
impacted than men’s. A poll conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation in March 2020 finds
that Hispanics, women, and parents with children under 18 are the most likely groups to report
that their life has been disrupted (Hamel et al., 2020). Another poll conducted by Morning
Consult in April 2020 shows that 1) around 80% of mothers report spending more time homeschooling children than their spouses, 2) 67% of telecommuting women and 82% of mothers of
children aged under 12 report being most responsible for housework, and 3) 64% of
telecommuting women and 70% of mothers of children aged under 12 report being most
responsible for childcare (Adams-Prassl et al., 2020; Carlson, Petts, & Pepin, 2020; Miller,
2020).

32

To mitigate potential gender inequality associated with working at home during the
pandemic, policymakers and employers could consider increasing support for effective flexible
working schedules, healthy work lifestyles, job security, and paid sick leaves for families with
children, as do other rich countries outside the U.S. (Gornick & Meyers, 2003). The global
pandemic and closing of childcare facilities and schools underscore the urgency of adequately
compensating domestic workers, childcare providers, and educators and protecting their health
and well-being. Over the long run, addressing workplace inflexibility is a critical task for
reducing gender inequality in employment and earnings and supporting families.

33

References
Adams-Prassl, A., Boneva, T., Golin, M., & Rauh, C. (2020). Inequality in the Impact of the
Coronavirus Shock: Evidence from Real Time Surveys. Cambridge-INET Working Paper.
University of Cambridge. Cambridge. Retrieved from
http://www.econ.cam.ac.uk/research-files/repec/cam/pdf/cwpe2032.pdf
Allard, K., Haas, L., & Philip Hwang, C. (2007). Exploring the paradox: Experiences of flexible
working arrangements and work–family conflict among managerial fathers in Sweden.
Community, Work and Family, 10(4), 475-493.
Allen, T. D., Golden, T. D., & Shockley, K. M. (2015). How effective is telecommuting?
Assessing the status of our scientific findings. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 16(2), 40-68.
Allen, T. D., Johnson, R. C., Kiburz, K. M., & Shockley, K. M. (2013). Work–family conflict
and flexible work arrangements: Deconstructing flexibility. Personnel Psychology, 66(2),
345-376.
Alon, T. M., Doepke, M., Olmstead-Rumsey, J., & Tertilt, M. (2020). The impact of COVID-19
on gender equality (w26947). Retrieved from https://www.nber.org/papers/w26947
Belanger, F., Collins, R. W., & Cheney, P. H. (2001). Technology requirements and work group
communication for telecommuters. Information Systems Research, 12(2), 155-176.
Bianchi, S. M. (2000). Maternal employment and time with children: Dramatic change or
surprising continuity? Demography, 37(4), 401-414.
Bianchi, S. M., Sayer, L. C., Milkie, M. A., & Robinson, J. P. (2012). Housework: Who did,
does or will do it, and how much does it matter? Social Forces, 91(1), 55-63.

34

Bittman, M., & Wajcman, J. (2000). The rush hour: The character of leisure time and gender
equity. Social Forces, 79(1), 165-189.
Blair-Loy, M. (2003). Competing devotions: Career and family among women executives.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Blau, F. D., & Kahn, L. M. (2013). Female labor supply: Why is the United States falling
behind? American Economic Review, 103(3), 251-256.
Brenan, M. (2020). U.S. Workers Discovering Affinity for Remote Work. GALLUP.
Carlson, D. L., Petts, R., & Pepin, J. R. (2020). US Couples’ Divisions of Housework and
Childcare During COVID-19 Pandemic. SocArXiv, May 6. doi:10.31235/osf.io/jy8fn.
Cha, Y. (2010). Reinforcing separate spheres: The effect of spousal overwork on men’s and
women’s employment in dual-earner households. American Sociological Review, 75(2),
303-329.
Chari, A. V., Engberg, J., Ray, K. N., & Mehrotra, A. (2015). The opportunity costs of informal
elder-care in the United States: new estimates from the American Time Use Survey.
Health Services Research, 50(3), 871.
Chung, H., & Van der Horst, M. (2018). Women’s employment patterns after childbirth and the
perceived access to and use of flexitime and teleworking. Human Relations, 71(1), 47-72.
Collins, C. (2019). Making motherhood work: How women manage careers and caregiving.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Collins, C., Landivar, L. C., Ruppanner, L., & Scarborough, W. J. (2020). COVID‐19 and the
Gender Gap in Work Hours. Gender, Work & Organization, forthcoming.
Conger, K. (2020). Facebook Starts Planning for Permanent Remote Workers. The New York
Times.

35

Craig, L., & Mullan, K. (2013). Parental leisure time: A gender comparison in five countries.
Social Politics, 20(3), 329-357.
Doucet, A., & Merla, L. (2007). Stay-at-home fathering: A strategy for balancing work and home
in Canadian and Belgian families. Community, Work and Family, 10(4), 455-473.
Flood, S., Meier, A., & Musick, K. (2019). Reassessing Parents' Leisure Quality With Direct
Measures of Well‐Being: Do Children Detract From Parents' Down Time? Journal of
Marriage and Family.
Glass, J. (2004). Blessing or curse? Work-family policies and mother’s wage growth over time.
Work and occupations, 31(3), 367-394.
Glass, J., Simon, R. W., & Andersson, M. A. (2016). Parenthood and happiness: Effects of workfamily reconciliation policies in 22 OECD countries. American Journal of Sociology,
122(3), 886-929.
Glass, J. L., & Noonan, M. C. (2016). Telecommuting and earnings trajectories among American
women and men 1989–2008. Social Forces, 95(1), 217-250.
Glass, J. L., & Riley, L. (1998). Family responsive policies and employee retention following
childbirth. Social Forces, 76(4), 1401-1435.
Goldin, C. (2014). A grand gender convergence: Its last chapter. American Economic Review,
104(4), 1091-1119.
Gornick, J. C., & Meyers, M. K. (2003). Families that work: Policies for reconciling parenthood
and employment. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Greenhaus, J. H., & Beutell, N. J. (1985). Sources of conflict between work and family roles.
Academy of Management Review, 10(1), 76-88.

36

Hamel, L., Lopes, L., Muñana, C., Kates, J., Michaud, J., & Brodie, M. (2020). KFF
Coronavirus Poll: March 2020. Retrieved from https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid19/poll-finding/kff-coronavirus-poll-march-2020/
Hammer, L. B., Neal, M. B., Newsom, J. T., Brockwood, K. J., & Colton, C. L. (2005). A
longitudinal study of the effects of dual-earner couples' utilization of family-friendly
workplace supports on work and family outcomes. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(4),
799.
Hartig, T., Kylin, C., & Johansson, G. (2007). The telework tradeoff: Stress mitigation vs.
constrained restoration. Applied Psychology, 56(2), 231-253.
Hays, S. (1996). The cultural contradictions of motherhood. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Hilbrecht, M., Shaw, S. M., Johnson, L. C., & Andrey, J. (2008). ‘I'm home for the kids’:
contradictory implications for work–life balance of teleworking mothers. Gender, Work
& Organization, 15(5), 454-476.
Hofferth, S. L., Flood, S. M., & Sobek, M. (2020). American time use survey data extract
builder: Version 2.8 [dataset].
Ishizuka, P., & Musick, K. (2018). Occupational Inflexibility and Women’s Employment during
the Transition to Parenthood. Population Association of America, Annual Meeting,
Denver, CO.
Jacobs, J. A., & Gerson, K. (2016). Unpacking Americans’ views of the employment of mothers
and fathers using national vignette survey data: SWS presidential address. Gender &
Society, 30(3), 413-441.

37

Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D. A., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A. (2004). A survey
method for characterizing daily life experience: The day reconstruction method. Science,
306(5702), 1776-1780.
Kalleberg, A. L. (2011). Good jobs, bad jobs: The rise of polarized and precarious employment
systems in the United States, 1970s-2000s. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Kim, J., Henly, J. R., Golden, L. M., & Lambert, S. J. (2019). Workplace Flexibility and Worker
Wellbeing by Gender. Journal of Marriage and Family, 82, 892–910.
Kim, S. S., Galinsky, E., & Pal, I. (2020). One Kind Word: Flexibility in the Time of COVID-19.
Retrieved from https://www.familiesandwork.org/research/2020/one-kind-word
Mas, A., & Pallais, A. (2017). Valuing alternative work arrangements. American Economic
Review, 107(12), 3722-3759.
Mattingly, M. J., & Blanchi, S. M. (2003). Gender differences in the quantity and quality of free
time: The US experience. Social Forces, 81(3), 999-1030.
Mattingly, M. J., & Sayer, L. C. (2006). Under pressure: Gender differences in the relationship
between free time and feeling rushed. Journal of marriage and family, 68(1), 205-221.
Milkie, M. A., Raley, S. B., & Bianchi, S. M. (2009). Taking on the second shift: Time
allocations and time pressures of US parents with preschoolers. Social Forces, 88(2),
487-517.
Miller, C. C. (2020). Nearly Half of Men Say They Do Most of the Home Schooling. 3 Percent
of Women Agree. The New York Times.
Miller, C. C., & Rampell, C. (2013). Yahoo Orders Home Workers Back to the Office. The New
York Times.

38

Mokhtarian, P. L., Bagley, M. N., & Salomon, I. (1998). The impact of gender, occupation, and
presence of children on telecommuting motivations and constraints. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 49(12), 1115-1134.
Moktharian, P. (1996). Modelling the choice of telecommuting: 2. A case of the preferred
impossible alternatives'. Environment and Planning A, 28, 1859-1876.
Musick, K., Meier, A., & Flood, S. (2016). How parents fare: Mothers’ and fathers’ subjective
well-being in time with children. American Sociological Review, 81(5), 1069-1095.
Nilles, J. M. (1998). Managing telework: Strategies for managing the virtual workforce (Vol. 6):
Wiley New York, NY.
Nomaguchi, K. M. (2009). Change in work‐family conflict among employed parents between
1977 and 1997. Journal of Marriage and Family, 71(1), 15-32.
Noonan, M. C., Estes, S. B., & Glass, J. L. (2007). Do workplace flexibility policies influence
time spent in domestic labor? Journal of Family Issues, 28(2), 263-288.
Noonan, M. C., & Glass, J. L. (2012). The hard truth about telecommuting. Monthly Lab. Rev.,
135, 38.
Offer, S., & Schneider, B. (2011). Revisiting the gender gap in time-use patterns: Multitasking
and well-being among mothers and fathers in dual-earner families. American
Sociological Review, 76(6), 809-833.
Pettit, B., & Hook, J. L. (2009). Gendered tradeoffs: Women, family, and workplace inequality in
twenty-one countries. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Rathbone, D. B. (1992). Telecommuting in the United States. ITE Journal, 62(12), 40-45.
Robinson, J., & Godbey, G. (2010). Time for life: The surprising ways Americans use their time.
State College, PA: Penn State Press.

39

Robinson, J. P. (2002). The time-diary method. In Time use research in the social sciences (pp.
47-89). New York, NY: Springer.
Sayer, L. C., Bianchi, S. M., & Robinson, J. P. (2004). Are parents investing less in children?
Trends in mothers’ and fathers’ time with children. American Journal of Sociology,
110(1), 1-43.
Scott-Dixon, K. (2004). Doing IT: Women working in information technology. Toronto, Canada:
Canadian Scholars’ Press.
Shaw, S. M., Andrey, J., & Johnson, L. C. (2003). The struggle for life balance: Work, family,
and leisure in the lives of women teleworkers. World Leisure Journal, 45(4), 15-29.
Silver, H. (1993). Homework and domestic work. Paper presented at the Sociological Forum.
Stone, A. A., Mackie, C., Sciences, S., & Council, N. R. (2013). The Subjective Well-Being
Module of the American Time Use Survey: Assessment for Its Continuation. In
Subjective Well-Being: Measuring Happiness, Suffering, and Other Dimensions of
Experience [Internet]: National Academies Press (US).
Tamrat, E., & Smith, M. (2002). Telecommuting and perceived productivity: An Australian case
study. Journal of Management & Organization, 8(1), 44-69.
Thulin, E., Vilhelmson, B., & Johansson, M. (2019). New Telework, Time Pressure, and Time
Use Control in Everyday Life. Sustainability, 11(11), 3067.
Townsend, N. (2002). Package deal: Marriage, work and fatherhood in men's lives.
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Travis, M. A. (2003). Equality in the virtual workplace. Berkeley J. Emp. & Lab. L., 24, 283.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2019). Table 6. Employed persons working at home, workplace,
and time spent working at each location by full- and part-time status and sex, jobholding

40

status, and educational attainment, 2018 annual averages. Retrieved from
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.t06.htm
Van den Berg, B., Brouwer, W., van Exel, J., Koopmanschap, M., van den Bos, G. A., & Rutten,
F. (2006). Economic valuation of informal care: lessons from the application of the
opportunity costs and proxy good methods. Social Science & Medicine, 62(4), 835-845.

41

Tables and Figures

Tables

Table 1: Parents’ Demographic Characteristics and Time Use Patterns, by Telecommuting on Diary Day
(Means and Proportions, SDs in parentheses)
Characteristics
Work characteristics
Weekly work hours (mean)
Works part time (%)
Weekly earnings ($)
Professional (%)
Management jobs (%)
Other (%)
Demographic characteristics
Age
College degree (%)
Number of children
Age of youngest child
Black (%)
Hispanic (%)
Married/cohabiting (%)
Spouse/partner works full time (%)
Time use during diary day
Formal work (mins)
Formal+domestic work (mins)
Share of workday telecommuting (%)
Housework (mins)
Childcare (mins)
Time with children (mins)
Leisure (mins)
Work contexts on diary day
Work spells
Work time child present (mins)
N=
Share in category (%)

Workplace
Fathers
Mothers

Mixed
Fathers
Mothers

Home
Fathers
Mothers

45 (10)
3.61
1073 (691)
22
13
65

38 (10)
21
720 (529)
34
8
58

48 (10)
2.78
1592 (781)
44
26
30

42 (12)
17
1154 (726)
59
20
21

48 (11)
6
1739 (791)
45
30
25

38 (13)
29
1068 (786)
45
20
35

39 (8)
36
2.06 (0.94)
7 (5)
9
22
91
36

38 (8)
40
1.93 (0.88)
8 (5)
15
19
72
57

41 (7)
72
2.06 (0.91)
7 (5)
7
8
95
38

40 (7)
80
1.86 (0.8)
8 (5)
8
9
83
71

42 (7)
75
1.98 (0.84)
8 (5)
4.1
6
93
41

40 (7)
69
1.96 (0.99)
7 (5)
7
10
85
73

524
606
0
41
43
144
163

465
606
0
76
78
193
138

(111)
(119)
(0)
(68)
(82)
(133)
(100)

554 (130)
645 (126)
20 (25)
40 (51)
58 (67)
154 (111)
138 (94)

505 (144)
659 (135)
23 (28)
74 (62)
92 (82)
208 (133)
109 (86)

477 (163)
598 (160)
100 (0)
50 (63)
80 (91)
217 (166)
183 (116)

399 (174)
606 (162)
100 (0)
102 (85)
109 (102)
292 (184)
147 (108)

2.27 (0.99)
1.72 (19)
8084
42

3.43 (1.11)
11 (33)
1268
7

3.3 (1.05)
18 (43)
1028
5

2.63 (1.2)
18 (50)
362
1.89

2.51 (1.27)
31 (63)
426
2.22

(121)
(128)
(0)
(58)
(65)
(123)
(106)

2.45 (1.03)
0.67 (10)
8011
42

Data source: American Time Use Survey 2003-2018 waves. Note: Sample is limited to 21-60 year old workers in employer
jobs, working at least two hours on diary day, and surveyed Monday to Friday. All analyses are weighted.

Table 2: OLS Models of Parents’ Time Use and Telecommuting on the Diary Day, among Parents who Ever
Telecommute
Housework Childcare
-5.12
-2.27
(9.06)
(12.19)
Home only
-0.85
66.94 **
(13.34)
(17.95)
Female
7.06
42.98 **
(8.41)
(11.31)
Female x Home and Workplace
29.01 *
-0.14
(13.65)
(18.37)
Female x Home
48.73 *
-46.60
(19.97)
(26.86)
Spouse not working full time
-18.86
31.10 *
(11.46)
(15.42)
Spouse works full time
-1.33
45.52 **
(10.35)
(13.92)
Frequency telecommuting: (ref. = less than fortnightly)
Fortnightly
-6.51
-26.10 *
(8.64)
(11.62)
At least weekly
0.69
-12.99
(9.90)
(13.32)
1-2 days a week
7.69
-28.52 *
(8.63)
(11.62)
3-4 days a week
-8.86
-24.03
(10.99)
(14.78)
N
339
339
R2
0.12
0.15
Home and Workplace

** = p.<0.01, * = p.<0.05.

Time w. child
37.50
(22.39)
166.83 **
(32.98)
60.50 **
(20.78)
5.84
(33.75)
-33.22
(49.36)
85.80 **
(28.33)
84.02 **
(25.58)
2.71
(21.35)
29.25
(24.48)
-29.18
(21.34)
-14.80
(27.16)
339
0.17

Leisure
-46.71 **
(15.70)
36.35
(23.13)
-29.45 *
(14.57)
43.39
(23.67)
-12.03
(34.61)
0.76
(19.87)
-13.98
(17.94)

Work time
61.47 **
(20.63)
-65.66 *
(30.39)
-3.88
(19.14)
-62.42 *
(31.09)
11.77
(45.48)
3.27
(26.10)
-10.11
(23.57)

11.50
(14.97)
-0.38
(17.16)
28.99
(14.97)
5.37
(19.04)
339
0.08

34.25
(19.68)
36.13
(22.55)
14.63
(19.66)
33.10
(25.02)
339
0.08

Work time w. child
17.45 *
(7.21)
21.02 *
(10.61)
-1.67
(6.69)
15.62
(10.86)
32.92 *
(15.88)
4.41
(9.12)
9.48
(8.23)
13.75 *
(6.87)
-1.19
(7.88)
4.40
(6.87)
-9.79
(8.74)
339
0.13

Table 3: Parents’ Subjective Well-being in Work Activities and across Diary Day, by Telecommuting on
Diary Day (Means and SDs)

Stress
Happiness
Tiredness
Stress
Happiness
Tiredness
N (work activities):
N (across diary day):

Workplace
Home
Fathers
Mothers
Fathers
Mothers
In Work Affect
2.17 (1.77) 2.52 (1.87) 2.54 (1.63) 2.73 (1.79)
3.88 (1.53) 4.11 (1.49) 3.52 (1.33) 3.75 (1.48)
2.33 (1.8) 2.64 (1.89) 2.27 (1.84) 2.94 (1.99)
Diary Day Average Affect
1.59 (1.55) 1.86 (1.67) 1.8 (1.53)
1.84 (1.6)
4.27 (1.36) 4.34 (1.31) 4.17 (1.31) 4.28 (1.37)
2.4 (1.62) 2.76 (1.74) 1.99 (1.48) 2.65 (1.73)
884
761
115
76
2195
2160
370
352

Data source: American Time Use Suvey Well-being Module 2010, 2012, and 2013 waves. Diary day averages are
calculated for exclusive telecommuters and workers working exclusively in the workplace on diary day. Analyses are
weighted

Table 4: Comparing Telecommuters During and Prior to COVID-19

Weekly work hours (mean)
Works part time (%)
Weekly earnings ($)
Professional (%)
Management jobs (%)
Other (%)
Age
College degree (%)
Number of children
Age of youngest child
Black (%)
White (%)
Hispanic (%)
Married/cohabiting (%)
Spouse/partner works full time (%)
N=

Fathers
CIS
ATUS
42 (9)
47 (10)
0.05
0.06
–
1812 (763)
0.55
0.45
0.14
0.32
0.31
0.24
40 (7)
43 (6)
0.76
0.77
2.64 (1.78)
2 (0.85)
6 (4.49)
8 (5)
0.08
0.05
0.55
0.8
0.16
0.06
0.92
0.92
–
0.39
177
315

Mothers
CIS
ATUS
36 (12)
38 (13)
0.28
0.28
–
1079 (804)
0.55
0.44
0.1
0.23
0.35
0.34
39 (7)
40 (7)
0.61
0.68
2.22 (1.46) 1.97 (0.99)
8 (4.18)
8 (4.98)
0.18
0.07
0.59
0.73
0.14
0.1
0.83
0.85
–
0.74
197
363

Note: CIS (COVID Impact Survey) sample includes respondents who worked from home in the past week in the
COVID Impact Study. Hours worked for these respondents indicate usual hours worked in March.

Figures

1. Diary Day Work Time by Work Location and Temporality
Panel A. Average Work Time

Panel C. The Timing of Work Hours

e

on

ly

Mixed

ix

ed

H
om

0.02

ac
e

M

0.01

or
k

pl

0.00
40
0

0

20
0

W

Telecommuter

Fathers

Proportion

Average work hours (mins)

Mothers

Panel B. Gender Gaps

0.02
0.01
0.00

H

om
e

on
l

y

Workplace Worker

M

ix

ed

0.02

ac
e

0.01

W

or
k

pl

0.00
-100

-75

-50

-25

0

5

7

Exogenous controls

Full controls

11

13

15

17

19

21

23

Time (24 hour clock)

Mothers' - fathers' work time (mins)

Baseline

9

Home

Workplace

Data: American Time Use Survey 2003-2018. Full models reported in Appendix Table A5.

Fathers

Mothers

2. Time Use by Gender and Work Location
Panel A. Average Time Use

Panel B. Gender Gaps

n

ed

or

kp

Le
i

la
ce

su
re

Ti

m

M

e

ix

w

ed

H

.c

hi

om

e

dr
e

Childcare

on
ly

C
hi

W

or
k

ld
ca

re

pl
ac

e

H

ou
se

M
ix

w

or

k

H
om

e

Housework

on
ly

Fathers

W

Mothers

e
Workplace

Mixed

kp
or
W

30
0

20
0

10
0

0

la

ce

Le

is

ur

e

M
ix

ed

H
om

hi
w
.c
m
e
Ti

Leisure

dr

on

en

ly

C

W

or
k

pl

hi
ld
ca
re

ac
e

H

ou
s

M
ix

ed

H

ew
or

k

om

e

on
l

y

Time w. chidren

Average time use (mins)

-50

0

50

100

Mothers' - fathers' time use (mins)

Home only

Baseline

Exogenous controls

Full controls

Data = American Time Use Survey 2003-2018. Average time use estimates are (unadjusted) descriptive means. All estimates are weighted.
Appendix Tables A1 - A4 report full models.

3. Time Use by Work Location and Mothers' Work Hours
Panel A. Fathers' Time Use

Panel B. Gender Gaps in Time Use

Home only
Mixed

Mother part time

Workplace

Home only

Family type

Mother part time

Mixed
Workplace

Home only

Time w. chidren

Home only

Time w. chidren

Work location

Workplace

Childcare

Both fulltime

Childcare

Mixed

Housework

Housework

Both fulltime

Both fulltime

Mother part time

Both fulltime
Leisure

Leisure

Mixed

Mother part time

Workplace
0

50

100

150

200

Time use (minutes)

Mother part time

250

0

100
Time use (minutes)

Both fulltime

Workplace

Mixed

Home only

Data = American Time Use Survey 2003-2018. Estimates exclude respondents without a spouse or partner. Appendix Table A8 report full models.

4. Work Context by Gender and Work Location

Work time
w. child (minutes)

Work spells (N)

Mixed

Mixed

Workplace

Workplace

2
0.

1
0.

0
0.

-0
.1

-0
.2

-0
.3

Mothers - fathers
work time .w child

Mothers - fathers work spells

Model

Baseline

15

Home only

0

Home only

10

Female

5

Male

30

3.
50

0

Workplace

3.
25

Workplace

3.
00

Mixed

2.
75

Mixed

2.
50

Home only

2.
25

Home only

20

Panel B. Work Time with Children

10

Panel A. Work Spells

Exogenous controls

Full controls

Data = American Time Use Survey 2003-2018. Average work context estimates are (unadjusted) descriptive means. Appendix Tables A6 - A7 report full models.

5. Subjective Well-being During Work and Across Day by Gender and Work Location
Panel A. Average Well-being

Panel B. Gender Gaps

Workplace

Work location

home

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Average subjective well-being

Male

Female

4.0

4.5

home

During
Work

Workplace

workplace

Tired

Tired

Home

home

Stress

Workplace

workplace

During
Work

Stress

Home

Happy

Workplace

Across
Day

workplace

Happy

Home

Tired

Workplace

workplace

home

Tired

Home

home

Stress

Workplace

workplace

Across
Day

Stress

Home

Happy

home

Happy

Home

workplace
-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

Gender gap in well-being

Baseline

Full

Data = American Time Use Survey Wellbeing Supplement 2010, 2012, 2013. Average subjective well-being estimates are (unadusted) descriptive means.
Appendix Tables A19 - A24 report full models.

6. Subjective Well-being During COVID-19 by Gender and Work Location
Panel A. Proportions Experiencing Affect

Panel B. Gender Gaps

Working from home

Anxious

Working, not from home

Anxious

Unemployed

Working from home

Lonely

Lonely

Affect

Unemployed

Working from home

Depressed

Work location

Working, not from home

Working, not from home

Depressed

Unemployed

Working from home

Hopeless

Working, not from home

Hopeless

Unemployed
0.0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

-0.2

-0.1

Proportions experiencing negative affect

Female

Male

0.0

0.1

0.2

Female affect - male affect

Unemployed

Data: COVID Impact Survey. Estimates are unadjusted weighted means.

Working, not from home

Working from home

