COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on online sex advertising and sex
trafficking
Julia O. Coxen1*, Vanessa Castro2,3, Bridgette Carr4,5, Glen Bredin1, and
Seth Guikema1
1

Department of Industrial and Operations Engineering, University of Michigan, 1205

Beal Avenue Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; 2Ford School of Public Policy,
University of Michigan, 735 S. State Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States;
3

School of Public Health, University of Michigan, 1415 Washington Heights, Ann

Arbor, MI 48109, United States; 4Michigan Law, University of Michigan, 625 S. State
Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States; 5Human Trafficking Clinic, University of
Michigan, , 625 S. State Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, United States.
Correspondence to: juliaoh@umich.edu

COVID-19 pandemic’s impact on online sex advertising and sex
trafficking
Disruptive social events like the Covid-19 pandemic can have significant impact on the
commercial sex industry, yet these effects have been little understood. This paper
examines the effect of the pandemic on one part of the commercial sex industry: sex
trafficking. Our results from scraped sexual service advertisements show that the
pandemic has had measurable impact on online advertising for sex trafficking in the
United States, with a significant decrease associated with stay-at-home orders followed
by an increase to levels well above prepandemic levels as Covid-related restrictions
were relaxed. We contribute to the policy landscape by showing that the initial decrease
was associated with a loss of demand for sexual services due to pandemic-related health
concerns, but that a confluence of factors, including the lack of economic and social
support, increased the number of people vulnerable to being exploited. This study can
assist policy makers in predicting future changes in the sex industry to support a more
just and inclusive society. In the context of future health crises, natural disasters, and
major social disruptions it can guide policy makers in apportioning public aid in a way
that does not leave vulnerable populations and existing sex workers powerless to being
trafficked.

Keywords: sex trafficking; online advertising; Covid-19 pandemic; commercial
sex

1. Background: sex trafficking and social disruption
Sex trafficking is a criminal enterprise in which a trafficker uses force, fraud, coercion,
or age to exploit individuals through the forced performance of sex acts. Sex trafficking
is often depicted in mainstream media, and this media coverage plays an important role

2

in the public understanding of human sex trafficking. Examples include the 2019 U.S.
media reporting on the involvement of well-known public figures such as Jeffrey
Epstein in sex trafficking and the oft-repeated, but not evidence-supported, media claim
that sex trafficking increases in response to singular events such as the Super Bowl.
This type of coverage sensationalizes the crime and presents it as a response to specific,
unusual events in a community. Such attention does not necessarily lead to positive
outcomes (Ahmad & Sheshu, 2012; Caulkins et al., 2019; Lederer & Wetzel, 2014). Sex
trafficking is an everyday problem that is widespread throughout the United States. The
Covid-19 pandemic has the potential to substantially affect sex trafficking, and policymakers need rigorous analysis of sex trafficking and its prevalence.
Sex trafficking primarily provides financial benefit to the traffickers and
consequently traffickers must generate demand for the services of their victims. The
primary way in which they do this is through online advertising (Boecking et al., 2019).
Online advertising thus provides insight into the state of the sex trafficking in the
United States. We focused on the subset of online advertisements with sex trafficking
indicators: specifically, on indicators that the sex worker is managed by a third party.
Too often, research and reporting on sex trafficking focuses on unique social
events (e.g., the Superbowl, the North American International Auto Show; Martin &
Hill, 2019). Focusing only on one-off events reinforces the idea that sex trafficking
happens only a few times a year or that it is a problem associated with the transportation
of victims into a community and supported by an influx of buyers from outside that
community. The term “trafficking” can be confusing in this context; sex trafficking is a
criminal enterprise that exploits victims 365 days of the year and does not have to
include movement. A victim of sex trafficking could be trafficked within their own
home or neighborhood (Shively et al., 2012).

3

Rather than focusing on transportation of the victim, a better way to frame the
idea of sex trafficking is to consider the presence of third-party management as a proxy.
An indication of a third-party manager in an advertisement for commercial sexual
services suggests that the provider is not an independent sex worker. While it is possible
that an individual who is voluntarily participating in sex work may have a third-party
manager, our informal interviews with law enforcement experts and others familiar with
the sex trafficking industry suggest that this situation is rare1. Third-party management
is thus strongly indicative of the individual being trafficked, as indicated in previous
literature (Ibanez & Gazan, 2016).
While sex trafficking occurs in all facets of the commercial sex industry, this
paper focuses only on sex trafficking through online ads for in-person sex work. This
distinction is important to understand the later claims we make about the connection
between sex work and the Covid-19 pandemic. We recognize there is no one-size-fitsall portrayal of sex trafficking victims, as they can be found throughout the highly
stratified and segmented commercial sex industry market, stretching from in-person
street prostitution to brothels, massage parlors, clubs, exclusive escort services, and
online virtual sex work (Shively et al., 2012). However, although they are not a direct
measure of sex trafficking or available sex services, the volume of advertisements for
in-person sexual services is a useful measure, as it helps characterize demand and
supply (Ahmed & Seshu, 2012).
2. Hypothesis
While often repeated media claims about that the presence of sex trafficking may lead
one to believe sex trafficking is episodic and only associated with large events (Martin

1

We are not attributing any feedback to a particular interviewee in order to honor their need to
remain anonymous.

4

& Hill, 2019), sex trafficking is a persistent reality and outside events have an effect on
its magnitude and profitability. Better understanding the relationship between sex
trafficking and outside events could help multiple stakeholders such as law and policy
makers and law enforcement to predict future changes and adapt to the changing nature
of the industry. It can also help policy makers better understand the effects—and
limitations—of existing policies during times of social disruption.
We hypothesized that the onset of social-distancing orders had a dampening
effect on commercial sex and sex trafficking due to client and provider reluctance to
contract the virus and a reduction in regular travel away from home for work and
recreation on the part of potential clients. However, we also hypothesized that this
temporary decrease would be accompanied by a confluence of other factors that would
lead to a rapid increase in sex trafficking after restrictions lifted. These factors are
detailed in the Discussion section. Prior to the discussion on factors, however, we first
organize the article to detail the materials and methods used for our analysis. We test
the hypotheses by collecting commercial sex advertising data scraped from a popular
website, focusing on a subset of advertisements with strong indicators of trafficking and
then testing for statistically significant changes in advertising volume.
3. Materials and methods
Building off other antitrafficking research (Boecking et al., 2019; Latonero, 2011;
Nagpal et al., 2015), we used the volume of sex advertisements as an indicator of the
prevalence of sex work in a given region.
3.1 Data
The internet hosts numerous online platforms for sexual services advertisements, which
serve as a basis for providers to connect with buyers of commercial sex work. The
landscape of available platforms has changed rapidly in the past year. Prior to the

5

United States’ legislative enactment of Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act—Stop
Enabling Sex Trafficking Act (FOSTA-SESTA; Allow States and Victims to Fight
Online Sex Trafficking Act, 2018), Backpage.com and Craigstlist.com had become the
favored sites to facilitate sex work and sex trafficking (DeLateaur, 2016). After
FOSTA-SESTA took effect, legislation effectively rendered Backpage.com’s and
Craigslist.com’s personals advertisements ineffective on the internet for commercial sex
advertising. Our informal expert interviews with law enforcement consistently inform
us that a single replacement has not emerged to replace Backpage.com. Instead,
websites spring up periodically and “hobbyist” and “mongers” (the terms used to
describe frequenters of these websites) find their way to them by word of mouth
(Feeney, 2013). However, in these conversations, one site that was consistently
mentioned as a leading advertisement site was Rubratings.com.
Data used in this research consisted of over 1 million sex ads from the online
platform Rubratings.com. This research is the first that we have been able to find that
addresses sex trafficking anomaly detection in a post–FOSTA-SESTA era. We
recognize that without one lead website that hosts the majority of advertisements to
replace Backpage.com, we are analyzing only a portion of all existing online
commercial sex advertisements online, potentially impacting our assessment. However,
our interviewees indicated that despite the changes brought about by the FOSTASESTA era, online advertisements are still helpful indicators of the market for
commercial sex in a given region.
The data from Rubratings.com were scraped in the Python programming
language with the use of the BeautifulSoup package. This facilitated a regular
automated scrape of the website from 140 cities across 47 U.S. states. The automated
scrapers for this analysis retrieved 1,019,709 total advertisements in the United States

6

over the period from January 3, 2020 to September 29, 2020. Data collected include
paid advertisements used by clients to browse photos, services, rates, and other
descriptions of sex workers. Typically, the advertisement will list an email address, a
phone number, or both, in order for the client to make contact and set up a “date.” The
collected data were the pageid, date modified, description text, location, phone number,
and date scraped.
We were unable to obtain completely continuous data (i.e., every day) over the
time period selected, as the Rubratings.com website and other similar websites are
evolving and becoming more savvy about how to block scraping. Over the 270 days
between January 3, 2020 and September 29, 2020, there were 57 days on which the
scraper did not run or was actively blocked. However, it is common for a given
advertisement to be listed on the site for multiple days. This duplication means that
most advertisements that ran on days the scraper was not running were caught by the
scraper on a different day. The data for the remaining 213 days are thus likely
representative of the entire time period under study. With this in mind, we removed the
duplicated advertisements to accurately characterize the actual daily advertising
behavior and to prevent inadvertently overweighting advertisements. We accomplished
this by comparing the dates the advertiser posted the ad with the date the scraper
captured the ad. If those dates matched we identified this as the advertisement’s unique
appearance, appended that advertisement to the analytic sample, and deleted any
identical copies. This procedure reduced the data set significantly (Fig. 1).

7

Figure 1. Data stratification for online advertising scraped from Rubratings.com from January 3,
2019 to September 29, 2020.

3.1.1 Data stratification
Exploring the website and probing some advertisements quickly made it clear that many
of these advertisements were actually scams attempting to obtain credit card
information. Classified advertisements are fertile ground for scammers (Al-Rousan et
al., 2020; McCormick, 2013), and our informal interviews with anti-trafficking experts
agreed that this is a common practice on these types of websites. One co-author
(Guikema) confirmed this by sending emails to all advertisers in Ann Arbor, Michigan,
who listed only an email address and found that all of them were scams attempting to
steal credit card information. In related research in the context of spam detection,
researchers found that 78% of fake or spam advertisements did not include phone
numbers, while 87% of real advertisements did include phone numbers (Tran et al.,
2011). For these reasons, the analytic sample includes only the advertisements with
phone numbers for further analysis.

8

The data are also stratified to characterize the impact of sex trafficking separate
from the impact of independent commercial sex work. Previous researchers based their
characterization on a “new to town” stratification that labels advertisements that had
recently appeared in that region (Boecking et al., 2019). We contend that this labeling is
potentially misleading because it bounds sex trafficking to movement. As mentioned
earlier, sex trafficking does not require movement, and this characterization may
overlook the persistent risk to victims every day. Furthermore this characterization
ignores the reality that independent commercial sex workers move around and work in
different cities as well. Instead of a “new to town” stratification, this research uses
phone number clustering. Some advertisements point to the same phone number,
whereas other phone numbers have single appearances in our data set. The informal
interviews we conducted with law enforcement, current and former sex workers, and
antitrafficking experts suggested that multiple advertisements pointing to one phone
number are evidence of a call center or third-party management. These experts
confirmed that the use of third-party management (or “pimps”) is a likely indicator of
sex trafficking.
This notion is further reinforced by the informal interviews we conducted with
current and former independent (non-trafficked) commercial sex workers, who
described their phone number as their “lifeline” and a way to stay in touch with their
“regulars,” thereby suggesting that their singular advertisement would be connected
only to their number. We incorporated this concept into our data by parsing the
advertisements that had a relationship with only one phone number that did not appear
to be related to any other advertisement (1:1 relationship between phone number and
ad) from the clusters of many ads that pointed to one phone number (1:n>1 relationship
between phone number and ads). We recognize that some sex trafficking victims are

9

likely using one phone number that will not appear elsewhere. We also recognize that
the use of short-term phone numbers associated with a disposable phone or a
“soft”/internet phone number is common in nefarious practices; this labeling will not
capture those third-party managers who cycle through multiple disposable numbers
(Chen et al., 2019). We do not wish to exclude these victims, but rather use this labeling
as a generalized sex trafficking indicator. Figure 1 summarizes the stratification of the
data set.
3.1.2 Data limitations
Despite the richness of the data scraped from the online advertisements, there are
admittedly many limitations as well. First, as mentioned previously, the automated
scrapers did not capture advertising activity every day as intended. Instead, there were
days when the scraper did not run or was actively blocked by the website. Despite
regular retooling and restructuring of the scraper, some partial or entire days were not
scraped; these were distributed at random throughout the entire data set. This
observation is consistent with other similar research (Boecking et al., 2019). We also
recognize that the shutdown of websites like Cityxguide.com, a site that gained
popularity after the passage of the FOSTA-SESTA anti-sex trafficking legislation, could
affect our analysis.
Other limitations include the imperfect way the data are stratified for detection
of scams and sex trafficking labeling. Research suggests that trafficking detection can
be also done through analyzing the advertisement description itself through various
types of machine-learning classification and by identifying movement patterns (Ibanez
& Suthers, 2015; Nagpal et al., 2015; Szeckely et al., 2015). Lastly, we recognize that
law enforcement and antitrafficking nonprofit organizations place decoy advertisements
on these types of websites to disrupt the criminal activity of those seeking paid sexual

10

services. These decoys have the ability to add noise to the data, as they could be
counted as either advertisements for commercial sex or for sex trafficking.
3.2 Methods
Following the data stratification, we were left with 369,280 advertisements that
reflected indications of our sex trafficking indicators; see Table 1.
Table 1. Daily descriptive statistics for scraped advertisements (Rubratings.com) January 3, 2020
through September 29, 2020. Compiled, entire data set; Sex Trfk, records that exhibited the sex
trafficking indicator; Comm Sex, records that did not exhibit the sex trafficking indicator, proxy for
independent commercial sex workers
Data
U.S. Ad
Minimum
Maximum
Mean
Std. Dev.

Count (total)

(by day)

(by day)

(by day)

(by day)

Compiled

1,019,709

210

8821

3711

1704

Sex Trfk

369,280

183

3194

1718

773

Comm Sex

86,064

93

883

406

274

We then aggregated these remaining advertisements by day and by each individual city.
We normalized the number of daily commercial sex online advertisements by assessing
an average number of advertisements in equilibrium (pre–Covid-19) and then dividing
by that average over the hypothesized anomalous period. We also applied a 3-day
moving average to smooth out the noise and emphasize the trends. We took the raw
mean number of advertisements pre–Covid-19. Those entries were then divided by the
pre–Covid-19 average to produce respective normalized values.
While data were collected from throughout the United States, we highlight eight
major U.S. cities from a variety of geographic areas in order to demonstrate the varied
impacts across the wide spectrum of stay-at-home order implementation dates. We
chose to highlight the following regions based on the variety of stay-at-home
implementation dates: Atlanta (April 3, 2019), Dallas/Fort Worth (April 2, 2019),
Seattle (March 23, 2019), New York (March 22, 2019), Houston (April 2, 2019),

11

Miami/Fort Lauderdale (April 3, 2020), and Detroit (April 3, 2019), as well as the entire
United States (varied stay-at-home implementation dates; Kaiser Family Foundation,
2020). The process described above was repeated for all eight regions to obtain
normalized values for each.
We systematically tested our hypothesis that there existed a decreasing trend of
sex trafficking advertisements after stay-at-home orders were instituted by
systematically comparing baseline and testing intervals around each individual state’s
stay-at-home orders (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2020). We tested the days immediately
prior to the inflection point in 15-, 30-, 45-, and 60-day increments to the 15-, 45-, and
60-day increments immediately following the lockdown orders. We tested these
pairings within the cities mentioned in the main test with a two-sided Welch’s t test of
the two independent samples. This statistical method tested the null hypothesis that the
two samples have the same expected values. If the p value is smaller than .10, we reject
the null hypothesis of equal expected values.
This testing helps us draw conclusions about the testing ranges’ statistical
significance. We are presenting a family of multiple hypothesis tests at the city level.
We therefore make a Bonferroni correction at the city level and use a lower p value that
accounts for the probability of getting one significant result from the family at the 10%
level (Miller, 2012). We use the Bonferroni method because it is one of the most
conservative and common ways to account for the number of comparisons. After using
these methods to analyze records we categorized as showing indications of sex
trafficking, we repeated the same methods for the records that were not classified by our
approach as indicative of sex trafficking. We refer to these records later as a proxy for
independent commercial sex workers. We conducted this same analysis for all eight
cities as well as the United States as a whole.

12

4. Results
Our results support our hypothesis that online ads indicative of sex trafficking would
rapidly decline after stay-at-home orders began, and then rapidly increase after those
orders were lifted. Figure 2 presents a time-series graph of total online commercial sex
advertising volume and sex trafficking advertising volume for all regions studied.

Figure 2. Number of advertisements for both compiled and “sex trafficking” data sets.
Note. Left (2a): Normalized time-series of daily ad counts of all compiled advertisements.
Right (2b): Normalized time-series of daily ad counts reflecting the sex trafficking indicator.

It exhibits the number of daily online advertisements for both the raw data (Figure 2a)
and the trafficking indicator subset (Figure 2b), normalized by the pre-Covid
advertising volume at the city level. Included in the graph are Atlanta, Chicago,
Dallas/Fort Worth, Seattle, New York, Houston, Miami/Fort Lauderdale, and Detroit, as
well as the United States as a whole.
Additionally, we list computed features on the trajectory and behavior of the sex
trafficking advertisements for each city (Table 2). The table is sorted by the earliest
stay-at-home order, with column descriptions listed (see Appendix for methods of
calculation). The table annotates the date at which that city’s decrease in sex trafficking
advertisements first began, followed by the average number of advertisements the city
evidenced from January 1, 2020 until each city’s decline began. We also calculated the

13

velocity (approximate slope) at which each city’s advertisements declined. The lowest
number of advertisements at the bottom of each time series, along with their
corresponding dates, follow in the table; all of these figures assist in the calculation of
the depth percentage of the decline.
Table 2. Statistics by city describing sex trafficking escort advertisement behavior over
time. Period covering January 2020 to May 2020, sorted in order of stay-at-home
orders.

We observed these statistics to be consistent with the visualized time-series
graph in Figure 2. It is also worth noting that the dips in sex trafficking advertisements
all began prior to the state-mandated stay-at-home order. This may have occurred in
anticipation of government-required social distancing. Sex trafficked victims and their
third-party managers may have known that in-person sex work demand would decline
in response, and were perhaps conserving the fees associated with posting
advertisements online. In the early days of the outbreak in the United States, the risk
communication around New York as the epicenter was clear (McKinley, 2020). We
would expect that the response to the danger of the virus to be evidenced in a dramatic
and rapid decline of in-person commercial sex, and that is indeed what we find in the
data. Table 3 supports this characterization, as New York reflects the fastest velocity
toward its lowest ad count.
Table 3 summarizes all of the statistical testing that characterizes the decrease in
advertising during lockdown as well as the increase in advertising immediately
following the lifting of restrictions for both the population of advertisements that

14

evidence our trafficking indicator as well as those that we label as independent
commercial sex workers.
Table 3. Summary of testing.

Each cell represents twelve systematic pairings and the presence of an arrow represents
statistical significance in six or more of those testing intervals, and the direction of the
arrow indicates an increasing or decreasing trend.
4.1 Decrease in advertising during lockdown
A statistically significant decrease is evident in both compiled advertisements and
trafficking advertisements immediately after stay-at-home orders were issued in most
but not all cities. The trend of decreased sex advertising during lockdown was
consistent for the United States as a whole and specific cities. Taking New York as an
example (stay-at-home order on March 22, 2020), we found a pre-Covid mean number
of advertisements of 419.52 (see Table 2). The first four entries for the 3-day moving
average for New York were 396, 374.4, 350.2, and 331.4. Those entries were then
divided by the pre–Covid-19 average to produce their respective normalized values of
0.944, 0.892, 0.835, and 0.790.
In the New York example, a p value greater than .0087 would indicate that there
exists no significant difference in the expected values of the baseline and testing ranges.
In Table 3, we see that New York’s data show that all range comparisons reveal
statistical anomalies. Furthermore, the negative t statistic indicates that the advertising

15

rate decreased. We can confidently conclude that New York experienced a downward
trend of sex trafficking advertisements associated with stay-at-home orders. One can
also observe that the decrease began prior to the state-mandated stay-at-home order. We
could surmise that advertisements started to drop in preparation for, or perhaps in
anticipation of, the orders.
Table 4. New York City intervals before and after stay-at-home order (March 22, 2020).

We found statistically anomalous decreases in sex trafficking advertisement in
Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas/Fort Worth, Seattle, Miami, Detroit, New York, and the
aggregated data across the United States. As Table 5 exhibits, however, most of the
tested ranges for Houston evidenced p values greater than our critical value. This
finding implies that Houston did not experience a statistically significant dip in sex
trafficking advertisement after their stay-at-home order. The result is consistent with
media reporting about generalized non-compliance with stay-at-home orders and the
accelerated or constant growth rates of new coronavirus cases in those regions
(Advisory Board, 2020).

16

Table 5. Houston, Texas intervals before and after stay-at-home order (April 4, 2020).

4.2 Increase in advertising after lockdown
After lockdown restrictions began to ease, online advertising quickly rose again. Sex
trafficking advertisements increased consistently in all regions studied. However, we
found differing results for independent commercial sex workers across the different
cities. Table 3 and Figure 2 show that in the period following the lifting of restrictions,
the change in volume for advertisements associated with independent sex workers are
mixed, with some rising rapidly in July (New York, Detroit) while others rise gradually
(Dallas) or decline soon after the lifting of restrictions (Miami). By contrast, sex
trafficking advertising is seen to rise rapidly in July across all of our tested cities. This
discrepancy may be an indication that traffickers may be forcing their victims into
dangerous client interactions as soon as possible to drive income, in contrast to their
independent peers who may be able to choose to be more risk-averse, waiting to re-enter
the market until pandemic conditions improve.
Table 3 shows the results of statistical comparisons of prepandemic advertising
to two postpandemic time periods: immediately after stay-at-home orders were issued,
and in the longer term after stay-at-home orders were lifted. In addition to the
statistically significant decrease associated with the first stay-at-home orders discussed
earlier, we also see a statistically significant increase in advertisements with trafficking
indicators in all cities when comparing the pre-Covid period with the period

17

immediately following lifted restrictions. From Figure 2b we see that this advertising
increased from between 1.25 and 3.5 times pre-Covid levels, depending on the city.
The substantial and statistically significant increase in sex trafficking advertising
could be explained by an increase in the number of sex trafficking victims post-Covid.
Alternately, traffickers experiencing significant declines in income due to the pandemic
could be attempting to make up for this through increased advertising. As will be
discussed below, we believe the former reason may account for some of the rise in
advertising, as the increased economic precarity associated with the pandemic may
make more people vulnerable to being trafficked.
5. Discussion
5.1 Reasons for trends in sex advertising
The present research confirms the hypothesis. In addition, the observed discrepancy
between data for ads we identified as leading to independent sex workers versus sex
trafficking victims show a clear difference, indicating that the chosen method of
identifying ads linked to trafficking victims was effective.
As discussed above, we would expect the Covid-19 pandemic to lead to a
temporary decrease in both commercial sex work and sex trafficking. Under normal
conditions, an overall decrease could indicate the favorable outcome of fewer sex
trafficking victims. The pandemic’s confluence with a variety of socioeconomic,
environmental, and policy factors, however, creates a potential wave of sex trafficking
victims that should not be disregarded by government policy and decision-makers.
Covid-19 will have outsized impacts on a marginalized population whose vulnerability
is amplified by the pandemic, making them more likely to enter a trafficking situation,
as well as a population of existing sex trafficking victims who are more likely to remain
in exploited conditions as a result of the pandemic. A proactive pandemic response

18

needs concrete policy actions to prevent a likely increase in sex trafficking exploitation.
Because sex trafficking by its very nature affects multiple sociopolitical and economic
systems and the health of at-risk communities, further analysis of the push and pull
factors provides a framework for the estimation of how Covid-19 may impact the
commercial sex industry and sex trafficking (Worsnop, 2019).
5.2 Socioeconomic factors
The onset of the pandemic and subsequent social-distancing orders make in-person
commercial sex work a risky occupation, placing sex workers and sex trafficking
victims in an even more economically insecure state. Furthermore, the economic aid
provided by the U.S. government through the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic
Security (CARES) Act is subject to anti-sex work measures built into the eligibility
provisions, as the federal regulations determining which businesses may receive such
aid overtly discriminate against businesses that derive revenue from services’ depictions
or displays of a “prurient sexual nature” (Code of Federal Regulations, 2017). This
should, over time, make some otherwise independent commercial sex workers more
vulnerable to becoming trafficking victims due to increased socioeconomic
vulnerability. At the same time, those who have lost jobs due to Covid-19 and work in
the gig economy may not have access to unemployment insurance as they are not a part
of the formal economy. Qualifying for such benefits will therefore likely be challenging
for these individuals and, subsequently, make these individuals more susceptible to sex
trafficking. These factors would tend to suggest that the increase in sex trafficking
advertising is at least partially due to an increase in the number of sex trafficking
victims available to traffickers, allowing them to increase their operations
postpandemic.

19

5.3 Environmental factors
The effects of Covid-19 are most profoundly felt in marginalized communities
experiencing heightened vulnerability due to factors such as race, income, gender, and
housing instability (Smith & Cockayne, 2020). Consequently, during these
unprecedented times, these factors may increase the exploitation of people in vulnerable
positions. The U.S. Department of State reports that although sex trafficking affects
every demographic, a common factor is the victim’s vulnerability to
exploitation. Traffickers are able to thrive when inequality exists and where people lack
access to social protection and justice (Department of State, 2016). The pandemic
creates unique environmental conditions that further restrict the access these already
marginalized communities have to social services and amplifies their existing risk of
sex trafficking (Todres & Diaz, 2020).
The pandemic intensifies this marginalization, making individuals more likely to
stay in a trafficked situation or become vulnerable to sex trafficking. For example,
efforts to establish preventive measures to quell the spread of the coronavirus have led
to the displacement of already marginalized commercial sex workers in brothels,
thereby causing them to become homeless during this crisis (Berger, 2020). Similarly,
as federal stimulus unemployment benefits and eviction bans expire across the United
States, evictions will likely increase, making vulnerable individuals homeless (Cowin et
al., 2020). Further compounding their inequality and lack of a safety net in both cases,
this displacement cannot be addressed by conventional solutions because of the unique
pandemic environmental conditions that restrict access to essential social services. This
confluence of conditions has the potential to keep existing victims in dangerous sex
trafficking situations or place others at risk of entering sex trafficking. If governments

20

do not address the potential effects of the pandemic on marginalized populations, we are
likely to see a sustained rise in sex trafficking prevalence.
5.4 Government efforts and policy factors
In addition to policies that continue to stigmatize sex workers during Covid-19, it is
important to consider the ways in which public health measures to contain the virus
through contact tracing may further exclude sex workers and sex trafficking victims
from protection. In most of the United States, because commercial sex work is
criminalized, there may be gaps and underreporting in surveillance and tracing, as
compliance may jeopardize sex workers’ ability to maintain their privacy and client
confidentiality. Policing may further threaten the health and financial well-being of sex
workers, who may face lost wages or clientele not willing to participate in public health
surveillance efforts that may require documentation and reporting. When stay-at-home
restrictions lift, it stands to reason that sex workers and traffickers will redouble their
efforts to make up for lost wages. In this way, the criminalization of sex work may have
an inadvertent influence on increased postpandemic commercial sex and sex trafficking
levels.
One way to contain the spread of the virus is to implement policy measures that
will not criminalize sex workers, while continuing to advocate for criminalization of all
other parts of the sex trafficking enterprise to protect victims. Decriminalization of sex
work would not only eliminate the burden of police interactions, but also allow
commercial sex workers and sex trafficking victims to qualify for economic relief
currently reserved for members of the formal economy. A full decriminalization
strategy may face insurmountable legislative constraints, but even temporarily
reinforced social services and local policing strategies that limit interactions with sex

21

workers would help keep them from becoming further marginalized and vulnerable to
victimization.
Our data analysis suggests that the rapid increase in sex trafficking that we
hypothesized would occur based on socioeconomic, environmental, policy, and
regulatory factors is already happening. Sex trafficking advertising has increased
substantially above prepandemic levels, and these increases are statistically significant.
We urgently need action to prevent this increase from accelerating even more rapidly.

22

Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the victims of sex trafficking and their continued
hardships due to this global crisis. We would also like to thank the insights we gained
from the experiences of the antitrafficking professionals at the University of Michigan
Human Trafficking Clinic. This research was funded in part by the Omar Bradley
Officer Research Fellowship in Mathematics.
Declaration of interest statement
The authors declare no competing interest.
Data Availability
Data and code for this research will be made publicly available upon request.

23

References
Advisory Board. (2020). In these 22 states, the coronavirus epidemic is getting worse.
https://www.advisory.com/daily-briefing/2020/06/15/coronavirus.
Ahmed, A., & Seshu, M. (2012). “We have the right not to be ‘rescued’”: When antitrafficking programmes undermine the health and well-being of sex workers.
Anti-Trafficking Review, 1, 149–168.
Allow States and Victims to Fight Online Sex Trafficking Act of 2017 to
Communications Act of 1934, H.R. 1865, 115th Cong. (2018).
https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/1865/text
Al-Rousan, S., Abuhussein, A., Alsubaei, F., Collen, L., & Shiva, S. (2020). Ads-guard:
Detecting scammers in online classified ads [paper presentation]. IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Canberra, Australia.
Berger, M. (2020, April 28). Sex workers are falling through the cracks in coronavirus
assistance programs around the world. The Washington Post.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/2020/04/28/sex-workers-are-fallingthrough-cracks-coronavirus-assistance-programs-around-world/
Boecking, B., Miller, K., Kennedy, E., & Dubrawski, A. (2019). Quantifying the
relationship between large public events and escort advertising behavior.
Journal of Human Trafficking, 5, 220–237.
Caulkins, J. P., Kammer-Kerwick, M., Konrad, R., Maass, K. L., Martin, L., & Sharkey,
T. (2019). A call to the engineering community to address human trafficking.
The Bridge on Cybersecurity, 49(3). https://www.nae.edu/216534/A-Call-to-theEngineering-Community-to-Address-Human-Trafficking
Chen, C., Dell, N., & Roesner, F. (2019). Computer security and privacy in the
interactions between victim service providers and human trafficking survivors

24

[paper presentation]. 28th ${USENIX} Security Symposium, Santa Clara, CA.
https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity19/presentation/chen
Code of Federal Regulations: What Businesses Are Ineligible for SBA Business
Loans?, 13 CFR § 120.110. (2017).
https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/13/120.110
Cowin, R., Martin, H., & Stevens, C. (2020, July 27). Measuring evictions during the
COVID-19 crisis. Community Development Briefs.
https://www.clevelandfed.org/newsroom-and-events/publications/communitydevelopment-briefs/db-20200717-measuring-evictions-during-the-covid-19crisis.aspx.
Department of State. (2016). Trafficking in persons report. https://20092017.state.gov/documents/organization/258876.pdf
DeLateaur, M. (2016). From Craiglist to Backpage.com: Conspiracy as a strategy to
prosecute third-party websites for sex trafficking. Santa Clara Law Review, 56,
531–592.
Feeney, H. (2013). RubMaps: Facilitating sexual exploitation in Chicago and beyond.
http://media.virbcdn.com/files/1b/3fb9ea6c4f55a345-RubmapsFinalReport.pdf
Ibanez, M., & Gazan, R. (2016). Virtual indicators of sex trafficking to identify
potential victims in online advertisements. In J. Caverlee, R. Kumar, & H. Tong
(Eds.), Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) 2016
IEEE/ACM International Conference,(pp. 818-824). IEEE.
Ibanez, M., & Suthers, D. D. (2014). Detection of domestic human trafficking indicators
and movement trends using content available on open internet source [paper
presentation]. 47th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences

25

(HICSS-47), Waikoloa, HI, USA. http://lilt.ics.hawaii.edu/papers/2014/IbanezSuthers-HICSS-2014.pdf
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2020). State data and policy actions to address coronavirus.
KFF. Retrieved June 3, 2020, from https://www.kff.org/health-costs/issuebrief/state-data-and-policy-actions-to-address-coronavirus/.
Latonero, M. (2011). Human trafficking online: The role of social networking sites and
online classifieds. SSRN Electronic Journal.
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2045851.
Lederer, L. J., & Wetzel, C. A. (2014). The health consequences of sex trafficking and
their implications for identifying victims in healthcare facilities. Annals of
Health Law, 23(61), 61-91.
Martin, L., & Hill, A. (2019). Debunking the myth of Super Bowl sex trafficking:
Media hype or evidenced-based coverage? Anti-Trafficking Review, 13, 13–29.
McCormick, A. M., & Eberle, W. (2013). Discovering fraud in online classified ads
[paper presentation]. 26th International FLAIRS Conference, St. Pete Beach,
FL, USA.
https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/FLAIRS/FLAIRS13/paper/viewPaper/5928
McKinley, J. (2020). New York City region is now an epicenter of the coronavirus
pandemic. New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/nyregion/Coronavirus-new-Yorkepicenter.html
Miller, R. G., Jr. (2012). Simultaneous statistical inference. Springer Science &
Business Media.

26

Nagpal, C., Miller, K., Boecking, B., & Dubrawski, A. (2015). An entity resolution
approach to isolate instances of Human Trafficking online. arXiv.
http://arxiv.org/abs/1509.06659.
Shively, M., Kliorys, K., Wheeler, K., & Hunt, D. (2012). A national overview of
prostitution and sex trafficking demand reduction efforts, final report. National
Institute of Justice. https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles1/nij/grants/238796.pdf
Smith, A., & Cockayne, J. (2020, April 2). The impact of COVID-19 on modern
slavery. Our World. https://delta87.org/2020/03/impact-covid-19-modernslavery
Szekely, P., Knoblock, C. A., Slepicka, J., Philpot, A., Singh, A., Yin, C., Kapoor, D.,
Natarajan, P., Marcu, D., Knight, K., Stallard, D., Karunamoorthy, S. S.,
Bojanapalli, R., Minton, S., Amanatullah, B., Hughes, T., Tamayo, M., Flynt,
D., Artiss, R. … Ferreira, L. (2015). Building and using a knowledge graph to
combat human trafficking [paper presentation]. Proceedings of the 14th
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2015), Bethlehem, PA, USA.
https://usc-isi-i2.github.io/papers/szekely15-iswc.pdf
Todres, J., & Diaz, A. (2020, September 21). COVID-19 and human trafficking—the
amplified impact on vulnerable populations. JAMA Pediatrics.
https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapediatrics/fullarticle/2770536
Tran, H., Hornbeck, T., Ha-Thuc, V., & Cremer, J. (2011). Spam detection in online
classified advertisements. Joint WICOW/AIRWeb.
https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/1964114.1964122?casa_token=fYdCy7j_T2
MAAAAA:tns9jAcl5vzmPg5xUfArLPWyWf_KfoFGf4q3thexqfBPuL7_8L2lK
d0NGbDWTVTPCyFY-x-MiRU).

27

Worsnop, C. Z. (2019). The disease outbreak-human trafficking connection: A missed
opportunity. Health Security, 17, 181–192.

28

Appendix

Notes on Table 2
Table 2 summarized statistics by city describing sex trafficking escort advertisement
behavior over time. This data covered the period from January 2020 to May 2020,
sorted in order of stay-at-home orders.
The following details how those statistics were calculated:
dip_velocity =

("#$%&' )* +#,-'./0% 1#23* )24)
("#$%&' )* *)'%.*3/ 6%4)-)

lowest_ad_count = lowest raw number of advertisements
lowest_ad_date = date at which lowest_ad_count captured
increase_began = approximate date at which ad count began to rise again
depth(%) =

("#$%&' )* +#,-')
(/0% 1#23* )24)

∗ 899

29

