Gender inequalities: Changes in income, time use and well-being
before and during the UK COVID-19 lockdown
Muzhi Zhou, Ekaterina Hertog, Kamila Kolpashnikova, and Man-Yee Kan
2020-06-09
Department of Sociology, University of Oxford
Disclaimer: This work is funded by a European Research Council Consolidator Grant awarded to Professor
Man-Yee Kan (award number 771736)
*Please direct correspondence to: Man-Yee Kan, man-yee.kan@sociology.ox.ac.uk or Muzhi Zhou, muzhi.
zhou@sociology.ox.ac.uk

Key Points
• This report aims to provide basic facts about gender inequality in income, time use, and wellbeing
before and during the COVID-19 pandemic in the UK.
• In this report, we compare employment, income, time use, and well-being figures reported before and
during the lockdown period (late March to April 2020) of the same group of individuals by analyzing
longitudinal data from the 2020 UK Household Longitudinal Survey (UKHLS) COVID study and the
full UKHLS data. Earlier studies on the topic are based on cross-sectional data with different survey
designs and sample selections. We have found gendered consequences of the COVID-19 lockdown.
• Women undertake the major share of housework and childcare and form 80% of the health and social
care workers who are more exposed to the virus, among people aged between 20 to 49.
• There was a 30% reduction in paid work time for both women and men, and the percentage was 45%
among non-key workers. Women and men experienced a similar amount (3-4 hours) of an increase in
weekly housework hours. We also note a comparable reduction in monthly labour income for women
and men.
• Women, especially mothers, experienced a more dramatic decline in well-being amid the COVID
pandemic.
• Single mothers fare the worst in the labour market, are the least likely to own a house, have a car in
the household, and have the highest risk of depression, which makes them particularly vulnerable in the
current circumstances. Single parents experience a largest 7% increase in the non-working rates during
the lockdown period.
• Childcare support is critical when the usual support networks, such as grandparents, friends, and
neighbours, can no longer help with childcare, especially for mothers.

Introduction
The COVID-19 outbreak has resulted in substantial negative social and economic consequences for populations
across the globe. Like many East Asian and European countries, the UK has introduced a number of “lockdown”
measures, such as the closing of schools, enforcing social distancing and requesting employees to work from
home, to slow down the outbreak. Previous research has shown that men’s income tends to recover faster
1

than women’s after natural disasters (Bradshaw 2004; Neumayer and Plümper 2007). The long-term gendered
consequences of the current COVID-19 pandemic are yet to be revealed.
This report analyses the consequences of the lockdown measures on women (vs men) and single parents in
the UK and hypothesises the reasons behind the observed disparities. We aim to document the gendered
consequences of the COVID-19 pandemic and uncover factors that could exacerbate these consequences.
We propose policy interventions that could tackle or preempt them. Other studies use different sampling
approaches and framework, thus comparing the results of different respondents(Payne and Vassilev 2020;
Andrew et al. 2020). This kind of comparison is less reliable to account for the impact of the current
lockdown. We compare the information provided by the same individuals before and during the lockdown.
This comparison could accurately reflect changes in people’s behaviours and feelings pre- and during and
lockdown. However, we would like to underscore the fact that the selected individuals in our sample analysis,
who respond to multiple waves of the UKHLS study, should differ from the general population in the UK,
with more detailed information and discussion provided in the following analysis.
In what follows, we will first report the gender gaps in paid work, housework, childcare, and income. We
will show that women were already disadvantaged in the labour market, did far more housework than men,
and were the main carers for children before the crisis. Women are also more likely to work in the front-line
as key workers and make important contributions to the fight against the pandemic. Single parents, the
majority of whom are single mothers, are particularly vulnerable because they are the only earners and carers
in their families. Socioeconomically disadvantaged before the start of the pandemic, they fare even worse in
the labour market during the lockdown.
We provide evidence showing the unequal impact of the lockdown measures by using the latest data from the
2020 UK Household Longitudinal Survey (UKHLS) COVID study (Please refer to technical notes for data
sources). Earlier studies on the topic are based on cross-sectional data, where the sampling methods and
respondents differ. Therefore, these reports were not able to measure changes in employment, time use and
well being of women during the lockdown. In this study, we compare employment, income, time use, and
well-being figures reported before and during the lockdown period (late March to April 2020) of the same
group of individuals. We find similar reduction in women’s and men’s paid work time and labour income but
a larger reduction in women’s well-being (especially mothers) than men’s.
These findings highlight the role of social structures in enhancing the long-existing social inequalities during
the crisis. We have not find clear evidence showing that the lockdown measures have enlarged the existing
gender gaps in paid work time, labour income, and even housework time, but we do observe an exacerbated
gender gap in well-being. The lockdown also affects single parents particularly hard, with their highest
increase in non-working rates. Mother’s and father’s childcare time remains at an approximately 2:1 ratio,
where mothers do 9 hours per week more childcare than fathers in our sample. This gender gap in childcare
time among parents in the 2015 UK time use survey was arroximately 7 hours per week.
We will conclude by suggesting that the government needs to take gendered impacts into account when
implementing policies to tackle the COVID-19 outbreak and making recommendations on policies that the
government should take to support vulnerable groups.

What are the gender gaps in the UK?
The aftermath of the coronavirus crisis will exacerbate the already existing gender gaps in wages, employment,
and housework. The gender gap in the labour market remains substantial, with women disproportionately
employed in lower-paid and less secure jobs. In 2019 across the UK, 6.3 million women were recorded
to work part-time (Devine and Foley 2020).
We select people aged between 20 to 49 from the recent waves of the UK Household Longitudinal Survey
(UKHLS) and present the results below (see the final “Data and measures” section for more technical details).
The selected group is of their prime working and childbearing age (or with young (aged younger than 16)
children) and are likely to experience the highest work-family conflict.
Figure 1 shows four indicators of the gender gap in the UK. Currently, the educational attainment levels
2

for women and men are similar. However, women are more likely to be out of the labour force or employed
part-time. In 2016/17, almost 80% of men were employed full-time, but only 50% of women had full-time
employment. Approximately 30% of women were employed part-time (including zero-hour contracts), and
20% of them were not working.

Figure 1: The gender gap in the UK
Figure 1 reveals a substantial long-existing gender income gap. Over recent years, women in the UK
consistently earned approximately £500 less than men per month. We note a tendency of a slow closure of
the gender gap in labour income. In the long run, women who lost their jobs during the crisis are more likely
to experience long-term consequences of job loss and income disruption. The lockdown measures may further
enlarge the gender gap in well-being, where women reported consistently lower levels than men.
As well as being disadvantaged in the labour market, women are also experiencing gender inequalities at home,
where men spend considerably less time on housework and care work compared to women (Kolpashnikova
2018; Kan 2014). This inequality is especially pronounced in families with children under the age of 16 (Zhou
and Kan 2020). Figure 2 reports the daily time (measured in minutes) spent on three main work activities housework, care work, and paid work, based on the 2014/15 UK time use survey. In two-parent families with
children under the age of 15, mothers spend more than 3.5 hours daily on all types of housework (routine
housework, like cooking, non-routine housework like car servicing, and shopping), while fathers spend under
two hours. This already large gender gap becomes worse when we add care time. In 2014-15, women in
two-parent households with at least one child younger than 15 years old spent more than 2 hours daily on
3

care work, while fathers spent around an hour. Echoing the inequality in the domestic sphere, men’s spend
more than double the amount of time on paid work compared to women. In the UK, women remain the
main homemakers and caregivers. This assigned domestic role puts them at a particular disadvantage in the
lockdown.

Figure 2: The gender gap in time use among parents (Unit: Daily minutes)
Earlier research in Germany has shown that extended maternity leave could enhance women’s caregiver
role and discourage mothers’ commitment to the labour market (Gangl and Ziefle 2015). Our own findings
also show that British mothers who stay at home over time become more supportive of women’s traditional
caregiver roles (Zhou 2017). Therefore, policies and social contexts that encourage women to stay at home
further strengthen women’s caregiver role.

Gender composition of the front-line workers
Despite women’s disadvantage in the labour market, women form a critical mass of the current front-line
workers to fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Looking at the gender composition of key worker occupations based on their ISCO code in Figure 3, following
a list of key worker occupations released by the government on 19 March 2020, we estimate that 30% of
people aged between 20 to 49 work in the sectors that are critical to the COVID-19 response. The percentage
would be lower if the selected population is older (Farquharson, Rasul, and Sibieta 2020).
Women occupy a higher percentage in the key sector: approximately 60% of the key workers are women.
This is driven by a substantial amount (~80%) of women working in health & social care and education &
childcare occupations. This pattern is observed across the globe (Wenham, Smith, and Morgan 2020; Boniol
et al. 2019). Thus, women are not only more likely to be discouraged from actively participating in the
labour market with their growing domestic load during the lockdown, but when they do work, they are more
likely to be in those professions more exposed to the virus, putting themselves and their families at the risk
of long-term lung disease and bereavement.
4

Figure 3: Gender composition of the frontline workers

Single parents are particularly vulnerable
Across the UK in 2019, there are 2.9 million single parents, of whom approximately 2 million are
with dependent children, and 86% of the single parents are women (OfficeforNationalStatistics(ONS)
2019; Clark 2019). In the full UKHLS sample, Figure 4 shows that approximately 60% of women and only
40% of men live in households with children under the age of 16. Nearly 20% of mothers are single parents.
Having to raise children on their own puts an enormous strain on women’s ability to participate in the labour
force. It can take one time off with a sick child to imperil a single mother’s job, especially if she is paid
hourly and is employed in a precarious job.
• Mothers are defined as those who have children below the age of 16 in the household in the figures and
following texts.
Single mothers are much less likely to be employed, have a lower income, and probably already come from a
disadvantaged background (Gregg, Harkness, and Smith 2009). Figure 5 below summarizes the distribution
of socioeconomic status for single mothers, partnered mothers, and others (men and non-mothers).
Single mothers are least likely to pursue higher education. Only about 10% of single mothers have a 1st
degree, whereas, for partnered mothers and fathers, the numbers are around 40%.
A higher proportion of single mothers compared to partnered mothers are already not in the workforce.
Figure 5 shows that almost 40% of single mothers were not in the labour force, whereas about 20% of
partnered mothers did not work. Both partnered and single mothers were more likely to be in part time
employment than men. These mothers are more at the risk of losing their occupations because of the
precarious nature of their employment.
Among those who are employed, single mothers are over-represented among workers in semi-routine & routine
jobs and are least likely to be in professional occupations. As a higher proportion of occupations that allow
telecommuting during the coronavirus crisis are the professional occupations, single mothers are least likely to
5

Figure 4: Gender difference in the proportion of single and partnered parents

Figure 5: The socioeconomic status of single mothers and the rest

6

be employed in occupations that allow working from home. They face an unenviable choice between having
to quit their job, to fulfil their care responsibilities, or leave their children unsupervised to continue providing
for their families. For those with younger children, there may be no choice at all.
Figure 5 also shows that among those who work, single and partnered mothers have similar chances
of being key workers and fighting at the front-line of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We go one step further to show differences in living conditions between single mothers and others (Figure
6). Among the three groups, single mothers are least likely to own a house and are the mostly likely to rent
with support such as housing allowances. They are also least likely to own a car, thus heavily relying on
public transport. This would increase their risk of exposure to the virus.

Figure 6: Living condition of single mothers, partnered mothers, men and non-mothers

Evidence from the UKHLS COVID study in April, 2020
The recent release of the Wave 1 UKHLS COVID study survey data enables us to identify the impact of the
lockdown with people’s information recorded before and during the COVID crisis. Individuals were followed
up in UKHLS since 2009, and those who remain active in the sample in the last wave of UKHLS (wave 9,
2017/18) were contacted to fill in a monthly questionnaire in April. We compare the weekly working hours,
housework hours, and subjective well-being scores reported by the same individuals before the lockdown and
in March/April 2020. We select the same age group of people as above (20 to 49).
Before reporting this comparison, we would like to point out the COVID respondents differ from those in the
original UKHLS sample, partly because the information was collected through online surveys rather than
the original face-to-face interviews. As Figure 7 shows, those who filled in the COVID-19 wave 1 online
questionnaire (as shown in the last two columns in the figure) tend to be more socioeconomically advantaged.
Specifically, the current COVID study respondents have more education and are more likely to work and be
in more prestigious occupations. They are also more likely to be in a partnership, men are more likely to be
fathers, and they are less likely to be single parents than those in the original UKHLS sample.
7

Figure 7: Comparing the wave 1 COVID sample and the original samples in waves 8 and 9 of the UKHLS

8

Accordingly, the documented impact in the following figures reflect information from a relatively socioeconomically advantaged group. If we assume that one’s socioeconomic status has a protective effect on
the negative consequences of the lockdown measures, the reported results may underestimate the potential
negative impacts of the lockdown. However, another paper discussed the potential of non-random sample
selection indicates that the bias due to sample selectio should be limited (Benzeval et al. 2020). Figures 8
and 10 show the comparisons by gender and parental status (single vs partnered parenthood).
We first plot in Figure 8 the percentage of people who are not working (either out of the labour force
or are unemployed) reported in January and February 2020 (Pre-lockdown) and in March and April 2020
(Lockdown). Because key workers are allowed to work during the lockdown, in addition of showing the result
of the full COVID sample, we also present the results from those who are not key workers to reflect the
impact of lockdown “business closure” measures on individuals.

Figure 8: Changes in employment status
Changes in the non-working rates are limited in the full sample. For the non-key worker sample, women and
men have a similar 3% - 4% increase in non-working rates. If we look at the parenthood and partnership
status, single parents experience the largest 7% increase in the non-working rates.
Figure 9 shows that changes in labour income and housework time are similar for women and men during
the initial period of the lockdown. An £84 drop in the median value of the monthly labour income is observed.
People increase their weekly housework time by about four hours. Men’s paid work time (including zero work
time of those who are not working), however, reflect a slightly sharper decline than women’s (11.6 hours
vs 8.3 hours). We must note that women and men have different starting points, where women reported
fewer working hours in the first place. In terms of the percentage change relative to their pre-lockdown
hours, women and men experience a similar 30% reduction in their paid work time of this COVID
sample.
We also need to note that women are more likely to be employed as key workers during the crisis. In our
sample, 50% of women and 37% of men who work at the time of the interview were key workers. We replicate
the same analysis about paid work time for non-key workers in our sample and record a 45% (10 hours) and
9

Figure 9: Changes in labour income, paid work time, housework time, and wellbeing

10

45% (15 hours) drop in women’s and men’s weekly paid work time among non-key workers,
respectively (not shown here).
Notably, we observe a faster drop in women’s well-being during the crisis. One main reason could
be the resulting conflict in combing market work and domestic work. This observation is consistent with
another paper showing that gender now plays a more important role in explaining inequality of opportunity
in psychological distress (Davillas and Jones 2020).
We now turn to the comparison between single parents (of whom 84% were women) and others, as shown in
Figure 10.

Figure 10: Changes in labour income, paid work time, housework time, and wellbeing across single parenthood
groups
Single parents have the lowest monthly labour earnings before the lockdown, and the room for a further
reduction in income is limited. Nonetheless, single parents experience a slightly larger reduction in their
weekly paid work hours than partnered mothers (10 hours vs 8 hours), although their paid work time before
the lockdown is similar. The relatively larger reduction in paid work time and the smaller reduction in
monthly earnings of single parents indicate that single parents should be more likely to be furloughed. In our
sample, 15%, 11%, and 14% of the single parents, mothers in couples, and others were furloughed in April
2020, respectively. In terms of the percentage of their pre-lockdown work time, the decline is 43% and 32%
reduction of the paid work time of the full sample and 72% and 44% reduction of the paid work
time of the non-key-worker sample (not shown there) for single parents and partnered mothers, respectively.
The growths in housework time are similar for single parents and partnered mothers. The declines in wellbeing, in terms of absolute values, are identical for the two groups too. However, compared with the others,
all mothers, disregarding their partnership status, experience a larger drop. This observation confirms our
11

expectation that the surging work-family conflict during the lockdown would dis-proportionally
impact mothers’ well-being. The significance of childcare responsibilities on women’s wellbeing is also
noted in another recent paper using the same dataset (Etheridge and Spantig (2020)). Moreover, given the
initial low well-being levels of single parents, the percentage change in well-being for single parents is the
largest. Supporting mental health and well-being of everyone, but especially women would be vital.

Childcare during the lockdown
The closure of nurseries, schools, and non-key sector jobs, the work from home guidance, together with the
societal expectations of women as the primary homemakers, have resulted in a disproportionate increase in
women’s domestic burden. The lockdown could lead to a resurgence of traditional gender roles and negatively
impact women’s labour market access and performance in the long-term.
We report the weekly childcare hours among those with dependent children (children younger than 16) in
Figure 11. We may compare this figure with the above Figure 2 to observe any changes in the gender gap
in the care time during the lockdown since 2015. Overall, in both periods, women spend approximately twice
as much time as men do on childcare for both age groups of children. On average, mothers spend 27 hours
weekly and fathers spend 16 hours weekly on childcare during the lockdown. The gender gap in childcare
among parents is thus 9 hours per week. The age of children matters the most. Caring for children younger
than 6 years old is comparable to a time commitment of full-time employment for mothers.
We also note that single parents spend less time on childcare than partnered mothers. This observation is
likely a result of single parents’ relatively less educational levels, as shown above and the evident educational
gradient in childcare time. In Figure 11, this educational gradient in childcare time is particularly significant
for parents with pre-school aged children. Key workers, who are allowed to send their children to nurseries or
schools, spend 10 hours less on childcare per week for both age groups.

Conclusion
In a crisis, it is paramount to ensure the safety and livelihood of all. Women, and particularly single mothers,
are already severely affected in the economic downturn as a result of the COVID-19 outbreak. Policymakers
must consider the gendered impacts and their repercussions when implementing measures to tackle the
epidemic.
The vulnerability is amplified by the current lockdown measures when no comprehensive childcare support is
available for non-key worker mothers who need to work (at home) to support themselves and their families.
Single parents may be particularly vulnerable because, in addition to the closure of nurseries and schools,
they can no longer rely on their social networks and grandparents for childcare, because of the prevention
concerns and physical distancing. For many people, the question boils down to ‘How can you work from
home and look after your children at the same time?’.
Single mothers are more at risk of losing their jobs because they are less likely to be in those occupations
that allow employees to ‘work from home’. Moreover, even if allowed to work from home, they are less likely
to be able to do so efficiently because they are the only ones to take care of children at home. As even before
the crisis, single mothers were at a higher risk of depression. This calls for more attention to this particular
group at this challenging time.
We also note that women are more likely to work in occupations that would make them ‘Key Workers’ under
the current definition used by the UK government. Single parents (most of whom are mothers) and their
families may be particularly at risk. To prevent the long-term decline in women’s economic power, spikes
in poverty among single-parent households in particular and the resulting child poverty, and in addition to
protecting health and well-being in the aftermath of the COVID-19 outbreak, we recommend the following
goals and measures of policies to
• Secure childcare options: More childcare resources would enable parents, especially mothers, to
perform their paid work tasks in a more efficient way and lower their risk of suffering from the work-family
12

Figure 11: Childcare time of people with dependent children from the 2020 Wave 1 Covid sample

13

conflict.
• Priorities single parent families: The extra vulnerability of single parent families who struggle
between work and childcare with their high risk of poverty and depression, should be reflected in
COVID-19 responses.
• Improve the well-being of women and especially single parents: Secured employment with
resources available to support women in need is crucial to minimize the disproportionately negative
impact of COVID-19 on well-being, especially for women who are more likely to be front-line key
workers, with limited economic resources, and become victims of domestic and sexual abuse during the
lockdown.

Technical Note:
Data and measures:
Understanding Society data. University of Essex, Institute for Social and Economic Research. (2020).
Understanding Society: Waves 1-9, 2009-2018 and Harmonised BHPS: Waves 1-18, 1991-2009. [data
collection]. 12th Edition. UK Data Service. SN:6614, 10.5255/UKDA-SN-6614-13 Age between 20 to 49 for
both women and men of the UKHLS are selected for analyses.
Monthly labour earnings are the monthly take-home labour income, adjusted for inflation using the 2015
income value.
Paid work hour is the weekly hours spent on paid employment, which include normal weekly hours and
normal overtime hours, for those who are currently working.
Housework hour is the weekly hours spent on housework, typically routine housework such as cooking,
cleaning, and laundry.
Well-being score is a measure of current mental well being reported by respondents. It is measured by
summing 12 items scored on a Lickert scale from 0 to 3. These items are: ‘ability to concentrate’, ‘losing sleep’,
‘playing a useful role in life’, ‘capability of making decisions’, ‘feeling under stress’, ‘overcoming difficulties’,
‘ability to enjoy activities’, ‘ability to face problems’, ‘feeling unhappy or depressed’, ‘losing confidence’,
‘believing in self-worth’, and ‘feeling generally happy’. The overall scale ranges from 0 (most distressed) to 36
(least distressed).
Understanding Society: COVID-19 Study, 2020. University of Essex, Institute for Social and Economic
Research. (2020). Understanding Society: COVID-19 Study, 2020. [24-30 April 2020]. 1st Edition. UK Data
Service. SN:8644, 10.5255/UKDA-SN-8644-1
Monthly labour earnings are the take-home pay/earnings, adjusted for inflation using the 2015 income
value and adjusted to make it as monthly earnings. Respondents provided information in January and
February 2020 and at the time of the interview (April 2020).
Paid work hour is the usual weekly hours spent on paid employment. The value is zero for those who are
currently not working. Respondents provided information in January and February 2020 and at the time of
the interview (April 2020).
Housework hour is the hours spent on housework last week when interviewed in April 2020, typically
routine housework such as cooking, cleaning, and laundry.
Well-being score is a measure of current mental well being reported by respondents. It is measured by
summing 12 items scored on a Lickert scale from 0 to 3. These items are: ‘ability to concentrate’, ‘losing sleep’,
‘playing a useful role in life’, ‘capability of making decisions’, ‘feeling under stress’, ‘overcoming difficulties’,
‘ability to enjoy activities’, ‘ability to face problems’, ‘feeling unhappy or depressed’, ‘losing confidence’,
‘believing in self-worth’, and ‘feeling generally happy’. The overall scale ranges from 0 (most distressed) to 36
(least distressed).

14

UK Time Use Survey data. Age between 20 to 49 for both women and men interviewed during 2014 to
2015. In this report we restricted our sample to men and women living in nuclear families with children under
15 years of age.
Paid work, Housework, and Care Work are measured in minutes spent daily on a given activity.
Note: Cross-sectional weights in the surveys have been applied in all results.

References
Andrew, Alison, Sarah Cattan, Monica Costa Dias, Christine Farquharson, Lucy Kraftman, Sonya Krutikova,
Angus Phimister, and Almudena Sevilla. 2020. “How Are Mothers and Fathers Balancing Work and Family
Under Lockdown?” Institute for Fiscal Studies. https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14860.
Benzeval, Micheala, Jon Burton, Thomas Crossley, Paul Fisher, Annette Jöckle, Hamish Low, and Brenda
Read. 2020. “The Idiosyncratic Impact of an Aggregate Shock: The Distributional Consequences of Covid-19.”
Understanding Society Working Paper Series. https://www.understandingsociety.ac.uk/sites/default/files/
downloads/working-papers/2020-09.pdf.
Boniol, Mathieu, Michelle McIsaac, Lihui Xu, Tana Wuliji, Khassoum Diallo, and Jim Campbell. 2019.
“Gender equity in the health workforce: Analysis of 104 countries.” WHO Health Workforce Working Paper 1,
no. 33: 1–8. https://www.who.int/hrh/resources/gender_equity-health_workforce_analysis/en/.
Bradshaw, Sarah. 2004. “Socio-economic impacts of natural disasters: A gender analysis.” United Nations
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, no. 33. https://www.cepal.org/en/publications/
5596-socio-economic-impacts-natural-disasters-gender-analysis.
Clark, Daniel. 2019. “United Kingdom (Uk): Single/Lone Parent Families in 2019, by Parent’s Gender.”
Statista. https://www.statista.com/statistics/281640/lone-parent-families-in-the-united-kingdom-uk-bygender/.
Davillas, Apostolos, and Andrew M. Jones. 2020. “The Covid-19 Pandemic and Its Impact on Inequality of
Opportunity in Psychological Distress in the Uk.” SSRN, May. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3614940.
Devine, Brigid Francis, and Niamh Foley. 2020. “Women and the Economy.” House of Commons Library, no.
CBP06838: 1–17. https://commonslibrary.parliament.uk/research-briefings/sn06838/.
Etheridge, Ben, and Lisa Spantig. 2020. “The Gender Gap in Mental Well-Being During the Covid-19
Outbreak: Evidence from the Uk.” Understanding Society Working Paper Series. https://www.iser.essex.ac.
uk/research/publications/working-papers/iser/2020-08.
Farquharson, Christine, Imran Rasul, and Luke Sibieta. 2020. “Key Workers: Key Facts and Questions.”
https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/14763.
Gangl, Markus, and Andrea Ziefle. 2015. “The Making of a Good Woman: Extended Parental Leave
Entitlements and Mothers’ Work Commitment in Germany.” American Journal of Sociology 121 (2): 511–63.
https://doi.org/10.1086/682419.
Gregg, Paul, Susan Harkness, and Sarah Smith. 2009. “Welfare Reform and Lone Parents in the Uk.” The
Economic Journal 119 (535): F38–F65. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2008.02226.x.
Kan, Man-Yee. 2014. “Household Production and the Labour Market.” In Gender Inequality in the Labour
Market in the Uk, edited by Giovanni Razzu, 122–33. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Kolpashnikova, Kamila. 2018. “American Househusbands: New Time Use Evidence of Gender Display.”
Social Indicators Research 140: 1259–77. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11205-017-1813-z.
Neumayer, Eric, and Thomas Plümper. 2007. “The Gendered Nature of Natural Disasters: The Impact
of Catastrophic Events on the Gender Gap in Life Expectancy, 1981-2002.” Annals of the Association of
American Geographers 97 (3): 551–66. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8306.2007.00563.x.

15

OfficeforNationalStatistics(ONS). 2019. “Families and Households in the Uk: 2019.” https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/families/bulletins/familiesandhouseholds/2019.
Payne, Chris S, and Gueorguie Vassilev. 2020. “Coronavirus and How People Spent Their Time Under
Lockdown: 28 March to 26 April 2020.” Office for National Statistics. https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/
nationalaccounts/satelliteaccounts/bulletins/coronavirusandhowpeoplespenttheirtimeunderrestrictions/
28marchto26april2020.
Wenham, Clare, Julia Smith, and Rosemary Morgan. 2020. “COVID-19: the gendered impacts of the
outbreak.” The Lancet 395 (10227): 846–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30526-2.
Zhou, Muzhi. 2017. “Motherhood, Employment, and the Dynamics of Women’s Gender Attitudes.” Gender
& Society 31 (6): 751–76. https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243217732320.
Zhou, Muzhi, and Man Yee Kan. 2020. “A new family equilibrium? Changing dynamics between the gender
division of labor and fertility in Great Britain, 1991–2017.” Demographic Research 40 (10227): 846–48.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30526-2.

16

