Impact of rumors or misinformation on coronavirus disease (COVID-19) in
social media
Samia Tasnim,1 Md Mahbub Hossain,1 Hoimonty Mazumder2
Abstract
The COVID-19 pandemic has not only caused significant challenges for health system all over
the globe but also fueled the surge of numerous rumors, hoaxes and misinformation, regarding
etiology, outcomes, prevention, and cure of the disease. This misinformation are masking healthy
behaviors and promoting erroneous practices that increase the spread of the virus and ultimately
result in poor physical and mental health outcomes among individuals. Myriad incidents of
mishaps caused by these rumors was reported across the world. To address this issue the
frontline healthcare providers should be equipped with the most recent research findings and
accurate information. The mass media, health care organization, community-based organizations,
and other important stakeholders should build strategic partnerships and launch common
platforms in disseminating authentic public health messages. Advanced technologies like natural
language processing or data mining approaches should be applied in detection and removal
online content with no scientific basis from all social media platforms. Those involved with the
spread of such rumors should be brought to justice. Telemedicine based care should be
established at a large scale to prevent depletion of limited resources.
Keywords: COVID-19, Coronavirus, Health Communication, Social Media, Health Policy

1

School of Public Health, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.
IPAS, Dhaka, Bangladesh
Corresponding Author: Dr. Samia Tasnim MD, School of Public Health, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843, USA. Email: tasnim@tamu.edu
2

Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and flow of (mis)information in social media
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is a respiratory tract illness resulting from Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) infection, which has spread all over
the globe, making it a major public health challenge across health systems. Simultaneously,
numerous rumors, misinformation, and hoaxes appeared on several social media platforms
regarding the etiology, outcomes, prevention, and cure of the disease1. The pressing issue is fake
news spread more rapidly in social media than the ones from reliable sources and damages the
authenticity balance of news ecosystem.
A recent analysis showed that during the 2016 presidential election in the United States, fake and
biased news were more outspread than news from 19 authentic sources combined2. It is becoming
a public health concern as the exposure to high-volume of information can lead to media fatigue
causing relaxation of healthy behaviors essential to protect individuals. Also, misinformation and
rumors regarding COVID-19 are masking healthy behaviors (such as hand washing, social
distancing etc.) and promoting erroneous practices that increase the spread of the virus and
ultimately result in poor physical and mental health outcomes among individuals. For example, in
India, a father of three was reported to commit suicide upon hearing his diagnosis of COVID-193.
Another example of hazards attributable to improper health communication can be drawn from
Nigeria, where the health officials found several cases of overdose of Chloroquine (a drug used to
treat malarial parasite) after the news regarding the effectiveness of the drug for treating COVID19 spawned in the news media.4 Another rumor about the national lockdown in the United States
has fueled panic buying of groceries and stationeries, which disrupted the supply chain, and
exacerbated demand-supply gaps and food insecurities among individuals with low socioeconomic

status and other vulnerable populations5. A similar phenomenon was observed in other economies
around the world, which may have prolonged impacts on public health nutrition and psychosocial
health among the affected populations.
Many misinformation related to diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19 has confused the general
population as well as the health care providers, who are battling a relatively less researched disease.
This is also reducing the legitimacy of new scientific discovery regarding the cure or vaccine for
this disease. These hoaxes and rumors are also creating a social stigma around this infection, which
has resulted in reduced compliance with home quarantine and social isolation. Several countries
have reported incidents where hundreds of individuals were infected from a single person who
visited their mosque/church despite their doctor’s advice to remain isolated at home6. Such
problems are contributing to suboptimal control of COVID-19 pandemic across populations.

Potential strategies to ensure effective health communication on COVID-19
It is understandable that people living in quarantine, isolation, or at risk of infectious disease
outbreak are likely to experience psychosocial stress and adverse health outcomes, which may
evoke interests in learning more about the disease7. However, such situations require assurance
complemented by flow of correct information. This need is acknowledged by the World Health
Organization (WHO), which has partnered with several social media and seven major tech
companies namely Facebook, Google, LinkedIn, Microsoft, Reddit, Twitter, and YouTube, and
agreed to stump out the frauds and misinformation, and promote critical updates from healthcare
agencies8.

Despite the agreements, the rumors are still rampant all over the platforms, which necessitates
several multipronged interventions to address the same. First, the frontline healthcare providers
should be equipped with the most recent research findings and accurate information, which can be
used in direct caregiving and communicated with the patients or populations at risk. This may also
leverage more robust patient-provider communication and result in better health outcomes.
Previously integration of information technology successfully improved patient care in managing
mass casualty incidents. This brought several positive outcomes in the form of optimization of
resources, an extension of care and improved health outcomes of patients.9
Secondly, mass media, community organizations, support groups, and civil society may play
critical roles in disseminating authentic information. To achieve this, it is necessary to build
strategic partnerships at local and global levels, connecting offline and online resources in a
coordinated manner so that validated information is communicated across platforms.
Third, all hoaxes and rumors should be removed from all online platforms, and only scientifically
sound information should be allowed to increase awareness among mass people. Advanced
technologies like natural language processing or text-mining approaches may be helpful in
detecting online content that has no scientific basis. The latest data-mining algorithms are
successfully detecting the unique characteristics of all kinds of fake news and removing them from
their respective platforms2. Twitter, Reddit, and Amazon have already implemented such methods
to remove fake accounts or product reviews. Application of the same principals in removing all
rumors and hoaxes regarding this pandemic despite its unique challenges is evidently feasible.
Therefore, social media and other online providers should adopt such measures to identify and
eliminate potentially harmful misinformation and rumors.

Fourth, online portals and personnel involved with the production and propagation of such
misinformation should be brought to justice. Local and national regulatory authorities and law
enforcement agencies should be made aware of these challenges to address these challenges in
respective contexts comprehensively. In this regard, governments of many countries have arrested
individuals involved with the spread of such rumors.10 However, before enforcing any of these
laws worldwide, authorities should conduct a proper investigation and ensure the legal rights of
the convicts.
Fifth, common platforms should be launched providing precautionary information in both online
and offline media on a large scale. Successful strategies for mass media campaigns from the last
few epidemics should be identified and implemented. These messages should be culturally tailored
and translated to several languages to increase outreach. The media coverage of the recent SARS,
H1N1, MERS-CoV, Ebola, and H7N9 epidemics had a significant effect on reducing the total
spread of these pathogens by promoting healthy behaviors. Factual information regarding the
COVID-19 is also expected to have similar results.
Sixth, using telemedicine approach evidence-based care and information services should be made
available for people with limited access to care such as people in the rural areas, elderly population,
or simply stuck at home due to lockdown. This will not only decrease the chances of the hospitalacquired infection but also reduce the utilization of resources like ventilators, personal protective
equipment for doctors etc.
Lastly, transparency, good information governance, and leadership across communities and
institutions should be promoted to remove any misleading information related to COVID-19,

which are essential for the greater good of populations experiencing health and psychosocial
burden of this pandemic.

Acknowledgement: None.
Conflicts of interest: We declare no conflicts of interest.
Funding: No funding was received at any stage of preparing this manuscript

References:
1.

Raman Sandhya. Public health experts worry about spread of COVID-19
misinformation.https://www.rollcall.com/2020/03/18/public-health-experts-worry-aboutspread-of-covid-19-misinformation/. Published 2020.

2.

Shu K, Sliva A, Wang S, Tang J, Liu H. Fake News Detection on Social Media. ACM
SIGKDD Explor Newsl. 2017. doi:10.1145/3137597.3137600

3.

Joe W. Coronavirus: Indian man “died by suicide” after becoming convinced he was
infected. The Telegraph. https://www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/science-anddisease/coronavirus-indian-man-died-suicide-becoming-convinced-infected/. Published
2020.

4.

Busari S, Adebayo B. Nigeria records chloroquine poisoning after Trump endorses it for
coronavirus treatment. CNN. https://www.cnn.com/2020/03/23/africa/chloroquine-trump-

nigeria-intl/index.html. Published 2020.
5.

Spencer SH. False Claims of Nationwide Lockdown for COVID19.https://www.factcheck.org/2020/03/false-claims-of-nationwide-lockdown-for-covid19/.

6.

Kasulis K. “Patient 31” and South Korea’s sudden spike in coronavirus cases. Aljazeera.
https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2020/03/31-south-korea-sudden-spike-coronaviruscases-200303065953841.html.

7.

Hossain MM, Sultana A, Purihit N. Mental health outcomes of quarantine and isolation
for infection prevention: A systematic umbrella review of the global evidence. 2020.
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/dz5v2.

8.

Major tech platforms say they’re ‘jointly combating fraud and misinformation’ about
COVID-19. The verge. https://www.theverge.com/2020/3/16/21182726/coronaviruscovid-19-facebook-google-twitter-youtube-joint-effort-misinformation-fraud.

9.

Zhao X, Rafiq A, Hummel R, Fei DY, Merrell RC. Integration of information technology,
wireless networks, and personal digital assistants for triage and casualty. Telemed J eHealth. 2006. doi:10.1089/tmj.2006.12.466

10.

NHK police arrest man “for spreading fake virus
news.”https://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1506616-20200204.htm.

