Age Structure and Living Arrangements Shape the Vulnerability of Spanish Provinces to
Outbreaks of Covid-19
Authors: Diederik Boertien1, Albert Esteve1,2, Iñaki Permanyer1
Affiliations:
1

Center for Demographic Studies, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain.

2

Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, 08193, Spain.

Background
Previous research has documented how age structures and co-residence patterns shape
the vulnerability of populations to outbreaks of covid-19, with Spain being among the
most vulnerable countries.
Objective
To document the role of age-specific co-residence patterns in shaping the vulnerability of
Spanish provinces to mortality arising from within-household transmission of covid-19.
Method
We use data from the Spanish Population Registry 2018 on 10% of the population residing
in private households in Spain. We combine information on the age and number of
household members with infection fatality ratios related to covid-19 to estimate the
average number of deaths per infection if a person becomes infected and transmits the
virus to other household members.

Results
Children live in the largest households of all age groups on average. However, the age
profile of the persons that children live with reduces, but does not eliminate, the risk of
mortality arising due to within-household transmission of the virus.
Provinces with aged populations face a double challenge. Not only do they have large
numbers of vulnerable persons due to their age, older persons are also more likely to
share the same households in aged provinces.
Contribution
We show how the vulnerability of Spanish provinces to covid-19 varies due to age
structure and co-residence patterns and document the role of specific age-based coresidence arrangements in this result.

Keywords: Population Characteristics; Family; Coronavirus Infections; Mortality;
Demography

As the covid-19 pandemic is still evolving, researchers have started to document the factors
that shape variation in mortality related to covid-19 across geographical areas. Predicting
the development and consequences of the pandemic across areas would require accounting
for a wide range of factors, including factors such as pre-existing morbidities, health
systems, and social interaction. In this article, we focus on demographic factors that, all else
equal, can shape the vulnerability of countries to mortality related to covid-19 (Dowd et al.,
2020; Esteve et al., 2020a; Nepomuceno et al., 2020). Fatalities due to infection with the
virus are heavily concentrated among older persons (Verity et al., 2020), and cross-country
differences in death tolls across countries are related to the age-structure of countries’
populations (Dowd et al., 2020). Co-residence patterns within households are likely to cause
variation in the vulnerability of geographical areas to covid-19 (Esteve et al., 2020a). Indoor
transmission has received increased attention after the confinement of people in their
homes in many countries across the globe (Li et al., 2020; Qian et al., 2020).
Previous research on how age structure and co-residence patterns shape vulnerability of
populations to covid-19 ranked Spain among the most vulnerable countries (Esteve et al.,
2020a). These results were based on the 2011 census. Spain is a country with an aged
population and a relatively high level of intergenerational co-residence (Moreno, 2012;
Reher, 1998). Therefore, we ask the two following main questions: Which specific coresidence arrangements contribute to the vulnerability of the Spanish population overall?
And how does vulnerability to covid-19 outbreaks vary across provinces in Spain?
We use data on household structure from population registries for the year 2018 and
combine this information with estimates of Covid-19 infection fatality ratios to estimate

how variation in co-residence patterns shapes vulnerability to Covid-19. Describing coresidence patterns and related vulnerability is important for at least two reasons.
First of all, co-residence patterns differ by age and this has been central to discussions on
age-specific confinement policies across countries. For instance, many countries have
closed and opened schools, therewith exposing children (and those who they get into
contact with) to possible infection. The extent to which such policies can have
consequences for mortality depends, among other factors, on whether children live with
persons who are vulnerable to dying from infection by covid-19. Ideally, infections should
be prevented for vulnerable individuals and their co-residents by considering a large variety
of characteristics (e.g. pre-existing medical conditions). However, many policies, including
those discussed above, are applied to age groups without discrimination.
Secondly, co-residence patterns vary across geographical areas and this affects the
vulnerability of these areas to deaths that can arise due to within-household transmission
of the virus. To illustrate, in a fictive society where everyone lives alone, a “perfect”
confinement policy will effectively reduce further transmissions. However, in a society
where people live together the virus can still spread within households after a “perfect”
confinement policy is implemented. Therefore, reductions in mortality will be delayed after
confinement policies are implemented in areas where vulnerable persons share their
residence with more people (all else equal).

Data and Method

We use Spanish registry data from the Padrón Continuo de Habitantes provided by the
National Institute of Statistics (INE) including information on age and household structure
for 10% of the Spanish population residing in private households in 2018. It is important to
note that our data does not include persons living in collective households such as old-age
homes. We select all 4,615,168 cases.
Besides describing the size and age-composition of households, the analysis is based on
calculating the “vulnerability” of households to deaths arising from within-household
transmission of covid-19. This indicator of vulnerability is based on the number and age of
household members combined with age-specific infection fatality rates related to covid-19.
More specifically, we calculate the estimated number of household members that dies after
an individual becomes infected and transmits the virus to all other household members. To
calculate this number we first create a variable indicating the number of persons each
individual lives with according to 10-year age groups (i.e. number of persons aged 0-9;
number of persons aged 10-19; … ; number of persons aged 80+). Subsequently, we use the
age-specific infection fatality ratios of Verity and colleagues (2020) to calculate the number
persons that are expected to pass away. For ease of interpretation, we multiply this number
by 1.000 to represent deaths per 1.000 infections. Age-specific infection fatality ratios were
unfortunately not available for men and women separately. In robustness checks, we use
age- and sex-specific fatality ratios based on confirmed cases and deaths in Spain
(Actualización nº 104. Enfermedad por el coronavirus (COVID-19) of the Spanish Ministry of
Health; See Appendix A).

Our indicator of vulnerability is based on the maximum possible number of household
transmissions per case and the related expected number of deaths. This number can be
adjusted downward proportionally if one assumes that only a share of the household
becomes infected, but a complication in that regard is that this indicator does not take into
account that the transmission of the virus within households can vary with age (Li et al.,
2020).

Results
Figure 1 displays the average number of persons that individuals live with (excluding
themselves) according to their own age and the age of co-resident persons. The average
number of co-resident persons ranges from 3.3 for young children to 1.2 for the oldest
group. Children live with most persons of all age groups.
The age-composition of co-resident persons varies considerably across age groups. Persons
aged 0-9 live with 0.02 persons aged 80 or more, on average, whereas persons 80 years or
more themselves live with 0.33 other persons aged 80 or more. Other observations that
stand out are the high number of persons aged 50-59 that individuals aged 20-29 live with,
and the relatively large number of persons aged 80 or more that individuals aged 50-59 live.
Both patterns reflect the co-residence of young adults with their parents which is common
in the Spanish context due to the late age at which people leave the parental home
(Moreno, 2020) and the co-residence of the oldest individuals with their adult children
(Esteve et al., 2020b; Reher, 1998).

Figure 1. Average number of co-resident persons by own age and age of co-resident
members

Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE).
Figure 2 shows, for each age group, the expected number of deaths if 1.000 persons become
infected with covid-19 and transmit the virus to all their household members. The dark parts
of the bars indicate infected individuals’ own risk of passing away, labelled from here
onward as “direct deaths”. These numbers reflect the infect fatality ratios of Verity and
colleagues (2020) used in this paper. The lighter parts of the bars indicate the additional
deaths that 1.000 infections are estimated to cause if infected individuals also transmit the
virus to all other members of their household. We label such cases as “indirect deaths” from
here onward.

The estimated number of indirect deaths ranges from an average of 9 deaths per 1.000
infected individuals aged 0 to 9, to 35 deaths per 1.000 infections among persons aged 80
or more. In other words, the number of deaths that could arise from a person above 80
transmitting the virus to other household members is almost 4 times higher than the
number of deaths that children aged 0-9 could cause in that manner (the inclusion of
persons living in residences would probably increase this difference further). However, the
average estimated number of deaths per infection does not vary greatly between age
groups below age 60. These numbers range from 9 for children aged 0 to 9 to 16 deaths per
1.000 cases for young adults aged 20-29. The latter group lives with a relatively high number
of persons aged 50-69 compared to the other groups below age 60 (See Figure 1). These
persons aged 50-69 are most likely their own parents, who have reached ages where covid19 forms a more serious risk in terms of mortality.

Figure 2. Estimated deaths after 1.000 persons of age group become infected and
transmit virus to all household members

Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE). Deaths calculated assuming all household
members become infected.

Variation across Provinces
Figure 3 shows how the age-specific estimates of indirect deaths per 1.000 infections (light
bars of Figure 2) vary across provinces. Infections among two age groups are contrasted
which have been central to many discussions of age-specific policies: persons aged 70+ on
the x-axis and persons aged 0-19 on the y-axis. In all provinces, the number of indirect
deaths per 1.000 infections is higher for older persons as compared to children. In other
words, older persons live with more persons vulnerable to covid-19 (i.e. other older

persons) as compared to younger persons. However, there is a clear variation in age-specific
estimates across provinces.
In Ceuta and Melilla, the vulnerability of children’s households is relatively high. This implies
that children, on average, live with more older persons than in other provinces. At the other
extreme, there is a group of provinces with high numbers of indirect deaths after infections
among older individuals. In these provinces, many older persons live with their generational
peers (probably their partners). This group, situated on the bottom-right corner, consists of
provinces from the interior of Spain such as Ávila, Guadalajara, and Lleida. The Galician
provinces in the northwestern extreme of Spain (A Coruña, Lugo, Ourense, Pontevedra)
combine elements of both previous categories: a high level of vulnerability for the
households of both the older and the young. Both intergenerational households and
households where older individuals live with peers of their age are relatively common in
Galicia. The rest of the provinces have relatively low levels of indirect deaths related to
infections of the young and the old (within the Spanish context).

Figure 3. Household’s vulnerability to indirect covid-19 related deaths for persons aged 019 and persons aged 70+

Orange = Children commonly live with older persons; Green: Older persons commonly live
with other older persons; Light-blue: Children and older commonly live with (other) older
individuals; Black: Children and older live relatively less often with (other) older
individuals.
Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE). Vulnerability calculated assuming all household
members become infected and using infect fatality ratios of Verity et al (2020).

Figure 4 shows how age structures and living arrangements shape the overall vulnerability
of provinces to covid-19. How many deaths are expected to arise if 1.000 random persons
in a given province become infected and infect all other household members? The dark-

blue parts of the bars show the randomly infected persons’ own risk of passing away. This
estimate varies across provinces due to differences in age structures. In other words,
variation in the number of old people makes it more or less likely for a random infection to
afflict an older person. Because the northwest of Spain has the oldest populations the
number of estimated deaths after 1.000 random persons become infected is twice as high
there as compared to several Southern provinces.
The sum of the three lighter parts of the bars of Figure 4 indicates the number of deaths
that can be induced by the within-household transmission of covid-19. Because the agestructure of the province also matters here, the total size of the lighter bars roughly follows
the order of the dark-blue bars of Figure 4. Deviations from this general pattern are caused
by variation across provinces in who older individuals live with. In other words, in provinces
where older persons live in large households, this estimate will be higher than expected and
vice versa. The provinces that stand out in this regard are, as expected, the Galician
provinces, and, to a lesser extent, provinces with high levels of co-residence of older
persons with generational peers (León, Lleida, Zamora) and provinces with high levels of
intergenerational residence such as the provinces in Africa.

Figure 4. Estimated deaths after 1.000 persons in province become infected and transmit
virus to all household members

Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE). Deaths calculated assuming all household
members become infected and using infect fatality ratios of Verity et al (2020).
The lighter parts of the bars are broken down by the contribution of infections among three
broad age groups to the estimated number of indirect deaths (i.e. indirect deaths are
broken down by the age of the person who got randomly infected and transmitted the virus
to household members). In general, the contribution of children is larger in provinces with
younger populations (on the left of the panel), whereas the contribution of ages 70+
matters more in provinces with aged populations (on the right of the panel). This suggests
that in aged populations there are relatively more households where older persons live with

generational peers. In younger populations (and Galicia), the transmission within
intergenerational households is relatively more important than in older populations.

Section 4: Discussion
The propagation and consequences of the covid-19 pandemic depend, among many other
factors, on the extent to which the virus can be transmitted within households. In this
paper, we documented variation in co-residence patterns and related vulnerability to
mortality due to covid-19 infections across age groups and Spain’s provinces. We obtained
three main findings that can help inform policies related to covid-19.
Firstly, children live in the largest households of all age groups and can play an important
role in propagating the virus (depending on the extent to which actual transmission
probabilities vary by age; Li et al., 2020; Danis et al., 2020). At the same time, the relatively
low number of older persons that children co-reside with reduces the risk of deaths that
can arise due to children transmitting the virus to household members. Among individuals
below age 60, infections of persons aged 20-29 have the highest risk of causing deaths due
to within household-transmission. Many young adults live with their parents who have
entered ages that make them more vulnerable to covid-19. At the same time, the
vulnerability of households varies relatively little across age groups until age 60. The
households of the oldest are the most vulnerable, not only because of their own risk of
dying but also because they are the most likely to live with other older persons.
Nonetheless, in our simulation, most indirect deaths would be provoked by individuals

below age 70 because of differences in the absolute size of age groups. A limitation of our
analysis is that we did not take into account other factors that can affect the vulnerability
of households, most importantly morbidity. If older persons with medical conditions are
less likely to live with other older persons, this might lead to a less steep age gradient in
vulnerability. At the same, time our results only referred to individuals living in private
households. The inclusion of old-age homes would accentuate the results by age.
Secondly, the co-residence patterns of older persons differ considerably between
provinces. We distinguished between older persons living with peers of their age, and older
persons living in inter-generational households. Inter-generational households lead to
relatively high vulnerability of children’s households in several provinces (Canary Islands,
Ceuta, Melilla and Galicia). In these provinces, policies affecting the confinement of younger
age groups are likely to have a relatively larger impact on the transmission of the virus
within households to the older population. In contrast, several provinces in the interior of
Spain stand out in terms of the vulnerability of older people’s households. In these
provinces, many older persons live with peers of their age, most likely their partners. Given
that these provinces also have the oldest populations, this poses a double challenge for
aged populations. Not only do aged populations have more persons at risk of dying from
covid-19, the at-risk population is also to an important extent concentrated in the same
households. This might especially be the case in Galicia, where both the challenges related
to inter-generational households and the co-residence of older individuals with their peers
exist. Fortunately, so far, Galicia is one of the regions of Spain with relatively few actual
cases of covid-19. This underlines the nature and limitations of our analysis, which aims at

estimating the risk of people dying if a person becomes infected and if all household
members become infected too.

References
Danis, K., Epaulard, O., Bénet, T. et al. (2020) Cluster of coronavirus disease 2019 (Covid-19)
in

the

French

Alps.

Clinical

Infectious

Diseases

2020.

Available

online:

https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciaa424
Dowd, J.B., Andriano, L., Brazel, D.M. et al. (2020). Demographic science aids in
understanding the spread and fatality rates of COVID-19. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 117(18), 9696-9698.
Esteve, A., Permanyer, I., Boertien D., Vaupel J.W. (2020a). National age and co-residence
patterns shape covid-19 vulnerability. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
Early view. Doi: 10.1073/pnas.2008764117
Esteve, A., Reher, D.S., Treviño, R. et al. (2020b) Living Alone over the Life Course: Cross‐
National Variations on an Emerging Issue. Population and Development Review. Online first.
https://doi.org/10.1111/padr.12311
Li, W., Zhang, B., Lu, J. et al. (2020) The characteristics of household transmission of COVID19. Clinical Infectious Diseases. available online: doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa450
Nepomuceno, M.R., Enrique Acosta, E., Alburez-Gutierrez, D., Aburto, J.M., Gagnon, A.,
Turra, C.M. (2020) Besides population age structure, health and other demographic factors

can contribute to understanding the COVID-19 burden. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 117(25), 13881-13883. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2008760117
Moreno, A (2012). The transition to adulthood in Spain in a comparative perspective: The
incidence of structural factors. Young, 20(1), 19-48.
Qian, H., Miao, T., Li, L., Zheng, X., Luo D., Li Y. (2020) Indoor transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
medRxiv. 2020 Jan 1. https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.04.04.20053058
Reher, D.S. (1998). Family ties in Western Europe: persistent contrasts. Population and
Development Review, 24(2): 203-234.
Verity, R., Okell, L.C., Dorigatti, I. et al. (2020). Estimates of the severity of coronavirus
disease 2019: a model-based analysis. Lancet Infectious Diseases, 20, 669–77. doi:
10.1016/S1473-3099(20)30243-7

Appendix A. Replication using fatality ratios of confirmed cases in Spain
In robustness checks we used the case fatality ratios as calculated and reported by the
Spanish Ministry of Health on the 13th of May 2020. These numbers are available at
https://www.mscbs.gob.es/profesionales/saludPublica/ccayes/alertasActual/nCovChina/documentos/Actualizacion_104_COVID-19.pdf
More specifically, the age-specific fatality ratios employed are: Ages 0-9: 0.2%; Ages 1019: 0.3%; Ages 20-29: 0.2%; Ages 30-39: 0.3%; Ages 40-49: 0.6%; Ages 50-59: 1.4%; Ages
60-69: 4.9%; Ages 70-79: 14.1%; Ages 80-89: 20.8%; Ages 90+=22.0%.
These fatality ratios are much higher because they do not take into account nonconfirmed cases. The fatality ratios for children are higher in particular (in relative terms).
This becomes visible once replicating Figure 2 using these fatality ratios (Figure A2). At the
same time, the ordering of age groups and provinces changes little once using these
alternative fatality ratios (See Figure A4).

Figure A2. Estimated deaths after 1.000 persons of age group become infected and
transmit virus to all household members

Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE). Deaths calculated assuming all household
members become infected and using infect fatality ratios of confirmed cases in Spain as
reported by Spanish Ministry of Health on 15/05/2020.

Figure A4. Estimated deaths after 1.000 persons in province become infected and
transmit virus to all household members

Source: Padrón de habitantes 2018 (INE). Deaths calculated assuming all household
members become infected and using infect fatality ratios of confirmed cases in Spain as
reported by Spanish Ministry of Health on 15/05/2020.

B. Analysis for men and women separately
Using confirmed case fatality ratios has the advantage of enabling an analysis for men and
women separately. The confirmed case fatality ratios for men are:
Ages 0-9: 0.2%; Ages 10-19: 0.3%; Ages 20-29: 0.3%; Ages 30-39: 0.5%; Ages 40-49: 0.9%;
Ages 50-59: 2.4%; Ages 60-69: 6.7%; Ages 70-79: 17.4%; Ages 80-89: 27.7%; Ages
90+=30.7%.
And for women:
Ages 0-9: 0.3%; Ages 10-19: 0.3%; Ages 20-29: 0.1%; Ages 30-39: 0.2%; Ages 40-49: 0.3%;
Ages 50-59: 0.7%; Ages 60-69: 3.0%; Ages 70-79: 10.0%; Ages 80-89: 15.8%; Ages
90+=18.6%.
Figures B1 and B2 show results for men and women separately. General patterns for men
and women are similar, the number of co-resident persons declines with age, but the age
of these co-resident persons increases.

Figure B1. Average number of co-resident persons by own age and age of co-resident
members

Figure B2. Estimated deaths after 1.000 persons of age group become infected and
transmit virus to all household members

At the same time, the number of indirect deaths per 1.000 infections start to vary between
men and women after age 50. Women aged 50-79 have higher risks of causing a death

through household transmission as they are more likely to live with an older person. This
probably reflects age differences within romantic relationships, where men are on average
older than women. This pattern turns around after ages 80, where men are more likely to
cause indirect deaths than women. Because women live longer they are less likely to live
with a partner at advanced ages than men.

