"x"
"1" "Title Page"
"2" "Type of paper:   Case conference"
"3" "Author names:"
"4" "Ritin   Mohindra"
"5" "Parul  Kalia"
"6" "Sanjana Kathiravan"
"7" "Shubh Mohan Singh"
"8" "Title:  The first patient with COVID-19: Notes from the Trenches"
"9" "Author affiliations:"
"10" "Dr.  Ritin   Mohindra , MD, Internal Medicine, is an Assistant Professor at  Department of Internal Medicine, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India"
"11" "Dr.  Parul  Kalia, Internal Medicine trainee year 1, Gastroenterology Department, Northwick Park Hospital, London, United Kingdom"
"12" "Dr. Sanjana Kathiravan, MD Psychiatry (pursuing), is Junior Resident at Department of Psychiatry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India (ORCID ID:  0000-0002-8651-5667 )"
"13" "Dr. Shubh Mohan Singh, MD Psychiatry, is an Additional Professor at Department of Psychiatry, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India"
"14" "Corresponding author:"
"15" "Dr. Shubh Mohan Singh"
"16" "Email Id:  shubhmohan@gmail.com"
"17" "Total number of pages: 13"
"18" "Total number of words: 246 1"
"19" "The first patient with COVID-19: Notes from the Trenches"
"20" "Abstract"
"21" "COVID-19 is a rapidly evolving situation and presently India has amongst the highest numbers of patients in the world.  However,  in the initial parts of the pandemic, the reaction of patients and clinicians to COVID-19 was one that was informed by being face d with a totally novel situation. This paper describes the personal experience of the first patient with COVID-19 admitted to a tertiary hospital in North India and the treating doctors. Implications of the experiences are discussed."
"22" "Introduction"
"23" "The COVID-19 pandemi c is a rapidly evolving phenomenon  (1) . While there are data on various aspects of the pandemic (and more is being added everyday), it is the small but defiant voices of the individual patients  and the doctors on the frontlines (and hence the trenches) that often get lost in the din of the bigger war."
"24" "We present a case conference of the first patient with COVID-19 admitted in a tertiary hospital in North India. This case conference is presented  in three parts. The first part is a  first-person  account of the patient (who is one of the authors and is incidentally a physician herself), the second part is a  first-person  account of a young Assistant Professor in the Department of Internal Medicine who  was the primary treating physician. This is followed by some closing comments.  These events took place in the 3rd and 4th week of March 2020."
"25" "Part 1: The Patient"
"26" "They conveyed the dreadful message, “You have tested positive for COVID-19, Dr  Parul ” and  I was admitted in the ‘Communicable disease (CD)’ ward on the 3rd floor of a large tertiary care hospital in Chandigarh. As a young doctor in the NHS, I had seen men and women, their young children, the elderly suffering from COVID-19. None of this, howev er, quite prepared me to cross the divide from being a doctor to being a patient. I had flown back from London to India to be with my parents and became symptomatic within a few hours of arrival. I decided to seek medical advice rather than go home, and he re I was."
"27" "At first, I just could not believe it. I was alone in a ward surrounded by equipment that I knew measured what and none of that gave me any comfort. A part of me kept saying that COVID-19 was unlikely to be a severe illness in a 25-year-old wom an. However, the first waves of anxiety were irresistible, and I could not help thinking, “What if I am one of the 5% patients who end up needing a ventilator?”"
"28" "Every few minutes, I was checking my oxygen levels, looking closely at that monitor all the tim e, imagining the worst. Everything suddenly became unbearable at this moment."
"29" "There was a tumult of emotions, thinking about how I might have ‘caught’ it, anger and regret; maybe some mistake had been made somewhere. Trying to calm myself down, I kept havi ng a feeling I might die. I could not sleep, and my mind knew no rest. In addition to the anxiety and loneliness, body aches tore me down. The fear of not knowing what will happen and not being around family made me shiver. As my symptoms started becoming  more prominent, I knew there was no mistaken diagnosis. Moreover, from the second day, I started receiving many phone calls round the clock, from the local administration and"
"30" "the media. I suddenly  realised  that I was a bit of a celebrity for being one of t he first patients with COVID-19 in the city. It was the kind of fame I could have done without."
"31" "People started checking out my social media accounts. The experience of being a subject of discussion and media attention was disconcerting. Everyone had the sa me questions, and I was tiring but couldn’t switch off my phone because it was the only means of communication I had with my family."
"32" "I would wake up to the hum of an old exhaust fan and the relentless"
"33" "knocking on my door to collect my breakfast. I could  see the hospital staff trying to avoid me after knocking on my door. I looked at my breakfast and  realised  that I couldn’t smell or taste anything and had lost my appetite. The doctors would come donned in their personal protective equipment. I could not s ee their faces, I nodded along most of the time as I could not hear them properly, and there was no use shouting. I felt what it must be like for the patients all around the world who don’t understand enough about the condition, all those patients I had se en when all donned up, trying to say “hello” through the N-95. The chain of thoughts broke when I saw people trying to peep in through the only small window, looking at the “first patient with COVID-19” in their ward."
"34" "I would sit up on the bed in the mid dle of the night,  terrorised , no one to talk to, no one to put me back to sleep. The days passed in a haze and I don’t remember the first few of them very well. On the 8th day into my admission, I started to have  diarrhoea  and severe abdominal pain followe d by chest pain. I panicked, started doing an abdominal exam on myself and also ran through differentials of chest pain in my mind. I got an Electrocardiogram, blood tests and a Chest X-ray to rule out all the life-threatening conditions I was sure I was d eveloping at that time. Tests were unremarkable. I was looked upon and told, “Everything is normal”, but I knew what it felt like at the moment. I had never felt that sick in my entire life, and this was a ‘novel’ experience. That is when I  realised  that C OVID-19 is a complete package!"
"35" "As days passed by, I was starting to feel sad, longing for human contact, trying to look out the small window with no one to talk to. I would come back to the bed and lie down or check out the ventilator next to my bed whic h, thankfully, I had not yet needed. I tried passing the time by reading the labels on the water bottles or the instructions leaflets accompanying the medications. The thought of saving thousands of lives by being a patient this time, in isolation, was enc ouraging along with phone calls from my family that kept me going, albeit brief because I quickly became short of breath."
"36" "Meanwhile, my parents were in quarantine. It was more like a prison, policemen stationed outside and posters  saying,  “DO NOT VISIT”, p eople clicking pictures of our house, my name and posting it all over social media with so much hatred and contempt. Some people would call me up on the phone and blame me for getting the disease into their communities. When my parents would stand in our b ackyard, the neighbours would call up the police to complain. We had been ostracised from society!"
"37" "Finally, after a couple of weeks, I was afebrile and started feeling better. After being tested again, I was told, “You have tested negative, Dr  Parul , twi ce. “Somehow, I could not hear it. I had become indifferent to it. When I stepped out the next day, the air felt different; there was new warmth in it. I was given my discharge card and taken to the ambulance bay. Now I could look out the windows, feel the  wind in my hair, see the empty roads lit up by the  streetlamps , hear the occasional ambulance sirens in the distance and finally, I was recovered!"
"38" "Part 2: The Doctor"
"39" "I had been selected as an Attending Consultant almost three months back. Having received my training in Emergency Management and Disaster Medicine, and having a penchant for Infectious diseases, I was posted in the CD ward where we were managing patients w ho require isolation. In January 2020, initially the CD ward was notified as the designated area for the treatment of suspected and proven COVID-19 patients. No sooner had we done this, we started receiving our first suspected patients with COVID-19 who in itially were international  travellers . These cases were far and few in the beginning. However with each passing day, as the pandemic gained momentum across the world, we experienced a surge in the number of  suspected COVID -19 patients. With the  ever-expanding  list of countries being affected by COVID-19, we too intensified our screening and testing."
"40" "Almost three months after the outbreak, I received a call in the late evening that a  25-year-old  Indian physician working in the United Kingdom had returned to  India and presented to our hospital with fever. She had directly come to the hospital from the airport, so as to minimize her interaction with her family members. We immediately admitted her and shifted her to our Isolation ward. On taking a detailed hist ory, I had this strong intuition that this could be our first patient with COVID-19. Her nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal samples were sent for testing, which came out positive for COVID-19. It was then that the real struggle began. The first priority was  that someone had to inform her about the test results which was something that I was not comfortable with. To my surprise, she took it rather well."
"41" "The next big challenge was to convince the residents and the other staff that now that COVID-19 disease is  finally here, we have to work together. Expectedly there were a variety of reactions.  Some were constantly asking why she had to come to India in the midst of the pandemic while others were more accepting.  However,  a little explaining and discussion meant  that soon most of them were on board. It was also important to protect her from the media and public scrutiny.  However,  her identity and contact details became available somehow which led to a lot of avoidable distress and resentment."
"42" "With the spread of th e virus in India, we were also in the process of developing protocols for our hospital. Her experiences not only helped us in devising protocols related to patient management, but also gave us insight into what to expect in the coming weeks."
"43" "In the extensi ve discussions I had with her, I  realized that  we were simply not prepared for all the things that COVID-19 brought along. For the first time, we were dealing with a disease where the family members who usually form the backbone of the social support syst em while the patient is admitted in the hospital were themselves quarantined. No caregivers were available to her and she was totally dependent on the health care system to provide for her. On one hand, the family was worried about the well-being of their  family member who was in isolation in the hospital, while she was anxious and guilty of having passed on the infection to her family. Such a situation was unprecedented for us and was further compounded by the sudden lockdown and curfew that was imposed. T here was an immediate shortage of essential supplies, a situation which slowly returned to normal over the next few days."
"44" "Most of the time, she was  self-diagnosing  herself. She had seen death due to COVID-19 from close quarters and feared the worst. She wo uld worry about various symptoms and I would try to reassure her and tell her that everything is going to be fine. I kept repeating the one sentence “Not on my watch” over and over again, while silently praying that I was right. Every morning I used to get   homemade food for her to lift her  spirits and  would get things that she asked me to get. I realized I was possibly her only human contact whilst she was in isolation and I had to double up as her treating physician and caregiver. But with every passing d ay, I realized she started keeping to herself as if she had resigned to fate and become distant."
"45" "Midway into her admission period, I was entrusted with the task of getting her family to the hospital for testing. She met them through a  window,  but it was eno ugh to lift her spirits. Also, the fact that the family tested negative came as a big relief to her. But this was short lived as she started having abdominal pain and feared that she was developing the cytokine storm. We ran a battery of tests which were r eported to be  normal,  and this was a relief to us. Towards the fag end of her isolation, we had just lost count of the days and were waiting in anticipation for the D-day and finally after two weeks of being in isolation, she tested negative for COVID-19.  Finally,  the big day arrived. After completing the formalities, I prepared her discharge summary, dropped her to the Ambulance bay and bade her goodbye. The ambulance door  shut,  and the ambulance silently rode into darkness. I was happy that she had won her b attle against COVID-19, but I knew that my war against COVID-19 had just begun."
"46" "Part 3: The Discussion"
"47" "Reactions to significant life events are stressful and generate significant emotional reactions. This is especially so when it is preceded by a period o f anticipation as in the COVID-19 pandemic. This is true for patients and doctors as well."
"48" "For a patient, and especially a physician patient, the initial diagnosis and the subsequent experience of  hospitalisation  can be disconcerting  (2,3) . It is often said that doctors make for bad patients, but sometimes doctors develop deeper empathy as well. The index patient continued to have relatively  severe symptoms and also this event occurred when most  people did not have much experience with the disease.  Therefore,  the emotional response was longer lasting. In our experience, after the initial emotional reactions the subsequent course of  hospitalisation  is mostly uneventful for most patients. Most quick ly get over the initial distress in a couple of days and realize that the illness is mild and unlikely to be dangerous. The worry about self is quickly replaced by concern for the welfare of the family which is incidentally usually quarantined and regardin g stigmatization in the community. The other concern is that most patients do not have the usual social support. Many hospitals at least initially do not have mechanisms in place to look after the holistic needs of the patient. In such a scenario, it is of ten the primary treating physician who is responsible for most aspects of patient care. While many doctors find the experience of patient care as uplifting and positive, it would help to have a background support system. In  addition,   organisations  can be he lpful in promoting positive mental health  (4) ."
"49" "An important aspect that is only getting belated recognition is the issue of stigma. From times immemorial, epidemics have been associated with  stigmatisation . This pandemic is no different and this has manifested as violence and abuse directed towards pat ients and doctors. This is compounded and accelerated by the ubiquity of social media which is a major driver of misinformation and fear. Following a recognition of the importance of stigma, more  organised  responses are now visible."
"50" "Finally, it is increas ingly likely that COVID-19 is going to be the new normal. In such a scenario, it is important that we incorporate planning for mental health consequences in patients and healthcare providers."
"51" "References"
"52" "1.  Ahn  D-G, Shin H-J, Kim M-H, Lee S, Kim H-S,  Myoung  J, et al. Current Status of Epidemiology, Diagnosis, Therapeutics, and Vaccines for Novel Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19). J Microbiol  Bi otechnol . 2020 Mar 28;30(3):313–24."
"53" "2.  Klitzman  R. “Patient-time”, “doctor-time”, and “institution-time”: perceptions and definitions of time among doctors who become patients. Patient Educ  Cou ns . 2007 May;66(2):147–55."
"54" "3.  Klitzman  R. Views and approaches toward risks and benefits among doctors who become patients. Patient Educ  Couns . 2006 Dec;64(1–3):61–8."
"55" "4.  Mohindra  R, R  R , Suri V, Bhalla A, Singh SM. Issues relevant to mental health promotion in frontline health care providers managing quarantined/isolated COVID19 patients. Asian J Psychiatry. 2020 Jun 1;51:102084."
"56" "Con flict of interest: None"
"57" "Acknowledgements: none"
