Jevons’ paradox and a tax on aviation to prevent the next
pandemic∗
Salvador Pueyoa,b,†
a Dept.

Evolutionary Biology, Ecology, and Environmental Sciences,

Universitat de Barcelona, Av. Diagonal 645, 08028 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain
b Research

& Degrowth, C/ Trafalgar 8 3, 08010 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain

Abstract
How is it possible that, in an era of unprecedented medical progress, humanity is once
again caught in a major pandemic? Several lines of evidence suggest that advances in
infectious diseases control facilitate the development of major urban centers, global highspeed transportation, industrial animal farming and ecosystem destruction. In turn, all of
these are well known to favor such diseases, thus reproducing the same kind of dynamic
observed in resource consumption and known as Jevons’ paradox. Such economic developments compel health systems to develop continuously just to maintain what had already
been achieved, which, furthermore, becomes more difficult under neoliberal policies. The
process involves massive cost-shifting to society from firms in, e.g., the aviation or meat
sector, which materializes intermittently in disasters such as the COVID-19 pandemic. A
proposal is presented to prevent comparable events in the future, with two parts. First,
a global fund with base funding from an internationally-agreed tax on aviation, devoted
to upgrading health systems and to programs to tackle sources of emerging infectious diseases, especially wild animal trade. Second and no less important, a global agreement to
fundamentally transform agri-food systems. This plan should be accompanied by redoubled
attention to various dimensions of global change.
Keywords: COVID-19; Globalization; Air travel; Meat consumption; Pandemic politics;
Degrowth.

1

Introduction

How is it possible that, in an era of unprecedented medical progress, humanity is once again
caught in a major pandemic? This paper suggests a systemic explanation and outlines a plan to
prevent a comparable if not even more harmful (e.g., Mermel, 2005) pandemic in the future.
∗

Copyright 2020 Salvador Pueyo. This work is made available in SocArXiv under the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International Public License. https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/vb5q3
†
E-mail: spueyo@riseup.net

1

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

2

Jevons’ paradox, also known as rebound effect, takes place when greater efficiency in the use
of some given natural resource stimulates growth in the economic activities that consume the
resource, which offsets the potential benefit for sustainability (Alcott, 2005). However, resource
use is not, probably, the only aspect of sustainability to which this logic applies (Alcott, 2005;
Schneider, 2008), and, in particular, it could be crucial to understand the evolution of epidemic
risk: As the author noted in Pueyo (2014, p. 3452), advanced ways to fight against infectious
diseases have eased the development of dense urban conglomerates, industrial farms and quick
transport all over the world, which represents an excellent culture medium for any infectious
agent able to overcome the current protections. The novelties in this paper are: the detailed
justification of the feedbacks implied by this assertion; the suggestion that, to some extent,
also ecosystem destruction is integrated in this dynamic; the conceptual connection to Jevons’
paradox and also to the Red Queen phenomenon; the introduction of the distributive dimension
of these processes, noting that they involve massive cost-shifting; and a policy proposal to escape
the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox.
In infectious diseases, feedbacks offsetting progress preceded the emergence of Jevons’ paradox
in all of its variants, as apparent from thousands of millions of years of arms race between
pathogens and hosts, a race that is considered a powerful motor of evolution and diversification.
This phenomenon is called Red Queen, because, like the character of Alice through the Looking
Glass that gives it its name, both hosts and pathogens need all the running you can do, to keep
in the same place (Decaestecker and King, 2019). In modern societies, this race has encountered
at least three important novelties. First, progresses in sanitation, medicine and health systems
gave a boost to (human) hosts, and allowed us not just to keep in the same place but also to gain
advantage in the race, decreasing substantially the presence of infectious diseases in part of the
world. This is not the end of the race, however, with bacteria developing resistance to antibiotics
(Laxminarayan et al., 2016; Holmes et al., 2016) and these and other emerging infectious agents
replacing those that were under control (Jones et al., 2008). Second, the Red Queen met Jevons:
the evidence synthesized in sec. 2 suggests that the improved sanitary conditions opened the door
for growth imperatives and drivers1 (Richters and Siemoneit , 2019) to lead to the expansion
of economic activities and patterns of organization that favor the origination and propagation
of infectious diseases and that, otherwise, would have probably been constrained by these same
diseases. In other words, human society is in a race not just against pathogens (Red Queen)
but also against itself (Jevons), so health systems need to run even more to keep in the same
place, let alone to stay ahead of pathogens. Third, in recent decades, the hegemony of neoliberal
policies resulted in health systems leaving the race in many countries (Ottersen et al., 2014).
These are the developments that, arguably, set the stage for the COVID-19 pandemic.
Section 2 synthesizes the evidence for an epidemiological Jevons’ paradox. Section 3 discusses
the distributive issues involved. Section 4 puts forward a specific policy proposal to escape the
paradox (which, however, would be sound even if there were no such paradox). The paper ends
with the Discussion.
1

In the terminology used by Richters and Siemoneit (2019), growth imperatives are conditions that create the
need for a given agent to increase its production or consumption to avoid existential consequences, while other,
less peremptory motivations for growth are subsumed under the concept of growth drivers. For a firm, the growth
imperative and the growth driver par excellence are, respectively, competition (when this compromises the firm’s
survival) and the pursuit of profit (as an end in itself). Other growth imperatives and drivers may exist for
consumers and for countries.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

2

3

Foundations for an epidemiological Jevons’ paradox

This section synthesizes the evidence in support of an epidemiological Jevons’ paradox as described in the Introduction, with each subsection referring to a different economic sector, pattern
or process. Of course, the mechanisms of the bottom up feedback exerted by resource availability
in the original Jevons’ paradox (Alcott, 2005) differ from those of the top down 2 feedback exerted
by infectious diseases, but they are suggested to have a comparable role in their interplay with
growth drivers and imperatives.

2.1

Urbanization

The suggestion in this subsection is that growth imperatives and drivers favor the agglomeration
of people in cities but that this process was traditionally counteracted by the greater prevalence
of infectious diseases in such areas, before the advent of modern sanitation and health systems.
Part of this old dynamics resurged with the COVID-19 pandemic, which exhibits a greater basic
reproductive number in larger cities (Stier et al., 2020).
It is well known that, in simple epidemiological models, infectious diseases can exert a negative
feedback on local abundance (Anderson and May, 1979). Even though it is not straightforward
to observe this feedback in nature because it is most often intertwined with other feedbacks,
there is evidence that it has much impact on some animal populations (Frick et al., 2015).
Furthermore, according to epidemiological models, since a high case-fatality rate hampers the
propagation of diseases, lethal pathogens would only survive and become endemic where there is
a large availability of potential hosts (Anderson and May, 1979). This led to the conjecture that
most deadly infectious diseases needed the previous appearance of cities to become established
(Dobson and Carper, 1996).
Before the 20th century, urban mortality clearly exceeded rural mortality in Europe and
elsewhere (Storey, 1985). Even though the chemical pollution of 19th century industrial cities
played a role, it is widely accepted that the main cause were infectious diseases, in the 19th
century (Hanlon and Tian, 2015) and especially before (Walter and DeWitte, 2017). Such
diseases were favored by the agglomeration of people and also by the accumulation of organic
waste (Walter and DeWitte, 2017). According to estimates for 1700-1750, in European cities
mortality was 25% greater than natality, but they sustained their population and even grew
by absorbing immigration from rural areas, thus acting as sinks for people. Urban mortality
gradually decreased, and dropped below natality in the 19th century, but it remained greater than
in rural areas (Jewad et al., 2015). Detailed analyses of 19th century English demographic data
detect a strong positive correspondence between the size of municipalities and their mortalities,
justifying the appellative killer cities (Hanlon and Tian, 2015). In that period the (demographic)
natural growth rate of cities was still modest, but they kept growing actively by absorbing
immigration (Jewad et al., 2015).
The higher intensity of interactions permitted by high population densities facilitates disease
propagation (Bettencourt et al., 2007; Alirol et al., 2011) but also economic activity. There is
2
These are ecological terms. Top-down regulation of the population of a given species is exerted by other
species in higher trophic levels, while bottom-up regulation results from the limited abundance of species in lower
levels or of abiotic resources. Here these terms are applied to economic activities and structures rather than to
population.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

4

a strong positive correspondence between city size and various indicators of economic activity
and growth, with cities being often described as engines of economic growth (Bettencourt et
al., 2007). This is a fundamental reason why cities have traditionally attracted immigration.
However, the realization of this potential for economic growth needs growth imperatives or at
least growth drivers, so it is these that ultimately pull people toward cities, aided on occasions
by social, cultural and political factors. Since there has always been an economic niche for
workers in rural areas, especially in the primary sector, socioeconomic factors must have created
a tendency toward some given proportion of urban and rural dwellers (ignoring, for the moment,
epidemiology). This socioeconomic attractor has indeed changed through time, notably because
of changes in agricultural productivity and other transformations in the countryside which added
a rural push to the urban pull (Jedwab et al., 2015). Whatever the urban share of population that
would have resulted from the socioeconomic attractor at some given point of history, however,
the share resulting from a more realistic attractor, with epidemiology included, must have been
substantially lower when referring to historical periods in which, e.g., urban mortality exceeded
urban natality by 25%. For this tentative conclusion not to be valid, the degree of inertia in
the place of residence should have been negligible (so migratory movements would have erased,
with no delay, the impact of differences in natural demographic growth rate on the spatial
distribution of population) and the dark prospects for health and survival in cities should have
exerted no dissuasion on potential immigrants. A piece of evidence consistent with the tentative
conclusion is historians’ interpretation that Britain’s problem in the 19th century (when urban
natural growth was no longer negative but still modest) was excess labor demands centered in
cities where the rates of natural increase were lowest (Williamson, 1990: p. 5). In other words,
before the 20th century, urban population share must have resulted largely from a tension between
economic growth imperatives and drivers on the one hand and infectious disease on the other,
and advances in the fight against diseases must have freed growth imperatives and drivers to
promote large-scale urbanization.
A comparison between 19th century English and contemporary Chinese cities showed that
the relation between city size and mortality had inverted (Hanlon and Tian, 2015), so, at that
point of space and time, urban expansion would not have offset the health benefits brought
about by the new capabilities to manage diseases. In contrast, the nexus between urbanization
and infectious disease spread remains strong in most lower income countries’ megacities (whose
expansion is, however, mostly driven by the rural push) (Alirol et al., 2011). More generally,
large cities all over the world remain especially vulnerable to new, emerging diseases during the
period in which no effective treatment is available. A significant correlation with city size had
already been observed for AIDS (Bettencourt et al., 2007) and has now been found for COVID-19
(Stier et al., 2020).
In sum, urbanization appears to play an important role in the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox. It is, however, a double-edged sword, because it also provides opportunities in terms of
economies of scale in health care (as in other fields, Xue, 2014). Because of this, while submitting that the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox merits inclusion in future spatial planning, the
more specific policy proposals in this paper (sec. 4) focus on other facets of the economy, treated
in the coming subsections.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

2.2

5

Connectivity and transportation

While the agglomeration of people in large cities favors interactions (and therefore the spread of
infectious diseases as well as economic activity) (Bettenecourt et al., 2007), these also depend
on subtler aspects of connectivity in social networks, and especially on the connectivity among
cities mediated by transportation. There are well-known model systems in which connectivity
and fluctuations are mutually regulated3 (Pruessner, 2012). It has been suggested that these
apply to the interaction between social networks and epidemics, based on (weak) evidence from
islands (Rhodes et al., 1997) reached intermittently by infectious diseases (these specific models
do not apply to endemic diseases, but these could equally be subject to a negative feedback with
connectivity). In medieval Europe, the Black Death affected more severely the cities that were
better connected (Gómez and Verdú, 2017; however, this study did not separate the effect of city
size), which must have exerted a negative feedback on connectivity among people by selectively
reducing the population of such cities.
In the contemporary, globalized world, particularly important for connectivity is the intensity
and speed of long range transportation of people, livestock and products. Among the various
carriers involved, aviation merits special attention. Its yearly growth rates of 6-8% in recent
years (IATA, 2019a, p. 3) and the revenues approaching a trillion dollars (IATA, 2019b) imply
that growth imperatives or drivers are strong in this case, as is the role of aviation in spreading
infectious diseases (Wang and Wu, 2018). To have a notion of how disease propagation has
changed through history, let us consider, again, the case of the Black Death. At an estimated
speed of 330-400 km y−1 , it probably took a decade or more for this epidemic to move from
Central Asia to Europe (Schmid et al., 2015). Thereafter it accelerated to more than 1000 km
y−1 (Schmid et al., 2015), which is considered an exceptional speed (Cohn, 2008), and spread over
most of Europe in only three years (Schmid et al., 2015). Ship journeys covering long distances
took place and were quicker, but infrequent. At such speed and frequencies but with modern
methods to deal with diseases, COVID-19 would have hardly left Hubei. However, aviation
moves pathogens from end to end of the world overnight. Other means of transportation also
participate, but aviation is so crucial that it is the only factor considered in state-of-the-art
models of long-range propagation of diseases (Wang and Wu, 2018).
Being clear that the proliferation of aviation did offset much of the benefit that could have
been gained from progress in sanitation and health systems, the remaining question is whether
the other part of the feedback also exists, i.e., if aviation is adversely affected by infectious
diseases and owes its prominence to the current capacities to deal with such diseases. The
impact of COVID-19 on aviation is extreme and visible. By mid April, 2020, worldwide flights
had decreased by 80%, and much more if U.S. and Asia domestic markets are left aside (Pearce,
2020a), with the recovery expected to be slow (Pearce, 2020b). The theoretical implications
of this collapse are not straightforward, because much of the impact is due to measures taken
by the very governments that are rescuing or committing to rescue the sector. However, many
airlines were already severely impacted before being affected by governmental decisions, because
of passengers’ fear, according to journalistic sources (Isidore, 2020), and this fear would have
increased if the pandemic’s rate of growth had not been reduced by governments’ measures. On
the other hand, this was a short-term reaction, which could moderate in a scenario where a
high risk of contagion of severe infectious disease were no longer a novelty but the norm (e.g.,
3

See Pueyo (2014) about the relevance of such models for ecological economics.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

6

in a post-antibiotic era, sec. 2.3). While any discussion on a scenario like this is necessarily
speculative, a number of permanent changes discouraging air transportation appear plausible,
especially at destinies, such as: more restrictive admission norms at entry points, and quarantines
being demanded with some frequency; some social avoidance of travelers; higher disease incidence
in urban regions hosting especially active airports (like well connected cities during the Black
Death; Gómez and Verdú, 2017), thus losing some vigor and appeal. All of these would be
components of the suggested negative feedback.

2.3

Livestock

Another highly relevant economic sector that has undergone substantial growth in the 20th -21st
centuries (largely for luxury consumption, associated to GDP growth; FAO, 2006, p. 9) is the
production of meat and other animal products. While wild mammals are in serious regression,
the total mammal biomass has more than quadrupled through human history, with 35% being
human biomass and 59% livestock (Bar-On et al., 2018). Therefore, 7.7 billion people make
up just 38% of the mammal mass (or 36% of the mammal and bird mass; Bar-On et al., 2018)
participating in modern societies, which (animal ethics aside) is a problem not only because these
animals need to eat4 and excrete with the consequent impacts on resources and the environment
(Poore and Nemecek, 2018; IPCC, 2019, ch. 5, p. 488), but also because (details below) (1)
this multiplies the effective population susceptible to shared or shareable pathogens, (2) some
features of the industrial methods applied to sustain so much livestock magnify disease spread,
(3) in part to avoid such spread, industrial livestock production is heavily medicalized, which
leads to the evolution of antibiotic resistance in bacteria, and (4) diseases transmitted from
other species are especially dangerous because, often, people’s immune systems and societies’
health systems are unprepared. The features of industrial farming magnifying disease spread
include: high numbers of animals per facility; high densities; early weaning which decreases
immunity (Bech et al., 1983); and intensive transportation of animals between farms and to
slaughterhouses, often at long distances and in stressful conditions (observed to induce a quick
multiplication of some pathogens; Barham et al., 2002). The resulting animal products are also
transported at increasing distances (e.g., Boqvist et al. (2014) reported that EU meat imports
had nearly duplicated in one decade).
Out of 335 emerging infectious diseases reported between 1940 and 2004, 43% were found
to have originated in wildlife and 17% in other vertebrates (i.e., basically, livestock), whereas
no zoonotic source was identified in the other 40% (Jones et al., 2008). While the ongoing
ecological disruption multiplies the transfer of diseases from wildlife (secs. 2.4-2.5), many important diseases are thought to have originated historically in animal agriculture, and, apparently,
the comparatively low diversity of pathogens in pre-Columbian America was due to the limited
presence of this activity (Wolfe et al., 2007). Animal food consumption is involved in the two
zoonotic categories and is seen as the most frequent checkpoint in the transfer of novel pathogens
to humans (Kock et al., 2020). The three categories are not fully separable, for at least three
reasons. First, some relevant species normally thought of as wild are also farmed (Kan et al.,
2005). Second, transmission chains often involve more than one species, with ordinary livestock
4

Since animals need to dissipate energy, only a small fraction of the resources fed to livestock reaches human
consumers (Schader et al., 2015).

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

7

often playing the role of bridge or amplifying hosts for pathogens originating in wildlife (Kock
et al., 2020). Third, without need of directly causing outbreaks in humans, antibiotic resistant
bacteria originating in livestock can transmit their resistance genes to other bacteria infecting
humans (Holmes et al., 2016).
Resistance to antibiotics is an area in which the Red Queen dynamic (sec. 1) is especially
active within modern societies. 21% of the emerging diseases reviewed by Jones et al. (2008) were
caused by antimicrobial-resistant bacterial strains, with an increasing trend. One decade ago,
an estimated 25,000 people per year were killed by multidrug-resistant bacteria in the EU alone
(ECDC and EMEA, 2009), and the problem tends to worsen (ECDC and EMEA, 2009; Laxminarayan et al., 2016; Holmes et al., 2016). Bacterial evolution has outpaced the development of
new antibiotics for long, with experts fearing a post-antimicrobial or post-antibiotic era, in which,
e.g., medical interventions needing aseptic conditions would no longer be possible (Laxminarayan
et al., 2016). This serious but underappreciated dimension of unsustainability results from the
use and overuse of antibiotics in human patients and animal agriculture (Laxminarayan et al.,
2016; Holmes et al., 2016), including pisciculture (Holmes, 2016). In high income countries, the
ratio between agricultural and medical use of antibiotics is close to nine (Rohr et al., 2019). Resistance evolves not only within hosts but also in the environment, due to antibiotics in effluents
(Laxminarayan et al., 2016; Holmes, 2016).
Because of its intimate association to the availability of antibiotics and other veterinary treatments, industrial farming is a sector in which the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox is especially
apparent. However, also in this sector there are worth-considering subtleties. The case of Denmark, described by Wielinga et al. (2014), is revealing because of its early changes in production
practices. In Denmark there is a strong presence of industrial farming, with, among other livestock, 111 million broiler chickens and 29 million pigs for 5 million people. Until the mid nineties,
antibiotics were applied intensively, as in most western countries, and, as is commonplace, they
were used not only to cure animals’ disease but also for prevention and even as growth stimulants.
This is attributed to farmers’ perception that they were needed to avoid widespread disease in
the conditions of industrial farming, as well as to veterinarians’ vested interest as sellers of the
antibiotics that they prescribed (in other words, to growth imperatives or profit motives in these
two sectors). However, immediately after new scientific findings in those years, both the farming
sector (which is special in this country because of its co-operative nature) and the government
reacted and adopted measures to reduce their application. Later, in 2006, the use of antibiotics
as growth stimulants was outlawed in the whole EU (a minimal measure still not adopted in
the U.S. and other countries). In Denmark, 60% of antibiotics, which were not used to cure
disease, were eliminated, with the help of alternative prophylactic procedures, and with only 1%
increase in production costs (Wielinga et al., 2014). However, the other 40% remained, and,
after the initial decoupling, growth in meat production was again coupled to growth in antibiotic
consumption (figure 4 in Wielinga et al., 2014). This suggests that greater reductions would have
greater economic impacts, or would even make intensive production inviable. The notion that
contemporary intensive animal farming would be difficult to conceive without at least some use
of antibiotics is implicit in much of the literature: e.g., Rohr et al. (2019) attribute their use to
the effort to prevent catastrophic disease-associated losses. The epidemiological Jevons paradox
affects the total consumption of animal products, because it would not be possible to simply
replace intensive by extensive farming, given the limited carrying capacity of each territory. Ex-

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

8

tensive beef production is already a motor of tropical deforestation (Fearnside, 2017) (and also
subject to the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox; sec. 2.4). A detailed comparison of two global
food production scenarios for 2050, business as usual and a scenario with livestock fed only from
grassland and by-products of food production, revealed that animal product consumption would
be at least 70% lower in the second case (Schader et al., 2015). In a nutshell, animal-based
food production is a sector in which the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox is particularly strong,
apparent and dangerous, and is tightly coupled to the Red Queen dynamic.

2.4

Ecosystem destruction

The origin of more than 40% emerging infectious diseases has been traced to wildlife, as noted
in sec. 2.3, and there is an increasing trend in the rate of transfer of novel diseases from wildlife
to humans (Jones et al., 2008). In particular, the consumption of some wild mammal is seen
as a specially likely origin for COVID-19 (Andersen et al., 2020), which exemplifies the hazard
inherent to wild animals’ exploitation and trade (Johnson et al., 2020). It is also established
that land clearing and habitat fragmentation carries risk of emerging diseases (IPBES, 2019,
p. 22), because it removes protective covers and creates active interfaces between society and
previously remote ecosystems, whose microbial and viral communities had been virtually isolated
from the global networks of dissemination until the arrival of the frontier of deforestation (Rohr
et al., 2019; Johnson et al., 2020), besides forcing animals from cleared lands to move elsewhere
(Wu et al., 2020). (Conversely, in such interfaces there is transfer of diseases from humans and
domesticated animals to wildlife, which can devastate wild populations; Rohr et al., 2019). There
is evidence that habitat protection reduces disease risk (Wu et al., 2020). The synergy between
land clearing and wild animal consumption is especially dangerous, lying, e.g., behind the origin
of ebola (Rulli et al., 2017).
Even though it is not claimed in this paper that the epidemiological Jevons paradox is always
involved in ecosystem destruction, there is evidence that it is in many instances. Infectious
diseases are thought to have prevented the European colonization of the Old World tropics for
centuries, as well as the French completion a Panama Canal (Wolfe et al., 2007). The ongoing
colonization of Amazonia is precisely one of the few contexts in which a negative feedback
involving infectious diseases has been explicitly studied. While it is well known that rainforest
colonization results, initially, in high incidence of malaria, MacDonald and Mordecai (2019) also
found that this disease slows down colonization. Furthermore, Amazonia is precisely a region
where deforestation is tightly linked to the production of beef and feedstock for the global market
(Fearnside, 2017). From the conclusions of sec. 2.3 follows that the epidemiological Jevons’
paradox is an indirect motor of deforestation for feed production. In situ beef production is
directly involved in the paradox, because these animals are heavily medicalized to resist local
diseases (Meirelles Filho, 2004, p. 156).

2.5

Other factors

Besides the factors treated in sec. 2.1-2.4, there are other ways in which economic activities
contribute to epidemic risk, but for which no role of the epidemic Jevons’ paradox was identified,
if the general impact of diseases on economic activity is left aside. Two of these are poised to
gaining much weight in the future. First, many economic activities impact climate. Different

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

9

diseases have different weather optima and are therefore affected differently by climate change,
but a more general impact is to compel animals to shift their geographic distributions, thus
creating opportunities to transfer pathogens to humans or other species from which they used
to be isolated (Carlson et al., 2020). Shifts in the distribution of several bat species in China,
including from the Rhinolophus genus, whose involvement in COVID-19 is suspected (Andersen
et al., 2020), have been attributed to climate change (Wu, 2016), which is far from sufficient
to conclude a causal connection between climate change and COVID-19 but serves as warning.
There are even fears that climate change could release ancient pathogens frozen in permafrost as
this melts (Legendre et al., 2015). Second, some economic activities involve genetic engineering, a
technology whose unrestrained use could potentially result in the accidental or deliberate release
of novel pathogens (Green et al., 2019). The study by Andersen et al. (2020) showing that
SARS-CoV-2 is unlikely to have been engineered serves, however, to illustrate the hazards posed
by this technology.

3

Distributive issues

3.1

Cost shifting

In sec. 2 the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox was presented just in terms of aggregate variables.
However, it also implies that progresses whose primary purpose is to benefit everybody’s health
are transmuted into benefits for certain economic activities and the actors involved in such
activities, which, therefore, consciously or unconsciously, are engaged in systematic cost-shifting5
toward the rest of society. These include major firms in sectors such as aviation of meat. Denmark
farmers are a reported example of economic agents becoming aware of the costs that they were
transferring and taking some steps to reduce them, but this is an exceptional case (which has
been attributed to the co-operative nature of the sector in that country; Wielinga et al., 2014),
and their remedy was partial (sec. 2.3).
Long-haul aviation is an instance in which the contrast is extreme also on the demand side,
i.e., in the dissociation between who benefit as consumers6 and who pays the costs. The share
5

The concept of cost-shifting, widely used in ecological economics, has its roots in K.W. Kapp’s writings on
social costs (Spash, 2019), i.e., harmful effects and inefficiencies that must have two characteristics. It must be
possible to avoid them and they must be part of the course of productive activities and be shifted to third persons
or the community at large (Kapp, 1978 [1963], p. 14). The load of pandemic risk involved in the productive
activities listed in sec. 2 not only is shifted to the community at large but also satisfies the condition of being,
in part, avoidable (sec. 4), so it is also a social cost sensu Kapp. He also wrote the term ’social costs’ covers
all direct and indirect losses sustained by third persons or the general public as a result of unrestrained economic
activities. These social losses may take the form of damages to human health (...) (Kapp, 1978 [1963], p. 13),
and included costs that are the result of the interaction of a great number of factors which make the process of
causation a complex and frequently a cumulative one (Kapp, 1978 [1963], p. 13). When discussing cost-shifting,
he gives an example whose parallel to pandemics is straightforward: In other cases, such as the greater frequency
and severity of floods resulting from soil erosion, the social losses are catastrophic in character and appear to be
the result of ’force majeur’, although actually they are caused or at least aggravated by the productive activities of
entrepreneurs (Kapp 1978 [1963], p. 267).
6
This does not mean that customers who flew in the pre-COVID-19 must be blamed for this problem, because,
in most of the information sources reaching non-specialized audiences, pandemic risks were either ignored or
portrayed as remote or under control, and the minority within this minority who were aware of the problem
might have generally seen as futile to change their behavior in isolation. A small fraction of flights may also be

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

10

of the global population participating in international air travel in any given year is probably
<4% (Appendix A), which is indicative of the small minority participating in long-haul flights (a
more relevant figure). Within this group, there are major differences in the frequency of flights.
Furthermore, high frequency of international flights is often associated to high income, as can
be observed both within (Gössling et al., 2009; Graham and Metz, 2017) and among (Vogel,
2016, p. 75) countries. This is even more apparent when considering the owners of private
jets. On the supply side, aviation is a powerful sector with revenues of $838 billion and a net
profit of $25.9 billion in 2019 (IATA, 2019b), in which 5 firms control 20% international passenger
flights (calculated from IATA, 2019a). The major companies benefiting from international freight
transportation by air must also be taken into account when the kind of freight carries some
epidemiological risk. In short, both on the demand and on the supply sides, long-haul aviation is
an activity in which just a minor fraction of the world’s population is involved, largely belonging
to high income groups. This contrasts with the key role that this activity plays in the spread of
pandemics (sec. 2.2). It has been for decades that air transportation data have been the main
foundation for analyses of the long-range propagation of diseases (Wang and Wu, 2018), while
epidemiologists repeatedly warned of the risk of a major pandemic causing a high mortality
(Mermel, 2005). For airlines, profits or growth imperatives have been taking preeminence over
the need to prevent such an outcome (and over climate).
With COVID-19, the costs systematically transferred to society by airlines and other companies, initially in the form of risk, have materialized, as of 25 June 2020 and with the pandemic
still growing, in the form of 483 thousand deaths officially attributed to the disease (database
by Dong et al., 2020) plus an unknown number awaiting attribution, millions of infected people,
Herculean unpaid and underpaid (if not unpayable) care work to dampen this impact, social
distancing and lockdown affecting most of the world’s population with the concomitant psychosocial burden (or even lack of access to essential material goods; HRW, 2020) and an incipient
economic depression that will cause much suffering in growth-dependent economies, while many
air companies are being rescued with taxpayers’ money. In the response to the pandemic, there
are even reported instances of generalized police violence against low-class citizens (HRW, 2020)
who have never flown and are the least likely to have introduced the disease to their countries.
In sum, humanity is witnessing and suffering one of the most massive cost-shifting events ever,
without even being aware of it.

3.2

Inequality and health systems

While the asymmetric nature of the interactions described throughout this paper creates this
intimate association between epidemiological Jevons’ paradox and cost-shifting, the specific ways
in which the paradox materializes is also affected by other, preexisting distributive problems.
These are described briefly because they are already well known. Before the COVID-19 pandemic,
infectious diseases had ceased to be perceived as a major cause of mortality in the wealthiest
parts of the world but not elsewhere (Alirol et al., 2011). Malnutrition weakens the immune
system (Rohr et al., 2019), and insufficient access to health systems is a serious concern in
seen as justified even after factoring-in their epidemiological impact and the more widely known (and, therefore,
less often excusable) climatic impact. It is not so readily justifiable for the companies in this sector not to have
seriously addressed pandemic risks, because this problem so little known by the general public was however well
known by specialists.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

11

many countries. Underlying such deficiencies there are the structural inequalities of international
economic relations (Ottersen et al., 2014), the rich history of boycotts, by high-income countries,
to attempts to implement socializing policies in low income countries (Hickel, 2017), and the
structural adjustment plans imposed by the IMF in most of the latter countries (Forster et al.,
2019)7 . Such plans are a crude expression of the same neoliberal policies that have ended up
affecting virtually every country, weakening governments’ health care services and, often, leaving
much of the population with little access to any such service even in high-income countries
(Labonté and Stuckler, 2015). To some extent, everybody is eventually affected by these policies,
because contagious diseases cannot be eradicated just for certain social classes, and because such
policies have resulted in a general weakening of health systems. The epidemiological Jevons’
paradox compels health systems to develop continuously just to maintain the improvements that
had already been achieved, but their capacity to respond to such requirement is curtailed by
neoliberal policies. The results have become apparent during the COVID-19 pandemic. Even
within the OECD, countries more affected by such policies display higher case-fatality rates
(Sherpa, 2020), with health systems having to work under high stress and relying on extra,
voluntary efforts by health personnel, unpaid caregivers and, to a lesser extent, citizenry in
general.

4

Policy proposal

Considering that many potential pandemics are in the waiting list (Jones et al., 2008; Carlson
et al., 2020) and they could be even more harmful than COVID-19 (Mermel, 2005), this section
outlines a plan to prepare for and, if possible, prevent the next pandemic, based on scientific
knowledge and equity. The plan is conceived as an international agreement to be adopted by
governments, but the same basic principles could be applied also at other levels. It affects
the economic activities most heavily involved in the origination, spread and cure of infectious
diseases. To avoid the epidemiological Jevons’ paradox, this plan involves a kind of wedge between
activities that increase or reduce protection from infectious disease, to ensure that the former
remain structurally ahead of the latter. Even if the paradox were disproved, the COVID-19
experience would suffice to concede that, for whatever reason, the balance between beneficial
and detrimental activities is too tilted toward the latter, while the evidence given in sec. 3.1
would suffice to conclude that there is a deep distributive injustice behind such tilt, a twofold
conclusion that would more than justify the kind of wedge introduced in this section.
The need of massive governments’ investment to upgrade health systems in most countries, in
anticipation of the next potential pandemic, would be denied by few people during the generalized lockdown under which this paper is being written. However, not only could it be unfeasible
in many countries to fund all of this effort from, say, income or payroll taxes, but it would be
unjust, because not everybody contributes equally to this risk. A straightforward consequence
of the magnitude of the cost-shifting and the exceptional role of aviation (highlighted in sec.
3.1) is that a tax on aviation would be much fairer. Therefore, the first part of the proposal is
the creation of a Global Pandemic Prevention and Preparedness Fund under the auspices of the
United Nations, whose base funding would come from an internationally agreed tax on aviation.
7

It has also been interpreted that such policies promote demographic growth (Sarkar, 1993), with the consequent environmental and epidemiological challenges.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

12

This Fund would serve to upgrade government-run or communitarian health systems (broadly
defined, including all required mechanisms to monitor and respond to emerging infectious diseases). The Fund would also ensure the long-term continuity of such improvements, by providing
regular, predictable funding (in view of the limitations demonstrated by current international
aid due to its volatility; Ottersen et al., 2014). This would require mechanisms to hedge against
possible financial downturns in the air transportation industry (requiring commitment from the
governments of high-income countries).
A second function of the Fund would be to finance programs to prevent the emergence of new
infectious diseases, focusing where such programs can be most cost-effective. This criterion would
justify a special effort to tackle wild animal trade (sec. 2.4), besides programs in other areas,
notably biosafety (sec. 2.5) (animal farming is addressed with a separate tool, below). Wildlife
trade involves a high diversity of interacting actors, including major legal businesses8 , criminal
organizations, and local, marginalized communities (t Sas-Rolfes et al., 2019). A requirement for
such programs to receive funding would be a careful design to take into account the livelihoods
and preferences of the latter.
Let us consider the tax on aviation in more detail. This proposal relies on the supposition
that airlines will become again a viable business. The tax would be additional to carbon and
other taxes. It would be graded according to the distance flown, the degree of compliance with
good practices (e.g., concerning illegal wildlife traffic; Utermohlen, 2019), and, in the case of
passenger transportation, the frequency with which the passenger flies. The latter measure
intends to attenuate potential downsides of a tax on aviation, such as even greater inequality in
the access to air travel as a function of income, or a disproportionate impact on migrants who
are currently living and working far from their families. A quantitatively detailed plan is beyond
the scope of this paper, but some numbers are given for orientation. As noted, the estimated
revenue of commercial airlines in 2019 was $838 billion. The operating profit (before interests and
taxes) was $42.5 billion and the net profit $25 billion (IATA, 2019b). Little before the COVID-19
pandemic, a report of the World Bank Group (WBG, 2019, p. 17) estimated the annual cost that
would be needed for pandemic preparedness at $13 billion, which is 50% of the airlines’ net profit
but only 1.6% of their revenue, so a relatively modest tax on aviation would suffice to cover this
cost. Such a tax would also suffice, e.g., to have an impact on the level of international funding
of the control of international wildlife trafficking, with major donors having committed less than
$200 million per annum (0.02% of the airlines’ revenue) in recent years (WBG, 2016), which
however only covers a minor fraction of the needs (t Sas-Rolfes et al., 2019). However, a higher
level of ambition would be desirable. A tax high enough to also serve to constrain long-haul air
traffic is suggested (see below), besides supplementary funding from more conventional sources
in case this does not suffice to cover all the needs. More clues about the potential of a tax on
aviation: commercial airlines’ net profits equal 40% of the health expenditure in countries where
one fourth of the world’s population lives, while the total health expenditures benefiting half the
world’s population equals 85% of the airlines’ revenues, and the total revenues equal one third
of the health expenditure devoted to 90% of the world’s population9 .
The tax on aviation would be high enough to constrain long-haul flights (in combination with
8

As a complementary measure, new bans are pertinent for such business, such as those being currently implemented by some countries (CITES, 2020).
9
These percentages were obtained by sorting countries by increasing GDP pc. Data for 2013 from UN (2020)
and IATA (2019b).

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

13

carbon taxes, whose impact, however, would be proportionally greater on short- and mediumhaul flights). At least, it would serve to constrain long-haul air traffic to pre-COVID-19 figures,
because, should growth trajectories resume after the initial impact of this pandemic (with, e.g.,
the number of international passenger-kilometres flown having increased by 7.2% from 2017 to
2018 (IATA, 2019a), corresponding to a doubling every ten years), the possibility to control local
epidemics before becoming pandemics would be increasingly elusive. Albeit a detailed assessment
is pending, an even lower volume would probably be desirable10 . Since the epidemiological impact
of the number of flights is not linear, a partial decrease in air traffic would have a modest impact
on the timing of the dispersal of epidemics in their exponential phase (Bajardi et al., 2011).
However, with health systems better funded and well prepared to detect emerging infectious
diseases in their early stages, just a few days of delay would be precious time gained to notice
the presence of the disease and take stronger action while it still affects a limited area. The
benefit of combining less air travel with local containment has been modeled in the case of
COVID-19 (Chinazzi et al, 2020). The tax would be expected to deter some prospect customers
from traveling, while others would shift to other, slower means of transportation. Of course such
modal changes do not avoid by themselves the spread of the disease, but, following the above
logic, modest decreases in the speed of propagation can make a difference if combined with strong
detection and response to emerging diseases (e.g., the disease could be detected on time for a
ship crossing the ocean to be quarantined before reaching its destination)11 . Indeed a policy
of constraining flights would also bring substantial co-benefits for climate, permitting greater
ambition in greenhouse gas emission targets, as well as in the sustainable use of resources, to
levels that would have had much fewer options of being achieved without the early tasting of the
consequences of unsustainability brought about by COVID-19.
Industrial animal farming compares to aviation both because of its key role in pandemic
risk (sec. 2.3) and because of its financial turnover, thus deserving no less attention. Aside
from the above Fund, another part of the multilateral agreement would consist of a calendar
for each country to transform, in measurable steps, its agri-food system toward a sustainable
and epidemiologically safe model. Among other measures, countries would strive to reduce
the production and consumption of animal products (as emphasized by epidemiologists such as
Kock et al., 2020) and, in the remaining livestock, to replace the use of antibiotics by healthier
living conditions for the animals. Such changes would also bring major co-benefits for the
local and global environment (including less pressure on ecosystems, with the corresponding
epidemiological benefit; sec. 2.4), each country’s food sovereignty, and the prevention of nontransmissible diseases (Willet et al., 2019) (not to mention animal welfare). Each country would
be free to apply its own policies to achieve the agreed targets. Similarly to the case of airlines,
taxes on industrial animal farming merit consideration. They are suggested as one of the main
tools for governments to achieve their targets. However, the preferred use of these taxes is to
benefit alternative agri-food schemes, in various ways, such as: grants and loans to producers
and distributors aligned with the intended policies, financing the transition in others, research
and assessment, and information campaigns for the general public about the various benefits of
10

Should this possibility be envisaged, the sectors dependent on air travel would need assistance from governments and multilateral institutions for their conversion, rather than just to survive during the crisis.
11
Therefore, mild diseases, for which no specific containment action would be taken, would propagate almost
with the same ease, with some delay. It has been suggested that the propagation of such diseases might help to
increase resistance to related but more virulent strains (Thompson et al., 2019).

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

14

diet change and advices to carry it out. The differences between the kinds of taxes suggested for
aviation and industrial animal farming are justified in Appendix B. This is a preferred option,
but the fundamental need is to address these two key sectors seriously, whichever the specific
policy.
The application of the described measures, even if very partially, would be a formidable
advance. However, an even deeper transformation is urgently needed. In particular, ecosystem
conservation and climate change mitigation would benefit from the suggested measures, but these
measures do not cover and do not intend to cover these vast areas comprehensively. Ideally, these
needs would be mainly covered by the reinforcement of already existing programs or the creation
of other programs not addressed primarily to epidemiology, but if those happen to be insufficient
to support projects of particular, strategic interest to prevent the emergence of new infectious
diseases, these projects would clearly be eligible to benefit from the Fund under the already
mentioned criterion of cost-effectiveness. Similarly, economic inequality and the undervaluation
and precariousness of care work are vast areas in need of attention to prevent the propagation
of infectious disease but also for many other reasons, and, obviously, they would not be covered
comprehensively by the suggested measures alone, but the redistribution of funds to support
health systems should contribute.

5

Discussion

The contemporary world has been described as a high-speed society, undergoing social acceleration (Rosa and Scheuerman, 2009), which, in the economic dimension, finds its expression in
economic growth. The high intensity and long range of interactions is enabled by and enabler of
economic growth (Bettencourt et al., 2007), by permitting coordinated activities, exchanges, and
combination of resources from different origins. They also bring some nonmarket benefits, but
involve high energy demand, failure to close material cycles, ecosystem impoverishment and homogenization, and mounting psychological loads. A high intensity and long range of interactions
create, too, the perfect medium for infectious diseases to arise and become pandemics. Progresses
in sanitation, medicine and health systems led the population of wealthy countries to mostly ignore pandemic threats (except for a few spikes of attention, e.g., following the initial spread of
AIDS), until COVID-19 arrived and forced the high-speed society to brake. Even the radical
green, degrowth and post-growth literature largely failed to mention pandemic risks alongside
other environmental and social factors of unsustainability of the current economic model, but
warnings of pandemic risk from this stance did exist (e.g., by the author of the present paper, first
in Pueyo, 1998) and, more important, such warnings are just one more example of a fundamental criticism implicit in this literature: that an increasingly technified society where short-term
growth imperatives and profit motives hold priority over the general long-term interest is doomed
to disaster the sooner or the later. A basic hypothesis introduced in this paper, and supported
by the various lines of evidence discussed in sec. 2, is that progresses in sanitation, medicine
and health systems posed the basis not only for forgetting about diseases but also for growth in
the very economic activities and structures that tend to cancel out such progresses, with health
systems needing all the running you can do, to keep in the same place (sec. 1) given the massive
cost-shifting, but failing to keep running as quickly as needed because of the neoliberal seizure of
social, cultural, economic and political power. From this interpretation it follows that an event

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

15

like the COVID-19 pandemic was highly plausible the sooner or the later, and materialized the
accumulated cost-shifting from the economic activities that create pandemic risk to the rest of
society.
Pandemic risks are not exhausted with COVID-19 (Jones et al., 2008; Carlson et al., 2020).
The next pandemic could be even worse, perhaps causing even more mortality (Mermel, 2005)
and not sharing the special feature of COVID-19 of being normally benign with children. From
the notions of an epidemiological Jevons’ paradox and of cost-shifting, it is straightforward to
seek solutions along the lines of the already mentioned literatures which problematize economic
growth (e.g., Kallis et al., 2018). Such literatures do not propose a kind of return to a past
that lacked the current means to cure diseases, but to overcome growth-dependencies and keep
economic activities at a sustainable level, allocating the available resources equitably and concentrating them in the functions that are really needed, such as health care. However, rather than
advocating such generic principles, the goal of this paper, beyond the tentative diagnosis, is to
present a specific plan to prepare for and, hopefully, prevent the next pandemic. Even if the case
for an epidemiological Jevons’ paradox (based on combining various pieces of partial evidence
in the literature, and in need of more focused research) were found unconvincing, the policy
proposal would remain valid, as argued in sec. 4. Furthermore, while the redistributive nature
of the proposal was justified by appealing to the notion of cost-shifting (sec. 3.1) rather than
externality, which, among other difficulties (Spash, 2019), would have carried the implication
that epidemiological costs (including human lives) can be quantified in monetary units, the policy proposal would be consistent with neoclassical economics if re-framed as the internalization
of an externality. The possibility of internalizing the cost of creating epidemic risk was briefly
discussed by Singer (2005) and Perrings et al. (2018), which are thus important precedents. From
a neoclassical stance it should be more difficult to argue against a policy of this kind than in
favor.
Unfortunately, there are more antagonistic platforms competing to gain audience in this
context of general disorientation. Some see in the current health crisis an opportunity for a
xenophobe agenda. Given the role of people’s movements around the world in disease propagation, there is risk of takeover by the extreme right, which is an extra reason to disseminate a
sounder response to the problem quickly. Even from the strictly epidemiological point of view,
there are at least two reasons why the proposal in this paper is sounder. First, high income,
western countries are not minor sources of emergent infectious diseases: between 1940 and 2004,
100 such diseases were reported in the U.S. and a similar number in western Europe (Woolhouse,
2008)12 . Fortunately, none of them spread like COVID-19, but this is a roulette. Second, the
amount of migrants traveling from low-income to high-income countries often pales as compared
to the number of local tourists and businesspeople coming back from journeys to these same
low income countries. Rather than classifying people by their nationality, it would be more effective to limit the frequency or speed of travel, while addressing the factors that contribute to
originating infectious diseases and reinforcing the means to cure them. Another platform, well
positioned to become the new common sense with little discussion, calls for a chronification of
12

Some diseases first detected in these countries might have originated elsewhere (Woolhouse, 2008), but,
conversely, many if not most diseases originating in these (or any other) country are likely to go undetected. This
is illustrated by studies showing that early cases of COVID-19 in some European countries were not identified
as a new disease (Coma et al., 2020; Ceriani et al., 2020), even when they were causing, in several provinces, as
much mortality as all other causes together (Ceriani et al., 2020).

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

16

some dose of the currently needed social distancing (possibly accompanied by Orwellian surveillance methods, which do however spur discussion). This is just an instance of shifting corporate
responsibilities to citizens (as previously described, e.g., in waste management; Wilkins, 2018).
Furthemore, the ongoing social distancing is accompanied by a general upload of personal and
professional lives to the Internet. While it is not questioned that, e.g., video-conferences are
preferable to flights given the manifold impacts of the latter, it is problematic to generalize the
adoption of digital alternatives to every real-world activity. The indiscriminate acceleration of a
digital transformation shaped by market forces poses environmental, social, psychological and,
ultimately, existential threats for which humanity is even less prepared than it used to be for
a pandemic like COVID-19. However, humanity is on time to choose a different path, and the
mental shake-up due to the pandemic creates a specially suitable occasion to rethink everything.
According to an old green aphorism, if today we don’t do the impossible, tomorrow we will
see the incredible 13 . Unfortunately, we failed to do the impossible, tomorrow arrived, and we
are witnessing the incredible. However, there is now a unique opportunity to prevent the next
incredible by advancing policies that would normally be impossible. The positive side of incredible
situations is that they can make the impossible turn possible.

Appendix A: Share of the global population participating
in international air travel
Gössling et al. (2007) estimated that <2% of the global population participated in international
air travel in 2000. Given the rapid growth in air traffic in the period from 2000 to the onset of
the COVID-19 pandemic (IATA, 2019a), this Appendix updates the estimate to 2018, which is
the most recent year for which reliable data are available. IATA (2019a) registered 1,811,324
thousand international trips in that year. However, outgoing and return trips, as well as each
of the connections, are counted as separate trips. Therefore, it is more straightforward to follow
Gössling et al.’s (2007) methodology and work with the number of international tourist arrivals
registered by UNWTO. This agency uses the definitions established by the UN (2010, p. 10), for
which A visitor (domestic, inbound or outbound) is classified as a tourist (or overnight visitor) if
his/her trip includes an overnight stay and A visitor is a traveller taking a trip to a main destination outside his/her usual environment, for less than a year, for any main purpose (business,
leisure or other personal purpose) other than to be employed by a resident entity in the country
or place visited. Most international travelers are thus covered by this definition. Gössling et al.
(2007) divided the number of international tourist arrivals by air in 2000 by the world population
in that year and by 2.5, which was the assumed average number of journeys per international
traveler during the year. Even though most of the people who fly to some other country in any
given year must do so only once, many journeys are due to a minority of high frequency travelers (Gössling et al., 2009; Liu et al., 2017), which justifies assuming an average frequency well
above unity. Performing the same calculation for the 730,885,776 inbound international tourists
that arrived by air in 2018 according to UNWTO (2020) and an estimated global population
of 7,631,091,113 in that year (UN, 2019), the result would be 3.8%. The obvious caveat is that
this calculation assumes that all the growth in international air travel is concentrated in the
13

Originally heard by the author in Catalan: Si avui no fem l’impossible, demà veurem l’increı̈ble.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

17

extensive margin (number of people participating), ignoring possible changes in the intensive
margin (number of journeys per traveler).

Appendix B: Rationale for the differences in the suggested
taxes for aviation and for industrial animal farming
There are certain asymmetries between the tax on aviation and the tax on industrial animal
farming suggested in sec. 4. One asymmetry is that the first would be global, while the second
would be an optional tool for governments to comply with some given commitments. Another
asymmetry concerns how the obtained funds would circulate among broad economic sectors (such
as the transportation, agri-food or health sector). Both would be earmarked taxes, i.e., the funds
would have predefined uses, but in the first case they would be transferred to a different sector,
while in the second they would be reinvested in the same sector (a scheme with a long tradition in
green programs; Riechmann, 1994). These two schemes have pros and cons. Only the first serves
to cover a need for funding in other, essential areas. Furthermore, in so doing, the tax reduces
the amount of cost-shifting. However, for the same reason, only the second prevents the possible
built-up of a vested interest by governments to perpetuate the undesired practices that originate
such costs, once these practices become the source of funding for necessary public services. Also,
the first can help to constrain the volume of the taxed sector, while the second can be more
effective to transform it. Related to this, the first would have a higher impact on the average
consumers’ prices of the products or services in the sector. The different choices in each case
has the following rationale. Because of the nature of air transportation, it should be easier to
globally agree on homogeneous taxing criteria and to supervise compliance from abroad. Given
the strong international component of this activity, it should also be easier for the public and
governments to accept the idea of the revenues of the tax being administered by a UN-dependent
body and allocated according to the needs of each country rather than their contribution. If the
taxes are homogeneous and administered by a UN body, there should be less interference of
vested interests, because of the potentially higher transparency and the absence of the factor of
economic competition among countries. Also, the impact sought on international aviation is not,
in principle, complete phase-out (unlike industrial animal farming), but constraining air traffic
to levels that are more manageable epidemiologically, which could be compatible with sustained
revenues for the Fund. Furthermore, generally speaking, higher prices for air travel do not
affect basic needs (especially if the prices are an increasing function of the frequency of flights).
In contrast, for agri-food systems, with their partly local character and their heterogeneity, it
would be more difficult to have globally homogeneous taxes supervised internationally, and their
revenues used beyond the borders of each country. Also, a deep transformation of the sector is
essential to minimize the collective costs that it generates, so this is a worthwhile use for the
revenues of the tax, and if they ever cease to be available because the transformation is complete,
anyway they will no longer be needed for this use. Furthermore, food is a basic need, so, as long
as some kinds of food are taxed, it will be helpful to have funds available to reduce the price of
other types of food and to assess consumers on diet changes.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

18

Acknowledgments
I am grateful, for useful inputs, to (in alphabetical order) Arnau Montserrat, Christos Zografos,
Cristina O’Callaghan-Gordo, Ester Conesa-Carpintero, Filka Sekulova, François Schneider, Giacomo d’Alisa, Jean Boucher, Joan Martı́nez Alier, Marta Conde, Noèlia Arco, Panagiota Kotsila,
Paul Peeters, Sam Bliss and Sı́lvia Heras.

References
Alcott, B., 2005. Jevons’ paradox. Ecol. Econ. 54, 9-21.
Alirol, E., Getaz, L., Stoll, B., Chappuis, F., Loutan, L., 2011. Urbanisation and infectious
diseases in a globalised world. Lancet. Infect. Dis. 11, 131-141.
Andersen, K.G., Rambaut, A., Lipkin, W.I., Holmes, E.C., Garry, R.F., 2020. The proximal
origin of SARS-CoV-2. Nat. Med. 26, 450-452.
Anderson, R.M., May, R.M., 1979. Population biology of infectious diseases: Part I. Nature 280,
361-367.
Bajardi, P., Poletto, C., Ramasco, J.J., Tizzoni, M., Colizza, V., Vespignani, A., 2011. Human
mobility networks, travel restrictions, and the global spread of 2009 H1N1 pandemic. PLoS ONE
6, e16591.
Barham, A.R., Barham, B.L., Johnson, A.K., Allen, D.M., Blanton Jr., J.R., Miller, M.F., 2002.
Effects of the transportation of beef cattle from the feedyard to the packing plant on prevalence
levels of Escherichia coli O157 and Salmonella spp. J. Food Prot. 65, 280-283.
Bar-On, Y.M., Phillips, R., Milo, R., 2018. The biomass distribution on Earth. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 25, 6506-6511.
Blech, F., Pollman, D.S., Nichols, D.A., 1983. Weaning pigs at an early age decreases cellular
immunity. J. Anim. Sci. 56, 396-400.
Bettencourt, L.M.A., Lobo, J., Helbing, D., Kühnert, C., West, G.B., 2007. Growth, innovation,
scaling, and the pace of life in cities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 104, 7301-7306.
Boqvist, S., Dekker, A., Depner, K., Grace, D., Hueston, W., Stärk, K.D.C., Sternberg Lewerin,
S., 2014. Contagious animal diseases: The science behind trade policies and standards. Vet. J.
202, 7-10.
Carlson, C.J., Albery, G.F., Merow, C., Trisos, C.H., Zipfel, C.M., Eskew, E.A., Olival, K.J.,
Ross, N., Bansal, S., 2020. Climate change will drive novel cross-species viral transmission.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

19

bioRxiv, doi: 10.1101/2020.01.24.918755.
Ceriani, L., Hernandez-Suarez, C., Verme, P., 2020. A simple early warning signal for COVID19. medRxiv, doi: 10.1101/2020.04.28.20083261.
Chinazzi, M., Davis, J.T., Ajelli, M., Gioannini, C., Litvinova, M., Merler, S., Pastore y Piontti,
A., Mu, K., Rossi, L., Sun, K., Viboud, C., Xiong, X., Yu, H., Halloran, E., Longini Jr., I.M.,
Vespignani, A., 2020. The effect of travel restrictions on the spread of the 2019 novel coronavirus
(COVID-19) outbreak. Science 368, 395-400.
CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora),
2020. Notification to the Parties No. 2020/018. CITES Secretariat, Geneva.
Cohn, S., 2008. 4 Epidemiology of the Black Death and successive waves of plague. Med. Hist.
52, 74-100.
Coma, E., Mora, N., Prats-Uribe, A., Fina, F., Prieto-Alhambra, D., Medina-Peralta, M., 2020.
Excess cases of influenza suggest an earlier start to the coronavirus epidemic in Spain than official
figures tell us: an analysis of primary care electronic medical records from over 6 million people
from Catalonia. medRxiv, doi: 10.1101/2020.04.09.20056259.
Decaestecker, E., King, K. 2019. Red Queen dynamics, in: Fath. B. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
Ecology, second ed., vol 3. Elsevier, Amsterdam, pp. 185-195.
Dobson, A.P., Carper, E.R., 1996. Infectious diseases and human population history. BioScience
46, 115-126.
Dong, E., Du, H., Gardner, L., 2020. An interactive web-based dashboard to track COVID-19
in real time. Lancet. Infect. Dis. 20, 533-534.
ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), EMEA (European Medicines
Agency), 2009. The Bacterial Challenge: Time to React. ECDC/EMEA, Stockholm.
FAO, 2006. Livestock’s Long Shadow. Environmental Issues and Options. FAO, Rome.
Fearnside, P.M., 2017. Deforestation of the Brazilian Amazon, in: Shugart, H. (Ed.), Oxford
Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science. Oxford University Press, New York, doi:
10.1093/acrefore/9780199389414.013.102.
Forster, T., Kentikelenis, A.E, Stubbs, T.H., King, L.P., 2019. Globalization and health equity:
The impact of structural adjustment programs on developing countries. Soc. Sci. & Med., doi:
10.1016/j.socscimed.2019.112496.
Frick, W.F., Puechmaille, S.J., Hoyt, J.R., Nickel, B.A., Langwig, K.E., Foster, J.T., Barlow,

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

20

K.E., Bartonička, T., Feller, D., Haarsma, A.J., Herzog, C., Horáček, I., van der Kooij, J.,
Mulkens, B., Petrov, B., Reynolds, R., Rodrigues, L., Stihler, C.W., Turner, G.G., Kilpatrick,
A.M. 2015. Disease alters macroecological patterns of North American bats. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr. 24, 741-749.
Gómez, J.M., Verdú, M., 2017. Network theory may explain the vulnerability of medieval human
settlements to the Black Death pandemic. Sci. Rep. 7, 43467.
Gössling S, Broderick J, Upham P, Ceron, J.-P., Dubois, G., Peeters, P., Strasdas, W., 2007.
Voluntary carbon offsetting schemes for aviation: Efficiency, credibility and sustainable tourism.
J. Sustain. Tour. 15, 223-248.
Gössling, S., Ceron, J.-P., Dubois, G., Hall, C.M., 2009. Hypermobile travellers, in: Gössling,
S., Upham, P. (Eds.), Climate Change and Aviation. Earthscan, New York.
Graham, A., Metz, D., 2017. Limits to air travel growth: The case of infrequent flyers. J. Air
Transp. Manag. 62, 109-120.
Gray, G.C., Merchant, J.A., 2018. Pigs, pathogens, and public health. Lancet Infect. Dis. 18,
372-373.
Green, M.S., LeDuc, J., Cohen, D., Franz, D.R., 2019. Confronting the threat of bioterrorism:
realities, challenges, and defensive strategies. Lancet Infect. Dis. 19, e2-13.
Hanlon, W.W., Tian, Y., 2015. Killer cities: Past and present. Am. Econ. Rev. 105, 570-575.
Hickel, J., 2017. The Divide. A Brief Guide to Global Inequality and its Solutions. Penguin
Random House, London.
Holmes, A.H., Moore, L.S.P., Sundsfjord, A., Steinbakk, M., Regmi, S., Karkey, A., Guerin, P.J.,
Piddock, L.J.V., 2016. Understanding the mechanisms and drivers of antimicrobial resistance.
Lancet 387, 176-187.
HRW (Human Rights Watch), 2020. India: COVID-19 Lockdown Puts Poor at Risk. https://
www.hrw.org/news/2020/03/27/india-covid-19-lockdown-puts-poor-risk (accessed 7 May
2020).
IATA (International Air Transport Association), 2019a. WATS: World Air Transport Statistics
2019. IATA, Geneva. https://www.iata.org/contentassets/a686ff624550453e8bf0c9b3f7f0ab26/
wats-2019-mediakit.pdf (accessed 26 April 2020).
IATA (International Air Transport Association), 2019b. Industry Statistics Fact Sheet. December 2019. IATA, Geneva. https://www.iata.org/en/iata-repository/publications/
economic-reports/fact-sheet-industry-statistics-dec19.pdf (accessed 26 April 2020).

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

21

IPBES (Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services),
2019. Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem
services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. IPBES secretariat, Bonn.
IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change), 2019. Climate Change and Land. IPCC,
Geneva.
Isidore, C., 2020. United, JetBlue cutting US flights because of coronavirus. CNN Business,
March 5, 2020. https://edition.cnn.com/2020/03/04/business/united-us-flight-cutscoronavirus/index.html (accessed 16 April 2020).
Jedwab, R., Christiaensen, L., Gindelsky, M., 2015. Demography, Urbanization and Development. Rural Push, Urban Pull and... Urban Push? Policy Research Working Paper 7333. World
Bank Group, Washington.
Johnson, C.K., Hitchens, P.L., Pandit, P.S., Rushmore, J., Evans, T.S., Young, C.C.W., Doyle,
M.M., 2020. Global shifts in mammalian population trends reveal key predictors of virus spillover
risk. Proc. R. Soc. B 287, 20192736.
Jones, K.E., Patel, N.G., Levy, M.A., Storeygard, A., Balk, D., Gittleman, J.L., Daszak, P.,
2008. Global trends in emerging infectious diseases. Nature 451, 990-993.
Kallis, G., Kostakis, V., Lange, S., Muraca, B., Paulson, S., Schmelzer, M., 2018. Research On
Degrowth. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 43, 291-316.
Kan, B., Wang, M., Jing, H., Xu, H., Jiang, X., Yan, M., Liang, W., Zheng, H., Wan, K., Liu,
Q., Cui, B., Xu, Y., Zhang, E., Wang, H., Ye, J., Li, G., Li, M., Cui, Z., Qi, X., Chen, K., Du, L.,
Gao, K., Zhao, Y.-t., Zou, X.-z., Feng, Y.-J., Gao, Y.,-F., Hai, R., Yu, D., Guan, Y., Xu, J., 2005.
Molecular evolution analysis and geographic investigation of severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus-like virus in palm civets at an animal market and on farms. J. Virol. 79, 1189211900.
Kapp, K. W. 1978 [1963]. The Social Costs of Business Enterprise (revised and extended edition). Spokesman, Nottingham.
Kock, R.A., Karesh, W.B., Veas, F., Velavan, T.P., Simons, D., Mboera, L.E.G., Dar, O., Arruda,
L.B., Zumla, A., 2020. 2019-nCoV in context: lessons learned? Lancet Planet. Health 4, e87-e88.
Labonté, R., Stuckler, D., 2019. The rise of neoliberalism: how bad economics imperils health
and what to do about it. J. Epidemiol. Community Health, doi:10.1136/jech-2015-206295.
Laxminarayan, R., Matsoso, P., Pant, S., Brower, C., Røttingen, J.-A., Klugman, K., Davies, S.,
2016. Access to effective antimicrobials: A worldwide challenge. Lancet 387, 168-175.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

22

Legendre, M., Lartigue, A., Bertaux, L., Jeudy, S., Bartoli, J., Lescot, M., Alempic, J.-M., Ramus, C., Bruley, C., Labadie, K., Shmakova, L., Rivkina, E., Couté, Y., Abergel, C., Claverie,
J.-M., 2015. In-depth study of Mollivirus sibericum, a new 30,000-y-old giant virus infecting
Acanthamoeba. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112, E5327-E5335.
Liu, J., Liu, B., Liu, Y., Chen, H., Feng, L., Xiong, H., Huang, Y., 2017. Personalized air travel
prediction: A multi-factor perspective. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 9, 30.
MacDonald, A.J., Mordecai, E.A., 2019. Amazon deforestation drives malaria transmission, and
malaria burden reduces forest clearing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 116, 22212-22218.
Meirelles Filho, J., 2004. O Livro de Ouro da Amazônia, fourth ed. Ediouro, Rio de Janeiro.
Mermel, L.A., 2005. Pandemic avian influenza. Lancet Infect. Dis. 5, 666-667.
Ottersen, O.P., Dasgupta, J., Blouin, C., Buss, P., Chongsuvivatwong, V., Frenk, J., FukudaParr, S., Gawanas, B.P., Giacaman, R., Gyapong, J., Leaning, J., Marmot, M., McNeill, D.,
Mongella, G.I., Moyo, N., Møgedal, S., Ntsaluba, A., Ooms, G., Bjertness, E., Lie, A.L., Moon,
S., Roalkvam, S., Sandberg, K.I., Scheel, I.B., 2014. The political origins of health inequity:
prospects for change. The Lancet–University of Oslo Commission on Global Governance for
Health. Lancet 383, 630667.
Pearce, B., 2020a. COVID-19: Updated Impact Assessment (14th April 2020). IATA, Geneva.
https://www.iata.org/en/iata-repository/publications/economic-reports/covid-fourthimpact-assessment/ (accessed 26 April 2020).
Pearce, B., 2020b. COVID-19: Assessing Prospects for Domestic Markets (21sr April 2020).
IATA, Geneva. https://www.iata.org/en/iata-repository/publications/economic-reports/
covid-19-assessing-prospects-for-domestic-markets/ (accessed 26 April 2020).
Perrings, C., Levin, S., Daszak, P., 2018. The economics of infectious disease, trade and pandemic risk. EcoHealth 15, 241-243.
Poore, J., Nemecek, T., 2018. Reducing foods environmental impacts through producers and
consumers. Science 360, 987-992.
Pruessner, G., 2012. Self-Organised Criticality. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Pueyo, S., 1998. Gérmenes sin fronteras. Integral 220, 44-49. https://ecoecophys.files.
wordpress.com/2020/03/pueyo-1998-gc3a9rmenes-sin-fronteras.pdf
Pueyo, S., 2014. Ecological econophysics for degrowth. Sustainability 6, 3431-3483.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

23

Rhodes, C.J., Jensen, H.J., Anderson, R.M., 1997. On the critical behaviour of simple epidemics.
Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B 264, 1639-1646.
Richters, O., Siemoneit, A., 2019. Growth imperatives: Substantiating a contested concept.
Struct. Chang. Econ. Dyn. 51, 126-137.
Riechmann, J., 1994. Otra forma de trabajar, producir y consumir: Los programas económicos
de Die Grünen. Ecologı́a Polı́tica 6, 59-90.
Rohr, J.R., Barrett, C.B., Civitello, D.J., Craft, M.E., Delius, B., DeLeo, G.A., Hudson, P.J.,
Jouanard, N., Nguyen, K.H., Ostfeld, R.S., Remais, J.V., Riveau, G., Sokolow, S.H., Tilman, D.,
2019. Emerging human infectious diseases and the links to global food production. Nat. Sustain.
2, 445-456.
Rosa, H., Scheuerman, W.E. (Eds.), 2009. High-Speed Society. Social Acceleration, Power, and
Modernity. Pennsilvania State Univ. Press.
Rulli, M.C., Santini, M., Hayman, D.T.S., D’Odorico, P., 2017. The nexus between forest fragmentation in Africa and Ebola virus disease outbreaks. Sci. Rep. 7, 41613.
Sarkar, S., 1993. Una sı́ntesis ecosocialista del problema de la sobrepoblación. Ecologı́a Polı́tica
6, 143152.
Schmid, B.V., Büntgen, U., Easterday, W.R., Ginzler, C., Walløe, L., Bramanti, B., Stenseth,
N.C., 2015. Climate-driven introduction of the Black Death and successive plague reintroductions into Europe. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 112: 3020-3025.
Schader, C., Muller, A., Scialabba, N.E-H., Hecht, J., Isensee, A., Erb, K.-H., Smith, P., Makkar,
H.P.S., Klocke, P., Leiber, F., Schwegler, P., Stolze, M., Niggli, U., 2015. Impacts of feeding less
food-competing feedstuffs to livestock on global food system sustainability. J. R. Soc. Interface
12, 20150891.
Schneider, F., 2008. Macroscopic rebound effects as argument for economic degrowth. Proceedings of the First International Conference on Economic De-growth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity, Paris, April 18-19th 2008. https://www.researchgate.net/profile/
Francois_Schneider2/publication/288665925_Macroscopic_rebound_effects_as_argument_
for_economic_degrowth/links/5e6a7553458515e555762c6e/Macroscopic-rebound-effectsas-argument-for-economic-degrowth.pdf
Sherpa, D., 2020. Estimating impact of Austerity policies in COVID-19 fatality rates: Examining the dynamics of economic policy and Case Fatality Rates (CFR) of COVID-19 in OECD
countries. medRxiv, doi: 10.1101/2020.04.03.20047530.
Singer, P., 2005. Who pays for bird flu? Project Syndicate, November 2005. http://www.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

24

project-syndicate.org/commentary/singer5 (accessed 24 June 2020).
Spash, C.L., 2019. Making pollution into a market failure rather than a cost-shifting success: The
suppression of revolutionary change in economics. SRE - Discussion Papers 2019/06. WU Vienna
University of Economics and Business, Vienna. http://www-sre.wu.ac.at/sre-disc/sredisc-2019_06.pdf
Stier, A.J., Berman, M.G., Bettencourt, L.M.A., 2020. COVID-19 attack rate increases with
city size. arXiv:2003.10376v2 [q-bio.PE].
Storey, R., 1985. An estimate of mortality in a pre-Columbian urban population. Am. Anthropol. 87, 519-535.
’t Sas-Rolfes, M., Challender, D.W.S., Hinsley, A., Verı́ssimo, D., Milner-Gulland, E.J., 2019.
Illegal wildlife trade: Scale, processes, and governance. Annu. Rev. Environ. Resour. 44, 201-28.
Thompson, R.N., Thompson , C.P., Pelerman, O., Gupta, S., Obolski, U., 2019 . Increased
frequency of travel in the presence of cross-immunity may act to decrease the chance of a global
pandemic. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 374, 20180274.
UN (United Nations), 2010. International Recommendations for Tourism Statistics 2008. UN,
New York.
UN (United Nations), 2019. World Population Prospects 2019, Online Edition. Rev. 1. UN,
New York. https://population.un.org/wpp/ (accessed 26 April 2020).
UN (United Nations), 2020. UNdata. UN, New York. https://data.un.org/ (accessed 29
April 2020).
UNWTO (World Tourism Organization), 2020. Compendium of Tourism Statistics dataset
[Electronic] (updated on 20 January 2020). UNWTO, Madrid. https://www.unwto.org/
data(accessed27April2020).
Utermohlen, M., 2019. Runway to Extinction. Wildlife Trafficking in the Air Transport Sector.
C4ADS, Washington.
Vogel, H.L., 2016. Travel Industry Economics, third ed. Springer.
Walter, B.S., DeWitte, S.N., 2017. Urban and rural mortality and survival in Medieval England.
Ann. Hum. Biol. 44, 338-348.
Wang L., Wu, J.T., 2018. Characterizing the dynamics underlying global spread of epidemics.
Nat. Commun. 9: 218.

S. Pueyo - SocArXiv, July 2020 (version 2)

25

WBG (World Bank Group), 2016. Analysis of International Funding to Tackle Illegal Wildlife
Trade. World Bank Group, Washington.
WBG (World Bank Group), 2019. Pandemic Preparedness Financing. Status Update. World
Bank Group, Washington.
Wielinga, P.R., Jensen, V.F., Aarestrup, F.M., Schlundt, J., 2014. Evidence-based policy for
controlling antimicrobial resistance in the food chain in Denmark. Food Control 40, 185-192.
Willett, W., Rockström, J., Loken, B., Springmann, M., Lang, T., Vermeulen, S., Garnett, T.,
Tilman, D., DeClerck, F., Wood, A., Jonell, M., Clark, M., Gordon, L. J., Fanzo, J., Hawkes,
Zurayk, R., Rivera, J. A., De Vries, W., Majele Sibanda, L., Afshin, A., Chaudhary, A., Herrero,
M., Agustina, R., Branca, F., Lartey, A., Fan, S., Crona, B., Fox, E., Bignet, V., Troell, M.,
Lindahl, T., Singh, S., Cornell, S. E., Srinath Reddy, K., Narain, S., Nishtar, S. and Murray,
C.J.L., 2019. Food in the Anthropocene. The EAT-Lancet Commission on Healthy Diets from
Sustainable Food Systems. Lancet 393, 447-492.
Williamson, G.J., 1990. Coping with City Growth during the British Industrial Revolution,
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Wolfe, N.D., Dunavan, C.P., Diamond, J., 2007. Origins of major human infectious diseases.
Nature 447, 279-283.
Woolhouse, M.E.J., 2008. Emerging diseases go global. Nature 451, 898-899.
Wu, J., 2016. Detection and attribution of the effects of climate change on bat distributions over
the last 50 years. Clim. Ch. 134, 681-696.
Wu, T., Perrings, C., Shang, C., Collins, J.P., Daszak, P., Kinzig, A., Minteer, B.A., 2020.
Protection of wetlands as a strategy for reducing the spread of avian influenza from migratory
waterfowl. Ambio 49, 939-949.
Xue, J., 2014. Is eco-village/urban village the future of a degrowth society? An urban planner’s
perspective. Ecol. Econ. 105, 130-138.

– Preprint uploaded 17 July 2020 (first version uploaded 12 May 2020) –

