Digital News Media Coverage on Sexual and Gender-Based
Violence in Kenya: Scoping the Impact of the COVID-19 Pandemic
Clara Broekaert, Ceri-Lune Renneboog, Ferdinand Okwaro, Abdu Mohiddin, Marleen
Temmerman.
Abstract
Background: Sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) in Kenya is frequently covered in
digital news media. As a powerful influencer of public opinion, news media coverage can
have a significant societal impact. This scoping review identifies the extent, nature, and
themes of all available digital news media coverage on SGBV in Kenya from June 2019 to
July 2020. It analyzes changes in coverage since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Method: The methodological framework for scoping reviews developed by Arksey and
O’Malley (2005) guided the scoping review. The selected articles were analyzed using
NVivo.
Results: Analysis of the 340 included articles indicates clear trends in news media coverage
on SGBV in Kenya. Before the COVID-19 pandemic, trends include high numbers of news
reports, feature articles, and opinion pieces on SGBV, female genital mutilation (FGM) as
the most covered form of SGBV, and opinion pieces in line with the Kenya Vision 2030
agenda. Since the implementation of the COVID-19 mitigation measures in Kenya, trends
include an increase in news media coverage on SGBV, extensive reporting on the causes of
the rise in SGBV cases in Kenya, and increased media attention for domestic and sexual
violence.
Conclusions: Analysis of the news media coverage demonstrates the health advocacy/agenda-setting role of the media. The increased reporting on SGBV since the implementation of the COVID-19 mitigation measures could facilitate broad-based awareness.
Key Words: SGBV, Kenya, Media, COVID-19 Pandemic, Scoping Review.
Introduction
In April of 2020, The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) projected that there
would be 31 million additional cases of
gender-based violence if the lockdown continued for at least six months and a further
15 million cases for every three months of
lockdown. Cases of FGM and child marriage are expected to soar by 2 million and
13 million between 2020 and 2030 respectively due to the COVID-19 pandemic and
the mitigation measures (UNFPA, 2020).

As the media serves as an influential shaper
of public opinion (McCombs, 2011), this
paper investigates how digital news media
has changed its coverage of SGBV in
Kenya since the onset of the COVID-19
pandemic. Underpinned by the methodological framework for scoping reviews proposed by Arksey and O’Malley (2005), this
study identifies the extent, nature, and
themes of media coverage on SGBV in
Kenya before and after the onset of the

1

COVID-19 pandemic. This study’s overarching objective is to examine changes in
the digital news media coverage of SGBV
and other associated harmful practices related to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Background
COVID-19
In May 2020, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that Africa could report up to 190,000 deaths and 44 million infections due to COVID-19 in the first year
of the pandemic if mitigation measures
were not rigorously implemented. After the
first case of COVID-19 was reported in
Kenya on March 15th, 2020, a series of mitigation measures were implemented. These
included a travel ban for foreigners, closure
of educational institutions, the creation of a
toll-free telephone line to report cases, the
directive for all nonessential private and
public institutions to work from home, the
prohibition of all social and religious gatherings, and a mandatory stay at a quarantine
center for returning nationals, residents,
and those who had contact with individuals
infected with COVID-19. Later in March,
all international flights were suspended. A
mandatory stay at quarantine centers for
those who violated the mitigation measures
was imposed, and a nationwide dusk-todawn curfew was set. In early April, the
cessation of movement into and out of the
Nairobi Metropolitan Area, Mombasa
County, Kilifi County, Mandera County,
and Kwale County took effect to curb the
spread of COVID-19 and has been partially
lifted as of July (Ministry of Health, 2020).
On April 4th, the government mandated the
use of masks in all public spaces. These formal mitigation measures were promoted
through information campaigns concerned
with recognizing symptoms of the coronavirus disease, applying appropriate hygiene

measures, and dealing with the psychological repercussions of the mitigation
measures. However, the COVID-19 mitigation measures implemented in Kenya have
been subject to wide-ranging debates. Critics point to the poor living conditions in the
quarantine centers that have made applying
the appropriate physical distancing and hygiene measures near to impossible (Mutahi,
2020). The Kenyan government and police
have also come under scrutiny for the use
of excessive violence to enforce the curfew
(Nyabola, 2020).
Sexual and Gender-Based Violence
This study adopted the definition of SGBV
proposed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as “any
act that is perpetrated against a person’s
will and is based on gender norms and unequal power relationships. It encompasses
threats of violence and coercion. It can be
physical, emotional, psychological, or sexual in nature and can take the form of a denial of resources or access to services. It inflicts harm on women, girls, men, and boys''
(2020).
In 2014, the National Crime Research
Center (NCRC) of Kenya published a
study on the prevalence, causes, and effects of SGBV at the community level.
The study found a lifetime GBV prevalence rate of 38% for women and 20.9%
for men, and a lifetime sexual violence
rate of 15.2% for women and 7.5% for
men in Kenya. The Kenya Demographic
and Health Survey of 2014 established that
47% of women aged 15 to 49 have experienced physical or sexual violence. Furthermore, the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) found that 21% of Kenyan girls
and women aged 15 to 49 have been subjected to female genital mutilation despite
2

the passing of the Prohibition of Female
Genital Mutilation Act in 2011. Similarly,
in 2017, 23% of Kenyan girls were married before 18 - the Marriage Act of 2014
set the minimum legal age of marriage at
18 without exceptions (Girls Not Brides,
2018). Some of the factors underlying
SGBV in Kenya include “the low status of
women in society, patriarchal values and
power structures focused on male dominance, discriminatory institutions and implementation of laws, the absence of a legal framework on intimate partner violence (IPV), and a criminal justice system
that is largely inaccessible” (Mc Evoy,
2012; NCRC, 2014).
Kenya’s Media Landscape
Kenya’s media landscape underwent digital
migration in 2015. Digital migration expands radio frequencies on the radio spectrum, allowing media companies to benefit
from lower broadcasting costs while
providing better viewing quality (Spectrum, 2017). From 2011 to 2015, this digital
migration expanded media coverage in
Kenya by increasing the population covered by television broadcasting from 55%
to 66%, the number of television broadcasters from 14 to 65, and the number of broadcasters reaching multiple cities from 5 to
22. Although radio and television remain
the most commonly used media platforms
by Kenyans, there is a steady increase in the
use of online news sources, read by 30% of
Kenyans (Reelforge & Tifa 2019). In contrast, only 10% of Kenyans read a newspaper in the week before the Reelforge and
Tifa survey in that same year - down from
27% in 2014. An examination of the websites most visited in Kenya demonstrates
that news sources including Standard Media, Nation, Tuko, Kenyans, Citizen TV,

Google, and Yahoo were popular (Reelforge & Tifa Research, 2019). As
smartphone use and access to the internet
continues to expand in Kenya, media outlets will further digitize, and digital news
will likely increase their readership.
News media has been identified as an influential agenda-setting factor and public
opinion shaper (McCombs, 2011). As our
perception of events is heavily influenced
by what we read in the media, “the priorities of the media strongly influence the priorities of the public” (McCombs, 2011).
The media prioritizes and frames specific
issues, thus shaping public opinion and priority (Seale, 2002). The UN Women Europe and Central Asia Media Coverage of
Gender-Based Violence handbook, published in 2017, addresses media reportage
protocols and highlights the importance of
reporting SGBV “in a responsible way,”
recognizing the impact media reporting can
have on the public perceptions of SGBV
(UN Women, 2017).
Methods
Due to the rapidly-paced publication of
news articles on SGBV in Kenya since the
start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the research team opted for the scoping review
method. As detailed by Arksey and O’Malley, this method allows for a comprehensive and descriptive-analytical overview
(2005). Their five-stage framework methodology guides our inquiry into the news
coverage on SGBV in Kenya.
1. Identifying the initial research questions
The research question was defined as follows: “How did the media report on the issue of SGBV in Kenya before the COVID
pandemic? How did media reporting on the
3

issue of SGBV change during the COVID
pandemic?” The following subsidiary questions were formulated:
➢ What is the extent of media coverage before and since the pandemic?
➢ What is the nature of the media coverage before and since the pandemic?
➢ What are the recurring themes of the
media coverage before and since the
pandemic?
2. Identifying relevant articles
A comprehensive search was conducted to
identify all relevant articles from digital
news media sources reporting on SGBV in
Kenya preceding and during the COVID-19
pandemic. The databases PressReader®
and AllAfrica® were used. In addition,
Yahoo!News® and Google News® were
searched to increase the chances of capturing all relevant articles. In the identification
process, numerous combinations of keywords were used to capture the articles on
SGBV, as detailed in Table 1.

The inclusion and exclusion criteria used
the following definitions and constraints:
Digital News Media: All news sources accessible via digital electronics devices regardless of orientation and biases. The
news output of international organizations
(e.g., WHO) and NGOs (e.g., Human
Rights Watch) were also considered as
news media.

Language Constraints. Only those articles
written in English were identified.
Time Period. All relevant articles were
identified from the 1st of June 2019 to the
18th of July 2020. This period allowed us
to compare pre-pandemic and pandemic
media coverage.
SGBV in Kenya. All news articles that discuss fully or partially SGBV, as per the
UNHCR definition, in Kenya were considered. This includes articles that report on
patterns as well as on individual cases of
SGBV.

Results
3. Article selection
Search queries of the keywords identified
an initial 3966 articles. The databases identified substantially more articles than
Yahoo!News ® and Google News®. The
algorithms of the latter websites limit results to the most popular and relevant articles. Furthermore, Google News® provides
100 results per search query as a standard,
which limited article identification.
Through a review of the titles and sources
of the articles, 1217 duplicate articles were
excluded. The second level of screening
based on publication date and the content of
the article titles (demonstrating clear relevance to the study) excluded 2084 articles.
The 665 articles that remained were fully
assessed for eligibility as per the set inclusion and exclusion criteria and were further
4

reduced to 340 articles, included in the
scoping review. Figure 1 illustrates the process of the article selection. The most frequent reason for exclusion was when an article did not cover SGBV in Kenya specifically and instead reported SGBV trends regionally or globally. Some articles appeared in searches on PressReader® and
were not digitally accessible. This was the
case when the original article was part of
the paper edition of the news source and not
its digital edition and was consequently excluded from the scoping review. Furthermore, some news sources published the
same article under different titles in their
digital and paper editions. In this case, the
paper duplicate was excluded.
4. Charting data
At this stage, the data of all included articles
were charted. Figure 2 details the frequency
of article publication. Figure 3 details the
news sources of the included articles. Figure 4 depicts the news sources of the articles over time. Developed with NVivo, a
computer-assisted qualitative data analysis
software, Figure 5 depicts the types of articles, and Figure 7 charts the recurring
themes of media coverage.

5. Findings
I. What is the extent of media coverage before and since the pandemic?
To formulate the influence of the COVID19 pandemic on SGBV media coverage, the
frequency of article publication and the diversity of news sources were examined.
The analysis of the frequency of publication
of SGBV-related articles demonstrates a
clear and logical connection between significant events, reports, and incidents concerned with SGBV and increased media
coverage. The Nairobi Summit on ICPD25,
concerned with advancing the sexual and
reproductive health and rights agenda,
prompted a spike in articles in November
2019 when it was held.

The second rise in news articles on SGBV
followed the implementation of COVID-19
mitigation measures in Kenya on the 15th
of March 2020. 160 articles were published
over the 9.5 months from the 1st of June
2019 to the 15th of March 2020, and 180
articles were published over the four
months from the 15th of March 2020 to the
18th of July 2020. The moving average
trendline (period of three) further demon-

5

strates the upward trend of article publication since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic in Kenya.
Although SGBV in Kenya is by international press and organizations, two Kenyan
news outlets, The Star and Daily Nation,
prominently report on it. They are followed
by non-governmental organizations Human
Rights Watch and ReliefWeb, as well as international news venues such as The Guardian, BBC, etc.

II. What is the nature of the media coverage
before and since the pandemic?
The nature of the media coverage was examined by inquiring into the type of articles
published on SGBV. The research team
used March 15th as the dividing line between articles published “before” and
“since'' the implementation of the COVID19 mitigation measures. NVivo software
was used to code the articles as either news
reports, feature articles, opinion pieces, reviews, or obituaries to capture the variety of
articles that discuss, fully or partially,
SGBV in Kenya.

As demonstrated by figure 4, since the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic, there is an increase in SGBV coverage by news sources
that do not typically report on the issue.

Inquiry into the nature of SGBV included a
wide variety of article types that cover
SGBV in Kenya. News reports (predominantly in Kenyan news sources), feature articles (in Kenyan, international, and NGO
news sources) as well as opinion pieces
(primarily in Kenyan news sources) were
the most shared article types covering the
subject. Notably, feature articles offered an
in-depth analysis of the rise of sexual and

6

gender-based violence such as domestic violence, female genital mutilation, and child
marriage due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
They also offered insight into different individual, governmental, non-governmental,
and corporate prevention, recovery, and
justice efforts. Nearly all opinion pieces
presented progressive stances on SGBV in
line with the sustainable development goals
and Kenya Vision 2030. One of the guiding
programs of Kenya Vision 2030 for SGBV
seeks to strengthen women’s participation
in reconciliation and peace committees and
prioritizes education on SGBV. Opinion articles concerned the promotion of these
principles and simultaneously shed light on
recent cases and trends of SGBV in Kenya.
III. What are the recurring themes of the
media coverage before and since the pandemic?
NVivo software was used to scope the
themes and subthemes of news media coverage. A hierarchy of nodes was created to
find the overarching themes in the included
articles (FGM, child marriage, domestic violence, LGTBQ+ violence, and general
SGBV) as well as the subthemes (trends,
rates, cases, increases, consequences,
causes, barriers to recovery and justice services, legal protections, etc.). One article
covering multiple themes and subthemes of
SGBV was coded to multiple nodes to accurately reflect this. The date of the implementation of the mitigation measures in
Kenya, the 15th of March, was again utilized as an artificial redline to divide articles published “before” and “since” the
COVID-19 pandemic mitigation measures.

Female Genital Mutilation
Before the COVID-19 mitigation measures,
in the 70 articles that discussed FGM, the
most recurring subtheme was prevention,
recovery, and justice efforts by individual,
governmental, and non-governmental actors (51 articles). Awareness-raising and
educational opportunities (42 articles), the
pledge by President Uhuru Kenyatta to end
FGM in Kenya by 2022 at the Nairobi Summit on ICPD25 (23 articles), the promotion
of alternative rites of passage (9 articles),
and least frequently, clitoral reconstruction
(2 articles), were all covered within this
subtheme. The second most recurring subtheme in media coverage was the causes of
FGM (37 articles) identified as retrogressive traditional beliefs (34 articles), FGM
as the prerequisite to marriage (16 articles),
and FGM as the promotion of chastity (8 articles).
The barriers to the eradication of FGM
(27) were identified as cross-border FGM

7

to and from Kenya (11), the growing trend
of underground FGM (8), the lack of education around the negative consequences
of FGM (8), the absence of a harmonious
eradication strategy among stakeholders
(4), and the medicalization of FGM (7).
Legal provisions that protect from FGM,
in particular the Prohibition of Female
Genital Mutilation Act of 2011, were also
frequently mentioned in media coverage
(31 out of the 70 articles that covered
FGM pre-COVID-19) - usually in context
that despite the criminalization of FGM it
remains widely practiced. The negative
consequences of FGM were covered in 21
articles. The health repercussions were
identified as sexual and reproductive complications, chronic conditions, psychological trauma, physical injury, and death. The
cut, indicated in the included articles as a
precondition to marriage, was also identified as a cause of high teenage pregnancy
rates.
The next most recurring subtheme in media
coverage was trends of FGM in Kenya (17).
The media covered a higher FGM prevalence rate among certain ethnic communities and geographies such as the Maasai,
Somalis, and Pokot and the Northeastern
counties respectively (13). Another reported trend was the progress of Kenya in
the eradication of FGM in the last decade
(6). Articles also covered cases of FGM,
typically not anonymized in feature articles
and anonymized in news reports (15). Another recurring subtheme was the national
prevalence rate of FGM, established at 21%
for women between the age of 15 and 49
(17). Other less covered subthemes included the different forms of FGM practiced in Kenya (12) and the legal challenge
to the FGM Prohibition Act filed by Dr.

Tatu Kamau on the grounds that it is an infringement to the right to exercise one’s
cultural beliefs (4).
The aforementioned subthemes of FGM
were also covered by the media after the
implementation of the COVID-19 mitigation measures. In the 49 articles on FGM
published since the COVID-19 pandemic,
two other recurring subthemes emerged:
the causes of the increase of FGM cases
since March 2020 (28) and the further consequences of the mitigation measures (10).
The reported increase in FGM cases was attributed to the imposed lockdown (24), including school closures, that created the
ideal environment for families to arrange
for their girls to undergo FGM. The other
reported cause was the economic implications of the COVID-19 mitigation
measures, prompting families to prepare
their girls for (child) marriage to receive a
dowry and cushion economic hardship (14).
Another reported FGM-related consequence of the lockdown includes a difficult
environment for prevention, recovery, and
justice initiatives to operate (10) with shelters and rescue centers closed, cross-border
dialogue to intercept “FGM tourism”
halted, community outreach programs suspended, and the number of social workers
and law enforcement officials within communities strongly diminished.
SGBV
Before the implementation of the COVID19 mitigation measures, of the 93 articles
that covered SGBV in Kenya generally, the
most recurring subtheme was prevention,
recovery, and justice efforts (58). Efforts
included Kenya’s pledge to eradicate GBV
practices by 2030 (5), the Nairobi Summit
(22), men’s participation in the eradication

8

of SGBV (5), and the individual, governmental, and nongovernmental prevention,
recovery, and justice efforts focusing on education, care services, and accountability,
(44 articles). Furthermore, trends of SGBV
received substantial media attention (27).
These trends included delayed justice for
survivors of SGBV (9) and human trafficking of women to and from Kenya, making
them prone to sexual and domestic abuse
(4). The media also identified several
groups as particularly vulnerable to SGBV
(6) such as (poor) women and girls, tea
plantation workers, people living with disabilities, and people not enrolled in the civil
register. Other trends included the increase
of SGBV during school holidays (4), men
as survivors of SGBV (1), cyberbullying as
an emerging form of SGBV in Kenya (2),
and the progress towards eliminating
SGBV (2). Rates of SGBV in Kenya were
also covered (27). They reported the estimated national prevalence rate of SGBV
against women and girls of 47%, county
prevalence rates, and occasional increases
in cases locally or nationally.
Individual cases of SGBV in Kenya also
received significant media attention and
included cases of femicide, physical harassment, and verbal abuse (13). Media
coverage on legal provisions that protect
from SGBV (15) encompassed references
to the Constitution of Kenya (2010), the
Policy on Gender and Development
(2019), the National Policy for the Eradication of FGM (2019), the Sexual Offences Act (2006), the Counter-Trafficking
Act (2011), the Children’s Act (2001), the
Prevention against violence Act (2015),
the Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act (2011), and international conventions Kenya is party to. These are usually
mentioned in the context of Kenya’s active

agenda in eradicating SGBV or the high
rates of SGBV despite extensive legal provisions. The causes of SGBV were reported in the media (14) as retrogressive
traditional beliefs (7), poverty (4), lawlessness and conflict (3), and a mental health
crisis (1). The reported health consequences of SGBV underlined sexually
transmitted infections (especially HIV),
sexual and reproductive health (SRH)
complications, psychological trauma,
physical injury, and death. Media coverage
on the economic repercussions of SGBV
underlined its dramatic effect on an individual’s wellbeing and the Kenyan economy. The various forms of SGBV were
also indicated as a critical cause of the low
school attendance rates by young girls.
After the implementation of the COVID-19
mitigation measures, in the 91 articles reporting on SGBV, prevention, recovery,
and justice efforts remained the most frequently covered subtheme (56). The increase in cases of SGBV, both locally and
nationally, was also frequently covered
(48): SGBV cases had tripled in the first
three months of the dusk-to-dawn curfew,
and the national GBV hotline, in June 2020,
reported a 650% increase in calls since the
implementation of the COVID-19 mitigation measures. As instances of SGBV increased due to mitigation measures and the
national lockdown, media coverage began
discussing the heightened number of calls
to GBV hotlines as an indicator for this increased SGBV prevalence. Nairobi, Kisumu, Mombasa, Kwale, Kilifi, Isiolo, and
Homa Bay, also reported local increases in
SGBV cases (7). The next most recurring
subtheme in media coverage was trends of
SGBV since the COVID-19 pandemic (29).
Trends included relatives and guardians as

9

main perpetrators of SGBV (14), vulnerable groups being disproportionately victimized (women, girls, and children - especially in informal settlements and pastoral
and remote communities) (13), the mitigation measures as barriers to services for survivors of SGBV (2), and the low awareness
among Kenyans of SGBV support services
(1). Media coverage also identified the
causes of the increase of SGBV cases (14).
These included economic repercussions of
the COVID-19 mitigation measures, which
have increased stress, uncertainty, and fear
for many (8) and the lockdown itself that
has closed schools and limited mobility (7).
Other subthemes largely corresponded to
pre-pandemic media coverage.
Sexual Violence
Media coverage on sexual violence in
Kenya before the implementation of the
COVID-19 mitigation measures (54) was
mostly concerned with trends of sexual violence (25). This included guardians, relatives, acquaintances, and security force
agents as common perpetrators (13) and
sexual violence in post-election settings
(11). Other reported trends included the underreporting of sexual violence (6), men as
survivors of sexual violence (3), transactional sex in coastal counties (1), and sodomy (1). Individual cases of sexual violence (22) and prevention, recovery, and
justice efforts of individuals, governmental,
and nongovernmental organizations (22)
were the next most recurring subthemes.
Reported consequences of sexual violence
(15) included teenage pregnancies (5),
stigma and social exclusion (9), and health
issues such as physical injuries, sexually
transmitted diseases, and psychological
trauma (4). The media coverage on the
prevalence of sexual violence in Kenya (13)

depicted several different sources of estimates, including: The Gender-Based Violence Recovery Centre in Mombasa, which
estimated that 1 in 3 girls have experienced
sexual violence before the age of 18, and
the Demographic Health Survey of 2014,
which established that 14% of women aged
15 to 49 have experienced sexual violence.
The next subtheme that received substantial
media attention was barriers to reporting,
recovery, and justice efforts (11). These encompassed lack of awareness about available services (5), victim-blaming and stigma
(4), lack of child-friendly spaces in court
and police offices (2), post-election unrest
(1), and lack of shelter for survivors (1).
Media coverage on the legal provisions that
protect from sexual violence referred to the
Constitution of Kenya (2010) that stipulates
the right to be free from violence and the
Sexual Offences Act (2006), that stipulates
protection from a range of sexual abuses
(10). Causes of sexual violence were not
frequently reported (2).
After the implementation of the COVID-19
mitigation measures, of the 72 articles concerned with sexual violence, the most covered subtheme was the increase in sexual
violence since the implementation of the
mitigation measures (38) with reporting
that sexual violence accounted for up to
35.8% of reported crimes in the first three
weeks of the dusk-to-dawn curfew. The
next most-recurring theme were the causes
of this increase (32) including the lockdown
and consequent school closures bringing
people, especially women and children, in
situations where they are vulnerable to sexual violence (28). The media reported that
the economic repercussions of the mitigation measures also contributed to the increase of sexual violence with an increasing
number of girls prone to sexual assault
10

while trying to secure a livelihood for themselves, parents moving to secure an income
and leaving their children in high-risk situations, and an upwards trend in transactional sex (9). Other subthemes were similar to those covered before the COVID-19
pandemic.
Anti-LGBTQ Violence
The media coverage on anti-LGBTQ violence in Kenya that was picked up by our
search queries (7) most frequently broadcasted the criminalization of same-sex acts
(5). Trends (4) and cases (3) of antiLGBTQ violence as well as prevention, recovery, and justice efforts (2) were the next
most recurring subthemes in media coverage. Trends cover the rampant homophobia
in the country and the frequent violence towards LGBTQ refugees. Although the media coverage on anti-LGBTQ violence in
Kenya after the implementation of the mitigation measures (5) focused more on
trends and cases of anti-LGBTQ violence,
no correlation was reported nor implied.
Domestic Violence
The media coverage on domestic violence
in Kenya before the COVID-19 pandemic
(27) predominantly narrated individual
cases (13). The next most recurring subthemes were the varying rates of domestic
violence in Kenya (8) with a reported 40%
of women experiencing domestic violence
within their lifetime, and individual, governmental, nongovernmental, and corporate
prevention, recovery, and justice efforts (8).
The media coverage was also concerned
with the consequences of domestic violence
(4). Economic repercussions were identified and a report by the audit firm KPMG
and telecommunications corporation Vodafone made headlines after it estimated
Kenya lost Sh5 billion (roughly 39 million

euros) every year as a result of working
women facing domestic violence. Reported
health consequences included bad mental
health and physical injury. Trends of domestic violence (3) (including security
force agents as perpetrators (2) and a decrease in likelihood of domestic violence
with higher household incomes (1)), causes
of domestic violence (3) (identified only as
substance abuse (2) and jealousy (1) in this
selection of articles), and legal protections
from domestic violence (2) (particularly the
Protection Against Domestic Violence Act
(2015)) were the least covered subthemes.
Since the implementation of the COVID-19
mitigation measures, media coverage (68)
has been especially concerned with the influence of the COVID-19 mitigation
measures on the reported increase in domestic violence (34). This includes a 45%
increase in domestic violence cases in May
2020, and a 34% increase in calls for help
related to domestic violence to a GBV hotline in the first three weeks of the dusk-todawn curfew. Causes of the increase (31)
identified in the media coverage were the
lockdown itself (14), the economic repercussions of the mitigation measures (14),
the overall stress, fear, and uncertainty people face in times of a global health crisis
(13), and increased substance abuse (4).
The third most recurring subtheme in media
coverage were individual cases of domestic
violence (17), followed by prevention, recovery, and justice efforts (12), and legal
protections from domestic violence (8).
The media also reported on the further consequences of the COVID-19 mitigation
measures on domestic violence (3). These
consequences included the aforementioned
health issues (2) as well as a potential mental health crisis, increased Google searches
11

within Kenya on finding domestic violence
help (1), and extra barriers to recovery and
justice services (1). The trends of domestic
violence in Kenya (4) that were covered by
the news media were its gradual destigmatization (1), the phenomenon of university
graduate homelessness due to domestic violence (2), and a decrease in reported cases
of domestic violence in June 2020 (1). The
least frequently covered subthemes were
similar to those covered before the implementation of the COVID-19 mitigation
measures.
Child Marriage
The media coverage on child marriage in
Kenya before the implementation of the
mitigation measures (40) most frequently
reported on prevention, recovery, and justice efforts (19). These included mostly
awareness and education campaigns, rescue
centers, and legal pursuits against perpetrators. The second most recurring subtheme
were the consequences of this form of
SGBV (14) including the discontinuation of
school (12) which in turn drives cycles of
poverty as well as health repercussions including psychological trauma and SRH
complications (2). Individual cases of child
marriage in Kenya were also frequently reported on (13), predominantly within articles that address the high prevalence of
child marriage or report on prevention, recovery, and justice efforts that have provided services to these individuals. Another
recurring theme were the causes of child
marriage (12). They were identified as poverty (8) and retrogressive traditional beliefs
including child beading (5). Legal provisions to protect from child marriage (6) as
well as the national rate of child marriage
(2), established at around 25% in 2019,
were the least covered subthemes by the
media.

Since the onset of COVID-19 mitigation
measures in Kenya, in the 41 articles concerned with child marriage, the most recurring subtheme is the causes of the increase
in child marriage (23). Causes include the
lockdown which closed schools and increased the vulnerability of girls to child
marriage (16) and the economic repercussions of the COVID-19 mitigation
measures that have disrupted livelihoods
(16). There was also substantial media attention for trends of child marriage (12)
such as child marriage as an important
contributor to teenage pregnancy rates (11)
and higher rates of child marriage in certain areas including Homa Bay, Migori,
Meru, Tana River, Kwale, Siaya, Narok,
and Mombasa (4). The news media reported the consequences of child marriages
in times of lockdown (5) as an increase in
the discontinuation of schooling (4) and
lack of connection to prevention, recovery,
and justice initiatives (1). News media
coverage presented other subthemes similarly to its pre-pandemic coverage.
Conclusion
Our initial concern with news media as a
powerful influencer of public opinion
prompted inquiry into both what is known
about sexual and gender-based violence in
Kenya from news media coverage and how
the COVID-19 pandemic has influenced
this. Through the scoping review method,
relevant articles were identified and charted
to identify the extent, nature, and themes of
SGBV coverage. The 340 included articles
were analyzed with NVivo. The research
team found clear trends in the digital news
media coverage on SGBV in Kenya.
There was a stark increase in articles on
SGBV in Kenya and increased diversity in
12

news sources after the implementation of
the COVID-19 mitigation measures. An increase in the share of news reports and feature articles on SGBV was also found. Thematically, FGM was the most covered form
of SGBV before the pandemic. While
SGBV broadly remained the most prevalent
theme in news media coverage after the implementation of the mitigation measures,
the share of articles reporting on domestic
violence and sexual violence increased and
replaced FGM as most covered form(s) of
SGBV. The lockdown (including school
closings and confinement to the home) and
the economic repercussions of the mitigation measures were the most frequently reported causes of the increase in all forms of
SGBV. The causes of SGBV were routinely
reported as retrogressive cultural beliefs
and poverty.
The agenda-setting role of the media has
important consequences for SGBV awareness in Kenya. The increasing digitization
of media outlets in Kenya and the democratization of access to internet will further

contribute to broad-based sensitivity to the
repercussions of SGBV on individuals and
society. The media’s consistent focus on
SGBV, opinion pieces aligned with progressive policy, near absence of sensationalism to narrate individual cases of SGBV,
and strong awareness and reporting on the
causes and consequences of the COVID-19
pandemic mitigation measures shows its
active role in health and development advocacy. Simultaneously, the prevalence of
SGBV themes in media coverage do not accurately depict the most common types of
SGBV in Kenya. FGM is less common in
Kenya than domestic violence, yet digital
news media coverage disproportionately reported on FGM before the pandemic. This
disposition can have influence on public
perception. Nonetheless, the increased and
diverse coverage since the COVID-19 pandemic can further serve as a significant facilitator in raising awareness and beneficially influence public perception of necessary SGBV prevention interventions.

13

References
Arksey, H., & O'Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: towards a methodological framework. International Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8:1, p. 19-32, doi:
10.1080/1364557032000119616
Girls Not Brides. (2018, December 18).
Kenya - Child Marriage Around
the World. Girls Not Brides. Retrieved from https://www.girlsnotbrides.org/child-marriage/kenya/
McCombs, M. E. (2011). The news and
public opinion: Media effects on
civic life. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Press.
McCombs, M. E. (2011). The Agenda-Setting Role of the Mass Media in the
Shaping of Public Opinion. Retrieved from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237394610_The_Agenda-Setting_Role_of_the_Mass_Media_in_the_Shaping_of_Public_Opinion
Mc Evoy, C. (2012). Battering, Rape, and
Lethal Violence: A Baseline of Information on Physical Threats
against Women in Nairobi. Small
Arms Survey. Retrieved from
http://www.smallarmssurvey.org/fileadmin/docs/F-Workingpapers/SAS-WP13-VAW-Nairobi.pdf
Ministry of Health. (2020, March). Kenya
Coronavirus Cases Rise to Four,
CS Health. Retrieved from
https://www.health.go.ke/kenyacoronavirus-cases-rise-to-four-cshealth/
Ministry of Health. (2020, April). The
Government announces extra
measures to prevent the spread off
coronavirus Nairobi. Retrieved
from

https://www.health.go.ke/govt-announces-extra-measures-to-prevent-spread-of-coronavirus-nairobi-monday-april-6-2020/
Ministry of Health. (2020, July 7). President Uhuru lifts movement ban in
three counties Nairobi, Monday
July 6, 2020. Retrieved from
https://www.health.go.ke/president-uhuru-lifts-movement-ban-inthree-counties-nairobi-mondayjuly-6-2020/
Mutahi, B. (2020, April 20). Coronavirus:
The fear of being sentenced to a
Kenyan quarantine centre. BBC.
Retrieved from
https://www.bbc.com/news/worldafrica-52326316
National Crime Research Center. (2014).
Gender-based violence in Kenya.
Retrieved from http://crimeresearch.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2018/02/wwwroot_publications_Gender-Based-Violence-inKenya.pdf
Nyabola, N. (2020, June 25). Why Kenyans Are Protesting Police Brutality at Home and Abroad. Foreign
Affairs. Retrieved from
https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/africa/2020-06-25/why-kenyans-are-protesting-police-brutality-home-and-abroad
Reelforge & Tifa Research. (2019, July).
Kenya Media Landscape Report.
Retrieved from
http://www.tifaresearch.com/wpcontent/uploads/2019/07/MediaLandscape-in-Kenya-2019-ReportReelforge-and-TIFA10.07.2019.pdf
Republic of Kenya. (2015, December).
Kenya Demographic and Health
14

Survey 2014. Retrieved from
https://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/FR308/FR308.
pdfNCPD-KE. (2020, November).
Nairobi
Seale, C. (2002). Media and health. London: SAGE Publications
Spectrum. (2017, January). Digital Migration Process in Kenya. Retrieved
from https://www.itu.int/en/ITUR/seminars/rrs/2017-Africa/Forum/GSMA%20Digital%20Migration%20Process%20in%20Kenya.pdf
UNFPA. (2020, April). Press Release:
New UNFPA Projections predict
calamitous impact on women’s
health as COVID-19 pandemic
continues. Retrieved from
https://www.unfpa.org/press/newunfpa-projections-predict-calamitous-impact-womens-health-covid19-pandemic-continues
UNHCR. (2020). Sexual and Gender
Based Violence. Retrieved from
https://www.unhcr.org/sexual-andgender-based-violence.html
UNICEF (2020). A Profile of Female Genital Mutilation in Kenya. UNICEF.
Retrieved from
https://data.unicef.org/resources/aprofile-of-female-genital-mutilation-in-kenya
UN Women. (2017). Media coverage of
gender-based violence - Handbook
and Training of Trainers. Retrieved
from https://eca.unwomen.org/en/digital-library/publications/2017/09/media-coverageof-gender-based-violence---handbook-and-training-of-trainers
WHO. (2020, May). New WHO estimates:
Up to 190 000 people could

die of COVID-19 in Africa if not
controlled. Retrieved from
https://www.afro.who.int/news/ne
w-who-estimates-190-000-peoplecould-die-covid-19-africa-if-notcontrolled

15

