Distancing Bonus or Downscaling Loss?
The Changing Livelihood of US Online Workers in Times of
COVID-19
Version: May 19, 20201
Fabian Stephany✦2, Michael Dunn✢, Steve Sawyer✧, Vili Lehdonvirta✦
✦ - Oxford Internet Institute, University of Oxford, UK
✣ - Department of Management & Business, Skidmore College, NY
✧ - School of Information Studies, Syracuse University, NY

Abstract
We draw on data from the Online Labour Index and interviews with freelancers in the United
States securing work on online platforms, to illuminate effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.
The pandemic’s global economic upheaval is shuttering shops and offices. Those able to do
so are now working remotely from their homes. They join workers who have always been
working remotely: freelancers who earn some or all of their income from projects secured via
online labour platforms. Data allow us to sketch a first picture of how the initial months of
the COVID-19 pandemic has affected the livelihoods of online freelancers. The data shows
online labour demand falling rapidly in early March 2020, but with an equally rapid recovery.
We also find significant differences between countries and occupations. Data from interviews
make clear jobs are increasingly scarce even as more people are creating profiles and seeking
freelance work online.
Keywords: Online Labour Markets; Multi-Method Study, Freelance Work; COVID-19;
telework
This is a pre-print version of an article forthcoming in the Journal of Economic & Social
Geography - Tijdschrift voor economische en sociale geografie.

1

Acknowledgement: We thank Raghav Raheja (Syracuse University) and Gabrielle Vaccaro (Skidmore
College) for their central role in the qualitative data collection efforts. Likewise, we would like to acknowledge
Dr. Otto Kässi for engineering most of the OLI data collection infrastructure.
2
Corresponding author: fabian.stephany@oii.ox.ac.uk

1

Introduction
We combine data from the Online Labour Index (OLI) and an interview-based panel study of
freelance workers in the United States to provide insight into the changes in online labour
markets relative to the ongoing pandemic arising from the global spread of the novel
coronavirus, COVID-19. We do so to contribute evidence and insight to the ways in which a
global pandemic appears in the localized context of one of the economies most impacted. The
freelance workers that are the focus of this analysis are those taking on projects and contracts
for knowledge work: technology support, software development, bookkeeping, accounting,
web content, writing and editing, and other types of cognitive work. The growth in online
labour markets, and the project- or task-based structure of freelance labour, provides a unique
window into effects of a pandemic on work. The OLI provides a global perspective; the panel
study provides for a more localized set of insights.
We pursue this work recognizing that as the scope and breadth of the global COVID-19
pandemic continues to grow, the implications to workers and labour markets grow more
profound. Even conservative estimates of a contained global outbreak are showing significant
global macroeconomic impacts (McKibben and Fernando, 2020). Similarly, models at the
country level are showing serious economic impacts (Atkeson, 2020). Early research is also
showing distinct demographic and industry differences in the impact of the pandemic
(Wenham, Smith and Morgan, 2020; Stephany et al. 2020).
Building on the emerging COVID-19 related research, we examine a specific subset of labor
markets​—​the online labor market and its workers​—​to understand the near-term impacts of the
pandemic. Online freelancers are in precarious work arrangements generally, and the
pandemic presents a particularly challenging scenario to them for at least three reasons. First,
the online nature of their work makes them susceptible to greater competition (Dunn, 2017).
Second, freelance work is project-based: there is little to no commitment between employer
and worker beyond the specifics of the project’s contract (Wood et al., 2019). Finally, in
many countries their status as independent contractors leaves online freelancers in vulnerable
positions especially during economic downturns. For example, in the United States, benefits
such as health care are tied to formal, full-time employment and are not provided to
freelancers. Indeed, in comparison with many industrialized countries, there are relatively
fewer labor and employment regulations governing non-standard work arrangements in the
United States (ILO, 2016; McKay, Pollack and Fitzpayne, 2019).
On the one hand, online labour markets could be experiencing a boost in demand as
companies move operations online. On the other hand, the sharp economic downturn could
be causing companies to reduce the use of online labour platforms alongside other types of
nonstandard work. We address this issue by examining recent changes in the global demand
for online labour. And while viruses may be blind to nation-states, policies and interventions
are nation-state specific. Cross-national comparisons can therefore provide insight on the
economic implications of specific policies and interventions. Research has already begun to
2

understand the economic implications of country specific interventions (e.g. Thunstrom,
Newbold, Finnoff, Ashworth and Shogren, 2020). In this initial rapid analysis, we therefore
use quantitative data to examine changes in the demand for online labour in three important
regional economies with different countermeasures towards the pandemic: United States,
Germany, and South Korea. The data show distinctly different geographic patterns between
countries, with US data showing a particularly acute drop in demand for workers, with a
simultaneously sharp increase in supply of available workers.
The data also make clear that not all occupations in the United States are experiencing the
shocks similarly. Tech and software development occupations show a significant increase in
both online labour demand and number of registered profiles. Because of the significant
market shock evident in the United States and its notable occupational differences, we
complement the quantitative view with interviews with United-States-based online freelance
workers, helping us to understand the significance, implications and lived experiences of the
market shock to online freelance workers.

Background
Online labour platforms are websites that mediate between buyers and sellers of remotely
deliverable cognitive work (Horton, 2010). The clients range from individuals and early-stage
startups to Fortune 500 companies (Corporaal & Lehdonvirta, 2017). The sellers are either
self-employed independent contractors, or people in regular employment who earn additional
income by moonlighting as freelancers via the Internet. The platforms match clients and
workers using a variety of mechanisms, such as allowing clients to post projects for bidding,
and allowing freelancers to post resumes for clients to evaluate. Besides matching, the
platforms also handle contracting, time tracking, monitoring, billing, and dispute resolution,
allowing the entire relationship to be carried out remotely.
Online labour platforms can be further subdivided into freelancing platforms (eg. Upwork,
TopTal, Fiverr) where payment is on an hourly or milestone basis, and microtask platforms
(eg. Amazon Mechanical Turk) where payment is on a piece rate basis (Lehdonvirta, 2018).
Of these, freelancing platforms appear to be much larger in terms of user numbers (Kässi &
Lehdonvirta, 2018). Online labour platforms are also sometimes called online gig platforms,
but they are conceptually distinct from local gig economy platforms such as Uber or
Deliveroo, which involve physical on-site service delivery (Wood et al., 2019). The global
market for online labour has grown approximately 50% over the past three years (Kässi &
Lehdonvirta, 2018). But as the COVID-19 pandemic is hitting the world’s economies,
causing a massive rise in unemployment in the United States, it is pertinent to ask how the
pandemic is affecting the market for online labour.

3

Pandemic’s potential effects on online labour demand
There are several potential mechanisms through which the pandemic could be causing a
positive demand shock for online labour. The pandemic appears to be forcing companies in
affected countries to shift from collocated office work towards home-based remote working
arrangements, known in previous literature as telework (Huws et al., 1990) or telecommuting
(Mokhtarian, 1991), and now colloquially referred to as “work from home”. The pandemic is
also likely pushing companies to increase the use of virtual collaboration as a substitute to
travel and face-to-face meetings. Telework and virtual collaboration have been slowly and
unevenly gaining in popularity already since their introduction in the early 1990s. Now, there
appears to be an unprecedented surge of interest towards them. For instance, interest in
remote working and related search terms in Google search approximately tripled from its
pre-pandemic baseline to March 2020 (Clement, 2020). The stock market value of
teleconferencing software company Zoom Video Communications approximately doubled in
the same time period3.
Given this surge of interest in remote work and virtual collaboration, it is conceivable that
remote-by-design online labour markets could be seeing a significant demand boost.
Companies looking to engage new contractors might now favour remote online contractors
hired through web-based platforms over on-site contractors hired through conventional
staffing agencies. Already before the pandemic, many skilled workers located in rural areas
of the United States appear to have successfully used online labour markets to remotely
access opportunities in urban areas (Braesemann et al., 2020). It is also possible that some
companies might be moving existing contractor relationships to online labour platforms, in
what is known as the “bring your own freelancer” model (Corporaal & Lehdonvirta, 2017).
Platforms provide features for monitoring and managing contractors remotely, which can
partly substitute for the missing in-person controls (Braesemann et al., 2020). Short-term
contractors are typically subject to more performance- and outcome-based controls than
regular employees, whose loyalty may be sought with cultural and incentive-based controls
(Ouchi, 1979).
Furthermore, the pandemic and the switch to remote work and virtual collaboration might
also be creating additional demand for certain types of labour, some of which is supplied
through online labour platforms. In particular, it is conceivable that there is a significant
positive demand shock for information technology contractors who can help companies set
up and maintain remote work and virtual collaboration infrastructure, and provide training on
their use. Systems integration work and database management work might also increase as
organizational reliance on systems over in-person interactions increases. Large firms often
​See:
https://markets.businessinsider.com/news/stocks/zoom-stock-price-surged-coronavirus-pandemic-video-work-from-home-20
20-3-1029023594
3

4

have existing IT services outsourcing providers, but small- and medium-sized companies may
be turning to online labour platforms for these needs (Bunyaratavej et al., 2011).
However, it is also conceivable that the pandemic could be causing a significant reduction in
demand for online labour, through a few possible mechanisms. Online labour is part of the
broader category of nonstandard work, which includes other independent contractors and
temporary workers. Many companies in the United States use nonstandard workers as a
flexible buffer that can be rapidly reduced in economic downturns to protect core workers
(Kalleberg, 2003). Online labour can also be seen as a form of outsourcing (Lehdonvirta et
al., 2019), which is likewise something that companies can adjust to respond to changing
demand. Given that the pandemic and its public policy responses have in many countries
already resulted in a general economic downturn of historic proportions, it is conceivable that
companies could be cutting their use of online labour platforms to engage contractors.
Already before the pandemic it was apparent that demand in the online labour market was
very responsive to events such as public holidays (Kässi & Lehdonvirta, 2018), and workers
felt that demand for their services could fluctuate a lot (Lehdonvirta, 2018).
Two opposing effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on demand for online freelance labour are
thus conceivable. On the one hand, to the extent that online labour is a substitute to on-site
labour, we can expect to see an increase in demand. The technical and organizational effort
involved in switching to remote operations might also cause an increase in the demand for
specific types of online labour, especially IT services. We will refer to all these
demand-increasing mechanisms collectively as the ​distancing bonus.​ On the other hand, to
the extent that online labour is a complement to general economic activity, we can expect to
see a decrease in demand, as companies facing declining revenues reduce non-essential
spending, including external online contractors. We refer to this as the ​downscaling loss.​
Pandemic’s potential effects on online labour supply
The pandemic can also be expected to have a significant impact on the supply of labour on
online labour markets. The supply generally speaking consists of two margins: the number of
workers offering their services through online platforms, and the number of hours that they
are willing to supply (Horton, 2010). The number of workers offering services online might
conceivably increase, because the pandemic and its countermeasures have led to record-high
unemployment in many countries, freeing up skilled workers (​del Rio-Chanona et al., 2020)​.
Workers who were already offering a small number of hours online on top of their regular
work (ie. moonlighting; Pesole et al. 2018) might increase the hours offered as a result of
being laid off. On the other hand, workers who are not laid off from their regular jobs might
decrease the number of hours they supply through online labour markets, to signal loyalty to
their employers. Both moonlighters as well as existing full-time online freelancers might also
decrease the hours supplied online as a result of falling ill or having increased care and
housework duties, as schools and daycare centers close or family members fall ill.
5

Geographic and temporal variation in the effects
The pandemic’s possible positive and negative effects on online labour supply and demand
are likely to vary across space and time, for a variety of reasons. Some reasons have to do
with the dynamics of the pandemic itself. The pandemic unfolds in phases, from initial
discovery to growing spread and eventual public and private countermeasures, followed by
an easing up of the countermeasures and possible additional waves of infection (Bedford et
al., 2020). Owing to differences in initial entry time, infection rates, and response speed,
different countries are at different phases, with different impacts on economic activity.
Country differences in public and private countermeasures, severity of the epidemic, and
underlying economic conditions are also likely to generate geographic variation in effects
seen in online labour markets (ILO, 2020).
Moreover, dynamics of the online labour market itself provide plenty of reasons to expect
geographic differences (Beerepoot & Lambregts, 2015). Generally speaking, a clear Global
North--Global South trade pattern is evident in online labour markets, where the majority of
employers are located in high-income countries (Kässi & Lehdonvirta, 2018) while most
workers are located in low- and middle-income countries (Lehdonvirta et al. 2019). Different
employer countries have different demand profiles in terms of the occupations they are
buying from online labour platforms, although these differences are surprisingly small (Kässi
& Lehdonvirta, 2018).
Changes in supply and demand in different countries are ultimately reflected in the global
aggregate online labour supply and demand. Although there is evidence of preference and
discrimination in online labour markets (Galperin & Greppi, 2019), overall the market
functions globally, with workers with similar skills and experience considered reasonably
good substitutes for each other regardless of location (Lehdonvirta et al., 2019).
The resulting overall effects on the market have substantive policy implications. If and when
online labour demand experiences a distancing bonus effect while supply remains relatively
constant, then the growing online labour market could offer an avenue for laid-off workers to
recover some of their earnings. But if the downscaling loss effect dominates and/or the
market is flooded with additional labour supply, then people thus far earning their main
income through online labour platforms are likely to join the ranks of self-employed people
urgently in need of financial assistance. In the following section we present a rapid initial
quantitative assessment of which effects dominate, across time and selected countries.

Quantitative evidence from the Online Labour Index
We draw on the OLI for a first quantitative assessment of how online labour markets are
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The OLI is an index that measures the utilization of

6

online labour platforms over time and across countries and occupations (Kässi &
Lehdonvirta, 2018). It serves a similar function as conventional labour market statistics on
new vacancies. The index is constructed by continuously collecting data on tasks and projects
posted on major online labour platforms in near real-time. The results of the OLI are
published as an open data set and an interactive online visualisation, updated daily.4 In this
rapid initial assessment, we examine the effects of the pandemic on the aggregate global
market, followed by three important regional economies. Finally, we present additional
analyses pertaining to the United States.
As discussed in the literature review, online labour markets have a distinct geography. Our
data allows us to provide a detailed picture of how the demand for online labour is
geographically distributed on the platforms monitored by the OLI. As shown in Figure 1, the
largest share of online labour demand originates from employers based in the United States,
who posted 41 percent of all projects recorded in 2020. The second largest buyer country for
online freelance work is the United Kingdom (8 percent), followed by India (6 percent).
Europe excluding the United Kingdom generates 16 percent of online labour demand, with
Germany as the biggest demander in this group. Only three percent of the demand for online
workers comes from the entirety of Africa. Given these very uneven geographies of online
labour demand, it is fair to assume that global developments on online labour markets are
often driven by buyers from the United States.

Figure 1: Globally, in 2020, the largest share of online labour demand stems from the United
States.
4

​http://ilabour.oii.ox.ac.uk/online-labour-index/

7

Changes in online labour demand
Over the past several years, the OLI has shown a clear seasonal pattern: demand drops during
the year-end holiday season, and then rises again to reach a plateau in February, which
normally persists until May. However, as Figure 2 shows, this is not the case in 2020. By
mid-March, when the World Health Organization declared that COVID-19 had become a
pandemic, the OLI was in deep decline, in comparison to 2018 and 2019. This finding
indicates that the downscaling loss effect may be dominating over the distancing bonus
effect. However, in early April 2020 the OLI began to rise again, surpassing by far the usual
level of previous years by the end of April. This observation, on the other hand, indicates that
at this stage of the pandemic, the distancing bonus may have started to dominate over the
downscaling loss.

Figure 2: Demand on major online labour platforms, January 1st to April 18th (2018-2020),
relative to the start of the year
To further examine this fast-changing dynamic, we are interested in examining the biggest
demander country, the United States. However, the United States was not the first economy
to be impacted by the pandemic and its countermeasures. It is useful to contrast it with other
important regional economies with different COVID-19 trajectories and responses. In this
study, we limit ourselves to examining three important regional economies: Germany, South

8

Korea, and the United States as the three economies confronted the pandemic at different
points in time and opted for different countermeasures.
Figure 3 shows a cross-country comparison of online labour demand from Germany, South
Korea and the United States. Each country shows a distinct pattern. South Korea was one of
the first economies that had to face the consequences of COVID-19 early in 2020. Demand
from South Korea fell from mid-February to mid-March, but bounced back rapidly in late
March. Demand from Germany similarly fell from February to March, and experienced a
more modest rebound in April. Demand from the United States started falling roughly two
weeks later than the demand from South Korea and Germany and fell furthest, but by early
May was close to reaching pre-crisis levels again.
These patterns are consistent with the idea that the pandemic reached the United States later
than it reached South Korea and Germany. Moreover, in comparison to the United States,
Germany and South Korea imposed countermeasures of different types and magnitudes. With
the historical experience of the MERS outbreak in 2015, South Korea relied on mass testing
and digital infection tracing, allowing the country to avoid a full lockdown (Normile 2020).
Germany established early and localised testing, which allowed the government to impose
only relatively moderate restrictions and to permit local business to open again in the
beginning of April. Demand from the United States can also be seen bouncing back from
mid-April onwards, even though restrictions remained largely in place. This could reflect
businesses adjusting to the new normal of remote work, rather than a return to pre-pandemic
operations.

9

Figure 3: Online labour demand from the United States, Germany and South Korea, relative
to the start of the year.
Given the particularly clear drop in demand for online labour from the United States, we are
interested in how this drop may vary across different types of work. The OLI categorises
online labour into six different occupations: Clerical and data entry, professional services,
software development and technology, creative and multimedia, sales and marketing support,
and writing and translation. For a more detailed description of these categories, see Kässi and
Lehdonvirta (2018).
As Figure 4 shows, not all occupations have experienced a drop in demand. Demand in
creative and multimedia or sales and marketing support has shrunk significantly as the
pandemic has unfolded. But requests for projects in the software development and technology
category remain largely unaffected. This finding is consistent with an interpretation that
companies are cutting non-essential freelance contracts, such as marketing and sales
campaigns, while maintaining freelance outsourcing that is essential for continued business
operations, such as tech support and database management. The figures are also consistent
with the idea that the rapid push towards videoconferencing and other remote operations
across companies has created additional demand for freelance IT specialists who are able to
help with this.

10

Figure 4: Online labour demand from the US, relative to the start of the year, by occupation
Changes in online labour supply
The OLI does not provide us with a direct measure of labour supply, but we are able to
observe the number of registered worker profiles on a smaller set of online labour platforms.5
This can be used as an imperfect proxy for the number of workers offering services through
online labour platforms. We are not able to observe changes in the number of hours the
workers are supplying.
An increase in the number of registered freelancer profiles in the United States is evident
since the beginning of April. In particular, as shown in Figure 5, a very significant number of
new freelancers have registered in the software development and technology category. Other
occupations do not show a similar increase in registered workers. This is consistent with an
interpretation that recently laid-off workers across the economy are not registering en masse
on online labour platforms to attempt to make up for lost income. Some workers are probably
doing so, but to some extent the increased supply in the software development and
technology category might also be attributable to the pull of increased opportunities due to
growing demand.
In sum, while we observe a ​downscaling loss for most online labour occupations in the
United States, software and tech jobs appear to profit from a ​distancing bonus effect.
5

The raw data (used in Figure 5) are collected by periodically sampling workers from four major online labour
platforms: Fiverr, Freelancer, Guru, and PeoplePerHour http://ilabour.oii.ox.ac.uk/measuring-the-supply-of-digital-labour-how-the-oli-worker-supplement-is-constructed

11

However, even in this category labour supply growth in the United States appears to have
outpaced labour demand growth, suggesting that the workers are likely to be experiencing a
tight market. To better understand the workers’ experiences, we draw on data from an
ongoing panel study in the United States that relies on structured interviews to provide
insights on how these trends are being manifested through the lived experiences of workers.

Figure 5: Registered online worker user accounts in the US, relative to the start of the year.

Insights from interviews with freelance workers in the United States
Our interview data come from an ongoing panel study of 60 freelance workers who are
located in the United States and seeking work online via the online labour platform Upwork.6
Upwork is one of many online labour platforms and routinely seen as a dominant player. The
focus on Upworkers serves as a window into the career plans and work strategies of freelance
workers seeing work online. The study is designed around a carefully constructed sample of
people who pursue freelance work as a primary or secondary source of income, and reflect a
range of work types, skill levels, experience online, gender, ethnicity and success with this
work.

6

See ​http://upwork.com​.

12

Participants are hired and paid as they would for other jobs found on Upwork.7 Once hired,
participants complete a 15’ survey that provides us an overview of their working plans,
outcomes and experiences and a 45’ interview. The interview builds on the survey data and
follows a carefully designed protocol of semi-structured questions. Interviews are done by
one of the six members of the digital work research group, a joint effort of Syracuse
University and Skidmore College, both in New York state. The research team members were
trained on the protocol and meet frequently and routinely to review the protocol, the data, and
pursue interim analyses (as is customary in field studies).
Beginning in mid-March, 2020, we asked freelancers how they were faring in the face of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Since then, we have done 31 interviews. For this paper, we completed
an interim analysis of these freelancers, reviewing the transcripts of the interview, drawing on
the field notes, and looking to secondary sources for additional insight8. Specific to
comparing with the OLI, the panel study design and this initial analysis, relies on the job
classifications provided by Upwork9, grouped into three broader categories (See Table 1 for
summary statistics):
1. ​Administrative work​ to include: accounting, customer service, translation, editing.
In the OLI, this category roughly responds to the occupations “writing and translation”,
“professional services”, and “clerical and data entry”.
2. ​Technology work to include: web, mobile and standard programming, engineering and
architecture, data and analytics, IT and networking.
In the OLI, this category roughly responds to the occupation “software development and
tech”.
3. ​Creative work to include: design, graphics, sales and marketing, writing, and some
one-offs like crisis response public-relations.
In the OLI, this category roughly responds to the occupations “creative and multimedia”,
“writing and translation”, and “sales and marketing support”.
Data from the panel study provide substantial evidence in support of downscaling loss
effects. The freelancers with whom we spoke report that there are fewer jobs being posted.
Freelancers who have long-standing clients tell us these clients are pausing current projects
and not adding new projects. Furthermore, freelancers indicate that there are many more
7

To reduce the pressure on having Upworkers bidding for work (which consumes precious bidding resources),
they are hired directly: reaching out to invite them to take the work. About 6 of 10 do: acceptances and
declinations are tracked. Research guidelines require paying those who agree to this job even if they do not
finish: this work is voluntary and they can cease working at any time. About 1 in 10 begin, but do not finish. All
who begin are rated five stars (as performance ratings matter greatly for online workers). Many of those who
have completed the work leave a positive review of the work. There are no negative reviews.
8

For example, there are active sub-threads for experiences with platform work, generally, and Upwork,
specifically, to be found in the online platform Reddit, as well as Facebook groups devoted to both.
9

Upwork changes its categorization of workers from time to time, making classification a challenge.

13

people bidding for the jobs: sometimes six times more than even a month ago (e.g., 30+ bids
now, versus five bids). This seems to align very well with the data presented in Figure 5.
Freelancers are also reporting that in response to the increased number of people seeking
work online, they are having to bid on more jobs to keep securing work, and often are
bidding for work below their target salary rates, and even below minimum wage rates. While
each freelancers situation is unique, work-seeking strategies in our initial analysis, seem to be
externally focused. That is, while many have relied on existing relationships, their
predictability of these relationships producing work are now more tenuous. In turn,
freelancers indicated that they are diversifying and applying to different type of work,
increasing the number of jobs they simultaneously are bidding for, bidding for lower paying
contracts and lowering their hourly rates.
From this initial analysis we see little evidence of distancing bonus effects in the United
States across the platforms broadly, although we see initial evidence of distancing bonus
effects at the occupation level. At first these changes were not affecting one broad category of
work more than another. By April, 2020, those respondents in creative spaces (marketing,
design, web content) noted work was slowing dramatically, while work supporting digital
infrastructure (web services, back-end web work) was steady or even increasing,
corroborating with the data in Figure 4. This suggests that clients are starting to look into the
concerning future and prioritizing basic operations over customer-facing efforts.

14

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Job Classification

Gender

Administrative

32%

Female

61%

Technology

32%

Male

39%

Creative

36%
Hours a Week Spent Looking for Work

Role of Freelance Work

Min

0

Primary Source of
Employment

Additional Source of
Employment

1st Qu.

1

53%

47%

Median

5

Mean

11

3rd Qu.

20

Max

45

Age

Length on Digital Platforms (in years)

Min

23

Min

0

1st Qu.

30

1st Qu.

2

Median

35

Median

3

Mean

37.99

Mean

5.25

3rd Qu.

45

3rd Qu.

8.50

Max

75

Max

20

Beyond these insights on distancing bonus and downscaling loss effects, two additional
observations from our interviews warrant mention. First, these United States’-based
freelancers are reporting changes in their life worlds that are reshaping their labor strategies
and working arrangements. Nearly all of the respondents report spouses and partners being
laid off or having to work from home, and that their children are now at home for schooling.
These changes are requiring the freelancers to alter their own working arrangements and
work availability - with most having less time to pursue work. The scope of these changes is
increasing each week, and the changes are becoming more impactful as the economy
continues to slow down. The current arrangements are no longer new, not yet normal, and
uncertainty clouds things. These changes dampen the ability of workers to take on typical
work loads, providing some opportunity for new entrants.
Finally, every one of the participants in the panel study is casting an increasingly worried eye
on the longer term as the economic slowdown in the United States’ continues to press on
most but the wealthy. Panel data make clear that fewer than 40% of our respondents have
15

health care: a profoundly disturbing finding given that many of their spouses and partners are
losing jobs. Panel data also make clear that fewer than 40% of our respondents had more than
a few weeks of savings: seven weeks into massive social distancing and 22 million people
losing their jobs, these workers are exhausting these reserves, well before the economic crisis
is over. Taken together, the low number of freelancers with healthcare, and savings,
showcases the precarity of the workspace and amplifies the implications of the changes to the
online labor markets as demonstrated above.

Discussion and Conclusion
Findings suggest the downscaling loss effect may be dominating over the distancing bonus
effect. At the same time, the number of workers seeking income through online labour
platforms is increasing. This, in turn, suggests freelancers earning their income through
online labour platforms are more likely to see a tighter market and larger variations in their
income in the face of a more uncertain online labor market. For the United States’-based
freelancers with whom we spoke, their situation is further complicated by the structural and
legal landscape they face. To wit, their employment classification (as independent
contractors) restricts access to social policies that could serve as a social safety net (e.g.,
access to healthcare and unemployment benefits). The broad and chaotic response by the
United States’ Federal Government (CARES Act10) in the face of the economic crisis is more
poignant for freelance workers as their status relative to what counts as work often means
they are not able to access unemployment benefits and may not be eligible for the stimulus
checks associated with the CARES act. Given the social and labor policies, significant market
shocks, like the pandemic, make visible the risks associated with non-standard work
arrangements in the United States.
These risks may be one of the reasons why the OLI figures for the United States vary so
much more than do those of South Korea and Germany. While this analysis has focused on
the United States, to fully understand the nuances and differences in the online labor market,
future analysis exploring other countries is essential. Furthermore, the data also only provide
a freelancer perspective, so understanding changes and behaviors of clients (employers) and
their impact (and how they’re impacted) would provide an important perspective in the
market dynamics discussed here.
We see value in the further interrogation of the ​downscaling loss and ​distancing bonus effects
from other analytic perspectives to include temporality, geography, and demography. The
magnitude of downscaling and distancing are likely to change over time, as the pandemic and
its consequences unfold. Moreover the effects are likely to vary across geography, due to
national differences in economic structures, the phase and severity of the pandemic, and
countermeasures adopted. We also see distinct differences in demands for different
occupations. Considering the gendered and racial differences in occupations (e.g. women, for
10

See: ​https://www.congress.gov/bill/116th-congress/senate-bill/3548/text?q=product+update

16

example, are overrepresented in the Sales and Creative occupations and minorities are
overrepresented in service occupations11), we then may see certain groups disproportionately
affected. As can be seen, one possible roadmap for near-term research related to the
pandemic can be, 1) the examination in the differences driven by occupation, 2) analysis of
the differences in country-level trajectories, 3) and further investigation of gender and racial
disparities found in freelance work. These implications illustrate the questions that emerge
from this early view into changes in the online labour markets for freelance work arising
from the global pandemic.
At a broader level, the COVID-19 pandemic produces a unique window of opportunity to
gauge the interdependencies between the online labor market and the regular economy.
Initially, the sharp decline in the online labor market closely mirrored the broader labor
market. As the pandemic has continued, our analysis shows a rebound in the online labor
market. This not only suggests that online labor markets can transcend its traditionally
complementary role in the broader markets, but may play a key role in bridging gaps in the
broader economy caused by sudden economic shocks. We speculate this is being manifested
in at least three ways. First, firms are using more project-based work, which is more
conducive to the use of freelancers. Second, firms are increasingly becoming more
accustomed to distributed and remote working arrangements, which is also more conducive
to freelancers. While both of these are independent of the current pandemic, they are
macro-level changes in employment relations that we see as catalysts to the increases in the
demand for online freelancers. Third, online platforms allow people to more easily seek
freelance work, which blurs the boundaries between online and traditional labor markets. As
a more efficient matching system for work, online labor markets help to alleviate the friction
associated with job searches and allow workers to seek work beyond their local geography.
All of these things allow online labor markets to normalize more quickly during periods of
economic shock. As the evidence in our analysis suggests, the online labor market demand
has recovered, and in some occupational areas has surpassed, relative to pre-pandemic levels.

11

See: ​https://contexts.org/blog/inequality-during-the-coronavirus-pandemic/#rea

17

References
Atkeson, A. (2020). What will be the economic impact of COVID-19 in the US? Rough
estimates of disease scenarios (Working Paper 26867). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Bedford, J., Enria, D., Giesecke, J., Heymann, D. L., Ihekweazu, C., Kobinger, G., ... &
Ungchusak, K. (2020). COVID-19: towards controlling of a pandemic. ​The Lancet,​
395​(10229), 1015-1018.
Beerepoot, N., & Lambregts, B. (2015). Competition in online job marketplaces: Towards a
global labour market for outsourcing services? ​Global Networks,​ 15(2), 236–255.
Braesemann, F., Lehdonvirta, V., & Kässi, O. (2020) ICTs and the Urban-Rural Divide: Can
Online Labour Platforms Bridge the Gap? ​Information, Communication, & Society.
Bunyaratavej, K., Doh, J., Hahn, E. D., Lewin, A. Y., & Massini, S. (2011). Conceptual
Issues in Services Offshoring Research: A Multidisciplinary Review. ​Group & Organization
Management,​ 36(1), 70–102.
Clement, J. (2020) Interest in remote working related search terms during COVID-19
outbreak March 2020. Statista.
https://www.statista.com/statistics/1105696/remote-working-google-searches-worldwide-duri
ng-covid-19-outbreak/​.
Corporaal, G.F., & Lehdonvirta, V. (2017) ​Platform Sourcing: How Fortune 500 Firms are
Adopting Online Freelancing Platforms.​ Oxford: Oxford Internet Institute.
del Rio-Chanona, R. M., Mealy, P., Pichler, A., Lafond, F., & Farmer, D. (2020). Supply and
demand shocks in the COVID-19 pandemic: An industry and occupation perspective. ​arXiv
preprint arXiv:2004.06759​.
Dunn, M. (2017). Digital Work: New Opportunities or Lost Wages? ​American Journal of
Management,​ 17(4), 10–27.
Galperin, H., & Greppi, C. 2019. Geographical discrimination in digital labor platforms. In
M. Graham (Ed.), ​Digital economies at global margins.​ Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horton, J. J. (2010). Online Labor Markets. In A. Saberi (Ed.), ​Internet and Network
Economics​ (pp. 515–522). Springer: Berlin Heidelberg.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-17572-5_45.

18

Huws, U., Korte, W. B., & Robinson, S. (1990). Telework: Towards the elusive office. John
Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ.
International Labour Organisation (2020). ​COVID-19 and the world of work: country policy
responses.​ ​ILO Publications: Geneva. ​https://www.voced.edu.au/content/ngv:86401​.
International Labour Organization (2016). ​Non-standard employment around the world:
Understanding challenges, shaping prospects.​ ILO Publications: Geneva.
https://www.ilo.org/global/publications/books/WCMS_534326/lang--en/index.htm​.
Kalleberg, A. L. (2003). Flexible Firms and Labor Market Segmentation: Effects of
Workplace Restructuring on Jobs and Workers. ​Work and Occupations, 30(2), 154–175.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888403251683.
Kässi, O., & Lehdonvirta, V. (2018). Online labour index: Measuring the online gig economy
for policy and research. ​Technological forecasting and social change,​ 137, 241-248.
Lehdonvirta, V. (2017). Where are online workers located? The international division of
digital gig work. ​iLabour blog.
http://ilabour.oii.ox.ac.uk/where-are-online-workers-located-the-international-division-of-digi
tal-gig-work/
Lehdonvirta, V. (2018). Flexibility in the gig economy: Managing time on three online
piecework platforms. ​New Technology, Work and Employment, 33(1), 13–29.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ntwe.12102.
Lehdonvirta, V., Kässi, O., Hjorth, I., Barnard, H., & Graham, M. (2019). The Global
Platform Economy: A New Offshoring Institution Enabling Emerging-Economy
Microproviders. ​Journal of Management,​ 45(2), 567–599.
McKay, C. Pollack, E. and A. Fitzpayne (2019). “Automation and a Changing Economy,”
The Aspen Institute Future of Work Initiative, April, 2019. Available online at:
https://assets.aspeninstitute.org/content/uploads/2019/04/Automation-and-a-Changing-Econo
my_The-Case-for-Action_April-2019.pdf​. Last accessed on 19 April, 2020.
McKibbin, Warwick J., and Roshen Fernando (2020). "The global macroeconomic impacts of
COVID-19: Seven scenarios.".
Mokhtarian, P. L. (1991) Defining telecommuting. ​Transportation Research Record 1​ 305:
273-281.

19

Normile, D. (2020). Coronavirus cases have dropped sharply in South Korea. What’s the
secret to its success. ​Science​, 17(03).
Ouchi, W., (1979). A Conceptual Framework for the Design of Organizational Control
Mechanisms. ​Management Science,​ 25(9): 833-848.
Pesole A, Urzí Brancati MC, Fernández-Macías E, Biagi F, González Vázquez I (2018)
Platform Workers in Europe. JRC Science for Policy Report. Brussels: European
Commission.
Stephany, F., Stoehr, N., Darius, P., Neuhäuser, L., Teutloff, O., & Braesemann, F. (2020).
The CoRisk-Index: A data-mining approach to identify industry-specific risk assessments
related to COVID-19 in real-time. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.12432.
Thunstrom, Linda and Newbold, Stephen and Finnoff, David and Ashworth, Madison and
Shogren, Jason F. (2020). “The Benefits and Costs of Using Social Distancing to Flatten the
Curve for COVID-19.” Forthcoming ​Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis​. Available at SSRN:
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3561934 or ​http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3561934​.
Wenham, C., Smith, J., & Morgan, R. (2020). COVID-19: the gendered impacts of the
outbreak. ​The Lancet​, 395(10227), 846-848.
Wood, A. J., Graham, M., Lehdonvirta, V., & Hjorth, I. (2019). Networked but
Commodified: The (Dis)Embeddedness of Digital Labour in the Gig Economy. ​Sociology​,
53(5), 931–950. https://doi.org/10.1177/0038038519828906.

20

